{"id": "57520", "revid": "4018503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57520", "title": "Yehudi Menuhin", "text": "American violinist and conductor (1916\u20131999)\nYehudi Menuhin, Baron Menuhin (22 April 1916\u00a0\u2013\u00a012 March 1999), was an American-born British violinist and conductor who spent most of his performing career in Britain. He is widely considered one of the greatest violinists of the 20th century.\nEarly life and career.\nYehudi Menuhin was born in New York City to Moshe Menuhin, a Lithuanian Jew from Gomel in modern Belarus, and Marutha, a Crimean Karaite. Through his father Moshe, he was descended from a rabbinical dynasty. Moshe and Marutha (n\u00e9e Sher) met in the Mutasarrifate of Jerusalem (part of historic Palestine under the Ottoman Empire) before marrying in New York in 1914. In late 1919, the pair became American citizens and changed the family name from Mnuchin to Menuhin. Menuhin's sisters were concert pianist and human rights activist Hephzibah, and pianist, painter and poet Yaltah.\nMenuhin's first violin instruction was at age four by Sigmund Anker (1891\u20131958); his parents had wanted Louis Persinger to teach him, and Persinger agreed. Menuhin took lessons for a while from Persinger at his Hyde Street studio. He made his first public solo appearance in November 1921, at a pupil's concert. On 29 February 1924, he formally debuted in a solo performance for a matinee concert given by the San Francisco Symphony at the Oakland Auditorium under the direction of Alfred Hertz, with Persinger playing the piano accompaniment. This was followed by a recital at the Scottish Rite Hall. His reputation preceded him to New York for his debut there on 17 March 1926, at the Manhattan Opera House. Persinger then agreed to teach him and accompanied him on the piano for his first few solo recordings in 1928 and 1929.\nJulia Boyd records:\nOn 12 April 1929 it [the Semperoper] cancelled its advertised programme to make way for a performance by the twelve-year-old Yehudi Menuhin. That night he played the Bach, Beethoven and Brahms violin concertos to an ecstatic audience\u00a0... The week before, Yehudi had played in Berlin with the Philharmonic under Bruno Walter to an equally rapturous response.\nA newspaper critic said of his Berlin performance: \"There steps a fat little blond boy on the podium, and wins at once all hearts as in an irresistibly ludicrous way, like a penguin, he alternately places one foot down, then the other. But wait: you will stop laughing when he puts his bow to the violin to play Bach's violin concerto in E major no.2.\"\nWhen the Menuhins moved to Paris, Persinger suggested Menuhin go to Persinger's old teacher, Belgian virtuoso and pedagogue Eug\u00e8ne Ysa\u00ffe. Menuhin did have one lesson with Ysa\u00ffe, but he disliked Ysa\u00ffe's teaching method and his advanced age. Instead, he went to Romanian composer and violinist George Enescu, under whose tutelage he made recordings with several piano accompanists, including his sister Hephzibah. He was also a student of Adolf Busch in Basel. He stayed in the Swiss city for a bit more than a year, where he started to take lessons in German and Italian as well.\nAccording to Henry A. Murray, Menuhin wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Actually, I was gazing in my usual state of being half absent in my own world and half in the present. I have usually been able to \"retire\" in this way. I was also thinking that my life was tied up with the instrument and would I do it justice?\u2014\u200a\nHis first concerto recording was made in 1931, Bruch's G\u00a0minor, under Sir Landon Ronald in London, the labels calling him \"Master Yehudi Menuhin\". In 1932 he recorded Edward Elgar's Violin Concerto in Bminor for His Master's Voice in London, with the composer himself conducting; in 1934, uncut, Paganini's D\u00a0major Concerto with Emile Sauret's cadenza in Paris under Pierre Monteux. Between 1934 and 1936, he made the first integral recording of Johann Sebastian Bach's sonatas and partitas for solo violin, although his Sonata No.\u00a02, in A\u00a0minor, was not released until all six were transferred to CD.\nHis interest in the music of B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k prompted him to commission a work from him \u2013 the Sonata for Solo Violin, which, completed in 1943 and first performed by Menuhin in New York in 1944, was the composer's penultimate work. \nWorld War II musician.\nHe performed for Allied soldiers during World War\u00a0II and, accompanied on the piano by English composer Benjamin Britten, for the surviving inmates of a number of concentration camps in June and July 1945 after their liberation in April of the same year, most famously Bergen-Belsen. He returned to Germany in 1947 to play concerto concerts with the Berlin Philharmonic under Wilhelm Furtw\u00e4ngler as an act of reconciliation, the first Jewish musician to do so in the wake of the Holocaust, saying to Jewish critics that he wanted to rehabilitate Germany's music and spirit.\nWorld interactions.\nMenuhin credited German philosopher Constantin Brunner with providing him with \"a theoretical framework within which I could fit the events and experiences of life\".\nHe and Louis Kentner (brother-in-law of his wife, Diana) gave the first performance of William Walton's Violin Sonata, in Z\u00fcrich on 30 September 1949.\nFollowing his role as a member of the awards jury at the 1955 Queen Elisabeth Music Competition, Menuhin secured a Rockefeller Foundation grant for the financially strapped Grand Prize winner at the event, Argentine violinist Alberto Lysy. Menuhin made Lysy his only personal student, and the two toured extensively throughout the concert halls of Europe. The young prot\u00e9g\u00e9 later established the International Menuhin Music Academy (IMMA) in Gstaad, in his honor.\nMenuhin made several recordings with the German conductor Wilhelm Furtw\u00e4ngler, who had been criticized for conducting in Germany during the Nazi era. Menuhin defended Furtw\u00e4ngler, noting that the conductor had helped a number of Jewish musicians to flee Nazi Germany.\nIn 1957, he founded the Menuhin Festival Gstaad in Gstaad, Switzerland. In 1962, he established the Yehudi Menuhin School in Stoke d'Abernon, Surrey. He also established the music program at The Nueva School in Hillsborough, California, sometime around then. In 1965 he received an honorary knighthood from the British monarchy. In the same year, Australian composer Malcolm Williamson wrote a violin concerto for Menuhin. He performed the concerto many times and recorded it at its premiere at the Bath Festival in 1965. Originally known as the Bath Assembly, the festival was first directed by the impresario Ian Hunter in 1948. After the first year the city tried to run the festival itself, but in 1955 asked Hunter back. In 1959 Hunter invited Menuhin to become artistic director of the festival. Menuhin accepted, and retained the post until 1968.\nMenuhin also had a long association and deep friendship with Ravi Shankar, beginning in 1952, leading to their joint performance in 1966 at the Bath Festival and the recording of their Grammy Award-winning album \"West Meets East\" (1967). During this time, he commissioned composer Alan Hovhaness to write a concerto for violin, sitar, and orchestra to be performed by himself and Shankar. The resulting work, entitled \"Shambala\" (c.\u20091970), with a fully composed violin part and space for improvisation from the sitarist, is the earliest known work for sitar with western symphony orchestra, predating Shankar's own sitar concertos, but Menuhin and Shankar never recorded it.\nMenuhin also worked with famous jazz violinist St\u00e9phane Grappelli in the 1970s on \"Jalousie\", an album of 1930s classics led by duetting violins backed by the Alan Claire Trio.\nIn 1975, in his role as president of the International Music Council, he declared October 1 as International Music Day. The first International Music Day, organised by the International Music Council, was held that same year, in accordance with the resolution taken at the 15th IMC General Assembly in Lausanne in 1973.\nIn 1977, Menuhin and Ian Stoutzker founded the charity Live Music Now, the largest outreach music project in the UK. Live Music Now pays and trains professional musicians to work in the community, bringing the experience to those who rarely get an opportunity to hear or see live music performance.\nAt the Edinburgh Festival Menuhin premiered Priaulx Rainier's violin concerto \"Due Canti e Finale\", which he had commissioned Rainier to write. He also commissioned her last work, \"Wildlife Celebration\", which he performed in aid of Gerald Durrell's Wildlife Conservation Trust.\nIn 1978, Menuhin played with the Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois fiddler Jean Carignan for a unique presentation of the \"Petit concerto pour Carignan et orchestre\" composed by Andr\u00e9 Gagnon. This concert appeared on his TV show The Music of Man broadcast by the CBC.\nIn 1983, Menuhin and Robert Masters founded the Yehudi Menuhin International Competition for Young Violinists, today one of the world's leading forums for young talent. Many of its prizewinners have gone on to become prominent violinists, including Tasmin Little, Nikolaj Znaider, Ilya Gringolts, Julia Fischer, Daishin Kashimoto and Ray Chen.\nIn the 1980s, Menuhin wrote and oversaw the creation of a \"Music Guides\" series of books; each covered a musical instrument, with one on the human voice. Menuhin wrote some, while others were edited by different authors.\nIn 1991, Menuhin was awarded the Wolf Prize by the Israeli Government. In the Israeli Knesset he gave an acceptance speech in which he criticised Israel's continued occupation of the West Bank:\nThis wasteful governing by fear, by contempt for the basic dignities of life, this steady asphyxiation of a dependent people, should be the very last means to be adopted by those who themselves know too well the awful significance, the unforgettable suffering of such an existence. It is unworthy of my great people, the Jews, who have striven to abide by a code of moral rectitude for some 5,000 years, who can create and achieve a society for themselves such as we see around us but can yet deny the sharing of its great qualities and benefits to those dwelling amongst them.\nLater career.\nMenuhin regularly returned to the San Francisco Bay Area, sometimes performing with the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra. One of the more memorable later performances was of Edward Elgar's Violin Concerto, which Menuhin had recorded with the composer in 1932.\nOn 22 April 1978, along with St\u00e9phane Grappelli, Yehudi played \"Pick Yourself Up\", taken from the \"Menuhin &amp; Grappelli Play Berlin, Kern, Porter and Rodgers &amp; Hart\" album as the interval act at the 23rd Eurovision Song Contest for TF1. The performance came direct from the studios of TF1 and not that of the venue (Palais des Congr\u00e8s), where the contest was being held.\nMenuhin hosted the PBS telecast of the gala opening concert of the San Francisco Symphony from Davies Symphony Hall in September 1980.\nHis recording contract with EMI lasted almost 70 years and is the longest in the history of the music industry. He made his first recording at age 13 in November 1929, and his last in 1999, when he was nearly 83 years old. He recorded over 300 works for EMI, both as a violinist and as a conductor. In 2009 EMI released a 51-CD retrospective of Menuhin's recording career, titled \"Yehudi Menuhin: The Great EMI Recordings\". In 2016, the Menuhin centenary year, Warner Classics (formerly EMI Classics) issued a milestone collection of 80 CDs entitled \"The Menuhin Century\", curated by his long-time friend and prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Bruno Monsaingeon, who selected the recordings and sourced rare archival materials to tell Menuhin's story.\nFrom 1984 until his death in 1999 he was the first guest conductor of Sinfonia Varsovia with which he performed over 300 times (nearly half of which were between 1996 and 1998). He said that \"working with no other orchestra gave me as much satisfaction as my work, as soloist and conductor, with the Sinfonia Varsovia Orchestra.\" In his \"Unfinished Journey: Twenty Years Later\" he added \"It was a true inspiration to spend as much time with them [Sinfonia Varsovia] as possible, to enjoy the deep satisfaction I derive from our music-making together.\". In 1991, he became Principal Guest Conductor of the English Symphony Orchestra, a position he also held until his death.\nIn 1990 Menuhin was the first conductor for the Asian Youth Orchestra which toured around Asia, including Japan, Taiwan, Singapore and Hong Kong with Julian Lloyd Webber and a group of young talented musicians from all over Asia.\nPersonal life.\nMenuhin was married twice, first to Nola Nicholas, daughter of an Australian industrialist and sister of Hephzibah Menuhin's first husband Lindsay Nicholas. They had two children, Krov and Zamira (who married pianist Fou Ts'ong). Following their 1947 divorce he married the British ballerina and actress Diana Gould, whose mother was the pianist Evelyn Suart and stepfather was Admiral Sir Cecil Harcourt. The couple had two sons, Gerard, notable as a Holocaust denier and far right activist, and Jeremy, a pianist. A third child died shortly after birth. In the 1960s and 1970s they lived in Highgate at 2 The Grove, a house later owned by Sting.\nThe name \"Yehudi\" means \"Jew\" in Hebrew. In an interview republished in October 2004, he recounted to \"New Internationalist\" magazine the story of his name:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Obliged to find an apartment of their own, my parents searched the neighbourhood and chose one within walking distance of the park. Showing them out after they had viewed it, the landlady said: \"And you'll be glad to know I don't take Jews.\" Her mistake made clear to her, the antisemitic landlady was renounced, and another apartment found. But her blunder left its mark. Back on the street my mother made a vow. Her unborn baby would have a label proclaiming his race to the world. He would be called \"The Jew\".\nMenuhin became an honorary citizen of Switzerland, and then also of the United Kingdom, in 1970 and 1985, respectively.\nAlong with Albert Einstein, Menuhin was one of the sponsors of the Peoples' World Convention (PWC), also known as Peoples' World Constituent Assembly (PWCA), which took place in 1950\u201351 at Palais Electoral, Geneva, Switzerland.\nMenuhin was a pescetarian.\nInterest in yoga.\nIn 1953, \"Life\" published photos of him in various esoteric yoga positions. In 1952, Menuhin was in India, where Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru introduced him to an influential yogi B.\u00a0K.\u00a0S. Iyengar, who was largely unknown outside the country. Menuhin arranged for Iyengar to teach abroad in London, Switzerland, Paris, and elsewhere. He became one of the first prominent yoga masters teaching in the West.\nMenuhin also took lessons from Indra Devi, who opened the first yoga studio in the U.S. in Los Angeles in 1948. Both Devi and Iyengar were students of Krishnamacharya, a famous yoga master in India.\nDeath and legacy.\nMenuhin died in Martin Luther Hospital in Berlin, Germany, from complications of bronchitis on 12 March 1999, just 40 days before his 83rd birthday. Soon after his death, the Royal Academy of Music acquired the \"Yehudi Menuhin Archive\", which includes sheet music marked up for performance, correspondence, news articles and photographs relating to Menuhin, autograph musical manuscripts, and several portraits of Paganini.\nViolins.\nMenuhin played a number of famous violins, arguably the most renowned of which is the \"Lord Wilton Guarnerius 1742\". Others included the \"Giovanni Bussetto 1680\", \"Giovanni Grancino 1695\", \"Guarneri filius Andrea 1703\", \"Soil Stradivarius\", \"Prince Khevenh\u00fcller 1733 Stradivari\", and \"Guarneri del Ges\u00f9 1739\".\nIn his autobiography \"Unfinished Journey\", Menuhin wrote: \"A great violin is alive; its very shape embodies its maker's intentions, and its wood stores the history, or the soul, of its successive owners. I never play without feeling that I have released or, alas, violated spirits.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57521", "revid": "30378809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57521", "title": "Situationist International", "text": "International organization of social revolutionaries (1957\u201372)\nThe Situationist International (SI) was an international organization of social revolutionaries made up of avant-garde artists, intellectuals, and political theorists. It was prominent in Europe from its formation in 1957 to its dissolution in 1972. The intellectual foundations of the Situationist International were derived primarily from libertarian Marxism and the avant-garde art movements of the early 20th century, particularly Dada and Surrealism. Overall, situationist theory represented an attempt to synthesize this diverse field of theoretical disciplines into a modern and comprehensive critique of mid-20th century advanced capitalism.\nEssential to situationist theory was the concept of the spectacle, a unified critique of advanced capitalism of which a primary concern was the progressively increasing tendency towards the expression and mediation of social relations through images. The situationists believed that the shift from individual expression through directly lived experiences, or the first-hand fulfillment of authentic desires, to individual expression by proxy through the exchange or consumption of commodities, or passive second-hand alienation, inflicted significant and far-reaching damage to the quality of human life for both individuals and society. Another important concept of situationist theory was the primary means of counteracting the spectacle; the construction of situations, moments of life deliberately constructed for the purpose of reawakening and pursuing authentic desires, experiencing the feeling of life and adventure, and the liberation of everyday life.\nThe situationists recognized that capitalism had changed since Karl Marx's formative writings, but maintained that his analysis of the capitalist mode of production remained fundamentally correct; they rearticulated and expanded upon several classical Marxist concepts, such as his theory of alienation. In their expanded interpretation of Marxist theory, the situationists asserted that the misery of social alienation and commodity fetishism were no longer limited to the fundamental components of capitalist society, but had now in advanced capitalism spread themselves to every aspect of life and culture. They rejected the idea that advanced capitalism's apparent successes\u2014such as technological advancement, increased productive capacity, and a raised general quality of life when compared to previous systems, such as feudalism\u2014could ever outweigh the social dysfunction and degradation of everyday life that it simultaneously inflicted.\nWhen the Situationist International was first formed, it had a predominantly artistic focus; emphasis was placed on concepts like unitary urbanism and psychogeography. Gradually, however, that focus shifted more towards revolutionary and political theory. The Situationist International reached the apex of its creative output and influence in 1967 and 1968, with the former marking the publication of the two most significant texts of the situationist movement, \"The Society of the Spectacle\" by Guy Debord and \"The Revolution of Everyday Life\" by Raoul Vaneigem. The expressed writing and political theory of the two aforementioned texts, along with other situationist publications, proved greatly influential in shaping the ideas behind the May 1968 insurrections in France; quotes, phrases, and slogans from situationist texts and publications were ubiquitous on posters and graffiti throughout France during the uprisings.\nEtymology and usage.\nThe founding manifesto of the Situationist International, \"Report on the Construction of Situations\" (1957), defined the construction of situations as \"the concrete construction of momentary ambiances of life and their transformation into a superior passional quality.\" The term \"situationist\" refers to the construction of situations, one of the early central concepts of the Situationist International; the term also refers to any individuals engaged in the construction of situations, or, more narrowly, to members of the Situationist International. Situationist theory sees the situation as a tool for the liberation of everyday life, a method of negating the pervasive alienation that accompanied the spectacle. \"Internationale Situationniste\" No. 1 (June 1958) defined the constructed situation as \"a moment of life concretely and deliberately constructed by the collective organization of a unitary ambiance and a game of events\". The situationists argued that advanced capitalism manufactured false desires; literally in the sense of ubiquitous advertising and the glorification of accumulated capital, and more broadly in the abstraction and reification of the more ephemeral experiences of authentic life into commodities. The experimental direction of situationist activity consisted of setting up temporary environments favorable to the fulfillment of true and authentic human desires in response.\nThe Situationist International strongly resisted use of the term \"situationism\", which Debord called a \"meaningless term\", adding \"[t]here is no such thing as situationism, which would mean a doctrine for interpreting existing conditions\". The situationists maintained a philosophical opposition to all ideologies, conceiving of them as abstract superstructures ultimately serving only to justify the economic base of a given society; accordingly, they rejected \"situationism\" as an absurd and self-contradictory concept. In \"The Society of the Spectacle\", Debord asserted that ideology was \"the abstract will to universality and the illusion thereof\" which was \"legitimated in modern society by universal abstraction and by the effective dictatorship of illusion\".\nHistory.\nOrigins (1945\u20131955).\nThe situationist movement had its origins as a left wing tendency within Lettrism, an artistic and literary movement led by the Romanian-born French poet and visual artist Isidore Isou, originating in 1940s Paris. The group was heavily influenced by the preceding avant-garde movements of Dadaism and Surrealism, seeking to apply critical theories based on these concepts to all areas of art and culture, most notably in poetry, film, painting and political theory. Among some of the concepts and artistic innovations developed by the Lettrists were the \"lettrie\" (a poem reflecting pure form yet devoid of all semantic content), new syntheses of writing and visual art identified as metagraphics and hypergraphics, as well as new creative techniques in filmmaking. Future situationist Guy Debord, who was at that time a significant figure in the Lettrist movement, helped develop these new film techniques, using them in his Lettrist film \"Howlings for Sade\" (1952) as well as later in his situationist film \"Society of the Spectacle\" (1972).\nBy 1950, a much younger and more left-wing part of the Lettrist movement began to emerge. This group kept very active in perpetrating public outrages such as the Notre-Dame Affair, where at the Easter High Mass at Notre Dame de Paris, in front of ten thousand people and broadcast on national TV, their member and former Dominican Michel Mourre posed as a monk, \"stood in front of the altar and read a pamphlet proclaiming that God was dead\". Andr\u00e9 Breton prominently came out in support of the action in a letter that spawned a large debate in the newspaper \"Combat\".\nIn 1952, this left wing of the Lettrist movement, which included Debord, broke off from Isou's group and formed the Letterist International, a new Paris-based collective of avant-garde artists and political theorists. The schism finally erupted when the future members of the radical Lettrists disrupted a Charlie Chaplin press conference for \"Limelight\" at the H\u00f4tel Ritz Paris. They distributed a polemic entitled \"No More Flat Feet!\", which concluded: \"The footlights have melted the make-up of the supposedly brilliant mime. All we can see now is a lugubrious and mercenary old man. Go home Mister Chaplin.\" Isou was upset with this, his own attitude being that Chaplin deserved respect as one of the great creators of the cinematic art. The breakaway group felt that his work was no longer relevant, while having appreciated it \"in its own time,\" and asserted their belief \"that the most urgent expression of freedom is the destruction of idols, especially when they claim to represent freedom,\" in this case, filmmaker Charlie Chaplin.\nDuring this period of the Letterist International, many of the important concepts and ideas that would later be integral in situationist theory were developed. Individuals in the group collaboratively constructed the new field of psychogeography, which they defined as \"the study of the specific effects of the geographical environment (whether consciously organized or not) on the emotions and behavior of individuals.\" Debord further expanded this concept of psychogeography with his theory of the d\u00e9rive, an unplanned tour through an urban landscape directed entirely by the feelings evoked in the individual by their surroundings, serving as the primary means for mapping and investigating the psychogeography of these different areas. During this period the Letterist International also developed the situationist tactic of d\u00e9tournement, which by reworking or re-contextualizing an existing work of art or literature sought to radically shift its meaning to one with revolutionary significance.\nFormation (1956\u20131957).\nIn 1956, Guy Debord, a member of the Lettrist International, and Asger Jorn of the International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus, brought together a group of artistic collectives for the \"First World Congress of Free Artists\" in Alba, Italy. The meeting established the foundation for the development of the Situationist International, which was officially formed in July 1957 at a meeting in Cosio di Arroscia, Italy. The resulting International was a fusion of these extremely small avant-garde collectives: the Lettrist International, the International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus (an offshoot of COBRA), and the London Psychogeographical Association (though, Anselm Jappe has argued that the group pivoted around Jorn and Debord for the first four years). Later, the Situationist International drew ideas from other groups such as Socialisme ou Barbarie.\nThe most prominent member of the group, Guy Debord, generally became considered the organization's de facto leader and most distinguished theorist. Other members included theorist Raoul Vaneigem, the Dutch painter Constant Nieuwenhuys, the Italo-Scottish writer Alexander Trocchi, the English artist Ralph Rumney (sole member of the London Psychogeographical Association, Rumney suffered expulsion relatively soon after the formation), the Danish artist Asger Jorn (who after parting with the SI also founded the Scandinavian Institute of Comparative Vandalism), the architect and veteran of the Hungarian Uprising Attila Kotanyi, and the French writer Mich\u00e8le Bernstein. Debord and Bernstein later married.\nIn June 1957, Debord wrote the manifesto of the Situationist International, titled \"Report on the Construction of Situations\". This manifesto plans a rereading of Karl Marx's \"Das Kapital\" and advocates a cultural revolution in western countries.\nArtistic period (1958\u20131962).\nDuring the first few years of the SI's founding, avant-garde artistic groups began collaborating with the SI and joining the organization. Gruppe SPUR, a German artistic collective, collaborated with the Situationist International on projects beginning in 1959, continuing until the group officially joined the SI in 1961. The role of the artists in the SI was of great significance, particularly Asger Jorn, Constant Nieuwenhuys and Pinot Gallizio.\nAsger Jorn, who invented Situgraphy and Situlogy, had the social role of catalyst and team leader among the members of the SI between 1957 and 1961. Jorn's role in the situationist movement (as in COBRA) was that of a catalyst and team leader. Guy Debord on his own lacked the personal warmth and persuasiveness to draw people of different nationalities and talents into an active working partnership. As a prototype Marxist intellectual Debord needed an ally who could patch up the petty egoisms and squabbles of the members. When Jorn's leadership was withdrawn in 1961, many simmering quarrels among different sections of the SI flared up, leading to multiple exclusions.\nThe first major split was the exclusion of Gruppe SPUR, the German section, from the SI on 10 February 1962. Many different disagreements led to the fracture, for example; while at the Fourth SI Conference in London in December 1960, in a discussion about the political nature of the SI, the Gruppe SPUR members disagreed with the core situationist stance of counting on a revolutionary proletariat; the accusation that their activities were based on a \"systematic misunderstanding of situationist theses\"; the understanding that at least one Gruppe SPUR member, sculptor Lothar Fischer, and possibly the rest of the group, were not actually understanding and/or agreeing with the situationist ideas, but were just using the SI to achieve success in the art market; and the betrayal, in the \"Spur #7\" issue, of a common agreement on the Gruppe SPUR and SI publications.\nThe exclusion was a recognition that Gruppe SPUR's \"principles, methods and goals\" were significantly in contrast with those of the SI. This split however was not a declaration of hostilities, as in other cases of SI exclusions. A few months after the exclusion, in the context of judicial prosecution against the group by the German state, Debord expressed his esteem to Gruppe SPUR, calling it the only significant artist group in (Germany) since World War II, and regarding it at the level of the avant-gardes in other countries.\nThe next significant split was in 1962, wherein the \"Nashists,\" the Scandinavian section of the SI led by J\u00f8rgen Nash, were excluded from the organization. Nash created the 2nd Situationist International.\nPolitical period (1963\u20131968).\nBy this point the Situationist International consisted almost exclusively of the Franco-Belgian section, led by Guy Debord and Raoul Vaneigem. These members possessed much more of a tendency towards political theory over the more artistic aspects of the SI. The shift in the intellectual priorities within the SI resulted in more focus on the theoretical, such as the theory of the spectacle and Marxist critical analysis, spending much less time on the more artistic and tangible concepts like unitary urbanism, d\u00e9tournement, and situgraphy.\nDuring this period, the SI began having more and more influence on local university students in France. Taking advantage of the apathy of their colleagues, five \"Pro-situs\", situationist-influenced students, infiltrated the University of Strasbourg's student union in November 1966 and began scandalising the authorities. Their first action was to form an \"anarchist appreciation society\" called The Society for the Rehabilitation for Karl Marx and Ravachol; next they appropriated union funds to flypost \"Return of the Durruti Column\", Andr\u00e9 Bertrand's \"d\u00e9tourned\" comic strip. They then invited the situationists to contribute a critique of the University of Strasbourg, and \"On the Poverty of Student Life\", written by Tunisian situationist Mustapha/Omar Khayati was the result. The students promptly proceeded to print 10,000 copies of the pamphlet using university funds and distributed them during a ceremony marking the beginning of the academic year. This provoked an immediate outcry in the local, national and international media.\nMay events (1968).\nThe Situationists played a preponderant role in the May 1968 uprisings, and to some extent their political perspective and ideas fueled such crisis, providing a central theoretic foundation. While SI's member count had been steadily falling for the preceding several years, the ones that remained were able to fill revolutionary roles for which they had patiently anticipated and prepared. The active ideologists (\"enrag\u00e9s\" and Situationists) behind the revolutionary events in Strasbourg, Nanterre and Paris, numbered only about one or two dozen persons.\nThis has now been widely acknowledged as a fact by studies of the period, what is still wide open to interpretation is the \"how and why\" that happened. Charles de Gaulle, in the aftermath televised speech of 7 June, acknowledged that \"This explosion was provoked by groups in revolt against modern consumer and technical society, whether it be the communism of the East or the capitalism of the West.\"\nThey also made up the majority in the Occupation Committee of the Sorbonne. An important event leading up to May 1968 was the scandal in Strasbourg in December 1966. The Union Nationale des \u00c9tudiants de France declared itself in favor of the SI's theses, and managed to use public funds to publish Mustapha Khayati's pamphlet \"On the Poverty of Student Life\". Thousands of copies of the pamphlet were printed and circulated and helped to make the Situationists well known throughout the nonstalinist left.\nQuotations from two key situationist books, Debord's \"The Society of the Spectacle\" (1967) and Khayati's \"On the Poverty of Student Life\" (1966), were written on the walls of Paris and several provincial cities. This was documented in the collection of photographs published in 1968 by Walter Lewino, \"L'imagination au pouvoir\".\nThough the SI were a very small group, they were expert self-propagandists, and their slogans appeared daubed on walls throughout Paris at the time of the revolt. SI member Ren\u00e9 Vi\u00e9net's 1968 book \"Enrag\u00e9s and Situationists in the Occupations Movement, France, May '68\" gives an account of the involvement of the SI with the student group of Enrag\u00e9s and the occupation of the Sorbonne.\nThe occupations of 1968 started at the University of Nanterre and spread to the Sorbonne. The police tried to take back the Sorbonne and a riot ensued. Following this a general strike was declared with up to 10 million workers participating. The SI originally participated in the Sorbonne occupations and defended barricades in the riots. The SI distributed calls for the occupation of factories and the formation of workers' councils, but, disillusioned with the students, left the university to set up the Council for Maintaining the Occupations (CMDO) which distributed the SI's demands on a much wider scale. After the end of the movement, the CMDO disbanded.\nAftermath (1968\u20131972).\nBy 1972, Gianfranco Sanguinetti and Guy Debord were the only two remaining members of the SI. Working with Debord, in August 1975, Sanguinetti wrote a pamphlet titled \"Rapporto veridico sulle ultime opportunit\u00e0 di salvare il capitalismo in Italia\" (\"The Real Report on the Last Chance to Save Capitalism in Italy\"), which (inspired by Bruno Bauer) purported to be the cynical writing of \"Censor\", a powerful industrialist. The pamphlet argued that the ruling class of Italy supported the Piazza Fontana bombing and other covert, false flag mass slaughter for the higher goal of defending the capitalist status quo from communist influence. The pamphlet was mailed to 520 of Italy's most powerful individuals. It was received as genuine and powerful politicians, industrialists and journalists praised its content. After reprinting the tract as a small book, Sanguinetti revealed himself to be the true author. In the outcry that ensued and under pressure from Italian authorities Sanguinetti left Italy in February 1976, and was denied entry to France.\nAfter publishing in the last issue of the magazine, an analysis of the May 1968 revolts and the strategies that will need to be adopted in future revolutions, the SI was dissolved in 1972.\nMain concepts.\nThe spectacle and its society.\nThe \"Spectacle\" is a central notion in situationist theory, developed by Guy Debord in his 1967 book \"The Society of the Spectacle\". In a limited sense, \"spectacle\" includes the mass media, which are \"its most glaring superficial manifestation.\" Debord said that the society of the spectacle came to existence in the late 1920s.\nThe critique of the \"spectacle\" is a development and application of Karl Marx's concept of fetishism of commodities, reification and alienation, and the way it was reprised by Gy\u00f6rgy Luk\u00e1cs in 1923. In the society of the spectacle, the commodities rule the workers and the consumers instead of being ruled by them. The consumers are passive subjects that contemplate the reified spectacle.\nAs early as 1958, in the situationist manifesto, Debord described official culture as a \"rigged game\", where conservative powers forbid subversive ideas to have direct access to the public discourse. Such ideas get first trivialized and sterilized, and then they are safely incorporated back within mainstream society, where they can be exploited to add new flavors to old dominant ideas. This technique of the spectacle is sometimes called \"recuperation\", and its counter-technique is the \"d\u00e9tournement\".\nD\u00e9tournement.\nA \"d\u00e9tournement\" is a technique developed in the 1950s by the Letterist International, and consist in \"turning expressions of the capitalist system against itself,\" like turning slogans and logos against the advertisers or the political status quo. \"D\u00e9tournement\" was prominently used to set up subversive political pranks, an influential tactic called situationist prank that was reprised by the punk movement in the late 1970s and inspired the culture jamming movement in the late 1980s.\nAnti-capitalism.\nThe Situationist International, in the 15 years from its formation in 1957 and its dissolution in 1972, is characterized by a Marxist and surrealist perspective on aesthetics and politics, without separation between the two: art and politics are faced together and in revolutionary terms. The SI analyzed the modern world from the point of view of everyday life. The core arguments of the Situationist International were an attack on the capitalist degradation of the life of people and the fake models advertised by the mass media, to which the Situationist responded with alternative life experiences. The alternative life experiences explored by the Situationists were the construction of situations, unitary urbanism, psychogeography, and the union of play, freedom and critical thinking.\nA major stance of the SI was to count on the force of a revolutionary proletariat. This stance was reaffirmed very clearly in a discussion on \"To what extent is the SI a political movement?\", during the Fourth SI Conference in London. The SI remarked that this is a core Situationist principle, and that those that don't understand it and agree with it, are not Situationist.\nArt and politics.\nThe SI rejected all art that separated itself from politics, the concept of 20th-century art that is separated from topical political events. The SI believed that the notion of artistic expression being separated from politics and current events is one proliferated by reactionary considerations to render artwork that expresses comprehensive critiques of society impotent. They recognized there was a precise mechanism followed by reactionaries to defuse the role of subversive artists and intellectuals, that is, to reframe them as separated from the most topical events, and divert from them the taste for the new that may dangerously appeal the masses; after such separation, such artworks are sterilized, banalized, degraded, and can be safely integrated into the official culture and the public discourse, where they can add new flavors to old dominant ideas and play the role of a gear wheel in the mechanism of the society of the spectacle.\nAccording to this theory, artists and intellectuals that accept such compromises are rewarded by the art dealers and praised by the dominant culture. The SI received many offers to sponsor \"creations\" that would just have a \"situationist\" label but a diluted political content, that would have brought things back to order and the SI back into the old fold of artistic praxis. The majority of SI continued to refuse such offers and any involvement on the conventional avant-garde artistic plane. This principle was affirmed since the founding of the SI in 1957, but the qualitative step of resolving all the contradictions of having situationists that make concessions to the cultural market, was made with the exclusion of Gruppe SPUR in 1962.\nThe SI noted how reactionary forces forbid subversive ideas from artists and intellectuals to reach the public discourse, and how they attack the artworks that express comprehensive critique of society, by saying that art should not involve itself into politics.\nThe construction of situations.\nThe first edition of \"Internationale Situationniste\" defines the constructed situation as \"a moment of life concretely and deliberately constructed by the collective organization of a unitary ambiance and a game of events.\"\nAs the SI embraced dialectical Marxism, the situation came to refer less to a specific avant-garde practice than to the dialectical unification of art and life more generally. Beyond this theoretical definition, the situation as a practical manifestation thus slipped between a series of proposals. The SI thus were first led to distinguish the situation from the mere artistic practice of the happening, and later identified it in historical events such as the Paris Commune in which it exhibited itself as the revolutionary moment. The SI's interest in the Paris Commune was expressed in 1962 in their fourteen \"Theses on the Paris Commune.\"\nPsychogeography.\nThe first edition of \"Internationale Situationniste\" defined psychogeography as \"the study of the specific effects of the geographical environment (whether consciously organized or not) on the emotions and behavior of individuals.\" The term was first recognized in 1955 by Guy Debord while still with the Letterist International:The word psychogeography, suggested by an illiterate Kabyle as a general term for the phenomena a few of us were investigating around the summer of 1953, is not too inappropriate. It does not contradict the materialist perspective of the conditioning of life and thought by objective nature. Geography, for example, deals with the determinant action of general natural forces, such as soil composition or climatic conditions, on the economic structures of a society, and thus on the corresponding conception that such a society can have of the world. Psychogeography could set for itself the study of the precise laws and specific effects of the geographical environment, whether consciously organized or not, on the emotions and behavior of individuals. The charmingly vague adjective psychogeographical can be applied to the findings arrived at by this type of investigation, to their influence on human feelings, and more generally to any situation or conduct that seems to reflect the same spirit of discovery.\nD\u00e9rive.\nBy definition, psychogeography combines subjective and objective knowledge and studies. Debord struggled to stipulate the finer points of this theoretical paradox, ultimately producing \"Theory of the D\u00e9rive\" in 1958, a document which essentially serves as an instruction manual for the psychogeographic procedure, executed through the act of d\u00e9rive (\"drift\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In a d\u00e9rive one or more persons during a certain period drop their usual motives for movement and action, their relations, their work and leisure activities, and let themselves be drawn by the attractions of the terrain and the encounters they find there... But the d\u00e9rive includes both this letting go and its necessary contradiction: the domination of psychogeographical variations by the knowledge and calculation of their possibilities.\nSI engaged in a play-form that was also\npracticed by its predecessor organization, the Lettrist International, the art of wandering through urban space, which they termed d\u00e9rive, whose unique mood is conveyed in Debord's darkly romantic meaning of palindrome. Two excursions organized by Andre Breton serve as the closest cultural precedents to the d\u00e9rive. The first in 1921, was an excursion to the Church of Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre with the Parisian Dadaists; the second excursion was on 1 May 1923, when a small group of Surrealists walked toward the countryside outside of Blois. Debord was cautious however to differentiate between the derive and such precedents. He emphasized its active character as \"a mode of experimental behavior\" that reached to Romanticism, the Baroque, and the age of chivalry, with its tradition of long adventures voyages. Such urban roaming was characteristic of Left Bank bohemianism in Paris.\nIn the SI's 6th issue, Raoul Vaneigem writes in a manifesto of unitary urbanism, \"All space is occupied by the enemy. We are living under a permanent curfew. Not just the cops\u2014the geometry\". D\u00e9rive, as a previously conceptualized tactic in the French military, was \"a calculated action determined by the absence of a greater locus\", and \"a maneuver within the enemy's field of vision\". To the SI, whose interest was inhabiting space, the d\u00e9rive brought appeal in this sense of taking the \"fight\" to the streets and truly indulging in a determined operation. The d\u00e9rive was a course of preparation, reconnaissance, a means of shaping situationist psychology among urban explorers for the eventuality of the situationist city.\nPolitical theory.\nMajor works.\nTwelve issues of the main French edition of journal \"Internationale Situationniste\" were published, each issue edited by a different individual or group, including: Guy Debord, Hadj Mohamed Dahou, Giuseppe Pinot-Gallizio, Maurice Wyckaert, Constant Nieuwenhuys, Asger Jorn, Helmut Sturm, Attila Kotanyi, J\u00f8rgen Nash, Uwe Lausen, Raoul Vaneigem, Mich\u00e8le Bernstein, Jeppesen Victor Martin, Jan Strijbosch, Alexander Trocchi, Th\u00e9o Frey, Mustapha Khayati, Donald Nicholson-Smith, Ren\u00e9 Riesel, and Ren\u00e9 Vi\u00e9net.\nClassic Situationist texts include: \"On the Poverty of Student Life\", \"Society of the Spectacle\" by Guy Debord, and \"The Revolution of Everyday Life\" by Raoul Vaneigem.\nThe first English-language collection of SI writings, although poorly and freely translated, was \"Leaving The 20th century\" edited by Christopher Gray. \"The Situationist International Anthology\" edited and translated by Ken Knabb, collected numerous SI documents which had previously never been seen in English.\nRelationship with Marxism.\nRooted firmly in the Marxist tradition, the Situationist International criticized Trotskyism, Marxism\u2013Leninism, Stalinism and Maoism from a position they believed to be further left and more properly Marxist. The situationists possessed a strong anti-authoritarian current, commonly deriding the centralized bureaucracies of China and the Soviet Union in the same breath as capitalism.\nDebord's work \"The Society of the Spectacle\" (1967) established situationist analysis as Marxist critical theory. \"The Society of the Spectacle\" is widely recognized as the main and most influential Situationist essay.\nThe concept of revolution created by the Situationist International was anti-capitalist, Marxist, Young Hegelian, and from the very beginning in the 50s, remarkably differently from the established Left, anti-Stalinist and against all repressive regimes.\nDebord starts his 1967 work with a revisited version of the first sentence with which Marx began his critique of classical political economy, \"Das Kapital\". In a later essay, Debord will argue that his work was the most important social critique since Marx's work. Drawing from Marx, which argued that under a capitalist society the \"wealth\" is degraded to an immense accumulation of commodities, Debord argues that in advanced capitalism, life is reduced to an immense accumulation of spectacles, a triumph of mere appearance where \"all that once was directly lived has become mere representation\". The spectacle, which according to Debord is the core feature of the advanced capitalist societies, has its \"most glaring superficial manifestation\" in the advertising-mass media-marketing complex.\nElaborating on Marx's argument that under capitalism our lives and our environment are continually depleted, Debord adds that the Spectacle is the system by which capitalism tries to hide such depletion. Debord added that, further than the impoverishment in the quality of life, our psychic functions are altered, we get a degradation of mind and also a degradation of knowledge. In the spectacular society, knowledge is not used anymore to question, analyze, or resolve contradictions, but to assuage reality.\nSituationist theorists advocated methods of operation that included democratic workers' councils and workers' self-management, interested in empowering the individual, in contrast to the perceived corrupt bureaucratic states of the Eastern bloc. Their anti-authoritarian interpretation of Marxist theory can be identified with the broader council communist and libertarian Marxist movements, themselves more broadly termed as left communism.\nThe last issue (1969) of the \"Situationist International\" journal, featured an editorial analyzing the events of May 1968. The editorial, written by Guy Debord, was titled \"The Beginning of an Era\", probably as a d\u00e9tournement reference of \"Nachalo\" (\"The Beginning\"), a Russian Marxist monthly magazine.\nAccording to Greil Marcus, some found similarities between the Situationists and the Yippies.\nFormer situationists T. J. Clark and Donald Nicholson-Smith (British section), argued that the portion of the moderate Left that is the \"established Left\", and its \"Left opinion-makers\", usually addressed contemptuously the SI as \"hopelessly young-Hegelian\".\nRelationship with anarchism.\nThe Situationist International was differentiated from both anarchists and Marxists. In spite of this, they have frequently been associated with anarchism. Debord did a critical assessment of the anarchists in his 1967 \"The Society of the Spectacle\". In the final, 12th issue of the journal, the situationists rejected spontaneism and the \"mystics of nonorganization,\" labeling them as a form of \"sub-anarchism\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The only people who will be excluded from this debate are... those who in the name of some sub-anarchist spontaneism proclaim their opposition to any form of organization, and who only reproduce the defects and confusion of the old movement\u2014mystics of nonorganization, workers discouraged by having been mixed up with Trotskyist sects too long, students imprisoned in their impoverishment who are incapable of escaping from bolshevik organizational schemas. The situationists are obviously partisans of organization\u2014the existence of the situationist organization testifies to that. Those who announce their agreement with our theses while crediting the SI with a vague spontaneism simply don't know how to read.\nAccording to situationist Ken Knabb, Debord pointed out the flaws and merits of both Marxism and anarchism. He argued that \"the split between Marxism and anarchism crippled both sides. The anarchists rightly criticized the authoritarian and narrowly economistic tendencies in Marxism, but they generally did so in an undialectical, moralistic, ahistorical manner... and leaving Marx and a few of the more radical Marxists with a virtual monopoly on coherent dialectical analysis\u2014until the situationists finally brought the libertarian and dialectical aspects back together again.\"\nRelationship with the established left.\nThe SI poses a challenge to the model of political action of a portion of the left, the \"established Left\" and \"Left opinion-makers\". The first challenging aspect is the fueling role that the SI had in the upheavals of the political and social movements of the 1960s, upheavals for which much is still at stake and which many foresee as recurring in the 21st century. The second challenging aspect, is the comparison between the Situationist Marxist theory of the Society of the Spectacle, which is still very topical 30 years later, and the current status of the theories supported by leftist establishments in the same period, like Althusserianism, Maoism, Autonomism, Freudo-Marxism and others.\nThe response to this challenge has been an attempt to silence and misinterpret, to \"turn the SI safely into an art movement, and thereby to minimize its role in the political and social movements of the sixties\".\nThe core aspect of the revolutionary perspectives, and the political theory, of the Situationist International, has been neglected by some commentators, which either limited themselves to an apolitical reading of the situationist avant-garde art works, or dismissed the Situationist political theory. Examples of this are Simon Sadler's \"The Situationist City\", and the accounts on the SI published by the \"New Left Review\".\nThe concept of revolution created by the Situationist International was anti-capitalist, Marxist, Young Hegelian, and from the very beginning in the 1950s, remarkably differently from the established Left, anti-Stalinist and against all repressive regimes. The SI called in May 1968 for the formation of workers' councils.\nThere was no separation between the artistic and the political perspectives. For instance, Asger Jorn never believed in a conception of the Situationist ideas as exclusively artistic and separated from political involvement. He was at the root and at the core of the Situationist International project, fully sharing the revolutionary intentions with Debord.\nReception.\nCriticism.\nCritics of the Situationists frequently assert that their ideas are not in fact complex and difficult to understand, but are at best simple ideas expressed in deliberately difficult language, and at worst actually nonsensical. For example, anarchist Chaz Bufe asserts in Listen Anarchist! that \"obscure situationist jargon\" is a major problem in the anarchist movement. Andrea Gibbons argues that the Parisian situationists failed to take on board practically or theoretically the experience of their African members, such as is shown by Abdelhafid Khattib's experience of police harassment while conducting psychogeographic research on Les Halles in 1958. She remarks how little the suppression of Algerians in Paris had impacted their activity and thinking \u2013 Bernstein and Debord co-signed the \"Declaration on the Right to Insubordination in the Algerian War\" in 1961, which led to them being questioned by the police. She cites a letter written by Jacqueline de Jong, Jorgen Nash, and Ansgar Elde protesting the expulsion of the \"Spur\" group in 1962 which highlights the political repression in Paris at that time. Gibbons also criticises the lack of mention of the Algerian situationists in either Debord's or Vaneigem's memoirs.\nInfluence.\nDebord's analysis of the spectacle has been influential among people working on television, particularly in France and Italy; in Italy, TV programs produced by situationist intellectuals, like Antonio Ricci's \"Striscia la notizia\", or Carlo Freccero's programming schedule for \"Italia 1\" in the early 1990s.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, anarchists, communists, and other leftists offered various interpretations of Situationist concepts in combination with a variety of other perspectives. Examples of these groups include: in Amsterdam, the Provos; in the UK, King Mob, the producers of \"Heatwave\" magazine (including Charles Radcliffe who later briefly joined the English Section of the Situationist International), and the Angry Brigade. In the US, groups like Black Mask (later Up Against the Wall Motherfuckers), The Weathermen, and the Rebel Worker group also explicitly employed their ideas.\nAnarchist theorists such as Fredy Perlman, Bob Black, Hakim Bey, and John Zerzan, have developed the SI's ideas in various directions away from Marxism. These theorists were predominantly associated with the magazines \"Fifth Estate\", \"\", and \"Green Anarchy\". During the early 1980s, English anarchist Larry Law produced the \"Spectacular Times\" pocket-books series, which aimed to make Situationist ideas more easily assimilated into the anarchist movement. Later anarchist theorists such as the CrimethInc. collective also claim Situationist influence.\nSituationist urban theory, defined initially by the members of the Lettrist International as \"Unitary Urbanism,\" was extensively developed through the behavioural and performance structures of The Workshop for Non-Linear Architecture during the 1990s. The re-emergence of the London Psychogeographical Association also inspired many new psychogeographical groups including Manchester Area Psychogeographic. The LPA and the Neoist Alliance along with the Luther Blissett Project came together to form a New Lettrist International with a specifically Communist perspective. Around this time, Unpopular Books and the LPA released some key texts including new translations of Asger Jorn's work.\nAround this time also, groups such as Reclaim the Streets and Adbusters have, respectively, seen themselves as \"creating situations\" or practicing detournement on advertisements.\nPunk and culture.\nIn cultural terms, Situationist International's influence has arguably been greater, if more diffuse. In the late 1960s, MC5, the Fugs and Hawkwind were radical situationist bands.\nSituationist ideas exerted a strong influence on the design language of the punk rock phenomenon of the 1970s and the post-punk scene of the early 1980s. To a significant extent, this was the result of the adoption of the style, aesthetics and slogans employed by the SI. These were often secondhand influences received through British situationist groups such as King Mob whose associates included Malcolm McLaren and Jamie Reid. Factory Records owner Tony Wilson was influenced by situationist urbanism, and Factory band the Durutti Column took their name from Andr\u00e9 Bertrand's collage \"Le Retour de la Colonne Durutti\". (Bertrand, in turn, took his title from the eponymous anarchist army during the Spanish Civil War). American punk group the Feederz have been acclaimed as exhibiting a more direct and conscious influence. Formed in the late 1970s, they became known for extensive use of detournement and their intention to provoke their audience through the exposition of situationist themes. Other musical artists whose lyrics and artwork have referenced situationist concepts include the Clash, Pussy Riot, Crass, Tom Robinson Band, Ian Dury, X-Ray Spex, Sham 69, Buzzcocks, the Fall, Patrik Fitzgerald, Conflict, the Royal Family and the Poor, Angelic Upstarts, Chaos UK, Chaotic Dischord, MDC, Dead Kennedys, Reagan Youth, Chumbawamba and Manic Street Preachers. Situationist theory experienced a vogue in the late '90s hardcore punk scene, when it was referenced by Orchid, His Hero Is Gone and CrimethInc.\nSituationist ideas may be found within the development of other avant-garde threads such as neoism, as well as artists such as Mark Divo and American artist Joey Skaggs who has been compared to Situationist practitioners for his use of staged spectacles and media infiltration to subvert dominant cultural narratives. His satirical hoaxes, such as \"Cathouse for Dogs\" and \"Portofess\", reflect Situationist strategies like d\u00e9tournement by exposing media complicity and challenging societal norms.\nWriters such as Thomas de Zengotita have echoed situationist theories regarding the of contemporary society.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57522", "revid": "39104771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57522", "title": "Einkorn", "text": "Primitive wheat\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEinkorn (from German \"Einkorn\", literally \"single grain\") can refer to either a wild species of wheat (\"Triticum\") or a domesticated form of wheat. The wild form is T. boeoticum (syn. \"T. m.\" subsp. \"boeoticum\"), and the domesticated form is T. monococcum (syn. \"T. m.\" subsp. \"monococcum\"). Einkorn is a diploid species (2\"n\" = 14 chromosomes) of hulled wheat, with tough glumes (husks) that tightly enclose the grains. The cultivated form is similar to the wild, except that the ear stays intact when ripe and the seeds are larger. The domestic form is known as in French, in German, \"einkorn\" or \"littlespelt\" in English, in Italian and in Spanish. The name refers to the fact that each spikelet contains only one grain.\nEinkorn wheat was one of the first plants to be domesticated and cultivated. \nDescription.\nEinkorn is a short variety of wild wheat, usually less than tall and is not very productive of edible seeds. The principal difference between wild einkorn and cultivated einkorn is the method of seed dispersal. In the wild variety the seed head usually shatters and drops the kernels (seeds) of wheat onto the ground. This facilitates a new crop of wheat. In the domestic variety, the seed head remains intact. While such a mutation may occasionally occur in the wild, it is not viable there in the long term: the intact seed head will only drop to the ground when the stalk rots, and the kernels will not scatter but form a tight clump which inhibits germination and makes the mutant seedlings susceptible to disease. But harvesting einkorn with intact seed heads was easier for early human harvesters, who could then manually break apart the seed heads and scatter any kernels not eaten. Over time and through selection, conscious or unconscious, the human preference for intact seed heads created the domestic variety, which has slightly larger kernels than wild einkorn. Domesticated einkorn thus requires human planting and harvesting for its continuing existence. This process of domestication may have taken only 20 to 200 years, resulting in a wheat that was easier to harvest.\nAn important characteristic facilitating the domestication of einkorn and other annual grains is that the plants are largely self-pollinating. Thus, the desirable (for human management) traits of einkorn could be perpetuated at less risk of cross-fertilization with wild plants which might have traits \u2013 e.g. smaller seeds, shattering seed heads, as less desirable for human management.\nTaxonomy.\nCultivated Einkorn was described as a taxon, \"Triticum monococcum\", by Carl Linnaeus in 1753. Later descriptions by other taxonomists, now treated as synonyms, include \"Triticum pubescens\" by von Bieberstein in 1800; \"Triticum hornemanii\" by Clementi in 1818; \"Nivieria monococcum\" in 1841; \"Triticum vulgare monococcum\" by Alefeld in 1866; \"Triticum monococcum subsp. cereale\" by Albert Thellung in 1918. Wild Einkorn is known either as \"Triticum monococcum\" subsp. \"aegilopoides\" or as \"Triticum boeoticum\".\nWild and domesticated einkorns are diploid wheats. Unlike emmer and bread wheat, which were formed by hybridisation with \"Aegilops\" goatgrasses, einkorn is not a hybrid.\nEcology and distribution.\nEinkorn wheat commonly grows wild in the hill country in the northern part of the Fertile Crescent and Anatolia, although it has a wider distribution reaching into the Balkans and south to Jordan near the Dead Sea. \nHistory.\nEarly human use.\nEinkorn wheat is one of the earliest cultivated forms of wheat, alongside emmer wheat (\"T. dicoccum\"). Hunter gatherers in the Fertile Crescent may have started harvesting einkorn as early as 30,000 years ago, according to archaeological evidence from Syria. \nDomestication.\nAlthough gathered from the wild for thousands of years, einkorn wheat was first domesticated approximately 10,000 years BP in the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA) or B (PPNB) periods. Evidence from DNA fingerprinting suggests einkorn was first domesticated near Karaca Da\u011f in southeast Turkey, an area in which a number of PPNB farming villages have been found. Yuval Noah Harari suggests that the domestication of einkorn was linked to intensive agriculture to support the nearby G\u00f6bekli Tepe site.\nSpread of cultivation.\nFrom the northern part of the Fertile Crescent, the cultivation of einkorn wheat spread to the Caucasus, the Balkans, and central Europe. Einkorn wheat was more commonly grown in cooler climates than emmer wheat, the other domesticated wheat. Cultivation of einkorn in the Middle East began to decline in favor of emmer wheat around 2000 BCE. Cultivation of einkorn was never extensive in Italy, southern France, and Spain. Einkorn continued to be cultivated in some areas of northern Europe throughout the Middle Ages and until the early part of the 20th century.\nAgronomy.\nEinkorn wheat is low-yielding but can survive on poor, dry, marginal soils where other varieties of wheat will not. It is primarily eaten boiled in whole grains or in porridge. As with other ancient varieties of wheat such as emmer, Einkorn is a \"covered wheat\" as its kernels do not break free from its seed coat (glume) with threshing. This makes it difficult to separate the husk from the seed.\nUses.\nEinkorn is a common food in northern Provence, France. It is used for bulgur or as animal feed in mountainous areas of countries including France, India, Italy, Morocco, the former Yugoslavia, and Turkey. It contains gluten (so is not suitable for people with gluten-related disorders) and has a higher percentage of protein than modern red wheats. It is considered more nutritious because it has higher levels of fat, phosphorus, potassium, pyridoxine, and beta-carotene.\nResource for plant breeding.\nEinkorn is the source of many potential introgressions for immunity; Russian geneticist Nikolai Vavilov called it an \"accumulator of complex immunities\". \"T.\u00a0monococcum\" is the source of \"Sr21\", a stem rust resistance gene which has been introgressed into hexaploid worldwide. It is also the source of \"Yr34\", a resistance gene for yellow rust.\nThe salt-tolerance feature of \"T. monococcum\" has been bred into durum wheat.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57523", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57523", "title": "Epi-Paleolithic", "text": ""}
{"id": "57524", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57524", "title": "Wild einkorn wheat", "text": ""}
{"id": "57525", "revid": "29291527", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57525", "title": "Emmer wheat", "text": ""}
{"id": "57526", "revid": "46977059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57526", "title": "P\u00e9clet number", "text": "Ratio of a fluid's advective and diffusive transport rates\nIn continuum mechanics, the P\u00e9clet number (Pe, after Jean Claude Eug\u00e8ne P\u00e9clet) is a class of dimensionless numbers relevant in the study of transport phenomena in a continuous environment. It is defined to be the ratio of the rate of advection of a physical quantity by the flow to the rate of diffusion of the same quantity driven by an appropriate gradient. In the context of species or mass transfer, the P\u00e9clet number is the product of the Reynolds number and the Schmidt number (Re \u00d7 Sc). In the context of the thermal fluids, the thermal P\u00e9clet number is equivalent to the product of the Reynolds number and the Prandtl number (Re \u00d7 Pr).\nDefinition.\nThe P\u00e9clet number is defined as\nformula_1\nUsages.\nMass transfer.\nFor mass transfer, it is defined as\nformula_2\nwhere L is the characteristic length, u the local flow velocity, D the mass diffusion coefficient, Re the Reynolds number, Sc the Schmidt number.\nSuch ratio can also be re-written in terms of times, as a ratio between the characteristic temporal intervals of the system:\nformula_3\nFor formula_4 the diffusion happens in a much longer time compared to the advection, and therefore the latter of the two phenomena predominates in the mass transport. \nHeat transfer.\nFor heat transfer, the P\u00e9clet number is defined as\nformula_5\nwhere Pr the Prandtl number, and \u03b1 the thermal diffusivity,\nformula_6\nwhere k is the thermal conductivity, \u03c1 the density, and cp the specific heat capacity.\nEngineering applications.\nIn engineering applications, the P\u00e9clet number is often very large. In such situations, the dependency of the flow upon \"downstream\" locations is diminished, and variables in the flow tend to become \"one-way\" properties. Thus, when modelling certain situations with high P\u00e9clet numbers, simpler computational models can be adopted.\nA flow will often have different P\u00e9clet numbers for heat and mass. This can lead to the phenomenon of double diffusive convection.\nIn the context of particulate motion, the P\u00e9clet number has also been called Brenner number, with symbol Br, in honour of Howard Brenner.\nOther usages.\nThe P\u00e9clet number also finds applications beyond transport phenomena, as a general measure for the relative importance of the random fluctuations and of the systematic average behavior in mesoscopic systems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57528", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57528", "title": "Jean Claude Eug\u00e8ne P\u00e9clet", "text": "French physicist (1793\u20131857)\nJean Claude Eug\u00e8ne P\u00e9clet (10 February 1793 \u2013 6 December 1857) was a French physicist.\nHe was born in Besan\u00e7on, France.\nP\u00e9clet became, in 1812, one of the first students of the \u00c9cole Normale in Paris with Gay-Lussac and Dulong being his professors. In 1816, he was elected professor at the Coll\u00e8ge de Marseille and taught physical sciences there until 1827. Being nominated \"ma\u00eetre de conf\u00e9rences\" (tenured position) at the \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure, he returned to Paris. In 1829, he became a professor of physics at the \u00c9cole Centrale des Arts et Manufactures that was being founded by the businessman Alphonse Lavall\u00e9e, by P\u00e9clet, and by two other scientists, Jean-Baptiste Dumas and Th\u00e9odore Olivier. \nHis salary was then 3000 Francs per year, plus a share of the profits of this private engineering school. \nIn 1840, P\u00e9clet became inspecteur g\u00e9n\u00e9ral de l'instruction publique.\nThe P\u00e9clet number is named after him. He was Coriolis's brother-in-law.\nHe died in Paris."}
{"id": "57531", "revid": "39067", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57531", "title": "Osbourne Reynolds", "text": ""}
{"id": "57532", "revid": "6111155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57532", "title": "Royal Horticultural Society", "text": "Registered charity in the UK\nThe Royal Horticultural Society (RHS), founded in 1804 as the Horticultural Society of London, is the UK's leading gardening charity.\nThe RHS promotes horticulture through its five gardens at Wisley (Surrey), Hyde Hall (Essex), Harlow Carr (North Yorkshire), Rosemoor (Devon) and Bridgewater (Greater Manchester); flower shows including the Chelsea Flower Show, Hampton Court Palace Flower Show, Tatton Park Flower Show and Cardiff Flower Show; community gardening schemes; Britain in Bloom and a vast educational programme. It also supports training for professional and amateur gardeners. As of 2023[ [update]] the president was Keith Weed and the director general was Clare Matterson CBE.\nHistory.\nFounders.\nThe creation of a British horticultural society was suggested by John Wedgwood (son of Josiah Wedgwood) in 1800. His aims were fairly modest: he wanted to hold regular meetings, allowing the society's members the opportunity to present papers on their horticultural activities and discoveries, to encourage discussion of them, and to publish the results. The society would also award prizes for gardening achievements.\nWedgwood discussed the idea with his friends, but it was four years before the first meeting, of seven men, took place, on 7 March 1804 at Hatchards bookshop in Piccadilly, London. Wedgwood was chairman; also present were William Townsend Aiton (successor to his father, William Aiton, as Superintendent of Kew Gardens), Sir Joseph Banks (President of the Royal Society), James Dickson (a nurseryman), William Forsyth (Superintendent of the gardens of St. James's Palace and Kensington Palace), Charles Francis Greville (a Lord of the Admiralty) and Richard Anthony Salisbury, who became the Secretary of the new society.\nBanks proposed his friend Thomas Andrew Knight for membership. The proposal was accepted, despite Knight's ongoing feud with Forsyth over a plaster for healing tree wounds which Forsyth was developing. Knight was president of the society from 1811 to 1838, and developed the society's aims and objectives to include a programme of practical research into fruit-breeding.\nMembership.\nIn 2009 more than 363,000 people were members of the society, and the number increased to more than 414,000 in 2013 and to 525,105 by 2019. Membership and fellowship of the society were previously decided by election, but are now by financial contribution. Fellows are supporters \"contributing a suggested \u00a35,000 per annum\" (as of 2022).\nMembers and Fellows of the Royal Horticultural Society are entitled to use the post-nominal letters MRHS and FRHS, respectively.\nGardens.\nThe Royal Horticultural Society's five major gardens in England are: Wisley Garden, near Wisley in Surrey; Rosemoor Garden in Devon; Hyde Hall in Essex; Harlow Carr in Harrogate, North Yorkshire and RHS Garden, Bridgewater in Worsley, Greater Manchester.\nThe society's first garden was in Kensington, from 1818 to 1822. In 1820 the society leased some of Hugh Ronalds' nursery ground at Little Ealing to set up an experimental garden, but the next year part of the Duke of Devonshire's estate at Chiswick was obtained. In 1823 it employed Joseph Paxton there. From 1827 the society held f\u00eates at the Chiswick garden, and from 1833, shows with competitive classes for flowers and vegetables. In 1861 the RHS (as it had now become) developed a new garden at South Kensington on land leased from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851 (the Science Museum, Imperial College and the Royal College of Music now occupy the site), but it was closed in 1882. The Chiswick garden was maintained until 1903\u20131904, by which time Sir Thomas Hanbury had bought the garden at Wisley and presented it to the RHS.\nRHS Garden Wisley is thus the society's oldest garden. Rosemoor came next, presented by Lady Anne Berry in 1988. Hyde Hall was given to the RHS in 1993 by its owners Dick and Helen Robinson. Dick Robinson was also the owner of the Harry Smith Collection which was based at Hyde Hall. Then came Harlow Carr, acquired by the merger of the Northern Horticultural Society with the RHS in 2001. It had been the Northern Horticultural Society's trial ground and display garden since they bought it in 1949. In 2013, more than 1.63 million people visited the four gardens.\nIn 2015 the RHS announced plans for a fifth garden at Worsley New Hall, Greater Manchester, under the name RHS Garden Bridgewater. The garden opened in May 2021.\nShows.\nThe RHS is well known for its annual flower shows which take place across the UK. The most famous of these shows is the RHS Chelsea Flower Show, visited by people from across the world. This was followed by the Hampton Court Palace Flower Show (which the RHS took over in 1993) and RHS Tatton Park Flower Show in Cheshire (since 1999). In 2024 the line up expanded to include the Malvern Spring Festival, Garden Hyde Hall Flower Show, Garden Rosemoor Flower Show and the first RHS Urban Show \nIn 2025 the introduced the first RHS Flower show at Wentworth Woodhouse.\nThe society is also closely involved with BBC Gardeners' World Live held annually at the Birmingham National Exhibition Centre.\nLibraries.\nThe RHS is custodian of the Lindley Library, housed within its headquarters at 80 Vincent Square, London, and in branches at each of its four gardens. The library is based upon the book collection of John Lindley.\nThe RHS Herbarium has its own image library (collection) consisting of more than 3,300 original watercolours, approximately 30,000 colour slides and a rapidly increasing number of digital images. Although most of the images have been supplied by photographers commissioned by the RHS, the archive includes a substantial number of slides from the Harry Smith Collection and Plant Heritage National Plant Collection holders.\nThe libraries in each of the gardens are open to all visitors. RHS members can borrow books from the Lindley London, as well as the libraries at Wisley Garden and Harlow Carr Garden.\nBritain in Bloom.\nIn 2002, the RHS took over the administration of the Britain in Bloom competition from the Tidy Britain Group (formerly and subsequently Keep Britain Tidy). In 2010, the society launched 'It's your neighbourhood', a campaign to encourage people to get involved in horticulture for the benefit of their community. In 2014, 'Britain in Bloom' celebrated its 50th anniversary.\nEducation and training.\nThe RHS runs formal courses for professional and amateur gardeners and horticulturalists and also validates qualifications gained elsewhere (e.g. at Kew Botanic Gardens).\nThe RHS Level 1 Award in Practical Horticulture aims to develop essential horticultural skills and to provide a foundation for further RHS practical qualifications at Levels 2 and 3. It is aimed at anyone who has an interest in plants and gardening.\nLevel 2 qualifications provide a basis for entry into professional horticulture, support career development for existing horticultural workers or can provide a foundation for further learning or training. There are separate theoretical- and practical-based qualifications at this Level and the RHS Level 2 Diploma in the Principles and Practices of Horticulture combines the theoretical- and practical-based qualifications.\nLevel 3 qualifications allow specialisation in the candidate's area of interest. They can offer proficiency for those looking for employment in horticulture, they can support further career and professional development for those already working in the field, or they can provide a basis for continued learning or training. As for Level 2, there are theoretical- and practical-based qualifications at Level 3 and a Diploma that combines both.\nThe Master of Horticulture (RHS) Award is the society's most prestigious professional horticultural qualification. It is of degree level and it is intended for horticultural professionals. The course allows for flexible study over a period of three years or more.\nThe RHS Campaign for School Gardening provides online inspiration, resources and advice to its members. With the help of teachers, volunteers and other school-gardening champions, they support millions of students in the UK, giving them the opportunity to grow plants, food and develop life skills.\nMedals and awards.\nPeople.\nThe society honours certain British persons who are deemed by its council to be deserving of special recognition in the field of horticulture with the Victoria Medal of Honour, established in 1897. There are only 63 holders of this medal at any time, one for every year of the reign of Queen Victoria. Since 2023, the society has handed out the Elizabeth Medal of Honour, for which there could be only 70 holders at any time, one for every year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth II. Thus, neither of the aforementioned medals are awarded every year\nOther awards bestowed by the society include the Associate of Honour (established in 1930) where the number does not exceed 100 at any time (unless they also hold the Victoria Medal of Honour). As of 2022 there were also the Harlow Carr Medal (for significant contribution to horticulture in the north of England), Reginald Cory Memorial Cup (for introducing new hybrid plants developed from existing garden plants), Community Award (for long-term contribution to community gardening) and the Roy Lancaster Award (for exceptional contribution by those under 35 years old). Medals issued by the society earlier in its history have included the Banksian, Knightian and Lindley medals, named after early officers of the society, as well as Honorary Fellowships.\nThe Veitch Memorial Medal, named after James Veitch, is awarded annually to persons of any nationality who have made an outstanding contribution to the advancement and improvement of the science and practice of horticulture.\nThe society awards Gold, Silver-gilt, Silver and Bronze medals to exhibitors at its Flower Shows.\nPlants.\nThe Award of Garden Merit, or AGM, is the principal award made to garden plants by the society after a period of assessment by the appropriate committees of the society. Awards are made annually after plant trials.\nOlder books may contain references to the following awards, which were based mainly on flower or fruit quality (but which are not referred to in current (2014) RHS websites and reports):\n PC: Preliminary Certificate\n HC: Highly Commended\n AM: Award of Merit (not the same as the AGM)\n FCC: First Class Certificate (once a very prestigious award)\nPublications.\nJournals.\nThe society published its proceedings as the \"Transactions of the Horticultural Society of London\" from 1807 to 1848. The society has also published a journal since 1846. It was initially known as the \"Journal of the Horticultural Society of London\" (1846\u20131855), then \"Proceedings of the Horticultural Society of London\" (1859\u20131860) and then \"Proceedings of the Royal Horticultural Society\" (1861\u20131869). \nIts main periodical for members was continued as the \"Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society\" (1866\u20131975). Since 1975 this monthly publication has been entitled \"The Garden\". The RHS also publishes \"The Plant Review\" four times a year and \"The Orchid Review\" annually, and it published \"Hanburyana\", an annual publication dedicated to horticultural taxonomy, from 2006 to 2013.\nRegisters and encyclopedias.\nSince the establishment of International Registration Authorities for plants in 1955 the RHS has acted as Registrar for certain groups of cultivated plants. It is now Registrar for nine categories \u2013 conifers, clematis, daffodils, dahlias, delphiniums, dianthus, lilies, orchids and rhododendrons. It publishes The International Orchid Register, an extensive listing of orchid hybrids, and the \"Encyclopedia of Conifers\", which was published in 2012.\nBooks.\nThe RHS publishes many horticulture and gardening books, including:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57533", "revid": "17101593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57533", "title": "Tashkent", "text": "Capital and largest city of Uzbekistan\nTashkent (), also known as Toshkent, is the capital and largest city of Uzbekistan. It is the most populous city in Central Asia, with a population of more than 3 million people as of April 1, 2024. It is located in northeastern Uzbekistan, near the border with Kazakhstan.\nBefore the influence of Islam in the mid-8th century AD, Sogdian and Turkic culture was predominant. After Genghis Khan destroyed the city in 1219, it was rebuilt and profited from its location on the Silk Road. From the 18th to the 19th centuries, the city became an independent city-state, before being re-conquered by the Khanate of Kokand. In 1865, Tashkent fell to the Russian Empire; as a result, it became the capital of Russian Turkestan. In Soviet times, it witnessed major growth and demographic changes due to forced deportations from throughout the Soviet Union. Much of Tashkent was destroyed in the 1966 Tashkent earthquake, but it was soon rebuilt as a model Soviet city. It was the fourth-largest city in the Soviet Union at the time, after Moscow, Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg) and Kiev (now Kyiv).\nTashkent plays a central role in the country's economic and human development. As of 2024, it recorded the highest HDI among Uzbekistan's regions, with a score of 0.840, reflecting significant progress in education, healthcare, and living standards. Economically, Tashkent was the leading contributor to the national GDP, accounting for 19% of Uzbekistan\u2019s GDP in the first half of 2024. This economic dominance is supported by ongoing infrastructure development and urban modernization projects aimed at enhancing its role as a financial and commercial hub. Nonetheless, the city faces challenges such as environmental concerns and the need for sustainable investment in public services.\nSince Uzbekistan gained independence, Tashkent has retained its multiethnic population, with ethnic Uzbeks forming the majority. In 2009, it celebrated 2,200 years of its written history. The master plan of Tashkent until 2045 was approved.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nDuring its long history, Tashkent has undergone various changes in names and political and religious affiliations. Abu Rayhan Biruni wrote that the city's name Tashkent comes from the turkic \"tash\" and persian \"kent\", literally translated as \"Stone City\" or \"City of Stones\".\nIlya Gershevitch (1974:55, 72) (apud Livshits, 2007:179) traces the city's old name Chach back to Old Iranian *\"\u010d\u0101i\u010da-\" \"area of water, lake\" (cf. \"\u010ca\u0113\u010dista\", the Aral Sea's name in the Avesta) (whence Middle Chinese transcription *\"\u017ai\u00e4k\" &gt; standard Chinese \"Sh\u00ed\" with Chinese character \u77f3 for \"stone\"), and *\"\u010ca\u010dkand\" ~ \"\u010ca\u010dkan\u03b8\" was the basis for Turkic adaptation Tashkent, popularly etymologized as \"stone city\". Livshits proposes that \"\u010ca\u010d\" originally designated only the Aral Sea before being used for the Tashkent oasis.\n\u00dcnal (2022) critiques Gershevitch's and Livshits's etymology as being \"based on too many assumptions\". He instead derives the name \"\u010ca\u010d\" from Late Proto-Turkic *\"t1i\u0101t2(\u0103)\" \"stone\", which he proposes to be seemingly another translation, besides the apparent Chinese translation \u77f3 \"sh\u00ed\" \"stone\", of *\"ka\u014bk-\" (whence Chinese transcription \u5eb7\u5c45 EHC *\"k\u02b0\u0251\u014b-k\u0268\u0251\" &gt; standard Chinese \"K\u0101ngj\u016b\"), which possibly meant \"stone\". Against Harold Walter Bailey's and Edwin G. Pulleyblank's suggested Tocharian origin for *\"ka\u014bk-\", \u00dcnal proposes that it was instead an Iranian word and compares it to Pashto \"k\u0101\u0301\u1e47ay\" \"stone\".\nEarly history.\nThe first occupants identified in the Tashkent oasis were the Burgulik (Burghulik, Burgulyuk or Burganlik) culture, an ancient pastoral society of the Late Bronze and Early Iron Ages. The Burgulik era is usually divided into two periods, Burgulik I occurred during the 9th to 7th centuries BCE and Burgulik II, from the 6th to 4th centuries BCE. Archaeological excavations indicate that the Burgulik people were involved in animal husbandry, possibly agriculture with some irrigation and handicrafts. They lived primarily in basement shaped huts or hollowed cave dwellings and there was no evidence of wooden architecture. The hill fort, Shashtepa, in the southern part of the city was constructed during Burgulik I and is believed to have been abandoned in the 7th century BCE.\nShashtepa was one of the largest villages of the Burgulik era as the availability of running water from the Dzhun Aryk, a branch of the Chirchik River and fertile soil made its location ideal for the sedentary life of agriculture. At the later stage (6th\u20133rd centuries BCE), it was influenced by the late Saka culture of Southern Kazakhstan (Usun) and the culture of Northern Fergana (Aktam burial ground).\nThe Burgulik culture was replaced by the Kaunchin culture (Chach), which is usually associated with the population of the Kangju (K'ang-ch\u00fc) state, a Chinese name for a kingdom in Central Asia that existed from about 140 BCE to the 5th century CE. Chinese sources suggest that a settlement existed here at oasis near the Chirchik River in the 2nd century BCE. Tashkent might have been or near \"Beitian,\" (Pi-tien) the summer capital of Kangju.\nSome scholars believe that a \"Stone Tower\" mentioned by Ptolemy in his famous treatise \"Geography\", and by other early accounts of travel on the old Silk Road, referred to this settlement (due to its etymology). This tower is said to have marked the midway point between Europe and China. Other scholars, however, disagree with this identification, though it remains one of four most probable sites for the Stone Tower.\nHistory as Chach.\nIn pre-Islamic and early Islamic times, the town and the province were known as \"Chach\". The Shahnameh of Ferdowsi also refers to the city as Chach.\nThe principality of Chach had a square citadel built around the 5th to 3rd centuries BC, some south of the Syr Darya River. By the 7th century AD, Chach had more than 30 towns and a network of over 50 canals, forming a trade center between the Sogdians and Turkic nomads. The Buddhist monk Xuanzang (602/603? \u2013 664 AD), who travelled from China to India through Central Asia, mentioned the name of the city as (). The Chinese chronicles \"History of Northern Dynasties\", \"Book of Sui\", and \"Old Book of Tang\" mention a possession called (\"stone\") or with a capital of the same name since the fifth century AD.\nIn 558\u2013603, Chach was part of the Turkic Khaganate. At the beginning of the 7th century, the Turkic Khaganate, as a result of internecine wars and wars with its neighbors, disintegrated into the Western and Eastern Khaganates. The Western Turkic ruler Tong Yabghu Qaghan (618-630) set up his headquarters in the Ming-bulak area to the north of Chach. Here he received embassies from the emperors of the Tang Empire and Byzantium. In 626, the Indian Buddhist preacher Prabhak\u0101ramitra arrived with ten companions to the Khagan. In 628, Xuanzang arrived in Ming-bulak.\nThe Turkic rulers of Chach minted their coins with the inscription on the obverse side of the \"lord of the Khakan money\" (mid-8th century); with an inscription in the ruler Turk (7th century), in Nudjket in the middle of the 8th century, coins were issued with the obverse inscription \"Nanchu (Banchu) Ertegin sovereign\".\nIslamic Caliphate.\nChach (Arabic: Shash) was conquered by the Umayyad Caliphate at the beginning of the 8th century.\nAccording to the descriptions of the authors of the 10th century, Shash was structurally divided into a citadel, an inner city (madina) and two suburbs - an inner (rabad-dahil) and an outer (rabad-harij). The citadel, surrounded by a special wall with two gates, contained the ruler's palace and the prison.\nPost Caliphate rule.\nUnder the Samanid Empire, whose founder Ismail Samani was a descendant of Persian Zoroastrian convert to Islam, the city came to be known as \"Binkath\". However, the Arabs retained the old name of \"Chach\" for the surrounding region, pronouncing it \"ash-Sh\u0101sh\" () instead. \nAbu Bakr Muhammad ibn Ali ash-Shashi, known as al-Kaffal ash-Shashi (904-975), was born in Tashkent. He was an Islamic theologian, scholar, jurist of the Shafi'i \"madhhab\", hadith scholar and linguist.\nAfter the 11th century, the name evolved from Chachkand/Chashkand to Tashkand. The modern spelling of \"Tashkent\" reflects Russian orthography and 20th-century Soviet influence.\nAt the end of the 10th century, Tashkent became part of the possessions of the Turkic state of the Karakhanids. In 998/99 the Tashkent oasis went to the Karakhanid Ahmad ibn Ali, who ruled the north-eastern regions of Mavarannahr. In 1177/78, a separate khanate was formed in the Tashkent oasis. Its center was Banakat, where dirhams of Mu'izz ad-dunya wa-d-din Qilich-khan were minted, in 1195\u20131197; and of Jalal ad-dunya wa-d-din Tafgach-khakan, in 1197\u20131206.\nMongol conquest.\nThe city was destroyed by Genghis Khan in 1219 and lost much of its population as a result of the Mongols' destruction of the Khwarezmid Empire in 1220.\nTimurid period.\nUnder the Timurid and subsequent Shaybanid dynasties, the city's population and culture gradually revived as a prominent strategic center of scholarship, commerce and trade along the Silk Road.\nDuring the reign of Amir Timur (1336-1405), Tashkent was restored and in the 14th-15th centuries Tashkent was part of Timur's empire. For Timur, Tashkent was considered a strategic city. In 1391 Timur set out in the spring from Tashkent to Desht-i-Kipchak to fight the Khan of the Golden Horde Tokhtamysh Khan. Timur returned from this victorious campaign through Tashkent.\nThe most famous saint Sufi of Tashkent was Sheikh Khovendi at-Takhur (13th to the first half of the 14th century). According to legend, Amir Timur, who was treating his wounded leg in Tashkent with the healing water of the Zem-Zem spring, ordered to build a mausoleum for the saint. By order of Timur, the Zangiata mausoleum was built.\nUzbek Shaybanid's dynasty period.\nIn the 16th century, Tashkent was ruled by the Shaybanid dynasty.\nShaybanid Suyunchkhoja Khan was an enlightened Uzbek ruler; following the traditions of his ancestors Mirzo Ulugbek and Abul Khair Khan, he gathered famous scientists, writers and poets at his court, among them: Vasifi, Abdullah Nasrullahi, Masud bin Osmani Kuhistani. Since 1518 Vasifi was the educator of the son of Suyunchhoja Khan Keldi Muhammad, with whom, after the death of his father in 1525, he moved to Tashkent. After the death of his former pupil, he became the educator of his son, Abu-l-Muzaffar Hasan-Sultan.\nLater the city was subordinated to Shaybanid Abdullah Khan II (the ruler actually from 1557, officially in 1583\u20131598), who issued his coins here. From 1598 to 1604 Tashkent was ruled by the Shaybanid Keldi Muhammad, who issued silver and copper coins on his behalf.\nKazakh ruled period.\nIn 1598, Kazakh Tauekel Khan was at war with the Khanate of Bukhara. The Bukhara troops sent against him were defeated by Kazakhs in the battle between Tashkent and Samarkand. During the reign of Yesim-Khan, a peace treaty was concluded between Bukhara and Kazakhs, according to which Kazakhs abandoned Samarkand, but left behind Tashkent, Turkestan and a number of Syr Darya cities.\nYesim-Khan ruled the Kazakh Khanate from 1598 to 1628, his main merit was that he managed to unite the Kazakh khanate. The city was part of Kazakh Khanate between 1598 and 1723.\nTashkent state.\nIn 1784, Yunus Khoja, the ruler of the dakha (district) Shayhantahur, united the entire city under his rule and created an independent Tashkent state (1784-1807), which by the beginning of the 19th century seized vast lands.\nKokand Khanate.\nIn 1809, Tashkent was annexed to the Khanate of Kokand. At the time, Tashkent had a population of around 100,000 and was considered the richest city in Central Asia.\nUnder the Kokand domination, Tashkent was surrounded by a moat and an adobe battlement (about 20 kilometers long) with 12 gates. It prospered greatly through trade with Russia but chafed under Kokand's high taxes. The Tashkent clergy also favored the clergy of Bukhara over that of Kokand. However, before the Emir of Bukhara could capitalize on this discontent, the Russian army arrived.\nColonial period.\nIn May 1865, Mikhail Grigorevich Chernyayev (Cherniaev), acting against the direct orders of the Tsar and outnumbered at least 15\u20131, staged a daring night attack against a city with a wall long with 11 gates and 30,000 defenders. While a small contingent staged a diversionary attack, the main force penetrated the walls, led by a Russian Orthodox priest. Although the defense was stiff, the Russians captured the city after two days of heavy fighting and the loss of only 25 dead as opposed to several thousand of the defenders (including Alimqul, the ruler of the Kokand Khanate). Chernyayev, dubbed the \"Lion of Tashkent\" by city elders, staged a hearts-and-minds campaign to win the population over. He abolished taxes for a year, rode unarmed through the streets and bazaars meeting common people, and appointed himself \"Military Governor of Tashkent\", recommending to Tsar Alexander II that the city become an independent khanate under Russian protection.\nThe Tsar liberally rewarded Chernyayev and his men with medals and bonuses, but regarded the impulsive general as a loose cannon, and soon replaced him with General Konstantin Petrovich von Kaufman. Far from being granted independence, Tashkent became the capital of the new territory of Russian Turkistan, with Kaufman as first Governor-General. A cantonment and Russian settlement were built across the Ankhor Canal from the old city, and Russian settlers and merchants poured in. Tashkent was a center of espionage in the Great Game rivalry between Russia and the United Kingdom over Central Asia. The Turkestan Military District was established as part of the military reforms of 1874. The Trans-Caspian Railway arrived in 1889, and the railway workers who built it settled in Tashkent as well, bringing with them the seeds of Bolshevik Revolution.\nEffect of the Russian Revolution.\nWith the fall of the Russian Empire, the Russian Provisional Government removed all civil restrictions based on religion and nationality, contributing to local enthusiasm for the February Revolution. The Tashkent Soviet of Soldiers' and Workers' Deputies was soon set up, but primarily represented Russian residents, who made up about a fifth of the Tashkent population. Muslim leaders quickly set up the Tashkent Muslim Council (\"Tashkand Shura-yi-Islamiya\") based in the old city. On 10 March 1917, there was a parade with Russian workers marching with red flags, Russian soldiers singing \"La Marseillaise\" and thousands of local Central Asians. Following various speeches, Governor-General Aleksey Kuropatkin closed the events with words \"Long Live a great free Russia\".\nThe First Turkestan Muslim Conference was held in Tashkent 16\u201320 April 1917. Like the Muslim Council, it was dominated by the Jadid, Muslim reformers. A more conservative faction emerged in Tashkent centered around the Ulema. This faction proved more successful during the local elections of July 1917. They formed an alliance with Russian conservatives, while the Soviet became more radical. The Soviet attempt to seize power in September 1917 proved unsuccessful.\nIn April 1918, Tashkent became the capital of the Turkestan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (Turkestan ASSR). The new regime was threatened by White forces, \"basmachi;\" revolts from within, and purges ordered from Moscow.\nSoviet period.\nThe city began to industrialize in the 1920s and 1930s.\nViolating the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact, Nazi Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941. The government worked to relocate factories from western Russia and Ukraine to Tashkent to preserve the Soviet industrial capacity. This led to great increase in industry during World War II.\nIt also evacuated most of the German communist emigres to Tashkent. The Russian population increased dramatically; evacuees from the war zones increased the total population of Tashkent to well over a million. Russians and Ukrainians eventually comprised more than half of the total residents of Tashkent. Many of the former refugees stayed in Tashkent to live after the war, rather than return to former homes.\nDuring the postwar period, the Soviet Union established numerous scientific and engineering facilities in Tashkent.\nOn 10 January 1966, then Indian Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri and Pakistan President Ayub Khan signed a pact in Tashkent with Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin as the mediator to resolve the terms of peace after the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965. On the next day, Shastri died suddenly, reportedly due to a heart attack. It is widely speculated that Shastri was killed by poisoning the water he drank.\nMuch of Tashkent's old city was destroyed by a powerful earthquake on 26 April 1966. More than 300,000 residents were left homeless, and some 78,000 poorly engineered homes were destroyed, mainly in the densely populated areas of the old city where traditional adobe housing predominated. The Soviet republics, and some other countries, such as Finland, sent \"battalions of fraternal peoples\" and urban planners to help rebuild devastated Tashkent.\nTashkent was rebuilt as a model Soviet city with wide streets planted with shade trees, parks, immense plazas for parades, fountains, monuments, and acres of apartment blocks. The Tashkent Metro was also built during this time. About 100,000 new homes were built by 1970, but the builders occupied many, rather than the homeless residents of Tashkent. Further development in the following years increased the size of the city with major new developments in the Chilonzor area, north-east and south-east of the city.\nAt the time of the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Tashkent was the fourth-largest city in the USSR and a center of learning in the fields of science and engineering. Due to the 1966 earthquake and the Soviet redevelopment, little architectural heritage has survived of Tashkent's ancient history. Few structures mark its significance as a trading point on the historic Silk Road. Such countries of the Soviet Union as Azerbaijan and Armenia, Kazakhstan and Georgia, Belarus and Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan and Tajikistan, Latvia, Moldova, Estonia helped restore the city after the earthquake and erected many modern buildings.\nCapital of Uzbekistan.\nTashkent is the capital of Uzbekistan, noted for its tree-lined streets, fountains and parks. In 2009, the local government initiated a controversial tree-cutting campaign.\nSince 1991, the city has changed economically, culturally, and architecturally. New development has superseded or replaced icons of the Soviet era. The largest statue ever erected for Lenin was replaced with a globe, featuring a geographic map of Uzbekistan. Buildings from the Soviet era have been replaced with new modern buildings. The \"Downtown Tashkent\" district includes the 22-story NBU Bank building, international hotels, the International Business Center, and the Plaza Building.\nThe Tashkent Business district is a special district, established for the development of small, medium and large businesses in Uzbekistan. In 2018, construction began on a new Downtown which would include a business district with skyscrapers of local and foreign companies, world hotels such as Hilton Tashkent Hotel, apartments, malls, shops and other entertainment. The construction of the International Business Center is planned to be completed by the end of 2021. Fitch assigns \"BB\u2212\" rating to Tashkent city, \"Stable\" forecast.\nIn 2007, Tashkent was named a \"cultural capital of the Islamic world\" by \"Moscow News\", as the city has numerous historic mosques and significant Islamic sites, including the Islamic University. Tashkent holds the Samarkand Kufic Quran, one of the earliest written copies of the Quran, which has been located in the city since 1924.\nTashkent is the most visited city in the country, and has greatly benefited from increasing tourism as a result of reforms under president Shavkat Mirziyoyev and opening up by abolishing visas for visitors from the European Union and other developing countries or making visas easier for foreigners.\nThe invention of television.\nIn the summer of 1928, the first fully electronic TV set was presented to the public in Tashkent. Boris Grabovsky's method, patented in Saratov in 1925, proposed a new model of TV imaging based on the vertical and horizontal electron beam sweeping under high voltage. Nowadays this principle of the TV imaging is used practically in all modern cathode-ray tubes. Historian and ethnographer Boris Golender (\u0411\u043e\u0440\u0438\u0441 \u0413\u043e\u043b\u0435\u043d\u0434\u0435\u0440 in Russian), in a video lecture, described this event. This date of demonstration of the fully electronic TV set is the earliest known so far. Despite this fact, most modern historians disputably consider Vladimir Zworykin and Philo Farnsworth as inventors of the first fully electronic TV set. In 1964, the contribution made to the development of early television by Grabovsky was officially acknowledged by the Uzbek government and he was awarded the prestigious degree \"Honorable Inventor of the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic\".\nGeography.\nTashkent is situated in a well-watered plain on the road between Samarkand, Uzbekistan's second city, and Shymkent across the border. Tashkent is just 13\u00a0km from two border crossings into Kazakhstan.\nClosest geographic cities with populations of over 1 million are: Shymkent (Kazakhstan), Dushanbe (Tajikistan), Bishkek (Kyrgyzstan), Kashgar (China), Almaty (Kazakhstan), Kabul (Afghanistan) and Peshawar (Pakistan).\nTashkent sits at the confluence of the Chirchiq River and several of its tributaries and is built on deep alluvial deposits up to . The city is located in an active tectonic area suffering large numbers of tremors and some earthquakes.\nThe local time in Tashkent is UTC/GMT +5 hours.\nClimate.\nTashkent features a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csa\") with some humid continental climate influences (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dsa\"). As a result, Tashkent experiences cold and often snowy winters not typically associated with most Mediterranean climates and long, hot and dry summers. Most precipitation occurs during the winter, which frequently falls as snow. The city experiences two peaks of precipitation in the early winter and spring. The slightly unusual precipitation pattern is partially due to its altitude. Summers are long in Tashkent, usually lasting from May to September. Tashkent can be extremely hot during the months of July and August. The city also sees very little precipitation during the summer, particularly from June through September.\nEcology.\nThe level of air pollution in Tashkent, especially in winter, significantly exceeds international norms. According to the World Bank, the average annual pollution level is more than 6 times higher than the WHO recommended level (5 \u03bcg/m3). The main sources of air pollution are the heating sector (28%), transport (16%) and industry (13%). There are 631 heating complexes around the city, according to the Ecological Party of Uzbekistan 60% of them use coal, sometimes rubber tyres and other fuels. As of the end of 2025, Tashkent regularly ranks among the most polluted megacities in the world according to IQAir data.\nDemographics.\nIn 1983, the population of Tashkent amounted to 1,902,000 people living in a municipal area of . By 1991, the year the Soviet Union dissolved, the city's population had grown to approximately 2,136,600. Tashkent was the fourth most populated city in the former USSR, after Moscow, Leningrad (St. Petersburg), and Kyiv. Nowadays, Tashkent remains the fourth most populous city in the CIS.\nAs of 2020, the city's population was 2,716,176.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUzbek is the main spoken language in Tashkent, though Russian is also spoken as a lingua franca. As in much of Uzbekistan, signage in Tashkent often contains a mix of Latin and Cyrillic scripts.\nTashkent is the center of the Greek community in Uzbekistan, which formed due to mass population transfers in the Soviet Union. Thousands of Pontic Greeks were forcibly displaced in the early 1940s, and after the defeat of the Democratic Army of Greece and the Communist Party of Greece in 1949, another wave of Greeks entered Central Asia. The Soviet Union sent around 11,000 refugees of the Greek Civil War to Tashkent, where a Greek community survives to this day. In the early 1980s, with the decriminalisation of the Greek Communist Party, many returned to Greece.\nDistricts.\nBektemir\nChilonzor\nYashnobod\nMiro-&lt;br&gt;bod\nMirzo&lt;br&gt;Ulugbek\nSergeli\nShaykhon-&lt;br&gt;tohur\nOlmazor\nUchtepa\nYakka-&lt;br&gt;saray\nYunusobod\n\"K a z a k h s t a n\"\n\"T a s h k e n t&lt;br&gt;R e g i o n\"\nSince 2020, when Yangihayot District was created, Tashkent has been divided into the following 12 districts ():\nBefore Tashkent was conquered by the Russian Empire, it was divided into four districts, or \"daha\" in Uzbek:\nIn 1940 it had the following districts (Russian \"\u0440\u0430\u0439\u043e\u043d\"):\nBy 1981, these were reorganized into the following:\nLandmarks.\nAlthough most of the ancient city was destroyed during the 1917 revolution and the 1966 earthquake, Tashkent has many museums and Soviet-era monuments:\nThe Russian Orthodox church in Amir Temur Square, built in 1898, was demolished in 2009. The building had not been allowed to be used for religious purposes since the 1920s due to the anti-religious campaign conducted across the former Soviet Union by the Bolshevik (communist) government in Moscow. During the Soviet period, the building was used for different non-religious purposes; after independence, it was a bank.\nTashkent also has a World War II memorial park and a Defender of Motherland monument.\nEducation.\nMost important scientific institutions of Uzbekistan, such as the Academy of Sciences of Uzbekistan, are located in Tashkent. There are several universities and institutions of higher education:\nEntertainment and shopping.\nThere are several shopping malls in Tashkent. These include Tashkent City Mall, Next and Samarqand Darvoza shopping malls. Most of the malls, including Riviera and Compass mall, were built and are operated by the Tower Management Group. This is part of the Orient Group of Companies.\nThe capital's most established theatre is the Alisher Navoi Theater, that has regular ballet and opera performances. Ilkhom Theater, founded by Mark Weil in 1976, was the first independent theater in the Soviet Union. The theater still operates in Tashkent and is known for its historical reputation.\nSport.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Tashkent, with the most prominent football clubs being Pakhtakor Tashkent FK, FC Bunyodkor, and PFC Lokomotiv Tashkent, all three of which compete in the Uzbekistan Super League. Footballers Maksim Shatskikh, Peter Odemwingie and Vasilis Hatzipanagis were born in the city. Humo Tashkent, a professional ice hockey team was established in 2019 with the aim of joining Kontinental Hockey League (KHL), a top level Eurasian league in future. Humo joined the second-tier Supreme Hockey League (VHL) for the 2019\u201320 season. Humo play their games at the Humo Ice Dome; both the team and arena derive their name from the mythical Huma bird. Humo Tashkent was a member of the reformed Uzbekistan Ice Hockey League which began play in February 2019. Humo finished in first place at the end of the regular season. Cyclist Djamolidine Abdoujaparov was born in the city, while tennis player Denis Istomin was raised there. Akgul Amanmuradova and Iroda Tulyaganova are notable female tennis players from Tashkent. Gymnasts Alina Kabaeva and Israeli Olympian Alexander Shatilov were also born in the city. Former world champion and Israeli Olympic bronze medalist sprint canoer in the K-1 500 m event Michael Kolganov was also born in Tashkent.\nIn Weightlifting, Uzbekistan won the heavyweight class in both the Rio and Tokyo Olympic Games. Tashkent is hosting the 2021 Weightlifting World Championships.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nTashkent is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57535", "revid": "1317106814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57535", "title": "Ishikawa diagram", "text": "Causal diagrams created by Kaoru Ishikawa\nIshikawa diagrams (also called fishbone diagrams, herringbone diagrams, cause-and-effect diagrams) are causal diagrams created by Kaoru Ishikawa that show the potential causes of a specific event.\nCommon uses of the Ishikawa diagram are product design and quality defect prevention to identify potential factors causing an overall effect. Each cause or reason for imperfection is a source of variation. Causes are usually grouped into major categories to identify and classify these sources of variation.\nOverview.\nThe \"defect\", or the problem to be solved, is shown as the fish's head, facing to the right, with the \"causes\" extending to the left as fishbones; the ribs branch off the backbone for major causes, with sub-branches for root-causes, to as many levels as required.\nIshikawa diagrams were popularized in the 1960s by Kaoru Ishikawa, who pioneered quality management processes in the Kawasaki shipyards, and in the process became one of the founding fathers of modern management.\nThe basic concept was first used in the 1920s, and is considered one of the seven basic tools of quality control. It is known as a fishbone diagram because of its shape, similar to the side view of a fish skeleton.\nMazda Motors famously used an Ishikawa diagram in the development of the Miata (MX5) sports car.\nRoot causes.\nRoot-cause analysis is intended to reveal key relationships among various variables, and the possible causes provide additional insight into process behavior. It shows high-level causes that lead to the problem encountered by providing a snapshot of the current situation.\nThere can be confusion about the relationships between problems, causes, symptoms and effects. Smith highlights this and the common question \u201cIs that a problem or a symptom?\u201d which mistakenly presumes that problems and symptoms are mutually exclusive categories. A problem is a situation that bears improvement; a symptom is the effect of a cause: a situation can be both a problem and a symptom.\nAt a practical level, a cause is whatever is responsible for, or explains, an effect - a factor \"whose presence makes a critical difference to the occurrence of an outcome\".\nThe causes emerge by analysis, often through brainstorming sessions, and are grouped into categories on the main branches off the fishbone. To help structure the approach, the categories are often selected from one of the common models shown below, but may emerge as something unique to the application in a specific case.\nEach potential cause is traced back to find the root cause, often using the 5 Whys technique.\nTypical categories include:\nThe 5 Ms (used in manufacturing).\nOriginating with lean manufacturing and the Toyota Production System, the 5 Ms is one of the most common frameworks for root-cause analysis:\nThese have been expanded by some to include an additional three, and are referred to as the 8 Ms:\nThe 8 Ps (used in product marketing).\nThis common model for identifying crucial attributes for planning in product marketing is often also used in root-cause analysis as categories for the Ishikawa diagram:\nThe 4 or 5 Ss (used in service industries).\nAn alternative used for service industries, uses four categories of possible cause: \nUse in specific industries.\nThe Ishikawa diagram has been widely adopted across various industries as an effective tool for root cause analysis in quality, efficiency, and safety-related issues. Its versatility allows it to be applied in both manufacturing and service contexts.\nIn the manufacturing industry, particularly in the automotive and electronics sectors, the diagram is frequently used in continuous improvement initiatives such as Six Sigma and Lean Manufacturing. Quality teams use it to identify causes related to materials, methods, machinery, manpower, environment, and measurement, facilitating informed decision-making to reduce defects and optimize processes.\nIn the food industry, the Ishikawa diagram is applied to analyze issues related to food safety, temperature control, cross-contamination, and regulatory compliance. Its use enables companies to identify improvement opportunities in production, packaging, and distribution stages.\nIn the pharmaceutical sector, it is a key tool in process validation, quality control, and compliance with Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP). It helps visualize factors affecting product quality from formulation to storage.\nIt has also been successfully implemented in sectors such as aerospace, pulp and paper, construction, education, and healthcare, where it supports structured problem-solving and promotes continuous improvement and a culture of quality.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57538", "revid": "47120006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57538", "title": "Beer Hall Putsch", "text": "Failed 1923 Nazi coup attempt in Munich, Germany\nThe Beer Hall Putsch, also known as the Munich Putsch, was a failed coup d'\u00e9tat by Nazi Party leader Adolf Hitler, General Erich Ludendorff and other leaders in Munich, Bavaria, on 8\u20139 November 1923, during the period of the Weimar Republic. Inspired by Benito Mussolini's March on Rome, Hitler's goal was to use Munich as a base for a march against Germany's national government in Berlin.\nThe putsch began on the evening of 8 November, when Hitler and a contingent of approximately six hundred (SA) members marched on the beer hall B\u00fcrgerbr\u00e4ukeller, where Gustav Ritter von Kahr\u2014the Minister-President of Bavaria who had banned some of Hitler's previous planned gatherings\u2014was delivering a speech. As the SA surrounded the hall, Hitler entered, fired a shot into the ceiling, and claimed that the Bavarian government had been overthrown and that the national revolution had begun. The following day, approximately two thousand Nazis marched on the , in the city centre, but were confronted by a police cordon, which resulted in the deaths of 15 Nazis, four police officers, and one bystander. Hitler escaped immediate arrest and was spirited off to safety in the countryside. After two days, he was arrested and charged with treason.\nThe putsch brought Hitler to the attention of the German nation for the first time and generated front-page headlines in newspapers around the world. His arrest was followed by a 24-day trial, which was widely publicised and gave him a platform to express his nationalist sentiments. Hitler was found guilty of treason and sentenced to five years in Landsberg Prison, where he dictated to fellow prisoners Emil Maurice and Rudolf Hess. On 20 December 1924, having served only nine months, Hitler was released. Once released, Hitler redirected his focus towards obtaining power through legal means rather than by revolution or force, and accordingly changed his tactics, further developing Nazi propaganda.\nBackground.\nIn the early 20th century, many of the larger cities of southern Germany had beer halls, where hundreds, and sometimes thousands, of people would socialise in the evenings, drink beer and participate in political and social debates. Such beer halls also became the hosts of occasional political rallies. One of Munich's largest beer halls was the , which became the site where the putsch began.\nAfter the Treaty of Versailles, which ended World War I, Germany declined as a major European power. Like many Germans of the period, Hitler, who had fought in the German Army but still held Austrian citizenship at the time, believed the treaty to be a betrayal, with the country having been \"stabbed in the back\" by its own government, particularly as the German Army was popularly thought to have been undefeated in the field. For the defeat, Hitler scapegoated civilian leaders, Jews and Marxists, later called the \"November Criminals\".\nHitler remained in the army in Munich after the war. He participated in various \"national thinking\" courses, organised by the Education and Propaganda Department of the Bavarian Army under Captain Karl Mayr, of which Hitler became an agent. Captain Mayr ordered Hitler, then an army (not the equivalent of lance corporal, but a special class of private) and holder of the Iron Cross, First Class, to infiltrate the tiny (\"German Workers' Party\", abbreviated DAP). Hitler joined the DAP on 12 September 1919. He soon realised that he was in agreement with many of the underlying tenets of the DAP, and rose to its top post in the ensuing chaotic political atmosphere of postwar Munich. By agreement, Hitler assumed the political leadership of a number of Bavarian revanchist \"patriotic associations\", called the . This political base extended to include about 15,000 members of the (SA, literally \"Storm Detachment\"), the paramilitary wing of the NSDAP.\nOn 26 September 1923, following a period of terror and political violence, Bavarian Prime Minister declared a state of emergency, and Gustav Ritter von Kahr was appointed (\"state commissioner\"), with dictatorial powers to govern the state. Along with , Bavarian state police chief Colonel and General formed a ruling triumvirate. Hitler announced that he would hold 14 mass meetings beginning on 27 September 1923. Afraid of the potential disruption, one of 's first actions was to ban the announced meetings, placing Hitler under pressure to act. The Nazis, with other leaders in the , felt they had to march upon Berlin and seize power or their followers would turn to the communists. Hitler enlisted the help of World War I general in an attempt to gain the support of and his triumvirate. However, had his own plan with and to install a nationalist dictatorship without Hitler.\nThe putsch.\nThe putsch was inspired by Benito Mussolini's successful March on Rome. From 22 to 29 October 1922, Hitler and his associates planned to use Munich as a base for a march against Germany's Weimar Republic government, but circumstances differed from those in Italy. Hitler came to the realisation that Kahr sought to control him and was not ready to act against the government in Berlin. Hitler wanted to seize a critical moment for successful popular agitation and support. He decided to take matters into his own hands. Hitler, along with a large detachment of SA, marched on the B\u00fcrgerbr\u00e4ukeller, where Kahr was making a speech in front of 3,000 people.\nOn the evening of 8 November 1923, 603 SA surrounded the beer hall and a machine gun was set up in the auditorium. Hitler, surrounded by his associates Hermann G\u00f6ring, Alfred Rosenberg, Rudolf Hess, Ernst Hanfstaengl, Ulrich Graf, Johann Aigner, Adolf Lenk, Max Amann, Max Erwin von Scheubner-Richter, Wilhelm Adam, Robert Wagner and others (some 20 in all), advanced through the crowded auditorium. Unable to be heard above the crowd, Hitler fired a shot into the ceiling and jumped on a chair, yelling: \"The national revolution has broken out! The hall is surrounded by six hundred men. Nobody is allowed to leave.\" He went on to state that the Bavarian government was deposed and declared the formation of a new government with Ludendorff.\nHitler, accompanied by Hess, Lenk, and Graf, ordered the triumvirate of Kahr, Seisser and Lossow into an adjoining room at gunpoint and demanded they support the putsch and accept the government positions he assigned them. Hitler had promised Lossow a few days earlier that he would not attempt a coup, but now thought that he would get an immediate response of affirmation from them, imploring Kahr to accept the position of Regent of Bavaria. Kahr replied that he could not be expected to collaborate, especially as he had been taken out of the auditorium under heavy guard.\nHeinz Pernet, Johann Aigne and Scheubner-Richter were dispatched to pick up Ludendorff, whose personal prestige was being harnessed to give the Nazis credibility. A telephone call was made from the kitchen by Hermann Kriebel to Ernst R\u00f6hm, who was waiting with his \"Bund Reichskriegsflagge\" in the \"L\u00f6wenbr\u00e4ukeller\", another beer hall, and he was ordered to seize key buildings throughout the city. At the same time, co-conspirators under Gerhard Rossbach mobilised the students of a nearby infantry officers' school to seize other objectives.\nHitler became irritated by Kahr and summoned Ernst P\u00f6hner, Friedrich Weber, and Hermann Kriebel to stand in for him while he returned to the auditorium flanked by Rudolf Hess and Adolf Lenk. He followed up on G\u00f6ring's speech and stated that the action was not directed at the police and Reichswehr, but against \"the Berlin Jew government and the November criminals of 1918\". Dr. Karl Alexander von Mueller, a professor of modern history and political science at the University of Munich and a supporter of Kahr, was an eyewitness. He reported:\nI cannot remember in my entire life such a change in the attitude of a crowd in a few minutes, almost a few seconds ... Hitler had turned them inside out, as one turns a glove inside out, with a few sentences. It had almost something of hocus-pocus, or magic about it.\nHitler ended his speech with: \"Outside are Kahr, Lossow and Seisser. They are struggling hard to reach a decision. May I say to them that you will stand behind them?\"\nThe crowd in the hall backed Hitler with a roar of approval. He finished:\nYou can see that what motivates us is neither self-conceit nor self-interest, but only a burning desire to join the battle in this grave eleventh hour for our German Fatherland ... One last thing I can tell you. Either the German revolution begins tonight or we will all be dead by dawn!\nHitler, Ludendorff, \"et al.\", returned to the main hall's podium, where they gave speeches and shook hands. The crowd was then allowed to leave the hall. In a tactical mistake, Hitler decided to leave the B\u00fcrgerbr\u00e4ukeller shortly thereafter to deal with a crisis elsewhere. Around 22:30, Ludendorff released Kahr and his associates.\nThe Bund Oberland, under the command of Max Ritter von M\u00fcller, was sent to seize weapons from the Army Engineer Barracks under the pretence of performing training manoeuvres. Oskar Cantzler, captain of the 1st company of the 7th Engineer Battalion, did not believe them, but allowed them to perform the manoeuvres inside the building. He locked the building with the 400 men inside and positioned two machine guns at the entrance. Hitler attempted to have the men released, but Cantzler refused. Hitler considered using artillery to destroy the building but chose not to.\nThe night was marked by confusion and unrest among government officials, armed forces, police units, and individuals deciding where their loyalties lay. Units of the \"Kampfbund\" were scurrying around to arm themselves from secret caches, and seizing buildings. At around 03:00, the first casualties of the putsch occurred when the local garrison of the \"Reichswehr\" spotted R\u00f6hm's men coming out of the beer hall. They were ambushed while trying to reach the \"Reichswehr\" barracks by soldiers and state police; shots were fired, but there were no fatalities on either side. Encountering heavy resistance, R\u00f6hm and his men were forced to fall back. In the meantime, the \"Reichswehr\" officers put the whole garrison on alert and called for reinforcements.\nIn the morning, Hitler ordered the seizure of the Munich city council as hostages.\nBy mid-morning on 9 November, Hitler realised that the putsch was going nowhere. The putschists did not know what to do and were about to give up. At this moment, Ludendorff cried out, \"Wir marschieren!\" ('We will march!'). R\u00f6hm's force together with Hitler's (a total of approximately 2000 men) marched out \u2013 but with no specific destination. On the spur of the moment, Ludendorff led them to the Bavarian Defence Ministry. However, at the \"Odeonsplatz\" in front of the \"Feldherrnhalle\", they met a force of 130 soldiers blocking the way under the command of State Police Senior Lieutenant Michael von Godin. The two groups exchanged fire, which resulted in the deaths of 16 Nazis, four police officers, and one bystander.\nTheir defeat by the government forces forced Hitler and Ludendorff to flee, Hitler would be driven by Ernst Hanfstaengl to Uffing while Ludendorff would flee to Munich. It was the origin of the \"Blutfahne\" ('blood flag'), which was stained with the blood of two SA members who were shot: the flag bearer Heinrich Trambauer, who was badly wounded, and Andreas Bauriedl, who fell dead onto the fallen flag. A bullet killed Scheubner-Richter. G\u00f6ring was shot in the leg, but escaped. The rest of the Nazis scattered or were arrested. Hitler was arrested two days later.\nIn a description of Ludendorff's funeral at the \"Feldherrnhalle\" in 1937 (which Hitler attended but without speaking) William L. Shirer wrote: \"The World War [One] hero [Ludendorff] had refused to have anything to do with him [Hitler] ever since he had fled from in front of the Feldherrnhalle after the volley of bullets during the Beer Hall Putsch.\" However, when a consignment of papers relating to Landsberg prison (including the visitor book) was later sold at auction, it was noted that Ludendorff had visited Hitler a number of times. The case of the resurfacing papers was reported in \"Der Spiegel\" on 23 June 2006; the new information (which came out more than 30 years after Shirer wrote his book, and which Shirer did not have access to) nullifies Shirer's statement.\nCounterattack.\nPolice units were first notified of trouble by three police detectives stationed at the \"L\u00f6wenbr\u00e4ukeller\". These reports reached Major Sigmund von Imhoff of the state police. He immediately called all his \"Gr\u00fcne Polizei\" units and had them seize the central telegraph office and the telephone exchange, although his most important act was to notify Major-General Jakob von Danner, the \"Reichswehr\" city commandant of Munich. As a proud war hero, Danner loathed the \"little corporal\" and those \"\"Freikorps\" bands of rowdies\". He also did not much like his commanding officer, Generalleutnant Otto von Lossow, \"a sorry figure of a man\". He was determined to put down the putsch with or without Lossow. Danner set up a command post at the 19th Infantry Regiment barracks and alerted all military units.\nMeanwhile, Captain Karl Wild, learning of the putsch from marchers, mobilised his command to guard Kahr's government building, the \"Commissariat\", with orders to shoot.\nAround 23:00, Major-General von Danner, along with fellow generals Adolf Ritter von Ruith and Friedrich Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein, compelled Lossow to repudiate the putsch.\nThere was one member of the cabinet who was not at the B\u00fcrgerbr\u00e4ukeller: Franz Matt, the vice-premier and minister of education and culture. A staunchly conservative Roman Catholic, he was having dinner with the Archbishop of Munich, Cardinal Michael von Faulhaber, and with the Nuncio to Bavaria, Archbishop Eugenio Pacelli (who would later become Pope Pius XII), when he learned of the putsch. He immediately telephoned Kahr. When he found the man vacillating and unsure, Matt made plans to set up a rump government-in-exile in Regensburg and composed a proclamation calling upon all police officers, members of the armed forces, and civil servants to remain loyal to the government. The action of these few men spelt doom for those attempting the putsch. The next day the archbishop and Rupprecht visited Kahr and persuaded him to repudiate Hitler.\nThree thousand students from the University of Munich rioted and marched to the \"Feldherrnhalle\" to lay wreaths. They continued to riot until 9 November, when they learned of Hitler's arrest. Kahr and Lossow were called Judases and traitors.\nTrial and prison.\nTwo days after the putsch, Hitler was arrested and he, Ludendorff, Hermann Kreibel, Wilhelm Frick, Ernst P\u00f6hner, Ernst R\u00f6hm, Friedrick Weber, Wilhelm Bruckner and Robert Wagner were charged with high treason in the special People's Court along with Heinz Pernet being charged as an accessory. Some of his fellow conspirators, including Rudolf Hess, were also arrested, while others, including Hermann G\u00f6ring and Ernst Hanfstaengl, escaped to Austria. The Nazi Party's headquarters was raided, and its newspaper, the \"V\u00f6lkischer Beobachter\" (\"The People's Observer\"), was banned. In January 1924, the Emminger Reform, an emergency decree, abolished the jury as trier of fact and replaced it with a mixed system of judges and lay judges in Germany's judiciary.\nThis was not the first time Hitler had been in trouble with the law. In an incident in September 1921, he and some men of the SA had disrupted a meeting of the \"Bayernbund\" ('Bavaria Union') which Otto Ballerstedt, a Bavarian federalist, was to have addressed, and the Nazi troublemakers were arrested as a result. Hitler ended up serving just over a month of a three-month jail sentence. Judge Georg Neithardt was the presiding judge at both of Hitler's trials.\nHitler's trial began on 26 February 1924 and lasted until 1 April 1924. Lossow acted as chief witness for the prosecution and Karl Kohl as defense lawyer. Hitler began with a nearly 4 hour long opening speech which began with him telling his life story before he shifted to discussing his political vision with a large focus on criticism of racial minorities, communism, the Weimar Republic and the Bavarian leaders who turned on him. He claimed the putsch had been solely his responsibility, inspiring the title \"F\u00fchrer\" or 'leader'. After this, Hitler would moderate his tone for the trial, dropping his usual anti-Semitism. The lay judges were fanatically pro-Nazi and had to be dissuaded by the presiding Judge, Georg Neithardt, from acquitting Hitler outright. The other nine defendants would follow with their own opening statements with little interruption from Neithardt. Ernst Rohm testified \"I still cannot comprehend that I should have to defend myself for a deed that seemed so natural to me\".\nAfter 6 days of opening statements, the witnesses first took to the stand on 4 March with various police and government officials testifying. Neithardt would make it clear that personal attacks on Bavarian leaders were out of bounds and wished to protect their reputations. All three Bavarian leaders testified. Lossow testified first, criticising Hitler for not trying to fix the government in Berlin through legal and constitutional means. Kahr testified next, saying that the putsch could have been a staggering catastrophe for the country. Seisser testified last, calling Hitler \"a young man who let the applause of crowds get to his head\" and saying that Hitler had set back the nationalist cause by years. Hitler presented his closing statement on 27 March and said that \"his goal was to be the destroyer of Marxism and just as a bird would sing because he is a bird, he had to engage in politics\". Hitler's closing statement brought a number of people in the courtroom to tears and he ended by saying \"for it is not you, gentlemen, who pronounce judgment upon us. Instead, the judgment of the eternal court of history will pronounce against this prosecution which has been raised against us\".\nHitler, Kreibel, P\u00f6hner and Weber were all sentenced to five years in ('fortress confinement') for treason with parole eligibility in six months, the absolute minimum sentence. was the mildest of the three types of jail sentence available in German law at the time; it excluded forced labour, provided reasonably comfortable cells, and allowed the prisoner to receive visitors almost daily for many hours. This was the customary sentence for those whom the judge believed to have had honourable but misguided motives, and it did not carry the stigma of a sentence of \"Gef\u00e4ngnis\" (common prison) or \"Zuchthaus\" (disciplinary prison). Except for Ludendorff, the remaining five defendants (Br\u00fcckner, Frick, Pernet, R\u00f6hm and Wagner) were found guilty of abetting high treason and sentenced to 15 months in prison, minus time served. They were freed and placed on parole until 1 April 1928. Due to Ludendorff's story that he was present by accident, an explanation he had also used in the Kapp Putsch, along with his war service and connections, he was acquitted.\nAlthough the trial was the first time that Hitler's oratory was insufficient, he used the trial as an opportunity to spread his ideas by giving speeches in the courtroom. The event was extensively covered in the newspapers the next day. The judges were impressed (Presiding Judge Neithardt was inclined to favouritism towards the defendants prior to the trial), and as a result, Hitler served just over eight months in prison and was fined 500\u00a0\u211b\ufe01\u2133\ufe01. Prison officials allegedly wanted to give Hitler deaf guards, to prevent him from persuading them to free him. In December 1924, he was granted early release for good behaviour. G\u00f6ring, meanwhile, had fled after suffering a bullet wound to his leg, which led him to become increasingly dependent on morphine and other painkilling drugs. This addiction continued throughout his life.\nOne of Hitler's greatest worries at the trial was that he was at risk of being deported back to his native Austria by the Bavarian government. The trial judge, Neithardt, was sympathetic toward Hitler and held that the relevant laws of the Weimar Republic could not be applied to a man \"who thinks and feels like a German, as Hitler does.\" The result was that the Nazi leader remained in Germany.\nThough Hitler failed to achieve his immediate goal, the putsch did give the Nazis their first national attention and propaganda victory. While serving their \"fortress confinement\" sentences at Landsberg am Lech, Hitler, Emil Maurice and Rudolf Hess wrote \"Mein Kampf\". The putsch had changed Hitler's outlook on violent revolution to effect change. From then his \"modus operandi\" was to do everything \"strictly legal\".\nThe process of \"combination\", wherein the conservative-nationalist-monarchist group thought that its members could piggyback on, and control, the National Socialist movement to garner the seats of power, was to repeat itself ten years later in 1933 when Franz von Papen asked Hitler to form a legal coalition government.\nFatalities.\nPutschists.\nThe 15 deceased are listed in Hitler's dedication to \"Mein Kampf\".\nScheubner-Richter was walking arm-in-arm with Hitler during the putsch; he was shot in the lungs and died instantly. He brought Hitler down and dislocated Hitler's shoulder when he fell. He was the only significant Nazi leader to die during the putsch. Of all the party members who died in the putsch, Hitler claimed Scheubner-Richter to be the only \"irreplaceable loss\".\nAccording to Ernst R\u00f6hm, Martin Faust and Theodor Casella, both members of the armed militia organisation \"Reichskriegsflagge\", were shot down accidentally in a burst of machine gun fire during the occupation of the War Ministry as the result of a misunderstanding with II/Infantry Regiment 19.\nAlso honoured as a martyr in \"Mein Kampf\" was Karl Kuhn (born 26 July 1897), a head waiter from Heilbronn. Allegedly he took part in the putsch as a member of the Freikorps Oberland, and was fatally shot by the police. In reality, Kuhn was an innocent bystander. He was working as a waiter in a nearby restaurant when he stepped outside to watch, after which he was killed in the crossfire.\nLegacy.\nThe 15 fallen insurgents, as well as the bystander Karl Kuhn, were regarded as the first \"blood martyrs\" of the Nazi Party and were remembered by Hitler in the foreword of \"Mein Kampf\". The Nazi flag they carried, which in the course of events had been stained with blood, came to be known as the \"Blutfahne\" ('blood flag') and was brought out for the swearing-in of new recruits in front of the \"Feldherrnhalle\" when Hitler was in power.\nShortly after he came to power, a memorial was placed at the south side of the \"Feldherrnhalle\" crowned with a swastika. The back of the memorial read \"Und ihr habt doch gesiegt!\" ('And you triumphed nevertheless!'). Behind it, flowers were laid, and either policemen or the SS stood guard between a lower plaque. Passers-by were required to give the Nazi salute. The putsch was also commemorated on three sets of stamps. \"Mein Kampf\" was dedicated to the fallen and, in the book \"Ich K\u00e4mpfe\" (given to those joining the party c. 1943), they are listed first even though the book lists hundreds of other dead. The header text in the book read \"Though they are dead for their acts they will live on forever.\" The army had a division named the Feldherrnhalle Regiment, and there was also an SA Feldherrnhalle Division.\n\"Der neunte Elfte\" (9 November, literally 'the ninth of the eleventh') became one of the most important dates on the Nazi calendar, especially following the seizure of power in 1933. Annually until the fall of Nazi Germany, the putsch would be commemorated nationwide, with the major events taking place in Munich. On the night of 8 November, Hitler would address the \"Alte K\u00e4mpfer\" ('Old Fighters') in the B\u00fcrgerbr\u00e4ukeller (after 1939, the L\u00f6wenbr\u00e4u, in 1944 in the Circus Krone Building), followed the next day by a re-enactment of the march through the streets of Munich. The event would climax with a ceremony recalling the 16 killed on the K\u00f6nigsplatz.\nThe anniversary could be a time of tension in Nazi Germany. The ceremony was cancelled in 1934, coming as it did after the so-called Night of the Long Knives. In 1938, it coincided with the \"Kristallnacht\", and in 1939 with the attempted assassination of Hitler by Johann Georg Elser. With the outbreak of war in 1939, security concerns caused the re-enactment of the march to be suspended, never to be resumed. However, Hitler continued to deliver his 8 November speech through 1943. In 1944, Hitler skipped the event and Heinrich Himmler spoke in his place. As the war went on, residents of Munich came increasingly to dread the approach of the anniversary, concerned that the presence of the top Nazi leaders in their city would act as a magnet for Allied bombers.\nEvery Gau (administrative region of Germany) was also expected to hold a small remembrance ceremony. As material given to propagandists said, the 16 fallen were the first losses and the ceremony was an occasion to commemorate everyone who had died for the movement.\nOn 9 November 1935, the dead were taken from their graves and to the \"Feldherrnhalle\". The SA and SS carried them down to the \"K\u00f6nigsplatz\", where two \"Ehrentempel\" ('honour temples') had been constructed. In each of the structures, eight of the dead Nazis were interred in a sarcophagus bearing their name.\nIn June 1945 the Allied Commission removed the bodies from the Ehrentempels and contacted their families. They were given the option of having their loved ones buried in Munich cemeteries in unmarked graves or having them cremated, a common practice in Germany for unclaimed bodies. On 9 January 1947, the upper parts of the structures were blown up.\nSince 1994, a commemorative plaque embedded in the pavement in front of the \"Feldherrnhalle\" contains the names of the four Bavarian policemen who died in the fight against the Nazis. The plaque reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Den Mitgliedern der Bayerischen Landespolizei, die beim Einsatz gegen die Nationalsozialistischen Putschisten am 9.11.1923 Ihr Leben lie\u00dfen. ('To the members of the Bavarian Police, who gave their lives opposing the National Socialist coup on 9 November 1923:...')In 2010, Munich Mayor Christian Ude and Bavarian Interior Minister Joachim Herrmann unveiled a memorial plaque at the Munich Residence, after which the base plate was removed in 2011 and handed over to the city museum.\nSupporters of the Putsch.\nKey supporters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther notable supporters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\u2020 Bormann and H\u00f6ss were awaiting trial after their assassination of Walther Kadow on behalf of the movement, supposedly avenging his alleged betrayal of Leo Schlageter a resistance fighter much admired by members of the paramilitary right during the occupation of the Ruhr who had been executed by French authorities in May of 1923. Evidence connecting Kadow to Schlageter's discovery, arrest and execution was later found to be utterly lacking. Thus\u2014while these two were not actually present in the ranks of the stormtroopers on the night of the Putsch\u2014their actions, eventual promotions and the various rewards or preference* shown to them within the hierarchy of the Third Reich on the strength of having served time in prison for actions undertaken on behalf of the party underline their significance as exemplars of Nazism, and particularly of 'the Old Fighters' who had already pledged allegiance to Hitler by the time of the first strike against the Republic.\n\u2020\u2020 Though Helene Hanfstaengl was not in the streets during the main action of the Putsch, it was to the Hanfstaengl's residence that Hitler fled after the collapse of the rebellion and it was she who prevented him from committing suicide when the police arrived to arrest him.\nAt the front of the march.\nIn the vanguard were four flag bearers followed by Adolf Lenk and Kurt Neubauer, Ludendorff's servant. Behind those two came more flag bearers, then the leadership in two rows.\nHitler was in the centre, slouch hat in hand, the collar of his trenchcoat turned up against the cold. To his left, in civilian clothes, a green felt hat, and a loose loden coat, was Ludendorff. To Hitler's right was Scheubner-Richter. To his right came Alfred Rosenberg. On either side of these men were Ulrich Graf, Hermann Kriebel, Friedrich Weber, Julius Streicher, Hermann G\u00f6ring, and Wilhelm Br\u00fcckner.\nBehind these came the second string of Heinz Pernet, Johann Aigner (Scheubner-Richter's servant), Gottfried Feder, Theodor von der Pfordten, Wilhelm Kolb, Rolf Reiner, Hans Streck, and Heinrich Bennecke, Br\u00fcckner's adjutant.\nBehind this row marched the \"Sto\u00dftrupp-Hitler\", the SA, the Infantry School, and the \"Oberl\u00e4nder\".\nDefendants in the \"Ludendorff\u2013Hitler\" trial.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "57539", "revid": "41235142", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57539", "title": "Ulysses (spacecraft)", "text": "NASA/ESA solar probe launched in 1990\nUlysses ( , ) was a robotic space probe whose primary mission was to orbit the Sun and study it at all latitudes. It was launched in 1990 and made three \"fast latitude scans\" of the Sun in 1994/1995, 2000/2001, and 2007/2008. In addition, the probe studied several comets. \"Ulysses\" was a joint venture of the European Space Agency (ESA) and the United States' National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), under leadership of ESA with participation from Canada's National Research Council. The last day for mission operations on \"Ulysses\" was 30 June 2009.\nTo study the Sun at all latitudes, the probe needed to change its orbital inclination and leave the plane of the Solar System. To change the orbital inclination of a spacecraft to about 80\u00b0 requires a large change in heliocentric velocity, the energy to achieve which far exceeded the capabilities of any launch vehicle. To reach the desired orbit around the Sun, the mission's planners chose a gravity assist maneuver around Jupiter, but this Jupiter encounter meant that \"Ulysses\" could not be powered by solar cells. The probe was powered instead by a General-Purpose Heat Source Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator (GPHS-RTG).\nThe spacecraft was originally named Odysseus, because of its lengthy and indirect trajectory to study the solar poles. It was renamed \"Ulysses\", the Latin translation of \"Odysseus\", at ESA's request in honor not only of Homer's mythological hero but also of Dante's character in the \"Inferno\". \"Ulysses\" was originally scheduled for launch in May 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" on STS-61-F. Due to the 28 January 1986 loss of \"Challenger\", the launch of \"Ulysses\" was delayed until 6 October 1990 aboard \"Discovery\" (mission STS-41).\nSpacecraft.\nThe spacecraft was designed by ESA and built by Dornier Systems, a German aircraft manufacturer. The body was roughly a box, approximately in size. The box mounted the dish antenna and the GPHS-RTG radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG) power source. The box was divided into noisy and quiet sections. The noisy section abutted the RTG; the quiet section housed the instrument electronics. Particularly \"loud\" components, such as the preamps for the radio dipole, were mounted outside the structure entirely, and the box acted as a Faraday cage.\n\"Ulysses\" was spin-stabilised about its z-axis which roughly coincides with the axis of the dish antenna. The RTG, whip antennas, and instrument boom were placed to stabilize this axis, with the spin rate nominally at 5 rpm. Inside the body was a hydrazine fuel tank. Hydrazine monopropellant was used for course corrections inbound to Jupiter, and later used exclusively to repoint the spin axis (and thus, the antenna) at Earth. The spacecraft was controlled by eight thrusters in two blocks. Thrusters were pulsed in the time domain to perform rotation or translation. Four Sun sensors detected orientation. For fine attitude control, the S-band antenna feed was mounted slightly off-axis. This offset feed combined with the spacecraft spin introduced an apparent oscillation to a radio signal transmitted from Earth when received on board the spacecraft. The amplitude and phase of this oscillation were proportional to the orientation of the spin axis relative to the Earth direction. This method of determining the relative orientation is called conical scanning and was used by early radars for automated tracking of targets and was also very common in early infrared guided missiles.\nThe spacecraft used S-band for uplinked commands and downlinked telemetry, through dual redundant 5-watt transceivers. The spacecraft used X-band for science return (downlink only), using dual 20 watts TWTAs until the failure of the last remaining TWTA in January 2008. Both bands used the dish antenna with prime-focus feeds, unlike the Cassegrain feeds of most other spacecraft dishes.\nDual tape recorders, each of approximately 45-megabit capacity, stored science data between the nominal eight-hour communications sessions during the prime and extended mission phases.\nThe spacecraft was designed to withstand both the heat of the inner Solar System and the cold at Jupiter's distance. Extensive blanketing and electric heaters protected the probe against the cold temperatures of the outer Solar System.\nMultiple computer systems (CPUs/microprocessors/Data Processing Units) are used in several of the scientific instruments, including several radiation-hardened RCA CDP1802 microprocessors. Documented 1802 usage includes dual-redundant 1802s in the COSPIN, and at least one 1802 each in the GRB, HI-SCALE, SWICS, SWOOPS and URAP instruments, with other possible microprocessors incorporated elsewhere.\nTotal mass at launch was , of which 33.5\u00a0kg was hydrazine propellant used for attitude control and orbit correction.\nInstruments.\nThe twelve different Instruments came from ESA and NASA. The first design was based on two probes, one by NASA and one by ESA, but the probe of NASA was defunded and in the end the instruments of the cancelled probe were mounted on \"Ulysses\".\nMission.\nPlanning.\nUntil \"Ulysses\", the Sun had only been observed from low solar latitudes. The Earth's orbit defines the ecliptic plane, which differs from the Sun's equatorial plane by only 7.25\u00b0. Even spacecraft directly orbiting the Sun do so in planes close to the ecliptic because a direct launch into a high-inclination solar orbit would require a prohibitively large launch vehicle.\nSeveral spacecraft (Mariner 10, Pioneer 11, and \"Voyagers 1\" and \"2\") had performed gravity assist maneuvers in the 1970s. Those maneuvers were to reach other planets also orbiting close to the ecliptic, so they were mostly in-plane changes. However, gravity assists are not limited to in-plane maneuvers; a suitable flyby of Jupiter could produce a significant plane change. An Out-Of-The-Ecliptic mission (OOE) was thereby proposed.\nOriginally, two spacecraft were to be built by NASA and ESA, as the International Solar Polar Mission. One would be sent over Jupiter, then under the Sun. The other would fly under Jupiter, then over the Sun. This would provide simultaneous coverage. Due to cutbacks, the U.S. spacecraft was cancelled in 1981. One spacecraft was designed, and the project recast as \"Ulysses,\" due to the indirect and untried flight path. NASA would provide the Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generator (RTG) and launch services, ESA would build the spacecraft assigned to Astrium GmbH, Friedrichshafen, Germany (formerly Dornier Systems). The instruments would be split into teams from universities and research institutes in Europe and the United States. This process provided the 12 instruments on board.\nThe changes delayed launch from February 1983 to May 1986 when it was to be deployed by the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" (boosted by the proposed Centaur G Prime upper stage). However, the \"Challenger\" disaster forced a two-and-a-half year stand down of the shuttle fleet, mandated the cancellation of the Centaur-G upper stage, and pushed the launch date to October 1990.\nLaunch.\n\"Ulysses\" was deployed into low Earth orbit from the Space Shuttle \"Discovery\". From there, it was propelled on a trajectory to Jupiter by a combination of solid rocket motors. This upper stage consisted of a two-stage Boeing IUS (Inertial Upper Stage), plus a McDonnell Douglas PAM-S (Payload Assist Module-Special). The IUS was inertially stabilised and actively guided during its burn. The PAM-S was unguided and it and \"Ulysses\" were spun up to 80 rpm for stability at the start of its burn. On burnout of the PAM-S, the motor and spacecraft stack was yo-yo de-spun (weights deployed at the end of cables) to below 8 rpm prior to separation of the spacecraft. On leaving Earth, the spacecraft became the fastest ever artificially-accelerated spacecraft, and held that title until the \"New Horizons\" probe was launched.\nOn its way to Jupiter, the spacecraft was in an elliptical non-Hohmann transfer orbit. At this time, \"Ulysses\" had a low orbital inclination to the ecliptic.\nJupiter swing-by.\nIt made its closest approach of 6.31 planetary radii from Jupiter on 8 February 1992 during a swing-by maneuver that increased its inclination to the ecliptic by 80.2\u00b0. The giant planet's gravity bent the spacecraft's flight path southward and away from the ecliptic plane. This put it into a final orbit around the Sun that would take it past the Sun's north and south poles. The size and shape of the orbit were adjusted to a much smaller degree so that aphelion remained at approximately 5 AU, Jupiter's distance from the Sun, and perihelion was somewhat greater than 1 AU, the Earth's distance from the Sun. The orbital period is approximately six years.\nPolar regions of the Sun.\nBetween 1994 and 1995 it explored both the southern and northern polar regions of the Sun, respectively.\nComet C/1996 B2 (Hyakutake).\nOn 1 May 1996, the spacecraft unexpectedly crossed the ion tail of Comet Hyakutake (C/1996 B2), revealing the tail to be at least 3.8 AU in length.\nComet C/1999 T1 (McNaught\u2013Hartley).\nAn encounter with a comet tail happened again in 2004 when \"Ulysses\" flew through the ion tailings of C/1999 T1 (McNaught-Hartley). A coronal mass ejection carried the cometary material to \"Ulysses\".\nSecond Jupiter encounter.\n\"Ulysses\" approached aphelion in 2003/2004 and made further distant observations of Jupiter.\nComet C/2006 P1 (McNaught).\nIn 2007, \"Ulysses\" passed through the tail of comet C/2006 P1 (McNaught). The results were surprisingly different from its pass through Hyakutake's tail, with the measured solar wind velocity dropping from approximately 700 kilometers per second (1,566,000\u00a0mph) to less than 400 kilometers per second (895,000\u00a0mph).\nExtended mission.\nESA's Science Program Committee approved the fourth extension of the \"Ulysses\" mission to March 2004 thereby allowing it to operate over the Sun's poles for the third time in 2007 and 2008. After it became clear that the power output from the spacecraft's RTG would be insufficient to operate science instruments and keep the attitude control fuel, hydrazine, from freezing, instrument power sharing was initiated. Up until then, the most important instruments had been kept online constantly, whilst others were deactivated. When the probe neared the Sun, its power-hungry heaters were turned off and all instruments were turned on.\nOn 22 February 2008, 17 years and 4 months after the launch of the spacecraft, ESA and NASA announced that the mission operations for \"Ulysses\" would likely cease within a few months. On 12 April 2008, NASA announced that the end date would be 1 July 2008.\nThe spacecraft operated successfully for over four times its design life. A component within the last remaining working chain of X-band downlink subsystem failed on 15 January 2008. The other chain in the X-band subsystem had previously failed in 2003.\nDownlink to Earth resumed on S-band, but the beamwidth of the high gain antenna in the S-band was not as narrow as in the X\u2013band, so that the received downlink signal was much weaker, hence reducing the achievable data rate. As the spacecraft traveled on its outbound trajectory to the orbit of Jupiter, the downlink signal would have eventually fallen below the receiving capability of even the largest antennas (70 meters - 229.7 feet - in diameter) of the Deep Space Network.\nEven before the downlink signal was lost due to distance, the hydrazine attitude control fuel on board the spacecraft was considered likely to freeze, as the radioisotope thermal generators (RTGs) failed to generate enough power for the heaters to overcome radiative heat loss into space. Once the hydrazine froze, the spacecraft would no longer be able to maneuver to keep its high gain antenna pointing towards Earth, and the downlink signal would then be lost in a matter of days. The failure of the X-band communications subsystem hastened this, because the coldest part of the fuel pipework was routed over the X-band traveling-wave tube amplifiers, because they generated enough heat during operation to keep the propellant plumbing warm.\nThe previously announced mission end date of 1 July 2008, came and went but mission operations continued albeit in a reduced capacity. The availability of science data gathering was limited to only when \"Ulysses\" was in contact with a ground station due to the deteriorating S-band downlink margin no longer being able to support simultaneous real-time data and tape recorder playback. When the spacecraft was out of contact with a ground station, the S-band transmitter was switched off and the power was diverted to the internal heaters to add to the warming of the hydrazine. On 30 June 2009, ground controllers sent commands to switch to the low gain antennas. This stopped communications with the spacecraft, in combination with previous commands to shut down its transmitter entirely.\nResults.\nDuring cruise phases, \"Ulysses\" provided unique data. As the only spacecraft out of the ecliptic with a gamma-ray instrument, \"Ulysses\" was an important part of the InterPlanetary Network (IPN). The IPN detects gamma ray bursts (GRBs); since gamma rays cannot be focused with mirrors, it was very difficult to locate GRBs with enough accuracy to study them further. Instead, several spacecraft can locate the burst through multilateration. Each spacecraft has a gamma-ray detector, with readouts noted in tiny fractions of a second. By comparing the arrival times of gamma showers with the separations of the spacecraft, a location can be determined, for follow-up with other telescopes. Because gamma rays travel at the speed of light, wide separations are needed. Typically, a determination came from comparing: one of several spacecraft orbiting the Earth, an inner-Solar-System probe (to Mars, Venus, or an asteroid), and \"Ulysses\". When \"Ulysses\" crossed the ecliptic twice per orbit, many GRB determinations lost accuracy.\nAdditional discoveries:\nFate.\n\"Ulysses\" will most likely continue in heliocentric orbit around the Sun indefinitely. However, there is a chance that in one of its re-encounters with Jupiter a close fly-by with one of the Jovian moons would be enough to alter its course and so the probe would enter a hyperbolic trajectory around the Sun and leave the Solar System.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57540", "revid": "36222423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57540", "title": "Robert Yerkes", "text": "American psychologist (1876\u20131956)\nRobert Mearns Yerkes (; May 26, 1876 \u2013 February 3, 1956) was an American psychologist, ethologist, eugenicist and primatologist best known for his work in intelligence testing and in the field of comparative psychology.\nYerkes was a pioneer in the study both of human and primate intelligence and of the social behavior of gorillas and chimpanzees. Along with John D. Dodson, Yerkes developed the Yerkes\u2013Dodson law relating arousal to performance.\nAs time went on, Yerkes began to propagate his support for eugenics in the 1910s and 1920s. His works are largely considered biased toward outmoded racialist theories by modern academics.\nHe also served on the board of trustees of Science Service, now known as Society for Science &amp; the Public, from 1921 to 1925. He was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1915, the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1923, and the American Philosophical Society in 1936.\nEducation and early career.\nRobert Yerkes was born in Breadysville, Pennsylvania (near Ivyland, Pennsylvania). Growing up on a farm in rural Pennsylvania, Robert Yerkes wanted to leave the hard life of the rural farmer and become a physician. With the financial help of an uncle, Yerkes attended Ursinus College from 1892 to 1897. Upon graduating he received an offer from Harvard University to do graduate work in Biology. Faced with a choice of Harvard or medical training in Philadelphia, he chose to go to Harvard.\nAt Harvard, Yerkes became interested in animal behavior, so much so that he put off further medical training to study comparative psychology. He earned his Ph.D. in the Psychology Department in 1902.\nHis early career was strongly influenced by the debts Yerkes incurred paying for school. Upon his graduation from Harvard, he took up a position with the school as an instructor and assistant professor in comparative psychology. He had to supplement his income during the summer for several years by teaching general psychology at Radcliffe College. Another part-time job he took on was being the director of psychological research at the Boston Psychopathic Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.\nIn 1907, Yerkes published his first book, \"The Dancing Mouse\". Among his friends during this time was future behaviorist John Watson, with whom he exchanged ideas and collaborated. He was also a member of the Wicht Club (1903\u20131911).\nIntelligence testing and eugenics.\nIn 1917, Yerkes served as president of the American Psychological Association (APA). Under his influence, the APA began several programs devoted to the war effort in World War I. As chairman of the Committee on the Psychological Examination of Recruits, he developed the Army Alpha and Army Beta Intelligence Tests, the first nonverbal group tests, which were given to over 1 million United States soldiers during the war.\nAlthough Yerkes claimed that the tests measured native intelligence, and not education or training, this claim is difficult to sustain in the face of the questions themselves. Question 18 of Alpha Test 8 reads: \"Velvet Joe appears in advertisements of ... (tooth powder)(dry goods)(tobacco)(soap).\"\nYerkes used the results of tests such as these to argue that recent immigrants (especially those from Southern and Eastern Europe) scored considerably lower than older waves of immigration (from Northern Europe.) The results would later be criticized as very clearly only measuring acculturation, as the test scores correlated nearly exactly with the number of years spent living in the US. Nonetheless, the effects of Yerkes work would have a lasting effect on American xenophobia and anti-immigrant sentiment. His work was used as one of the eugenic motivations for harsh and racist immigration restrictions.\nHe was appointed as an \"Expert Eugenic Agent\" to The House Committee on Immigration and Naturalization, where his work would contribute to the creation of the discriminatory National Origins Formula. In his introduction to Carl C. Brigham's \"A Study of American Intelligence\" (which helped popularize eugenics in the U.S.), Yerkes stated that \"no one of us as a citizen can afford to ignore the menace of race deterioration.\"\nAlong with Edward L. Thorndike, Yerkes was a member and Chairman of the Committee on Inheritance of Mental Traits, part of the Eugenics Record Office, which was founded by Charles Benedict Davenport, a former teacher of Yerkes at Harvard.\nNational Research Council.\nImmediately after World War I, Yerkes worked as a paid officer for the United States National Research Council (NRC) and took the helm of the NRC Committee for Research in Problems of Sex. The Committee for Research in Problems of Sex helped Yerkes establish close relationships with officers from Rockefeller philanthropic foundations. These relationships later helped him to solicit substantial funds for his chimpanzee projects.\nPrimatology.\nYerkes had a long and storied fascination with the study of chimpanzees. He began by purchasing two chimpanzees, Chim (a male bonobo) and Panzee (a female common chimpanzee), from a zoo. He brought them home and kept them in a bedroom where they could eat with a fork at a miniature table. Chim was a particular delight for Yerkes, and the summer that chimp and psychologist spent together is memorialized in \"Almost Human\" (1924). He had spent time in 1924 hosted by Rosal\u00eda Abreu at her large primate colony in Cuba. She was the first person to succeed in breeding chimpanzees in captivity. He was accompanied by Harold C. Bingham, Josephine Ball and Chim, the bonobo. Chim unfortunately died during the visit. Yerkes returned from this visit with advice from Abreu to help in raising and observing chimps on his own.\nIn 1924, Yerkes was hired as a professor of psychobiology, a field he pioneered, at Yale University. He founded the Yale University Laboratories of Primate Biology in New Haven, followed by his Anthropoid Breeding and Experiment Station in Orange Park, Florida, with funds from the Rockefeller Foundation. The primate language Yerkish was developed at Yerkes Laboratories of Primate Biology. Yerkes retired from his position as Director in 1942, when he was replaced by Karl Lashley. After his death, the lab was moved to Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia, and renamed the Yerkes National Primate Research Center.\nAsked how to say his name, he told \"The Literary Digest\" it was YER-keez.\nLegacy.\nIn April 2022, Emory University removed Yerkes\u2019 name from the National Primate Research Center, after a review by Emory's Committee on Naming Honors recommended that the name be changed due to Yerkes' past support for eugenics. The Yerkes National Primate Research Center will be known as the Emory National Primate Research Center, effective June 1, 2022.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57541", "revid": "38001712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57541", "title": "Walker Percy", "text": "American novelist (1916\u20131990)\nWalker Percy, OblSB (May 28, 1916 \u2013 May 10, 1990) was an American writer whose interests included philosophy and semiotics. Percy is noted for his philosophical novels set in and around New Orleans; his first, \"The Moviegoer\", won the National Book Award for Fiction.\nTrained as a physician at Columbia University, Percy decided to become a writer after a bout of tuberculosis. He devoted his literary life to the exploration of \"the dislocation of man in the modern age.\" His work displays a combination of existential questioning, Southern sensibility, and deep Catholic faith. He had a lifelong friendship with author and historian Shelby Foote and spent much of his life in Covington, Louisiana, where he died of prostate cancer in 1990.\nEarly life and education.\nPercy was born on May 28, 1916, in Birmingham, Alabama, the first of three boys to LeRoy Pratt Percy and Martha Susan Phinizy. His father's Mississippi Protestant family included his great-uncle LeRoy Percy, a US senator, and LeRoy Pope Walker, a pro-slavery secessionist in Antebellum America and the first Confederate States Secretary of War during the American Civil War. In February 1917, Percy's grandfather died by suicide.\nIn 1929, when Percy was 13, his father died by suicide. His mother took the family to live at her own mother's home in Athens, Georgia. Two years later, Percy's mother died in a suspected suicide when she drove a car off a country bridge and into Deer Creek near Leland, Mississippi, where they were visiting. Percy regarded this death as another suicide. Walker and his two younger brothers, LeRoy (Roy) and Phinizy (Phin), were taken in by their first cousin once removed, William Alexander Percy, a bachelor lawyer and poet living in Greenville, Mississippi.\nPercy was raised as an agnostic, but he was nominally affiliated with a theologically liberal Presbyterian church. William Percy introduced him to many writers and poets.\nPercy attended Greenville High School and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where he majored in chemistry and joined the Xi chapter of Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity. He wrote essays and book reviews for the school's \"Carolina Magazine\". He graduated with a B.A. in 1937.\nFriendship with Shelby Foote.\nAfter moving to Greenville, Mississippi, in 1930, Shelby Foote became Percy's lifelong best friend. As young men, Percy and Foote decided to visit William Faulkner in Oxford, Mississippi. However, when they arrived at his home, Percy was so in awe of the literary giant that he could not bring himself to speak. Foote and Faulkner had a lively conversation.\nPercy and Foote were classmates at both Greenville High School and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Although Foote was not permitted to join Percy's fraternity because of his partly Jewish heritage, he and Percy stayed close friends during their two overlapping years. They went on dates together, made regular trips to nearby Durham, North Carolina, to drink and socialize, and journeyed to New York City during one of their semester breaks. When Percy graduated in 1937, Foote dropped out and returned to Greenville.\nIn the late 1940s, Percy and Foote began a correspondence that lasted until Percy's death in 1990. A collection of their correspondence was published in 1996.\nMedical training and tuberculosis.\nPercy received an M.D. from Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons in New York City in 1941, intending to become a psychiatrist. There, he spent five days a week in psychoanalysis with Janet Rioch, to whom he had been referred by Harry Stack Sullivan, a friend of Uncle Will. After three years, Walker decided to quit the psychoanalysis and later reflected on his treatment as inconclusive. Percy became an intern at Bellevue Hospital in Manhattan in 1942 but contracted tuberculosis the same year while he was performing an autopsy at Bellevue. At the time, there was no known treatment for the disease other than rest. While he had only a \"minimal lesion\" that caused him little pain, he was forced to abandon his medical career and to leave the city. Percy spent several years recuperating at the Trudeau Sanitorium in Saranac Lake, in the Adirondack Mountains of Upstate New York. He spent his time sleeping, reading, and listening to his radio to hear updates on World War II. He was envious of his brothers, who were both enlisted in the war and fighting overseas. During this period, Percy used Trudeau's Mellon Library, which held over 7,000 titles. He read the works of Danish existentialist philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard as well as Fyodor Dostoevsky, Gabriel Marcel, Jean-Paul Sartre, Franz Kafka, and Thomas Mann. He began to question the ability of science to explain the basic mysteries of human existence. He began to rise daily at dawn to attend Mass.\nIn August 1944, Percy was pronounced healthy enough to leave Trudeau and was discharged. He traveled to New York City to see Huger Jervey, dean of Columbia Law School and a friend of Percy. He then lived for two months in Atlantic City, New Jersey, with his brother Phin, who was on leave from the Navy. In the spring of 1945, Percy returned to Columbia as an instructor of pathology and took up residence with Huger Jervey. In May, an X-ray revealed a resurgence of the bacillus. Percy consequently traveled to Wallingford, Connecticut, to stay at Gaylord Farm Sanatorium.\nYears later, Percy reflected on his illness with more fondness than he had then felt at the time: \"I was the happiest man ever to contract tuberculosis, because it enabled me to get out of Bellevue and quit medicine.\"\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nIn 1935, during the winter term of Percy's sophomore year at Chapel Hill, he contributed four pieces to \"The Carolina Magazine\". According to scholars such as Jay Tolson, Percy proved his knowledge and interest in the good and the bad that accompany contemporary culture with his first contributions. Percy's personal experiences at Chapel Hill are portrayed in his first novel, \"The Moviegoer\" (1961), through the protagonist Binx Bolling. During the years that Percy spent in his fraternity, Sigma Alpha Epsilon, he \"became known for his dry wit,\" which is how Bolling is described by his fraternity brothers in \"The Moviegoer\".\nPercy had begun in 1947 or 1948 to write a novel called \"The Charterhouse\", which was not published and Percy later destroyed. He worked on a second novel, \"The Gramercy Winner\", which \nalso was never published.\nPercy's literary career as a Catholic writer began in 1956 with an essay about race in the Catholic magazine \"Commonweal\". The essay \"Stoicism in the South\" condemned Southern segregation and demanded a larger role for Christian thought in Southern life.\nLater career.\nAfter many years of writing and rewriting in collaboration with editor Stanley Kauffmann, Percy published his first novel, \"The Moviegoer\", in 1961. Percy later wrote of the novel that it was the story of \"a young man who had all the advantages of a cultivated old-line southern family: a feel for science and art, a liking for girls, sports cars, and the ordinary things of the culture, but who nevertheless feels himself quite alienated from both worlds, the old South and the new America.\"\nLater works included \"The Last Gentleman\" (1966), \"Love in the Ruins\" (1971), \"Lancelot\" (1977), \"The Second Coming\" (1980), and \"The Thanatos Syndrome\" in 1987. Percy's personal life and family legends provided inspiration and played a part in his writing. \"The Thanatos Syndrome\" features a story about one of Percy's ancestors that was taken from a family chronicle written by Percy's uncle, Will Percy. Percy's vision for the plot of \"The Second Coming\" came to him after an old fraternity brother visited him in the 1970s. He told Percy the story of his life where he is burned out and does not know what to do next. The trend of Percy's personal life influencing his writing seemingly held true throughout his literary career, beginning with his first novel. Percy also published a number of nonfiction works exploring his interests in semiotics and existentialism, his most popular work being \"Lost in the Cosmos\".\nIn 1975, Percy published a collection of essays, \"The Message in the Bottle: How Queer Man Is, How Queer Language Is, and What One Has to Do with the Other\". Percy attempted to forge a connection between the idea of Judeo-Christian ethics and rationalized science and behavioralism. According to scholars such as Anne Berthoff and Linda Whitney Hobson, Percy presented a new way of viewing the struggles of the common man by his specific use of anecdotes and language.\nPercy taught and mentored younger writers. While teaching at Loyola University of New Orleans, he was instrumental in getting John Kennedy Toole's novel \"A Confederacy of Dunces\" published in 1980. That was more than a decade after Toole committed suicide, despondent about being unable to get recognition for his book. Set in New Orleans, it won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction, which was posthumously awarded to Toole.\nIn 1987, Percy, along with 21 other noted authors, met in Chattanooga, Tennessee, to create the Fellowship of Southern Writers.\nPersonal life.\nPercy married Mary Bernice Townsend, a medical technician, on November 7, 1946. Both studied Catholicism and were received into the Roman Catholic Church in 1947. Fearing that Percy was sterile, the married couple adopted a first daughter, Mary Pratt, but later conceived a second daughter, Ann, who became deaf at an early age. The family settled in Covington, Louisiana, across Lake Pontchartrain from New Orleans. Percy's wife and one of their daughters later had a bookstore, where the writer often worked in an office on the second floor.\nViews.\nPercy was strongly anti-abortion. In 1981, he authored a \"New York Times\" opinion article, in which he called abortion a \"banal atrocity\". On another occasion, Percy once told an interviewer:\nIf I had anything to say to the liberals, it is that I agree with them on almost everything: their political and social causes, and the ACLU, God knows, the right to freedom of speech, to help the homeless, the poor, the minorities, God knows the blacks, the third world\u2014their hearts are in the right place. It\u2019s actually a mystery, a bafflement to me, how they cannot see the paradox of being in favor of these good things and yet not batting an eyelash when it comes to destroying unborn life.\nPercy's final novel, \"The Thanatos Syndrome\", condemns eugenics, senicide, and abortion. Percy was a member of the anti-communist organization the Information Council of the Americas (INCA).\nIllness and death.\nPercy underwent an operation for prostate cancer on March 10, 1988, but it had already metastasized to surrounding tissue and lymph nodes. In July 1989, he volunteered to allow his doctors at the Mayo Clinic, in Rochester, Minnesota, to use experimental medicines. Percy enrolled in a pilot study to test the effects of the drugs interferon and fluorouracil in cancer patients. In his correspondence with Foote, Percy expressed frustration over the frequent travel and hospital stays: \"Hospitals are no place for anyone, let alone a sick man.\" Although the side effects of the experimental treatment were debilitating, Percy had a revelation when he saw children with cancer waiting in the lounges. He decided to continue the treatment at Mayo as long as he could so that the results of his treatment might be of value to others.\nHe died of prostate cancer at his home in Covington in 1990, eighteen days before his 74th birthday. He is buried on the grounds of St. Joseph Benedictine Abbey, in St. Benedict, Louisiana. He had become a secular oblate of the Abbey's monastic community, making his final oblation on February 16, 1990, less than three months before his death.\nLegacy and honors.\nInfluence.\nPercy's work, which often features protagonists facing displacement, influenced other Southern authors. According to scholar Farrell O'Gorman, Percy's vision helped bring a fundamental change in southern literature where authors began to use characters concerned with \"a sense of estrangement\". His writing serves as an example for contemporary southern writers who attempt to combine elements of history, religion, science, and the modern world. Scholars such as Jay Tolson state that Percy's frequent use of characters facing spiritual loneliness in the modern world helped introduce different ways of writing in the south post-war.\nAwards and honors.\nIn 1962, Percy was awarded the National Book Award for Fiction for his first novel, \"The Moviegoer\".\nIn 1985, Percy was awarded the St. Louis Literary Award from the Saint Louis University Library Associates.\nIn 1989, the University of Notre Dame awarded Percy its Laetare Medal, which is bestowed annually to a Catholic \"whose genius has ennobled the arts and sciences, illustrated the ideals of the Church, and enriched the heritage of humanity\".\nAlso in 1989, the National Endowment for the Humanities chose him as the winner for the Jefferson Lecture in the Humanities. He read his essay, \"The Fateful Rift: The San Andreas Fault in the Modern Mind\".\nLoyola University New Orleans has multiple archival and manuscript collections related to Percy's life and work.\nIn 2019, a Mississippi Writers Trail historical marker was installed in Greenville, Mississippi, to honor Percy's literary contributions.\nWorks.\nNonfiction.\nSeveral of the following texts are mere pamphlets, reprinted in \"Signposts in a Strange Land\" (ed. Samway).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57542", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57542", "title": "ETA Hoffman", "text": ""}
{"id": "57543", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57543", "title": "E.T.A. Hoffman", "text": ""}
{"id": "57544", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57544", "title": "E. T. A. Hoffman", "text": ""}
{"id": "57546", "revid": "5846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57546", "title": "Caenorhabditis elegans", "text": "Free-living species of nematode\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCaenorhabditis elegans () is a free-living transparent nematode about 1\u00a0mm in length that lives in temperate soil environments. It is the type species of its genus. The name is a blend of the Greek \"caeno-\" (recent), \"rhabditis\" (rod-like) and Latin \"elegans\" (elegant). In 1900, Maupas initially named it \"Rhabditides elegans.\" Osche placed it in the subgenus \"Caenorhabditis\" in 1952, and in 1955, Dougherty raised \"Caenorhabditis\" to the status of genus.\n\"C. elegans\" is an unsegmented pseudocoelomate and lacks respiratory or circulatory systems. Most of these nematodes are hermaphrodites and a few are males. Males have specialised tails for mating that include spicules.\nIn 1963, Sydney Brenner proposed research into \"C. elegans,\" primarily in the area of neuronal development. In 1974, he began research into the molecular and developmental biology of \"C. elegans\", which has since been extensively used as a model organism. It was the first multicellular organism to have its whole genome sequenced, and in 2019 it was the first organism to have its connectome (neuronal \"wiring diagram\") completed.\nAs of 2024,[ [update]] four Nobel prizes have been won for work done on \"C. elegans.\"\nAnatomy.\n\"C.elegans\" is unsegmented, vermiform, and bilaterally symmetrical. It has a cuticle (a strong outer covering, as an exoskeleton), four main epidermal cords, and a fluid-filled pseudocoelom (body cavity). It also has some of the same organ systems as larger animals. About one in a thousand individuals is male and the rest are hermaphrodites. The basic anatomy of \"C.elegans\" includes a mouth, pharynx, intestine, gonad, and collagenous cuticle. Like all nematodes, they have neither a circulatory nor a respiratory system. The four bands of muscles that run the length of the body are connected to a neural system that allows the muscles to move the animal's body only as dorsal bending or ventral bending, but not left or right, except for the head, where the four muscle quadrants are wired independently from one another. When a wave of dorsal/ventral muscle contractions proceeds from the back to the front of the animal, the animal is propelled backwards. When a wave of contractions is initiated at the front and proceeds posteriorly along the body, the animal is propelled forwards. Because of this dorsal/ventral bias in body bends, any normal living, moving individual tends to lie on either its left side or its right side when observed crossing a horizontal surface. A set of ridges on the lateral sides of the body cuticle, the alae, is believed to give the animal added traction during these bending motions.\nIn relation to lipid metabolism, \"C.elegans\" does not have any specialized adipose tissues, a pancreas, a liver, or even blood to deliver nutrients compared to mammals. Neutral lipids are instead stored in the intestine, epidermis, and embryos. The epidermis corresponds to the mammalian adipocytes by being the main triglyceride depot.\nThe pharynx is a muscular food pump in the head of \"C.elegans\", which is triangular in cross-section. This grinds food and transports it directly to the intestine. A set of \"valve cells\" connects the pharynx to the intestine, but how this valve operates is not understood. After digestion, the contents of the intestine are released via the rectum, as is the case with all other nematodes. No direct connection exists between the pharynx and the excretory canal, which functions in the release of liquid urine.\nMales have a single-lobed gonad, a vas deferens, and a tail specialized for mating, which incorporates spicules. Hermaphrodites have two ovaries, oviducts, and spermatheca, and a single uterus. \nThere are 302 neurons in \"C.elegans,\" approximately one-third of all the somatic cells in the whole body. Many neurons contain dendrites which extend from the cell to receive neurotransmitters or other signals, and a process that extends to the nerve ring (the \"brain\") for a synaptic connection with other neurons. \"C.elegans\" has excitatory cholinergic and inhibitory GABAergic motor neurons which connect with body wall muscles to regulate movement. In addition, these neurons and other neurons such as interneurons use a variety of neurotransmitters to control behaviors.\nGut granules.\nNumerous gut granules are present in the intestine of \"C.elegans\", the functions of which are still not fully known, as are many other aspects of this nematode, despite the many years that it has been studied. These gut granules are found in all of the Rhabditida orders. They are very similar to lysosomes in that they feature an acidic interior and the capacity for endocytosis, but they are considerably larger, reinforcing the view of their being storage organelles.\nA particular feature of the granules is that when they are observed under ultraviolet light, they react by emitting an intense blue fluorescence. Another phenomenon seen is termed 'death fluorescence'. As the worms die, a dramatic burst of blue fluorescence is emitted. This death fluorescence typically takes place in an anterior to posterior wave that moves along the intestine, and is seen in both young and old worms, whether subjected to lethal injury or peacefully dying of old age.\nMany theories have been posited on the functions of the gut granules, with earlier ones being eliminated by later findings. They are thought to store zinc as one of their functions. Recent chemical analysis has identified the blue fluorescent material they contain as a glycosylated form of anthranilic acid (AA). The need for the large amounts of AA the many gut granules contain is questioned. One possibility is that the AA is antibacterial and used in defense against invading pathogens. Another possibility is that the granules provide photoprotection; the bursts of AA fluorescence entail the conversion of damaging UV light to relatively harmless visible light. This is seen as a possible link to the melanin\u2013containing melanosomes.\nReproduction.\nThe hermaphroditic worm is considered to be a specialized form of self-fertile female, as its soma is female. The hermaphroditic germline produces male gametes first, and lays eggs through its uterus after internal fertilization. Hermaphrodites produce all their sperm in the L4 stage (150 sperm cells per gonadal arm) and then produce only oocytes. The hermaphroditic gonad acts as an ovotestis with sperm cells being stored in the same area of the gonad as the oocytes until the first oocyte pushes the sperm into the spermatheca (a chamber wherein the oocytes become fertilized by the sperm).\nThe male can inseminate the hermaphrodite, which will preferentially use male sperm (both types of sperm are stored in the spermatheca). \n The sperm of \"C. elegans\" is amoeboid, lacking flagella and acrosomes. When self-inseminated, the wild-type worm lays about 300 eggs. When inseminated by a male, the number of progeny can exceed 1,000. Hermaphrodites do not typically mate with other hermaphrodites. At 20\u00a0\u00b0C, the laboratory strain of \"C. elegans\" (N2) has an average lifespan around 2\u20133 weeks and a generation time of 3 to 4 days.\n\"C. elegans\" has five pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes. Sex in \"C. elegans\" is based on an X0 sex-determination system. Hermaphrodites of \"C. elegans\" have a matched pair of sex chromosomes (XX); the rare males have only one sex chromosome (X0).\nSex determination.\n\"C. elegans\" are mostly hermaphroditic organisms, producing both sperms and oocytes. Males do occur in the population in a rate of approximately 1 in 200 hermaphrodites, but the two sexes are highly differentiated. Males differ from their hermaphroditic counterparts in that they are smaller and can be identified through the shape of their tail. \"C.elegans\" reproduce through a process called androdioecy. This means that they can reproduce in two ways: either through self-fertilization in hermaphrodites or through hermaphrodites breeding with males. Males are produced through non-disjunction of the X chromosomes during meiosis. The worms that reproduce through self-fertilization are at risk for high linkage disequilibrium, which leads to lower genetic diversity in populations and an increase in accumulation of deleterious alleles. In \"C. elegans\", somatic sex determination is attributed to the \"tra-1\" gene. The \"tra-1\" is a gene within the TRA-1 transcription factor sex determination pathway that is regulated post-transcriptionally and works by promoting female development. In hermaphrodites (XX), there are high levels of \"tra-1\" activity, which produces the female reproductive system and inhibits male development. At a certain time in their life cycle, one day before adulthood, hermaphrodites can be identified through the addition of a vulva near their tail. In males (XO), there are low levels of \"tra-1\" activity, resulting in a male reproductive system. Recent research has shown that there are three other genes, \"fem-1, fem-2, and fem-3,\" that negatively regulate the TRA-1 pathway and act as the final determiner of sex in \"C. elegans\".\nEvolution.\nThe sex determination system in \"C. elegans\" is a topic that has been of interest to scientists for years. Since they are used as a model organism, any information discovered about the way their sex determination system might have evolved could further the same evolutionary biology research in other organisms. After almost 30 years of research, scientists have begun to put together the pieces in the evolution of such a system. What they have discovered is that there is a complex pathway involved that has several layers of regulation. The closely related organism \"Caenorhabditis briggsae\" has been studied extensively and its whole genome sequence has helped put together the missing pieces in the evolution of \"C. elegans\" sex determination. It has been discovered that two genes have assimilated, leading to the proteins XOL-1 and MIX-1 having an effect on sex determination in \"C. elegans\" as well. Mutations in the XOL-1 pathway leads to feminization in \"C. elegans .\" The \"mix-1\" gene is known to hypoactivate the X chromosome and regulates the morphology of the male tail in \"C. elegans.\" Looking at the nematode as a whole, the male and hermaphrodite sex likely evolved from parallel evolution. Parallel evolution is defined as similar traits evolving from an ancestor in similar conditions; simply put, the two species evolve in similar ways over time. An example of this would be marsupial and placental mammals. Scientists have also hypothesized that hermaphrodite asexual reproduction, or \"selfing\", could have evolved convergently by studying species similar to \"C. elegans\" Other studies on the sex determination evolution suggest that genes involving sperm evolve at the faster rate than female genes. However, sperm genes on the X chromosome have reduced evolution rates. Sperm genes have short coding sequences, high codon bias, and disproportionate representation among orphan genes. These characteristics of sperm genes may be the reason for their high rates of evolution and may also suggest how sperm genes evolved out of hermaphrodite worms. Overall, scientists have a general idea of the sex determination pathway in \"C. elegans\", however, the evolution of how this pathway came to be is not yet well defined.\nDevelopment.\nEmbryonic development.\nThe fertilized zygote undergoes rotational holoblastic cleavage.\nSperm entry into the oocyte commences formation of an anterior-posterior axis. The sperm microtubule organizing center directs the movement of the sperm pronucleus to the future posterior pole of the embryo, while also inciting the movement of PAR proteins, a group of cytoplasmic determination factors, to their proper respective locations. As a result of the difference in PAR protein distribution, the first cell division is highly asymmetric. \"C. elegans\" embryogenesis is among the best understood examples of asymmetric cell division.\nAll cells of the germline arise from a single primordial germ cell, called the \"P4\" cell, established early in embryogenesis. This primordial cell divides to generate two germline precursors that do not divide further until after hatching.\nAxis formation.\nThe resulting daughter cells of the first cell division are called the AB cell (containing PAR-6 and PAR-3) and the P1 cell (containing PAR-1 and PAR-2). A second cell division produces the ABp and ABa cells from the AB cell, and the EMS and P2 cells from the P1 cell. This division establishes the dorsal-ventral axis, with the ABp cell forming the dorsal side and the EMS cell marking the ventral side. Through Wnt signaling, the P2 cell instructs the EMS cell to divide along the anterior-posterior axis. Through Notch signaling, the P2 cell differentially specifies the ABp and ABa cells, which further defines the dorsal-ventral axis. The left-right axis also becomes apparent early in embryogenesis, although it is unclear exactly when specifically the axis is determined. However, most theories of the L-R axis development involve some kind of differences in cells derived from the AB cell.\nGastrulation.\nGastrulation occurs after the embryo reaches the 24-cell stage. \"C. elegans\" are a species of protostomes, so the blastopore eventually forms the mouth. Involution into the blastopore begins with movement of the endoderm cells and subsequent formation of the gut, followed by the P4 germline precursor, and finally the mesoderm cells, including the cells that eventually form the pharynx. Gastrulation ends when epiboly of the hypoblasts closes the blastopore.\nPost-embryonic development.\nUnder environmental conditions favourable for reproduction, hatched larvae develop through four larval stages - L1, L2, L3, and L4 - in just 3 days at 20\u00a0\u00b0C. When conditions are stressed, as in food insufficiency, excessive population density or high temperature, \"C. elegans\" can enter an alternative third larval stage, L2d, called the dauer stage (\"Dauer\" is German for permanent). A specific dauer pheromone regulates entry into the dauer state. This pheromone is composed of similar derivatives of the 3,6-dideoxy sugar, ascarylose. Ascarosides, named after the ascarylose base, are involved in many sex-specific and social behaviors. In this way, they constitute a chemical language that \"C. elegans\" uses to modulate various phenotypes. Dauer larvae are stress-resistant; they are thin and their mouths are sealed with a characteristic dauer cuticle and cannot take in food. They can remain in this stage for a few months. The stage ends when conditions improve favour further growth of the larva, now moulting into the L4 stage, even though the gonad development is arrested at the L2 stage.\nEach stage transition is punctuated by a molt of the worm's transparent cuticle. Transitions through these stages are controlled by genes of the heterochronic pathway, an evolutionarily conserved set of regulatory factors. Many heterochronic genes code for microRNAs, which repress the expression of heterochronic transcription factors and other heterochronic miRNAs. miRNAs were originally discovered in \"C. elegans.\" Important developmental events controlled by heterochronic genes include the division and eventual syncitial fusion of the hypodermic seam cells, and their subsequent secretion of the alae in young adults. It is believed that the heterochronic pathway represents an evolutionarily conserved predecessor to circadian clocks.\nSome nematodes have a fixed, genetically determined number of cells, a phenomenon known as eutely. The adult \"C. elegans\" hermaphrodite has 959 somatic cells and the male has 1033 cells, although it has been suggested that the number of their intestinal cells can increase by one to three in response to gut microbes experienced by mothers. Much of the literature describes the cell number in males as 1031, but the discovery of a pair of left and right MCM neurons increased the number by two in 2015. The number of cells does not change after cell division ceases at the end of the larval period, and subsequent growth is due solely to an increase in the size of individual cells.\nEcology.\nThe different \"Caenorhabditis\" species occupy various nutrient- and bacteria-rich environments. They feed on the bacteria that develop in decaying organic matter (microbivory). They possess chemosensory receptors which enable the detection of bacteria and bacterial-secreted metabolites (such as iron siderophores), so that they can migrate towards their bacterial prey. Soil lacks enough organic matter to support self-sustaining populations. \"C. elegans\" can survive on a diet of a variety of bacteria, but its wild ecology is largely unknown. Most laboratory strains were taken from artificial environments such as gardens and compost piles. More recently, \"C. elegans\" has been found to thrive in other kinds of organic matter, particularly rotting fruit.\n\"C. elegans\" can also ingest pollutants, especially tiny nanoplastics, which could enable the association with antibiotic-resistant bacteria, resulting in the dissemination of nanoplastics and antibiotic-resistant bacteria by \"C. elegans\" across the soil. Moreover, microplastics can alter the bacterial food preference by \"C. elegans\" over generations, resulting in \"C. elegans\" preferring microplastic-contaminated food over non-contaminated bacteria.\n\"C. elegans\" can also use different species of yeast, including \"Cryptococcus laurentii\" and \"C. kuetzingii\", as sole sources of food. Although a bacterivore, \"C. elegans\" can be killed by a number of pathogenic bacteria, including human pathogens such as \"Staphylococcus aureus\", \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\", \"Salmonella enterica\" or \"Enterococcus faecalis\". Pathogenic bacteria can also form biofilms, whose sticky exopolymer matrix could impede \"C. elegans\" motility and cloaks bacterial quorum sensing chemoattractants from predator detection.\nInvertebrates such as millipedes, insects, isopods, and gastropods can transport dauer larvae to various suitable locations. The larvae have also been seen to feed on their hosts when they die.\nNematodes can survive desiccation, and in \"C. elegans\", the mechanism for this capability has been demonstrated to be late embryogenesis abundant proteins.\n\"C. elegans\", as other nematodes, can be eaten by predator nematodes and other omnivores, including some insects.\nThe Orsay virus is a virus that affects \"C. elegans\", as well as the Caenorhabditis elegans Cer1 virus and the Caenorhabditis elegans Cer13 virus.\nWild isolates of \"Caenorhabditis elegans\" are regularly found with infections by Microsporidia fungi. One such species, \"Nematocida parisii\", replicates in the intestines of \"C. elegans\".\n\"Arthrobotrys oligospora\" is the model organism for interactions between fungi and nematodes. It is the most common and widespread nematode capturing fungus.\nUse as a model organism.\nIn 1963, Sydney Brenner proposed using \"C. elegans\" as a model organism for the investigation primarily of neural development in animals. It is one of the simplest organisms with a nervous system. The neurons do not fire action potentials, and do not express any voltage-gated sodium channels. In the hermaphrodite, this system comprises 302 neurons the pattern of which has been comprehensively mapped, in what is known as a connectome, and shown to be a small-world network.\nResearch has explored the neural and molecular mechanisms that control several behaviors of \"C. elegans\", including chemotaxis, thermotaxis, mechanotransduction, learning, memory, and mating behaviour. In 2019 the connectome of the male was published using a technique distinct from that used for the hermaphrodite. The same paper used the new technique to redo the hermaphrodite connectome, finding 1,500 new synapses.\nIt has been used as a model organism to study molecular mechanisms in metabolic diseases. \nBrenner also chose it as it is easy to grow in bulk populations, and convenient for genetic analysis. It is a multicellular eukaryotic organism, yet simple enough to be studied in great detail. The transparency of \"C. elegans\" facilitates the study of cellular differentiation and other developmental processes in the intact organism. The spicules in the male clearly distinguish males from females. Strains are cheap to breed and can be frozen. When subsequently thawed, they remain viable, allowing long-term storage. Maintenance is easy when compared to other multicellular model organisms. A few hundred nematodes can be kept on a single agar plate and suitable growth medium. Brenner described the use of a mutant of \"E. coli\" \u2013 OP50. OP50 is a uracil-requiring organism and its deficiency in the plate prevents the overgrowth of bacteria which would obscure the worms. The use of OP50 does not demand any major laboratory safety measures, since it is non-pathogenic and easily grown in Luria-Bertani (LB) media overnight.\nCell lineage mapping.\nThe developmental fate of every single somatic cell (959 in the adult hermaphrodite; 1031 in the adult male) has been mapped. These patterns of cell lineage are largely invariant between individuals, whereas in mammals, cell development is more dependent on cellular cues from the embryo.\nAs mentioned previously, the first cell divisions of early embryogenesis in \"C. elegans\" are among the best understood examples of asymmetric cell divisions, and the worm is a very popular model system for studying developmental biology.\nProgrammed cell death.\nProgrammed cell death (apoptosis) eliminates many additional cells (131 in the hermaphrodite, most of which would otherwise become neurons); this \"apoptotic predictability\" has contributed to the elucidation of some apoptotic genes. Cell death-promoting genes and a single cell-death inhibitor have been identified.\nRNA interference and gene silencing.\nRNA interference (RNAi) is a relatively straightforward method of disrupting the function of specific genes. Silencing the function of a gene can sometimes allow a researcher to infer its possible function. The nematode can be soaked in, injected with, or fed with genetically transformed bacteria that express the double-stranded RNA of interest, the sequence of which complements the sequence of the gene that the researcher wishes to disable.\nRNAi has emerged as a powerful tool in the study of functional genomics. \"C. elegans\" has been used to analyse gene functions and claim the promise of future findings in the systematic genetic interactions.\nEnvironmental RNAi uptake is much worse in other species of worms in the genus \"Caenorhabditis\". Although injecting RNA into the body cavity of the animal induces gene silencing in most species, only \"C. elegans\" and a few other distantly related nematodes can take up RNA from the bacteria they eat for RNAi. This ability has been mapped down to a single gene, \"sid-2\", which, when inserted as a transgene in other species, allows them to take up RNA for RNAi as \"C. elegans\" does.\nCell division and cell cycle.\nResearch into meiosis has been considerably simplified since every germ cell nucleus is at the same given position as it moves down the gonad, so is at the same stage in meiosis. In an early phase of meiosis, the oocytes become extremely resistant to radiation and this resistance depends on expression of genes \"rad51\" and \"atm\" that have key roles in recombinational repair. Gene \"mre-11\" also plays a crucial role in recombinational repair of DNA damage during meiosis. Furthermore, during meiosis in \"C. elegans\" the tumor suppressor BRCA1/BRC-1 and the structural maintenance of chromosomes SMC5/SMC6 protein complex interact to promote high fidelity repair of DNA double-strand breaks.\nA study of the frequency of outcrossing in natural populations showed that selfing is the predominant mode of reproduction in \"C. elegans\", but that infrequent outcrossing events occur at a rate around 1%. Meioses that result in selfing are unlikely to contribute significantly to beneficial genetic variability, but these meioses may provide the adaptive benefit of recombinational repair of DNA damages that arise, especially under stressful conditions.\nDrug abuse and addiction.\nNicotine dependence can also be studied using \"C. elegans\" because it exhibits behavioral responses to nicotine that parallel those of mammals. These responses include acute response, tolerance, withdrawal, and sensitization.\nBiological databases.\nAs for most model organisms, scientists that work in the field curate a dedicated online database and WormBase is that for \"C. elegans\". The WormBase attempts to collate all published information on \"C. elegans\" and other related nematodes. Information on \"C. elegans\" is included with data on other model organisms in the Alliance of Genome Resources.\nAgeing.\n\"C. elegans\" has been a model organism for research into ageing; for example, the inhibition of an insulin-like growth factor signaling pathway has been shown to increase adult lifespan threefold; while glucose feeding promotes oxidative stress and reduces adult lifespan by a half. Similarly, induced degradation of an insulin/IGF-1 receptor late in life extended life expectancy of worms dramatically. \nLong-lived mutants of \"C. elegans\" were demonstrated to be resistant to oxidative stress and UV light. These long-lived mutants had a higher DNA repair capability than wild-type \"C. elegans\". Knockdown of the nucleotide excision repair gene Xpa-1 increased sensitivity to UV and reduced the life span of the long-lived mutants. These findings indicate that DNA repair capability underlies longevity. Consistent with the idea that oxidative DNA damage causes aging, it was found that in \"C. elegans\", exosome-mediated delivery of superoxide dismutase (SOD) reduces the level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and significantly extends lifespan, i.e. delays aging under normal, as well as hostile conditions.\nThe capacity to repair DNA damage by the process of nucleotide excision repair declines with age.\n\"C. elegans\" exposed to 5mM lithium chloride (LiCl) showed lengthened life spans. When exposed to 10\u03bcM LiCl, reduced mortality was observed, but not with 1\u03bcM.\n\"C. elegans\" has been instrumental in the identification of the functions of genes implicated in Alzheimer's disease, such as presenilin. Moreover, extensive research on \"C. elegans\" has identified RNA-binding proteins as essential factors during germline and early embryonic development.\nTelomeres, the length of which have been shown to correlate with increased lifespan and delayed onset of senescence in a multitude of organisms, from \"C. elegans\" to humans, show an interesting behaviour in \"C. elegans.\" While \"C. elegans\" maintains its telomeres in a canonical way similar to other eukaryotes, in contrast \"Drosophila melanogaster\" is noteworthy in its use of retrotransposons to maintain its telomeres, during knock-out of the catalytic subunit of the telomerase (\"trt-1\") \"C. elegans\" can gain the ability of alternative telomere lengthening (ALT). \"C. elegans\" was the first eukaryote to gain ALT functionality after knock-out of the canonical telomerase pathway. ALT is also observed in about 10-15% of all clinical cancers. Thus \"C. elegans\" is a prime candidate for ALT research. Bayat et al. showed the paradoxical shortening of telomeres during \"trt-1\" over-expression which lead to near sterility while the worms even exhibited a slight increase in lifespan, despite shortened telomeres.\nSleep.\n\"C. elegans\" is notable in animal sleep studies as the most primitive organism to display sleep-like states. In \"C. elegans\", a lethargus phase occurs shortly before each moult. \"C. elegans\" has also been demonstrated to sleep after exposure to physical stress, including heat shock, UV radiation, and bacterial toxins.\nSensory biology.\nWhile the worm has no eyes, it has been found to be sensitive to light due to a third type of light-sensitive animal photoreceptor protein, LITE-1, which is 10 to 100 times more efficient at absorbing light than the other two types of photopigments (opsins and cryptochromes) found in the animal kingdom.\n\"C. elegans\" is remarkably adept at tolerating acceleration. It can withstand 400,000 g's, according to geneticists at the University of S\u00e3o Paulo in Brazil. In an experiment, 96% of them were still alive without adverse effects after an hour in an ultracentrifuge.\nDrug library screening.\nHaving a small size and short life cycle, C. elegans is one of the few organisms that can enable in vivo high throughput screening (HTS) platforms for the evaluation of chemical libraries of drugs and toxins in a multicellular organism. Orthologous phenotypes observable in C. elegans for human diseases have the potential to enable profiling of drug library profiling that can inform potential repurposing of existing approved drugs for therapeutic indications in humans.\nSpaceflight research.\n\"C. elegans\" made news when specimens were discovered to have survived the Space Shuttle \"Columbia\" disaster in February 2003. Later, in January 2009, live samples of \"C. elegans\" from the University of Nottingham were announced to be spending two weeks on the International Space Station that October, in a space research project to explore the effects of zero gravity on muscle development and physiology. The research was primarily about genetic basis of muscle atrophy, which relates to spaceflight or being bed-ridden, geriatric, or diabetic. Descendants of the worms aboard Columbia in 2003 were launched into space on \"Endeavour\" for the STS-134 mission. Additional experiments on muscle dystrophy during spaceflight were carried on board the ISS starting in 2018. It was shown that the genes affecting muscles attachment were expressed less in space. However, it has yet to be seen if this affects muscle strength.\nGenetics.\nGenome.\n\"C. elegans\" was the first multicellular organism to have its whole genome sequenced. The sequence was published in 1998, although some small gaps were present; the last gap was finished by October 2002. In the run up to the whole genome the \"C. elegans\" Sequencing Consortium/\"C. elegans\" Genome Project released several partial scans including Wilson et al. 1994.\nSize and gene content.\nThe \"C. elegans\" genome is about 100 million base pairs long and consists of six pairs of chromosomes in hermaphrodites or five pairs of autosomes with XO chromosome in male \"C. elegans\" and a mitochondrial genome. Its gene density is about one gene per five kilo-base pairs. Introns make up 26% and intergenic regions 47% of the genome. Many genes are arranged in clusters and how many of these are operons is unclear. \"C. elegans\" and other nematodes are among the few eukaryotes currently known to have operons; these include trypanosomes, flatworms (notably the trematode \"Schistosoma mansoni\"), and a primitive chordate tunicate \"Oikopleura dioica\". Many more organisms are likely to be shown to have these operons.\nThe genome contains an estimated 20,470 protein-coding genes. About 35% of \"C. elegans\" genes have human homologs. Remarkably, human genes have been shown repeatedly to replace their \"C. elegans\" homologs when introduced into \"C. elegans\". Conversely, many \"C. elegans\" genes can function similarly to mammalian genes.\nThe number of known RNA genes in the genome has increased greatly due to the 2006 discovery of a new class called \"21U-RNA\" genes, and the genome is now believed to contain more than 16,000 RNA genes, up from as few as 1,300 in 2005.\nScientific curators continue to appraise the set of known genes; new gene models continue to be added and incorrect ones modified or removed.\nThe reference \"C. elegans\" genome sequence continues to change as new evidence reveals errors in the original sequencing. Most changes are minor, adding or removing only a few base pairs of DNA. For example, the WS202 release of WormBase (April 2009) added two base pairs to the genome sequence. Sometimes, more extensive changes are made as noted in the WS197 release of December 2008, which added a region of over 4,300 bp to the sequence.\nThe \"C. elegans\" Genome Project's Wilson et al. 1994 found CelVav and a von Willebrand factor A domain and with Wilson et al. 1998 provides the first credible evidence for an aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) homolog outside of vertebrates. 2\nRelated genomes.\nIn 2003, the genome sequence of the related nematode \"C. briggsae\" was also determined, allowing researchers to study the comparative genomics of these two organisms. The genome sequences of more nematodes from the same genus e.g., \"C. remanei\", \"C. japonica\" and \"C. brenneri\" (named after Brenner), have also been studied using the shotgun sequencing technique. These sequences have now been completed.\nOther genetic studies.\nAs of 2014, \"C. elegans\" is the most basal species in the 'Elegans' group (10 species) of the 'Elegans' supergroup (17 species) in phylogenetic studies. It forms a branch of its own distinct to any other species of the group.\nTc1 transposon is a DNA transposon active in \"C. elegans\".\nScientific community.\nSeveral scientists have won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for scientific discoveries made working with \"C. elegans\". It was awarded in 2002 to Sydney Brenner, H. Robert Horvitz, and John Sulston for their work on the genetics of organ development and programmed cell death, in 2006 to Andrew Fire and Craig C. Mello for their discovery of RNA interference, and in 2024 to Victor Ambros and Gary Ruvkun for their discovery of microRNA and its role in gene regulation.\nIn 2008, Martin Chalfie shared a Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work on green fluorescent protein; some of the research involved the use of \"C. elegans\".\nMany scientists who research \"C. elegans \"closely connect to Sydney Brenner, with whom almost all research in this field began in the 1970s; they have worked as either a postdoctoral or a postgraduate researcher in Brenner's lab or in the lab of someone who previously worked with Brenner. Most who worked in his lab later established their own worm research labs, thereby creating a fairly well-documented \"lineage\" of \"C. elegans\" scientists, which was recorded into the WormBase database in some detail at the 2003 International Worm Meeting.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57547", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57547", "title": "Xenopus", "text": "Genus of amphibians\nXenopus () (Gk., \u03be\u03b5\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2, \"xenos\"\u00a0=\u00a0strange, \u03c0\u03bf\u03c5\u03c2, \"pous\"\u00a0=\u00a0foot, commonly known as the clawed frog) is a genus of highly aquatic frogs native to sub-Saharan Africa. Twenty species are currently described within it. The two best-known species of this genus are \"Xenopus laevis\" and \"Xenopus tropicalis\", which are commonly studied as model organisms for developmental biology, cell biology, toxicology, neuroscience and for modelling human disease and birth defects.\nThe genus is also known for its polyploidy, with some species having up to 12 sets of chromosomes.\nCharacteristics.\n\"Xenopus laevis\" is a rather inactive creature. It is incredibly hearty and can live up to 15 years. At times the ponds that \"Xenopus laevis\" is found in dry up, compelling it, in the dry season, to burrow into the mud, leaving a tunnel for air. It may lie dormant for up to a year. If the pond dries up in the rainy season, \"Xenopus laevis\" may migrate long distances to another pond, maintaining hydration by the rains. It is an adept swimmer, swimming in all directions with ease. It is barely able to hop, but it is able to crawl. It spends most of its time underwater and comes to surface to breathe. Respiration is predominantly through its well-developed lungs; there is little cutaneous respiration.\nDescription.\nAll species of \"Xenopus\" have flattened, somewhat egg-shaped and streamlined bodies, and very slippery skin (because of a protective mucus covering). The frog's skin is smooth, but with a lateral line sensory organ that has a stitch-like appearance. The frogs are all excellent swimmers and have powerful, fully webbed toes, though the fingers lack webbing. Three of the toes on each foot have conspicuous black claws.\nThe frog's eyes are on top of the head, looking upwards. The pupils are circular. They have no moveable eyelids, tongues (rather it is completely attached to the floor of the mouth) or eardrums (similarly to \"Pipa pipa\", the common Suriname toad).\nUnlike most amphibians, they have no haptoglobin in their blood.\nBehaviour.\n\"Xenopus\" species are entirely aquatic, though they have been observed migrating on land to nearby bodies of water during times of drought or in heavy rain. They are usually found in lakes, rivers, swamps, potholes in streams, and man-made reservoirs.\nAdult frogs are usually both predators and scavengers, and since their tongues are unusable, the frogs use their small fore limbs to aid in the feeding process. Since they also lack vocal sacs, they make clicks (brief pulses of sound) underwater (again similar to \"Pipa pipa\"). Males establish a hierarchy of social dominance in which primarily one male has the right to make the advertisement call. The females of many species produce a release call, and \"Xenopus laevis\" females produce an additional call when sexually receptive and soon to lay eggs. The \"Xenopus\" species are also active during the twilight (or crepuscular) hours.\nDuring breeding season, the males develop ridge-like nuptial pads (black in color) on their fingers to aid in grasping the female. The frogs' mating embrace is inguinal, meaning the male grasps the female around her waist.\nSpecies.\nExtant species.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFossil species.\nThe following fossil species have been described:\nModel organism for biological research.\nLike many other frogs, they are often used in laboratory as research subjects. \"Xenopus\" embryos and eggs are a popular model system for a wide variety of biological studies. This animal is used because of its powerful combination of experimental tractability and close evolutionary relationship with humans, at least compared to many model organisms.\n\"Xenopus\" has long been an important tool for \"in vivo studies\" in molecular, cell, and developmental biology of vertebrate animals. However, the wide breadth of \"Xenopus\" research stems from the additional fact that cell-free extracts made from \"Xenopus\" are a premier \"in vitro \"system for studies of fundamental aspects of cell and molecular biology. Thus, \"Xenopus\" is a vertebrate model system that allows for high-throughput \"in vivo\" analyses of gene function and high-throughput biochemistry. Furthermore, \"Xenopus\" oocytes are a leading system for studies of ion transport and channel physiology. \"Xenopus\" is also a unique system for analyses of genome evolution and whole genome duplication in vertebrates, as different \"Xenopus\" species form a ploidy series formed by interspecific hybridization.\nIn 1931, Lancelot Hogben noted that \"Xenopus laevis\" females ovulated when injected with the urine of pregnant women. This led to a pregnancy test that was later refined by South African researchers Hillel Abbe Shapiro and Harry Zwarenstein. A female Xenopus frog injected with a woman's urine was put in a jar with a little water. If eggs were in the water a day later it meant the woman was pregnant. Four years after the first \"Xenopus\" test, Zwarenstein's colleague, Dr Louis Bosman, reported that the test was accurate in more than 99% of cases. From the 1930s to the 1950s, thousands of frogs were exported across the world for use in these pregnancy tests.\nThe &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;National Xenopus Resource of the Marine Biological Laboratory is an \"in vivo\" repository for transgenic and mutant strains and a training center.\nOnline Model Organism Database.\nXenbase is the Model Organism Database (MOD) for both \"Xenopus laevis\" and \"Xenopus tropicalis\".\nInvestigation of human disease genes.\nAll modes of \"Xenopus\" research (embryos, cell-free extracts, and oocytes) are commonly used in direct studies of human disease genes and to study the basic science underlying initiation and progression of cancer. \"Xenopus\" embryos for \"in vivo\" studies of human disease gene function: \"Xenopus\" embryos are large and easily manipulated, and moreover, thousands of embryos can be obtained in a single day. Indeed, \"Xenopus\" was the first vertebrate animal for which methods were developed to allow rapid analysis of gene function using misexpression (by mRNA injection). Injection of mRNA in \"Xenopus\" that led to the cloning of interferon. Moreover, the use of morpholino-antisense oligonucleotides for gene knockdowns in vertebrate embryos, which is now widely used, was first developed by Janet Heasman using \"Xenopus\".\nIn recent years, these approaches have played in important role in studies of human disease genes. The mechanism of action for several genes mutated in human cystic kidney disorders (e.g. nephronophthisis) have been extensively studied in \"Xenopus\" embryos, shedding new light on the link between these disorders, ciliogenesis and Wnt signaling. \"Xenopus\" embryos have also provided a rapid test bed for validating newly discovered disease genes. For example, studies in \"Xenopus\" confirmed and elucidated the role of \"PYCR1\" in cutis laxa with progeroid features.\nTransgenic \"Xenopus\" for studying transcriptional regulation of human disease genes: \"Xenopus\" embryos develop rapidly, so transgenesis in \"Xenopus\" is a rapid and effective method for analyzing genomic regulatory sequences. In a recent study, mutations in the \"SMAD7\" locus were revealed to associate with human colorectal cancer. The mutations lay in conserved, but noncoding sequences, suggesting these mutations impacted the patterns of \"SMAD7\" transcription. To test this hypothesis, the authors used \"Xenopus\" transgenesis, and revealed this genomic region drove expression of GFP in the hindgut. Moreover, transgenics made with the mutant version of this region displayed substantially less expression in the hindgut.\n\"Xenopus\" cell-free extracts for biochemical studies of proteins encoded by human disease genes: A unique advantage of the \"Xenopus\" system is that cytosolic extracts contain both soluble cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins (including chromatin proteins). This is in contrast to cellular extracts prepared from somatic cells with already distinct cellular compartments. \"Xenopus\" egg extracts have provided numerous insights into the basic biology of cells with particular impact on cell division and the DNA transactions associated with it (see below).\nStudies in \"Xenopus\" egg extracts have also yielded critical insights into the mechanism of action of human disease genes associated with genetic instability and elevated cancer risk, such as ataxia telangiectasia, \"BRCA1\" inherited breast and ovarian cancer, \"Nbs1\" Nijmegen breakage syndrome, \"RecQL4\" Rothmund-Thomson syndrome, \"c-Myc\" oncogene and FANC proteins (Fanconi anemia).\n\"Xenopus\" oocytes for studies of gene expression and channel activity related to human disease: Yet another strength of \"Xenopus\" is the ability to rapidly and easily assay the activity of channel and transporter proteins using expression in oocytes. This application has also led to important insights into human disease, including studies related to trypanosome transmission, Epilepsy with ataxia and sensorineural deafness Catastrophic cardiac arrhythmia (Long-QT syndrome) and Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy.\nGene editing by the CRISPR/CAS system has recently been demonstrated in \"Xenopus\" \"tropicalis\" and \"Xenopus laevis\". This technique is being used to screen the effects of human disease genes in \"Xenopus\" and the system is sufficiently efficient to study the effects within the same embryos that have been manipulated.\nInvestigation of fundamental biological processes.\nSignal transduction: \"Xenopus\" embryos and cell-free extracts are widely used for basic research in signal transduction. In just the last few years, \"Xenopus\" embryos have provided crucial insights into the mechanisms of TGF-beta and Wnt signal transduction. For example, \"Xenopus\" embryos were used to identify the enzymes that control ubiquitination of Smad4, and to demonstrate direct links between TGF-beta superfamily signaling pathways and other important networks, such as the MAP kinase pathway and the Wnt pathway. Moreover, new methods using egg extracts revealed novel, important targets of the Wnt/GSK3 destruction complex.\nCell division: \"Xenopus\" egg extracts have allowed the study of many complicated cellular events \"in vitro\". Because egg cytosol can support successive cycling between mitosis and interphase \"in vitro\", it has been critical to diverse studies of cell division. For example, the small GTPase Ran was first found to regulate interphase nuclear transport, but \"Xenopus\" egg extracts revealed the critical role of Ran GTPase in mitosis independent of its role in interphase nuclear transport. Similarly, the cell-free extracts were used to model nuclear envelope assembly from chromatin, revealing the function of RanGTPase in regulating nuclear envelope reassembly after mitosis. More recently, using \"Xenopus\" egg extracts, it was possible to demonstrate the mitosis-specific function of the nuclear lamin B in regulating spindle morphogenesis and to identify new proteins that mediate kinetochore attachment to microtubules. Cell-free systems have recently become practical investigatory tools, and \"Xenopus\" oocytes are often the source of the extracts used. This has produced significant results in understanding mitotic oscillation and microtubules.\nEmbryonic development: \"Xenopus\" embryos are widely used in developmental biology. A summary of recent advances made by \"Xenopus\" research in recent years would include:\nDNA replication: \"Xenopus\" cell-free extracts also support the synchronous assembly and the activation of origins of DNA replication. They have been instrumental in characterizing the biochemical function of the prereplicative complex, including MCM proteins.\nDNA damage response: Cell-free extracts have been instrumental to unravel the signaling pathways activated in response to DNA double-strand breaks (ATM), replication fork stalling (ATR) or DNA interstrand crosslinks (FA proteins and ATR). Notably, several mechanisms and components of these signal transduction pathways were first identified in \"Xenopus\".\nApoptosis: \"Xenopus\" oocytes provide a tractable model for biochemical studies of apoptosis. Recently, oocytes were used recently to study the biochemical mechanisms of caspase-2 activation; importantly, this mechanism turns out to be conserved in mammals.\nRegenerative medicine: In recent years, tremendous interest in developmental biology has been stoked by the promise of regenerative medicine. \"Xenopus\" has played a role here, as well. For example, expression of seven transcription factors in pluripotent \"Xenopus\" cells rendered those cells able to develop into functional eyes when implanted into \"Xenopus\" embryos, providing potential insights into the repair of retinal degeneration or damage. In a vastly different study, \"Xenopus\" embryos was used to study the effects of tissue tension on morphogenesis, an issue that will be critical for \"in vitro\" tissue engineering. \"Xenopus\" species are important model organisms for the study of spinal cord regeneration, because while capable of regeneration in their larval stages, \"Xenopus\" lose this capacity in early metamorphosis.\nPhysiology: The directional beating of multiciliated cells is essential to development and homeostasis in the central nervous system, the airway, and the oviduct. The multiciliated cells of the \"Xenopus\" epidermis have recently been developed as the first \"in vivo\" test-bed for live-cell studies of such ciliated tissues, and these studies have provided important insights into the biomechanical and molecular control of directional beating.\nActin: Another result from cell-free \"Xenopus\" oocyte extracts has been improved understanding of actin.\nSmall molecule screens to develop novel therapies.\nBecause huge amounts of material are easily obtained, all modalities of \"Xenopus\" research are now being used for small-molecule based screens.\nChemical genetics of vascular growth in \"Xenopus\" tadpoles: Given the important role of neovascularization in cancer progression, \"Xenopus\" embryos were recently used to identify new small molecules inhibitors of blood vessel growth. Notably, compounds identified in \"Xenopus\" were effective in mice. Notably, frog embryos figured prominently in a study that used evolutionary principles to identify a novel vascular disrupting agent that may have chemotherapeutic potential. That work was featured in the New York Times Science Times\n\"In vivo\" testing of potential endocrine disruptors in transgenic \"Xenopus\" embryos; A high-throughput assay for thyroid disruption has recently been developed using transgenic \"Xenopus\" embryos.\nSmall molecule screens in \"Xenopus\" egg extracts: Egg extracts provide ready analysis of molecular biological processes and can rapidly screened. This approach was used to identify novel inhibitors of proteasome-mediated protein degradation and DNA repair enzymes.\nGenetic studies.\nWhile \"Xenopus laevis\" is the most commonly used species for developmental biology studies, genetic studies, especially forward genetic studies, can be complicated by their pseudotetraploid genome. \"Xenopus tropicalis\" provides a simpler model for genetic studies, having a diploid genome.\nGene expression knockdown techniques.\nThe expression of genes can be reduced by a variety of means, for example by using antisense oligonucleotides targeting specific mRNA molecules. DNA oligonucleotides complementary to specific mRNA molecules are often chemically modified to improve their stability \"in vivo\". The chemical modifications used for this purpose include phosphorothioate, 2'-O-methyl, morpholino, MEA phosphoramidate and DEED phosphoramidate.\nMorpholino oligonucleotides.\nMorpholino oligos are used in both \"X. laevis\" and \"X. tropicalis\" to probe the function of a protein by observing the results of eliminating the protein's activity. For example, a set of \"X. tropicalis\" genes has been screened in this fashion.\nMorpholino oligos (MOs) are short, antisense oligos made of modified nucleotides. MOs can knock down gene expression by inhibiting mRNA translation, blocking RNA splicing, or inhibiting miRNA activity and maturation. MOs have proven to be effective knockdown tools in developmental biology experiments and RNA-blocking reagents for cells in culture. MOs do not degrade their RNA targets, but instead act via a steric blocking mechanism RNAseH-independent manner. They remain stable in cells and do not induce immune responses. Microinjection of MOs in early \"Xenopus\" embryos can suppress gene expression in a targeted manner.\nLike all antisense approaches, different MOs can have different efficacy, and may cause off-target, non-specific effects. Often, several MOs need to be tested to find an effective target sequence. Rigorous controls are used to demonstrate specificity, including:\nXenbase provides a searchable catalog of over 2000 MOs that have been specifically used in Xenopus\" research.\" The data is searchable via sequence, gene symbol and various synonyms (as used in different publications). Xenbase maps the MOs to the latest \"Xenopus\" genomes in GBrowse, predicts 'off-target' hits, and lists all \"Xenopus\" literature in which the morpholino has been published.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57549", "revid": "784330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57549", "title": "Mission San Xavier del Bac", "text": "17th-century Spanish mission in Arizona\nMission San Xavier del Bac () is a historic Spanish Catholic mission about south of downtown Tucson, Arizona, on the Tohono O'odham Nation San Xavier Indian Reservation. The mission was founded in 1692 by Eusebio Kino in the center of a centuries-old settlement of the Sobaipuri O'odham, a branch of the Akimel or River O'odham located along the banks of the Santa Cruz River. The mission was named for Francis Xavier, co-founder of the Jesuit Order in Europe. The original church was built to the north of the later Franciscan church and was demolished during an Apache raid in 1770.\nThe mission was rebuilt between 1783 and 1797, which makes it the oldest European structure in Arizona. Labor was provided by the O'odham. An outstanding example of Spanish Colonial architecture in the United States, the Mission San Xavier del Bac hosts some 200,000 visitors each year. It is a well-known pilgrimage site, with thousands visiting each year on foot and on horseback, some among ceremonial cavalcades or \"cabalgatas\".\nThe site is also known as \"Wa:k\" in the O'odham language (\"\" (\"Water Place\") referring to its surface water and springs, which no longer flow. The water in the Santa Cruz River came up to the surface a few miles south of Martinez Hill and then submerged again near Los Reales Wash. The Santa Cruz River used to run year-round in this section and was once critical to the community's survival, but now runs only part of the year.\nHistory.\nMission San Xavier del Bac was established in 1692 by Eusebio Francisco Kino, who founded a chain of Spanish missions in the Sonoran Desert. A Jesuit of Italian descent, Kino often visited and preached in the area, then the Pimer\u00eda Alta colonial territory of the Viceroyalty of New Spain. Construction of the first mission church, about from the site of today's mission, began on April 28, 1700, as noted in his diary:\nOn the twenty-eighth we began the foundations of a very large and capacious church and house of San Xavier del Bac, all of the many people working with much pleasure and zeal, some in digging for the foundations, others in hauling many and very good stones of tezontle from a little hill which was about a quarter of a league away. ... On the twenty-ninth we continued laying the foundations of the church and of the house.\nThe \"little hill\" is believed to be that southeast of San Xavier del Bac. The location was vulnerable to Apache raids, and construction was interrupted until 1756, when it resumed under Alonso Ignacio Benito Espinosa. By 1763 the building was sufficiently complete that the missionaries could hold services inside it, although a poorly prepared foundation led to architectural issues.\nIn 1767, Charles III of Spain banned Jesuits from Spanish lands in the Americas; he installed Franciscans, whom he considered more pliable and \"reliable\", as replacements. Francisco Garc\u00e9s was assigned to San Xavier del Bac, where he remained until 1778. By 1770, the continuing Apache raids finally destroyed the original church. From 1775 on, the mission community and its Indigenous converts were protected somewhat from Apache raids by the Presidio San Agust\u00edn del Tucs\u00f3n, established roughly downstream on the Santa Cruz River.\nThe present mission building was constructed under the direction of Franciscan fathers Juan Bautista Velderrain and Juan Bautista Llorenz between 1783 and 1797. With 7,000 pesos borrowed from a Sonoran rancher, they hired architect Ignacio Gaona, who employed a large workforce of O'odham to create today's church.\nFollowing Mexican independence in 1821, what was then known as Alta California was administered from Mexico City. In 1822, the mission was included under the jurisdiction of the Catholic Diocese of Sonora. In 1828, the Mexican government banned all Spanish-born priests, with the last resident Franciscan departing San Xavier for Spain in 1837.\nLeft vacant, the mission began to decay. Concerned about their church, local O'odham began to preserve what they could. In 1852, John Russell Bartlett visited the mission, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The mission is] truly a miserable place, consisting of from eighty to one hundred huts, or wigwams, made of mud or straw, the sole occupants of which are Pimo Indians, though generally called Papagos. In the midst of these hovels stands the largest and most beautiful church in the State of Sonora.\nWith the Gadsden Purchase in 1853, the site of San Xavier became a part of the United States and the new Territory of Arizona. The church was re-opened in 1859 when the Santa Fe Diocese added the mission to its jurisdiction. It ordered repairs paid for with diocesan money, and assigned a priest to serve the community. In 1868 the Diocese of Tucson was established. It provided for regular services to be held again at the church.\nIn 1872, the Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet opened a school at the mission for the Tohono O'odham children. In 1895, a grant of $1,000 was given to repair the building. More classrooms were added in 1900. The Franciscans returned to the mission in 1913. In 1947, they built a new school next to the church for the local children.\nMissionaries.\nLike most missions in New Spain, San Xavier was staffed by Jesuits until their 1767 expulsion from Mexico; afterwards, they were replaced by Franciscans.\nRenovation.\nExtensive restoration began in 1992 and was continuing as of 2021.\nIn 2024, a project to preserve the mission's tan plaster exterior received a $749,000 grant from the Historic Preservation Fund of the National Park Service.\nArchitecture.\nSan Xavier has an elegant white stucco, Moorish-inspired exterior, with an ornately decorated entrance. Visitors entering the massive, carved mesquite-wood doors are often struck both by the coolness of the interior and the dazzling colors of the paintings, carvings, frescoes, and statues. The architecture is entirely European, with no Piman influence on its Baroque style.\nThe floor plan of the church resembles the classic Latin cross, with a main aisle separated from the sanctuary by the transept, which has chapels at either end. The dome above the transept is high, supported by arches and squinches. At least three different artists painted the artwork inside the church. It is considered by many to be the finest example of Spanish mission architecture in the United States.\n21st century.\nUnlike the other Spanish missions in Arizona, San Xavier is still actively run by Franciscans, and continues to serve the native community by which it was built. Widely considered to be the finest example of Spanish Colonial architecture in the United States, the Mission hosts some 200,000 visitors each year. It is open to the public daily, except when being used for church services. The Franciscan Sisters of Christian Charity, who have taught at the school since 1872, continue with their work and reside in the mission convent. It has a mausoleum which is open for visiting.\nThe mission makes a cameo appearance in Willa Cather's 1927 novel \"Death Comes for the Archbishop\" when it is described by Vaillant as \"the most beautiful church on the continent, though it had been neglected for more than two hundred years.\"\nMission San Xavier del Bac was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1960 and was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1966. The San Xavier Festival is held the evening of the Friday after Easter and features a torch-light parade of Tohono O'odham and Yaqui tribal members.\nIn popular culture.\nThe exterior of the Mission was used in the 1979 TV mini-series \"Salem's Lot\", as an establishing shot taken for a fictitious church in Guatemala.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57550", "revid": "40478368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57550", "title": "Charles Edward Stuart", "text": "Jacobite leader (1720\u20131788)\nCharles Edward Louis John Sylvester Maria Casimir Stuart (31 December 1720 \u2013 30 January 1788) was the elder son of James Francis Edward Stuart, making him the grandson of James VII and II, and the Stuart claimant to the thrones of England, Scotland, and Ireland from 1766. He is also known as the Young Pretender, the Young Chevalier and Bonnie Prince Charlie, and to Jacobites as \"Charles III\".\nBorn in Rome to the exiled Stuart court, he spent much of his early and later life in Italy. In 1744, he travelled to France to take part in a planned invasion of England to restore the Stuart monarchy under his father. When storms partly wrecked the French fleet, Charles resolved to proceed to Scotland following discussion with leading Jacobites. This resulted in Charles landing by ship on the west coast of Scotland, leading to the Jacobite rising of 1745. The Jacobite forces under Charles initially achieved several victories in the field, including the Battle of Prestonpans in September 1745 and the Battle of Falkirk Muir in January 1746. However, by April 1746, Charles was defeated at Culloden, effectively ending the Stuart cause. Although there were subsequent attempts such as a planned French invasion in 1759, Charles was unable to restore the Stuart monarchy.\nWith the Jacobite cause lost, Charles spent the remainder of his life on the continent, except for one secret visit to London. On his return, Charles lived briefly in France before he was exiled in 1748 under the terms of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle. Charles eventually returned to Italy, where he spent much of his later life living in Florence and Rome. He had a number of mistresses before marrying Princess Louise of Stolberg-Gedern in 1772. In his later life, Charles's health declined greatly, and he was said to be an alcoholic. However, his escapades during the 1745 and 1746 uprisings and his escape from Scotland led to his portrayal as a romantic figure of heroic failure. His life and the once possible prospects of a restored Stuart monarchy have left an enduring historical legend that continues to have a legacy today.\nEarly life.\nChildhood and education: 1720\u20131734.\nCharles was born in the Palazzo Muti in Rome, Italy, on 31 December 1720, where his father had been given a residence by Pope Clement XI. Historians differ as to who carried out his baptism ceremony. Kybett reports that it was presided over by Pope Clement, whereas Douglas and Pininski state it was carried out by the Bishop of Montefiascone. Regardless, he was given the names Charles for his great-grandfather, Edward after Edward the Confessor, Louis for the King of France, Casimir after the kings of Poland, and Sylvester as he was born on Saint Sylvester's Day.\nCharles was the son of the Old Pretender, James Francis Edward Stuart (himself son of the exiled Stuart King James II and VII), and Maria Clementina Sobieska, a Polish noblewoman (the granddaughter of John III Sobieski). Charles Edward's grandfather, James II of England and Ireland and VII of Scotland, ruled the kingdoms from 1685 to 1688. He was deposed when the English Parliament invited the Dutch Protestant William III and his wife, Princess Mary, King James's eldest daughter, to replace him in the Revolution of 1688. Many Protestants, including a number of prominent parliamentarians, had been worried that King James aimed to return England fully to the Catholic faith. Since the exile of James and the Act of Settlement, the \"Jacobite Cause\" had striven to return the Stuarts to the thrones of England and Scotland, which had been united in 1603 under James VI and I, with the parliaments joined by the Acts of Union in 1707 as the Kingdom of Great Britain.\nCharles was said to have suffered from weak legs at an early age, possibly as a result of rickets. However, Charles was instructed in a regime of exercise and dancing to help improve his constitution, which strengthened his legs by later years. Charles spent much of his early childhood in Rome and Bologna in the company of a small retinue and a close but often argumentative family. His brother Henry Benedict Stuart was born 5 years later on 6 March 1725. His mother and father were regularly at disagreement with each other, leading to one notable incident in which Clementina left the palace shortly after Henry's birth in 1725 and moved to a convent, not returning until 1727. As the legitimate heir to the thrones of England, Scotland, and Ireland\u2014according to the Jacobite succession, James, along with his household, lived with a sense of pride, and staunchly believed in the divine right of kings. Charles spent much of his early years in the company of older men, several of whom acted as his tutors. Charles Edward's governor was the Protestant James Murray, Jacobite Earl of Dunbar. While the Pope had raised initial concerns over Charles's religious education under a Protestant governor, James agreed that Charles would be raised as a Catholic. Among his tutors were the Chevalier Ramsay, Sir Thomas Sheridan and Father Vinceguerra, a Catholic priest. He quickly became conversant in English, French and Italian, although it was said that he never fully mastered any language and was partially illiterate. During his childhood, he was reported to enjoy hunting, horsemanship, a form of golf, music and dancing.\nTravels in Europe: 1734\u20131745.\nIn 1734, his cousin, the Duke of Liria, who was proceeding to join Don Carlos in his struggle for the crown of Naples, passed through Rome. He offered to take Charles on his expedition, and the boy of thirteen was appointed general of artillery by Don Carlos. On 30 July 1734, he departed Rome with an escort and proceeded with his cousin to the French and Spanish siege of Gaeta, his first exposure to war. While at Gaeta, he observed the final stages of the siege and was said to have come under fire in the trenches of the siegeworks. He returned to Rome in late 1734. In January 1735, shortly after his fourteenth birthday, Charles's mother Clementina died of scurvy. She had been in a poor state of declining health for many months; however, Charles was said to have been deeply distressed after her death.\nAs Charles grew older, he was introduced by his father and the Pope to Italian society. In 1737, James sent his son on a tour through major Italian cities to complete his education as a prince and man of the world. Charles proceeded to visit Genoa, Florence, Parma, Bologna and Venice. The Italian tour was a shock for Charles, who had believed he would be welcomed as a royal prince. Instead, most European courts would only receive him as the \"Duke of Albany\" (an historic title adopted by Scottish royals in the 14th century). Despite being Catholic, many European states wished to avoid antagonising Britain, the only exception being Venice.\nBy the time he had reached 20, he had become a notable member of upper-class society in Rome and had developed a fondness for alcohol and fine clothes, often in excess of his allowance. He had become increasingly distant from his brother due to Henry's devotion to prayer and religious study. His father continued to rely on foreign aid in his attempts to restore himself to the British and Irish thrones. However, Charles became increasingly supportive of the idea of rebellion unassisted by invasion or by support of any kind from abroad. On 23 December 1743, owing to his limited ability to travel to Britain, James named his son Charles prince regent, giving him the authority to act in his name.\nIn January 1744, his father believed he had managed to obtain the de facto renewed support of the French government. Following this mistaken belief, Charles Edward travelled covertly to France from Rome, initially under the guise of a hunting party. However, neither the French Government nor King Louis XV had officially invited Charles. Nevertheless, by February, the French government had agreed to support a planned invasion of England, hoping to remove British forces from the War of the Austrian Succession. Charles then travelled to Dunkirk with the purpose of accompanying a French Army across to England. The invasion never materialised, as the French fleet was scattered by a storm in the spring equinox, losing 11 ships. By the time it regrouped, the British fleet realised the diversion that had deceived them and resumed their position in the Channel.\nAfter the failure of the planned invasion, Charles remained in France, staying at several places, including Gravelines, Chantilly and Paris, leasing a hilltop house in Montmartre in May 1744. Owing to his expenditure on his wardrobe, attendants and drinking, Charles fell into debt to the amount of 30,000 livres. With news of this and following the failed invasion, the French attempted to encourage Charles to return to Italy by refusing to pay him a monthly subsidy. However, when he could no longer afford the rent on the house in Montmartre, the Archbishop of Cambrai agreed to lend him his country estate near Paris where he stayed until January 1745. Charles then moved to the country house of Anne, Duchess of Berwick in Soissons, following repeated attempts by the French to encourage him to leave the Paris region. However, Charles continued to travel regularly to Paris during this period, often incognito and frequenting the hotels of the city to meet with supporters.\n1745 uprising.\nPreparations and journey to Scotland: 1745.\nIn both Rome and Paris, Charles met numerous supporters of the Stuart cause; he knew that Jacobite representatives were in every key European court. He had now taken a considerable share in correspondence and other work promoting his and his father's interests. While in Paris and Soissons, Charles sought funding and support to restore the monarchy. Following conversations with Irish and Scottish exiles such as Sir Thomas Sheridan who assured him of the strength of the Jacobite movement in Scotland, as well as following receipt of a petition to Charles from Sir Hector Maclean on behalf of intervention, Charles resolved to launch an expedition to Scotland. The ultimate aim was to instigate a rebellion that would place his father on the thrones of England, Scotland, and Ireland. To assist with funding the expedition, Charles borrowed some 180,000 livres from the Paris bankers John Waters and George Waters. Part of these funds had been raised through support from loyalists in Britain such as Sir Henry Bedingfield of Oxburgh Hall. As security for the loans, Charles was able to use the Sobieski crown jewels of his great-grandfather John III Sobieski, which had passed down to him through his mother. He used these extensive funds to purchase weapons and fit out the \"Elisabeth\", an old man-of-war of 66 guns, and the \"Du Teillay\" (sometimes called \"Doutelle\"), a 16-gun privateer.\nEncouraged by the French victory in May 1745 at the Battle of Fontenoy, Charles and his party set sail on 5 July for Scotland. During the voyage north, Charles's squadron was fired upon by HMS \"Lion\" in the Celtic Sea. The \"Du Teillay\", with Charles on board, made sail to escape, while the \"Elisabeth\", with her greater firepower, engaged \"Lion\". When \"Lion\" withdrew, the \"Elisabeth\" was forced to return to Brest for repairs, taking the majority of Charles's supplies, including some 1,800 broadswords, 8 artillery pieces and most of the 1,500 muskets he had purchased. The \"Du Teillay\" successfully landed him and seven companions at Eriskay on 23 July 1745. The group would later be known as the Seven Men of Moidart and included John O'Sullivan, an Irish exile and former French officer, and Charles's secretary George Kelly. Many Catholic and Protestant Highland clans still supported the Jacobite cause, and Charles hoped for a warm welcome from these clans to start an insurgency by Jacobites throughout Britain. However, receiving a cool reception from the clan leaders there, many of those contacted advised him to return to France, including MacDonald of Sleat and Norman MacLeod. Aware of the potential impact of defeat, they felt that by arriving without French military support, Charles had failed to keep his commitments and was unconvinced by his personal qualities. Undeterred, Charles set sail again and arrived at the bay of Loch nan Uamh. He had hoped for support from a French fleet, but it was not forthcoming, and he decided to raise an army in Scotland.\nEarly stages and victory at Prestonpans: 1745.\nAlthough several clan chiefs initially discouraged him, he gained the crucial support of Donald Cameron of Lochiel, Chief of Clan Cameron, after Charles provided \"security for the full value of his estate should the rising prove abortive.\" Thereafter, support continued to grow. It is recorded that during this time, Charles began to take lessons in conversational Gaelic under the tutorship of Alasdair mac Mhaighstir Alasdair. On 19 August, he raised his father's standard at Glenfinnan and gathered a force large enough to enable him to march towards Edinburgh. The force proceeded eastwards, reaching Invergarry Castle by the last week of August. Charles's forces continued on via the Corrieyairack Pass, where their control of the pass persuaded advancing government forces to withdraw from the area. Stopping briefly first at Blair Castle, Charles and his forces reached Perth on 4 September. At Perth, his ranks were joined by more sympathisers, including Lord George Murray. Previously pardoned for his participation in the 1715 and 1719 risings, Murray took over from O'Sullivan due to his better understanding of Highland military customs, and the Jacobites spent the next week re-organising their forces. On 14 September, Charles and his forces took Falkirk, and Charles stayed at Callendar House, where he persuaded the Earl of Kilmarnock to join him.\nCharles's progress onto Edinburgh was helped by the action of the British leader, General Sir John Cope, who had marched to Inverness, leaving the south country undefended. On 16 September, Charles and his army encamped outside the city at Gray's Mill in Longstone. Lord Provost Archibald Stewart controlled the city, which quickly surrendered. However, the castle under the command of George Preston did not surrender and was blockaded until Charles later called off the siege owing to a lack of artillery. On 17 September, Charles entered Edinburgh, accompanied by around 2,400 men. During this time, Charles also gave trophies to his supporters, a prominent example being Prince Charlie's Targe. Allan Ramsay painted a portrait of Charles while he was in Edinburgh, which survived in the collection of the Earl of Wemyss at Gosford House and, as of 2016[ [update]], was on display at the Scottish National Portrait Gallery. \nMeanwhile, Sir John Cope had brought his forces by sea to Dunbar, a decision he would soon regret. On 20 September, Charles mustered and joined his forces at Duddingston. On 21 September, Charles and his forces defeated Cope's army, the only government army in Scotland, at the Battle of Prestonpans. Charles was said to have been only 50 paces from the front-line of the battle, and he later expressed remorse that the victory involved killing his own subjects. It was reported during the battle that Charles and Lord Murray had argued over the disposition of forces. The historian Hugh Douglas argues this was to result in an ever-worsening relationship between the two that would culminate with ultimate defeat later at Culloden.\nInvasion of England: 1745\u20131746.\nMorale was high following the battle at Prestonpans, and Charles returned to Edinburgh, holding court at Holyrood Palace. Jacobite morale was further boosted in mid-October when the French landed with supplies of money and weapons and an envoy, which seemed to validate claims of French backing. However, Lord Elcho later claimed that his fellow Scots were already concerned by Charles's autocratic style and fear his Irish advisors overly influenced him. \nA \"Prince's Council\" of senior leaders was established; Charles resented it as an imposition by the Scots on their divinely appointed monarch, while the daily meetings accentuated divisions between the factions. The council was said to include Perth, Lord George Murray, Thomas Sheridan, John O'Sullivan, Murray of Broughton, Lochiel, Keppoch, Clanranald, Glencoe, Ardsheal and Lochgarry. The option to remain in Scotland was considered but Charles had confidently proposed marching into England via Berwick and then onto Newcastle to meet General Wade's forces. A discussion then took place and while the council was persuaded to agree to invade England, it was felt an approach by way of Carlisle would better suit their forces as they lacked sufficient artillery for investing the stronger walls of Berwick. Charles was obliged to acquiesce. \nOn 2 November, the main army headed south to Carlisle (with a smaller column making a brief feint to the east to Kelso and as if to Wooler to provide a distraction to Wade). The army numbered approximately 6,000 men. On 9 November Charles army began to surround Carlisle. The blockade was completed by 13 November, while Charles himself stayed with a part of his force at nearby Brampton. Owing to the castle and walls being in a poor state of repair and with no prospect of relief by Wade's force, the town and castle of Carlisle eventually agreed to surrender to Charles on 15 November. On 18 November, Charles made a triumphal entry into Carlisle on a white charger and resided at Highmore House. Charles held a council of war again in Carlisle, where it was discussed to either remain in Carlisle or continue an advance further into England. \nAfter receiving encouraging reports of the potential support of Jacobites in Lancashire Charles and his council agreed to continue south. Charles and his army left Carlisle (leaving a small garrison) and proceeded onto Penrith, arriving there on 21 November.\nContinuing on Charles and his army then reached Kendal by the evening of 23 November, where he resided at Stricklandgate in the town. His forces then continued south to Preston on the 26 November and Manchester on 29 November. Charles resided at a townhouse at 44 Manchester Street and levied taxes on the town, as well as issuing a proclamation for the repair of local bridges. While at Manchester, Charles ordered local Jacobite volunteers and those from Lancashire to be formed as the Manchester Regiment, though numbers of volunteers were significantly below what he had expected. On 1 December, he headed with his army to Macclesfield where he remained for several days before departing for Leek and then further south to Derby. Charles stayed at Exeter House with his main force, leading elements of his army progressed as far south as the River Trent at Swarkestone Bridge in Derbyshire, arriving there on 4 December. \nAt Derby, despite Charles's objections, his council decided to return to Scotland given the lack of English Jacobite and French support. There were also rumours that large government forces were being amassed. Charles admitted that he had not heard from the English Jacobites since leaving France despite claiming the contrary; this caused his relationship with some of the Scots to become irretrievably damaged. Charles was said to be manifestly distraught at the decision and had tried, without success to persuade his council to continue on to London. \nThe result was that on 6 December, the Jacobite forces and Charles left Derby and began their march north back to Scotland. Charles's route north was the same as the one he had taken on the journey south. He returned via Stockport to Manchester on 9 December, and after some light resistance from the local population, Charles demanded \u00a35,000 from the town, eventually receiving \u00a32,500 in payment. With government forces in close pursuit, Charles and his army resumed their journey north, proceeding on through Preston, Lancaster, and Kendal until the Jacobite forces eventually met the government forces at Clifton near Penrith in Cumbria on 18 December. \nThe Jacobite forces won the Clifton Moor Skirmish, allowing them to continue north to Carlisle. Charles re-entered Carlisle on 19 December with his army and ordered the Manchester Regiment to stay behind as garrison in the castle, leaving behind the sick as well as some his cannons. Leaving Carlisle, he crossed the river Esk with his forces and returned to Scotland.\nScotland, Culloden and return to France: 1746.\nCharles and his forces reached Glasgow on 26 December, resting until 3 January 1746. The decision was then made to lay siege to Stirling and Stirling Castle. However, while the town surrendered immediately, the castle's artillery proved too strong for the Jacobite forces to approach and seize the castle. Government forces also attempted a relief of the siege, which resulted in a victory for Charles in the ensuing Battle of Falkirk Muir in January 1746. A failure to take the castle, however, resulted in the abandonment of the siege and the Jacobite forces moving northward to Crieff, then Moy and Inverness. In February, while resting in Moy at Moy Hall, Charles narrowly avoided capture by an advance party of government forces that had been sent to capture him as the party had been detected by four local men on sentry at the roadside to the hall. With a halt in operations until the weather improved, Charles forces then rested at Inverness, including a stay of some four days at Kilravock Castle. Charles and his troops were then required to move after word reached them of the pursuit against them by the forces of George II's son Prince William, Duke of Cumberland.\nGovernment forces caught up with Charles and his army at the ensuing Battle of Culloden on 16 April. Charles ignored the advice of his subordinate Lord George Murray and chose to fight on flat, open, marshy ground, where his forces were exposed to superior firepower from government troops. To ensure his safety, his officers requested that Charles command his army from behind the front lines, preventing him from gaining a clear view of the battlefield. He hoped that Cumberland's army would attack first, and he had his men stand exposed to the accurate fire from government artillery batteries. Seeing the error in this, he quickly ordered an attack, but his messenger was killed before the order could be delivered. The Jacobite attack was uncoordinated, charging into withering musket fire and grapeshot fired from the cannons, and it met with little success. In the centre, the Jacobites reached the first line of government troops, but a second line of soldiers eventually repulsed this attack. The remaining Jacobite survivors in the front line fled. However, the Jacobite Army units fighting on the north-eastern side of the battlefield, as well as Irish and Scots regulars in the second line, retired in good order, allowing Charles and his personal retinue to escape northwards. \nAfter the defeat, Murray led a group of Jacobites to Ruthven, intending to continue the fight. Charles thought he was betrayed but abandoned the Jacobite cause. Some 20 miles from the battlefield, Charles rested briefly at Gorthleck, the home of his dubious supporter Lord Lovat, before retreating to Invergarry Castle, by way of Fort Augustus, on 16 April. Charles then hid in the moors of the Highlands of Scotland, before making a flight to the Hebrides, always barely ahead of the government forces. Many Highlanders aided him during his escape, and none betrayed him for the \u00a330,000 reward. While Charles was in the Hebrides, funds had arrived from Spain and France on two ships that called at Lochaber. Too late to assist Charles following Culloden, only the Spanish gold was landed, but much of it was lost.\nCharles was assisted by supporters such as the pilot Donald Macleod of Galtrigill and Captain Con O'Neill, who took him to Benbecula. From 16 April until 28 June, Charles travelled through Benbecula, South Uist, North Uist, Harris, and the Isle of Lewis. On 28 June, Charles was aided by Flora MacDonald, who helped him sail to the Isle of Skye and then to Raasay by taking him in a boat disguised as her maid \"Betty Burke\". Charles remained on Skye until 8 July when he crossed back to the mainland to Morar. With the aid of a few loyal servants and local supporters, Charles hid from government forces in the western Grampian Mountains for several weeks. He ultimately evaded capture, and on 19 September, he left the country aboard the French frigate \"L'Heureux\", commanded by Richard Warren. The Prince's Cairn marks the traditional spot on the shores of Loch nan Uamh in Lochaber from which he made his final departure from Scotland.\nLater life.\nLife in Europe: 1746\u20131766.\nCharles landed back in France on 10 October\u00a0[O.S. 29 September]\u00a01746. On his return, he was initially received warmly by King Louis XV, but as far as obtaining additional military or political assistance was concerned, his efforts proved fruitless. However, he became at once the popular hero and idol of many Parisians on account of his exploits in Scotland. In March 1747, he travelled briefly to Madrid via Lyon for an audience with Ferdinand VI of Spain, but the King rejected the idea of Spain providing help to restore the Stuarts. His relationship with his brother Henry deteriorated during this time, when Henry accepted a cardinal's hat in July 1747. He also deliberately broke off communication with his father in Rome (who had approved of his brother's action). \nWhile back in France, Charles had numerous mistresses. He had a relationship with his first cousin Marie Louise de La Tour d'Auvergne, wife of Jules, Prince of Gu\u00e9m\u00e9n\u00e9, that resulted in a short-lived son named Charles (born 28 July 1748, died 18 January 1749). In December 1748, he was arrested by the French authorities while attending the opera at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Palais-Royal. Briefly imprisoned with John Roy Stewart at the Ch\u00e2teau de Vincennes, he was then expelled from France under the terms of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle that ended the War of the Austrian Succession. He moved first to the Papal territory at Avignon, and then in 1749 to Lun\u00e9ville in the Duchy of Lorraine. In the following years, he was reported to have made several visits in secret to Paris, but was not discovered by the French authorities.\nAfter his defeat, Charles indicated to the remaining supporters of the Jacobite cause in England that, accepting the impossibility of his recovering the English and Scottish crowns while he remained a Catholic, he was willing to commit himself to reigning as a Protestant. Accordingly, he visited London incognito in 1750, staying for several weeks primarily at the Essex Street London residence of Lady Primrose, the widow of the 3rd Viscount of Primrose. While in London, Charles abjured the Catholic faith and conformed to the Protestant faith by receiving Anglican communion, likely at one of the remaining non-juring chapels. Bishop Robert Gordon, a staunch Jacobite whose house in Theobald's Row was one of Charles's safe-houses for the visit, is the most likely to have celebrated the communion. A chapel in Gray's Inn, used by the nonjurors, was suggested as the venue as early as 1788. This rebuts David Hume's suggestion that it took place at a church in the Strand. and biographers such as Kybett who have suggested St Martin-in-the-Fields.\nCharles lived for several years in exile with his Scottish mistress, Clementina Walkinshaw (later known as Countess von Alberstrof), whom he met, and may have begun a relationship with, during the 1745 rebellion. She was suspected by many of Charles's supporters of being a spy planted by the Hanoverian government of Great Britain. On 29 October 1753, the couple had a daughter, Charlotte. Charles's inability to cope with the collapse of the Jacobite cause led to his problem with alcohol, and mother and daughter separated from Charles with his father James's assistance.\nIn 1759, at the height of the Seven Years' War, Charles was summoned to a meeting in Paris with the French foreign minister, the Duc De Choiseul. Charles failed to make a good impression, being argumentative and idealistic in his expectations. Choiseul was planning a full-scale invasion of England involving upwards of 100,000 men, to which he hoped to add a number of Jacobites led by Charles. However, he was so little impressed with Charles that he dismissed the prospect of Jacobite assistance. The French invasion, which was Charles's last realistic chance to recover the thrones of England, Scotland and Ireland for the Stuart dynasty, was ultimately thwarted by naval defeats at Quiberon Bay and Lagos.\nPretender: 1766\u20131788.\nCharles's father died on 1 January 1766. Pope Clement XI had recognised James as King of England, Scotland, and Ireland as \"James III and VIII\", but over 40 years later Pope Clement XIII did not give Charles the same recognition as \"Charles III\". However, on 23 January, with the Pope's permission, Charles moved into the Palazzo Muti, which his father had lived in for over 40 years. Charles wrote to both the Kings of France and Spain on his accession, but recognition as King Charles III was not granted by either monarch. Charles returned to his social life in Rome, making visits to the Pope and indulging in pastimes such as hunting, shooting, balls, concerts, operas and plays. One notable occasion, was when he met and heard Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart perform at the Chigi Palace on 6 April. However, he would periodically shut himself away in his rooms, and was said to have formed no new friendships in his later life. He made visits to Florence and Pisa in 1770, where he took to the waters at the city's thermal baths. Charles returned to Paris in early 1771 with the permission of the French authorities under the Duc de Choiseul, who once again wished to discuss the possibility of a Jacobite invasion. However, on the day of the meeting, Charles was reported to be so intoxicated that he was unable to speak coherently, so the discussions were abandoned.\nBy the time Charles entered his 51st year, concern was raised by his Jacobite supporters and the French that he had not yet married, and that only his brother, a priest sworn to celibacy, remained as the only male heir. The French also wished to continue the Stuart line as a potential weapon against the government in Britain. In 1771, while he was in Paris, Charles dispatched Sir Edmund Ryan, an Irish officer in Berwick's regiment, to seek out a bride for him. Despite some potential negotiations with prospective brides, he was unable to find a wife. A few months later, Charles's companion, the Duc d'Aiguillion, and his cousin Charles Fitz-James Stuart suggested the latter's sister-in-law Princess Louise of Stolberg-Gedern as a prospective bride. Accordingly, on 28 March 1772, Charles married Princess Louise by proxy. The couple met shortly after for the first time at Macerata on 17 April 1772, where the marriage was reported to have been consummated.\nThey lived first in Rome and then moved to Florence in 1774, where he was provided with a residence by Prince Corsini, the Palazzo di San Clemente, now known as the \"Palazzo del Pretendente\". In Florence, he used the title \"Count of Albany\" as an alias, and his wife Louise was normally referred to as the \"Countess of Albany\". Charles's health deteriorated in later life, and he was reported to have suffered from asthma, high blood pressure, swollen legs and ulcers. In 1774, while in Florence, he suffered constantly from his illnesses, which required him to be carried by his servants to and from his carriage. Charles was also known to be an alcoholic, a condition that worsened with age.\nCharles and Louise left Florence in 1777 and returned to Rome. Their relationship had become increasingly quarrelsome. One cause was said to be the speculation regarding Louise's adulterous relationships with the courtiers Carl Bonstetten and the Italian poet Count Vittorio Alfieri. Another cause was stated to be Charles himself, who was reported as becoming increasingly irrational and drunk. In November 1780, Louise formally left Charles. After separating, she claimed that Charles had physically abused her. This claim was generally believed by contemporaries. The historian Douglas states that Charles had been drinking following Saint Andrew's Day celebrations, and after accusing Louise of infidelities, may have attempted to rape her, resulting in her screaming to the extent that the household servants intervened. In the years that followed, the Pope awarded Louise half of Charles's papal pension, and Charles's international reputation was greatly damaged. He was said to live an increasingly isolated and unhappy life, especially after his brother Henry agreed to house Louise at his estate.\nBy 1783, Charles's health continued to decline, and for a time, he fell seriously ill such to the extent that he was given the Sacraments. Although Charles recovered, he agreed to create a new will, and signed an act of legitimation for his illegitimate daughter Charlotte. Charles also gave her the title \"Duchess of Albany\" in the peerage of Scotland and the style \"Her Royal Highness\", but these honours did not give Charlotte any right of succession to the throne. Charlotte lived with her father in Florence and Rome for the next five years. Eventually, she survived her father by less than two years, dying unmarried at Bologna in November 1789. In April 1784, Charles was persuaded by the visiting King Gustav III of Sweden to grant Louise a decree of separation. While not a formal divorce, as no such legal procedure existed in the Papal States, Louise was thereby legally permitted to live separately from her husband, even though she had been doing so for some time. Charles spent the majority of his last years living between Florence and Rome. However, he left Florence for the last time in 1785 and returned to Rome. It was reported that he was limited to light travelling by his doctors owing to his fragility.\nDeath and burial.\nCharles died in Rome of a stroke on 30 January 1788, aged 67. His brother the Cardinal Duke of York, who was present at the death, had the record read that he died on the morning of 31 January, as it was deemed unlucky to have him declared dead on the same date as the execution of his great-grandfather, King Charles I. Charles's will left most of his estate to his heir, his daughter Charlotte. There were a few exceptions, including some plates for his brother Henry, as well as some annuities for his servants.\nOn his death, a cast of his face was made, and his body was embalmed and placed in a coffin of cypress wood. Adorned with the Order of the Thistle, the Cross of St Andrew, the Order of the Garter and the Cross of St George, Charles was first buried in Frascati Cathedral near Rome, where his brother Henry was bishop. At Henry's death in 1807, Charles's remains (except his heart) were moved to the crypt of St Peter's Basilica in the Vatican, where they were laid to rest next to those of his brother and father. This was below the spot where the monument to the Royal Stuarts by Antonio Canova would later be erected. His mother Maria is also buried nearby at St Peter's. Charles's heart remained in Frascati Cathedral, where it is contained in a small urn beneath the floor, under a monument.\nCultural depictions.\nCharles has been depicted in painting since the 18th century, much of it belonging to Romanticism and later Victorian representations of the Jacobites. Charles's departure from Scotland in 1746 is depicted in an engraving of a painting by Francis William Topham, . In 1892, John Pettie painted Charles entering the Ballroom at Holyroodhouse. Charles and the Jacobites would also be depicted in numerous drawings, prints and on objects, his likeness and coat of arms even depicted on objects such as engraved drinking glasses.\nCharles has been depicted on stage as well as in film and television. He was portrayed by David Niven in the 1948 semi-biographical film \"Bonnie Prince Charlie\". Charles was also portrayed by Andrew Gower in the historical dramatic series \"Outlander\", based upon Diana Gabaldon's book series. His life has formed a component of numerous historical plays, including \"For Bonnie Prince Charlie\" (1897), the \"Young Pretender\" (1996) and \"The Glory\" (2000).\nThe legacy of Charles Stuart and his role in Jacobitism has also influenced songs and music. Examples include the folk songs \"\", \"Bonnie Charlie\", \"Wha'll be King but Charlie?\" and \"Charlie is my darling\". Charles's subsequent flight from Scotland is commemorated in \"The Skye Boat Song\" by the English author Sir Harold Edwin Boulton and in the Irish song \"Mo Ghile Mear\" by Se\u00e1n Cl\u00e1rach Mac Domhnaill. The popular song \"My Bonnie Lies over the Ocean\" could be in reference to him as a way to refer to him but also to any woman. It was covered by Tony Sheridan and the Beatles in 1961.\nArms.\nDuring his pretence as Prince of Wales, Charles claimed a coat of arms consisting of those of the kingdom, differenced by a \"label argent of three points\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57551", "revid": "51027800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57551", "title": "Third Punic War", "text": "War between Rome and Carthage 149\u2013146 BC\n \nThe Third Punic War (149\u2013146 BC) was the third and last of the Punic Wars fought between Carthage and Rome. The war was fought entirely within Carthaginian territory, in what is now northern Tunisia. When the Second Punic War ended in 201\u00a0BC one of the terms of the peace treaty prohibited Carthage from waging war without Rome's permission. Rome's ally, King Masinissa of Numidia, exploited this to repeatedly raid and seize Carthaginian territory with impunity. In 149\u00a0BC Carthage sent an army, under Hasdrubal, against Masinissa, the treaty notwithstanding. The campaign ended in disaster as the Battle of Oroscopa ended with a Carthaginian defeat and the surrender of the Carthaginian army. Anti-Carthaginian factions in Rome used the illicit military action as a pretext to prepare a punitive expedition.\nLater in 149\u00a0BC a large Roman army landed at Utica in North Africa. The Carthaginians hoped to appease the Romans, but despite the Carthaginians surrendering all of their weapons, the Romans pressed on to besiege the city of Carthage. The Roman campaign suffered repeated setbacks through 149\u00a0BC, only alleviated by Scipio Aemilianus, a middle-ranking officer, distinguishing himself several times. A new Roman commander took over in 148\u00a0BC and fared equally badly. At the annual election of Roman magistrates in the spring of 147\u00a0BC the public support for Scipio was so great that the usual age restrictions were lifted to allow him to be appointed consul and commander in Africa.\nScipio's term commenced with two Carthaginian successes, but he tightened the siege and started to build a large mole to prevent supplies from getting into Carthage via blockade runners. The Carthaginians had partially rebuilt their fleet, and it sortied, to the Romans' surprise. After an indecisive engagement, the Carthaginians mismanaged their withdrawal and lost many ships. The Romans then built a large brick structure in the harbour area that dominated the city wall. Once this was complete, Scipio led a strong force that stormed the camp of Carthage's field army and forced most of the towns and cities still supporting Carthage to surrender. In early 146\u00a0BC the Romans launched their final assault and, over six days, systematically destroyed the city and killed its inhabitants; only on the last day did they take prisoners, 50,000 of them, who were sold into slavery. The conquered Carthaginian territories became the Roman province of Africa, with Utica as its capital. It was a century before the site of Carthage was rebuilt as a Roman city.\nPrimary sources.\nThe main source for most aspects of the Punic Wars is the historian Polybius (c.\u2009200 \u2013 c.\u2009118\u00a0BC), a Greek sent to Rome in 167\u00a0BC as a hostage. His works include a now-lost manual on military tactics, but he is best known for \"The Histories\", written sometime after 146\u00a0BC. He accompanied his patron and friend, the Roman general Scipio Aemilianus, in North Africa during the Third Punic War; this causes the normally reliable Polybius to recount Scipio's actions in a favourable light. In addition, significant portions of \"The Histories\"' account of the Third Punic War have been lost.\nThe account of the Roman annalist Livy, who relied heavily on Polybius, is much used by modern historians of the Punic Wars, but all that survives of his account of events after 167\u00a0BC is a list of contents. Other ancient accounts of the Third Punic War or its participants which have also been largely lost include those of Plutarch, Dio Cassius and the Greek Diodorus Siculus. Modern historians also use the account of the 2nd-century\u00a0AD Greek Appian. The modern historian Bernard Mineo states that it \"is the only complete and continuous account of this war\". It is thought to have been largely based on Polybius's account, but several problems with it have been identified. These issues mean that of the three Punic Wars, the third is the one about which the least is reliably known. Other sources include coins, inscriptions, archaeological evidence and empirical evidence from reconstructions.\nBackground.\nIn the mid-2nd century\u00a0BC Rome was the dominant power in the Mediterranean region, while Carthage was a large city-state in the north east of what is now Tunisia. Carthage and Rome had fought the 23-year-long First Punic War from 264 to 241\u00a0BC and the 17-year-long Second Punic War between 218 and 201\u00a0BC. Both wars ended with Roman victories; the Second when the Roman general Scipio Africanus defeated Hannibal, the premier Carthaginian general of the war, at the Battle of Zama, south-west of Carthage. Africanus imposed a peace treaty on the Carthaginians which stripped them of their overseas territories and some of their African ones. An indemnity of 10,000 silver talents was to be paid over 50 years. Hostages were taken and Carthage was prohibited from waging war outside Africa\u2014and could wage war in Africa only with Rome's express permission. Many senior Carthaginians wanted to reject the treaty, but Hannibal spoke strongly in its favour and it was accepted in spring 201\u00a0BC. Henceforth, it was clear that Carthage was politically subordinate to Rome.\nAt the end of the war Masinissa, an ally of Rome, emerged as by far the most powerful ruler among the Numidians, the indigenous population which controlled much of what is now Algeria and Tunisia. Over the following 50 years, he repeatedly took advantage of Carthage's inability to protect its possessions. Whenever Carthage petitioned Rome for redress or permission to take military action, Rome backed Masinissa and refused. Masinissa's seizures of and raids into Carthaginian territory became increasingly flagrant. In 151\u00a0BC Carthage raised a large army commanded by the previously unrecorded general Hasdrubal and, the treaty notwithstanding, counter-attacked the Numidians. The campaign ended in disaster at the Battle of Oroscopa and the army surrendered. Many Carthaginians were subsequently massacred by the Numidians. Hasdrubal escaped to Carthage, where, in an attempt to placate Rome, he was condemned to death.\nCarthage paid off its indemnity in 151\u00a0BC and was prospering economically but was no military threat to Rome. Nevertheless, there had long been a faction within the Roman Senate that had wished to take further military action against Carthage. For example, the dislike of Carthage by the senior senator Cato was so well known that since the 18th century (AD), he has been credited with ending all of his speeches with (\"Carthage must be destroyed\"). The opposing faction included Scipio Nasica, who argued that fear of a strong enemy such as Carthage would keep the common people in check and avoid social division. Cato was a member of an embassy to Carthage, probably in 153\u00a0BC, and noted her growing economy and strength; Nasica was likely a member of the same embassy. Using the illicit Carthaginian military action as a pretext, Rome began preparing a punitive expedition.\nModern scholars have advanced several theories as to why Rome was eager for war. These include: a Roman fear of Carthaginian commercial competition; a desire to forestall a wider war which might have broken out with the death of Masinissa, who was aged 89 at the time; the factional use of Carthage as a political \"bogeyman\", irrespective of its true power; a greed for glory and loot; and a desire to quash a political system which Rome considered anathema. No consensus has been reached regarding these and other hypotheses. Carthaginian embassies attempted to negotiate with Rome, which responded evasively. The large North African port city of Utica, some north of Carthage, went over to Rome in 149\u00a0BC. Aware that Utica's harbour would greatly facilitate any assault on Carthage, the Senate and the People's Assembly of Rome declared war on Carthage.\nThe Romans elected two men each year, known as consuls, as senior magistrates, who at time of war would each lead an army; on occasion their term of office was extended. A large Roman army landed at Utica in 149\u00a0BC under both consuls for the year, Manius Manilius commanding the army and Lucius Marcius Censorinus the fleet. The Carthaginians continued to attempt to appease Rome and sent an embassy to Utica. The consuls demanded that they hand over all weaponry; reluctantly the Carthaginians did so. Large convoys took enormous stocks of equipment from Carthage to Utica. Surviving records state that these included 200,000 sets of armour and 2,000 catapults. Carthage's warships all sailed to Utica and were burnt in the harbour. Once Carthage was disarmed, Censorinus made the further demand that the Carthaginians abandon their city and relocate away from the sea; Carthage would then be destroyed. The Carthaginians abandoned negotiations and prepared to defend their city.\nOpposing forces.\nThe city of Carthage was unusually large for the time: modern scholars give population estimates ranging from 90,000 to 800,000. Any of these would make Carthage one of the most populous cities in the Mediterranean area at the time. It was strongly fortified with walls of more than circumference. Defending the main approach from the land were three lines of defences, of which the strongest was a brick-built wall wide and high with a ditch in front of it. Built into this wall was a barracks capable of holding over 24,000 soldiers. The city had few reliable sources of ground water but possessed a complex system to catch and channel rainwater and many cisterns to store it.\nThe Carthaginians raised a strong and enthusiastic force to garrison the city from their citizenry and by freeing all slaves willing to fight. They also formed a field army at least 20,000 strong, which was placed under Hasdrubal, freshly released from his condemned cell. This army was based at Nepheris, south of Carthage. Appian gives the strength of the Roman army which landed in Africa as 84,000 soldiers; modern historians estimate it at 40,000\u201350,000 men, of whom 4,000 were cavalry.\nCourse of the war.\n149 BC.\nThe Roman army moved to Carthage, unsuccessfully attempted to scale the city walls, and settled down for a siege. They set up two camps under command of legates: Censorinus' had the primary role of protecting the beached Roman ships and Manilius's housed the Roman legions. Hasdrubal moved up his army to harass the Roman supply lines and foraging parties. The Romans launched another assault on the city but were repulsed again. Scipio Aemilianus, the adopted grandson of Scipio Africanus, who was serving as a tribune\u00a0\u2013 a middle-ranking military position\u00a0\u2013 held back his men and was able to deploy them to beat off the pursuing Carthaginians, preventing heavy losses.\nThe camp established by Censorinus was badly situated and by early summer was so pestiferous that it was moved to a healthier location. This was not as defensible, and the Carthaginians inflicted losses on the Roman fleet with fireships. The Romans then made these attacks more difficult by building additional fortifications. Nevertheless, the Carthaginians repeatedly attacked the camps. In often confused fighting Scipio distinguished himself further by his role in thwarting these; the discipline which he imposed on his troops was in contrast with the behaviour of most of the rest of the Roman army.\nManilius decided to strike against the Carthaginians' main camp near Nepheris, despite its strong position and fortifications. Arriving there, Manilius ordered an immediate assault, against Scipio's advice. This initially went well, but the Romans advanced into an untenable position. When they attempted to withdraw, the Carthaginians counterattacked, inflicting heavy casualties. Scipio led 300 cavalrymen in a series of limited and well-disciplined charges and threats which caused the Carthaginians to pause long enough for most of the infantry to complete their retreat. That night Scipio led his cavalry back to rescue a trapped group of Romans. The Roman column retreated to its camp near Carthage, where a committee from the Senate had arrived to evaluate Scipio and Manilius' progress. Scipio's performance was prominent in their subsequent report. Scipio made contact with several of the leaders of Carthage's Numidian cavalry, then joined a second, better-planned expedition led by Manilius against Hasdrubal at Nepheris. Despite the greater forethought, the Romans made no progress, although one of the Numidians contacted by Scipio did defect to the Romans with 2,200 men. Manilius withdrew after the Romans ran out of food and Scipio led the Romans' new allies on a successful foraging expedition.\n148 BC.\nThe Romans elected two new consuls in 148\u00a0BC, but only one of them was sent to Africa: Lucius Calpurnius Piso Caesoninus; Lucius Hostilius Mancinus commanded the navy as his subordinate. He pulled back the close siege of Carthage to a looser blockade and attempted to mop up the other Carthaginian-supporting cities in the area. He failed: Neapolis surrendered and was subsequently sacked, but Aspis withstood assaults from both the Roman army and navy, while Hippo was fruitlessly besieged. A Carthaginian sortie from Hippo destroyed the Roman siege engines, causing the Romans to break off the campaign and go into winter quarters. Hasdrubal, already in charge of the Carthaginian field army, overthrew the civilian leadership of Carthage and took command himself. Carthage allied with Andriscus, a pretender to the Macedonian throne. Andriscus had invaded Roman Macedonia, defeated a Roman army, had himself crowned King Philip\u00a0VI and sparked the Fourth Macedonian War.\n147 BC.\nScipio intended to stand in the 147\u00a0BC elections for the post of , which was a natural progression for him. Aged 36 or 37, he was too young to stand as consul, for which by the the minimum age was 41. There was considerable political manoeuvring behind the scenes. Scipio and his partisans played on his successes over the previous two years and the fact that it was his adoptive grandfather, Scipio Africanus, who had sealed Roman victory in Africa in the Second Punic War. Public demand to appoint him as consul and so allow him to take charge of the African war, was so strong that the Senate put aside the age requirements for all posts for the year. Scipio was elected consul and appointed to sole command in Africa; usually theatres were allocated to the two consuls by lot. He was granted the usual right to conscript enough men to make up the numbers of the forces there and the unusual entitlement to enroll volunteers.\nScipio moved the Romans' main camp back to near Carthage, closely observed by a Carthaginian detachment of 8,000. He made a speech demanding tighter discipline and dismissed those soldiers he considered ill-disciplined or poorly motivated. He then led a successful night attack and broke into the city with 4,000 men. Panicked in the dark, the Carthaginian defenders, after an initial fierce resistance, fled. Scipio decided that his position would be indefensible once the Carthaginians reorganised themselves in daylight and so withdrew. Hasdrubal, horrified at the way the Carthaginian defences had collapsed, had Roman prisoners tortured to death on the walls, in sight of the Roman army. He was reinforcing the will to resist in the Carthaginian citizens; from this point, there could be no possibility of negotiation or even surrender. Some members of the city council denounced his actions and Hasdrubal had them too put to death and took full control of the city.\nThe renewed close siege cut off landward entry to the city, but a tight seaward interdiction was all but impossible with the naval technology of the time. Frustrated at the amount of food being shipped into the city, Scipio built an immense mole to cut off access to the harbour via blockade runners. The Carthaginians responded by cutting a new channel from their harbour to the sea. They had built a new fleet and once the channel was complete, the Carthaginians sailed out, taking the Romans by surprise. In the ensuing Battle of the Port of Carthage the Carthaginians held their own, but when withdrawing at the end of the day many of their ships were trapped against the city's sea wall and sunk or captured. The Romans now attempted to advance against the Carthaginian defences in the harbour area, eventually gaining control of the quay. Here, over several months, they constructed a brick structure as high as the city wall, which enabled up to 4,000 Romans to fire onto the Carthaginian ramparts from short range.\nOnce this feature was complete, Scipio detached a large force and led it against the Carthaginian field army at Nepheris. The Carthaginians, commanded by a Greek named Diogenes, had established a fortified camp for their winter quarters. Late in 147\u00a0BC Scipio directed an assault on the camp from several directions and overran it. Fleeing Carthaginians were pursued by Rome's mounted Numidian allies and few escaped. The town of Nepheris was then besieged and surrendered after three weeks. Most of the fortified positions still holding out in Carthage's hinterland now opened their gates.\n146 BC.\nScipio's position as the Roman commander in Africa was extended for a year in 146\u00a0BC. In the spring he launched a full-scale assault from the harbour area, which successfully breached the walls. Over six days, the Romans systematically worked their way through the residential part of the city, killing everyone they encountered and setting the buildings behind them on fire. On the last day Scipio agreed to accept prisoners, except for 900 Roman deserters in Carthaginian service, who fought on from the Temple of Eshmoun and burnt it down around themselves when all hope was gone. At this point, Hasdrubal surrendered to Scipio on the promise of his life and freedom. Hasdrubal's wife, watching from a rampart, then blessed Scipio, cursed her husband and walked into the temple with her children to burn to death.\n50,000 Carthaginian prisoners were sold into slavery. The notion that Roman forces then sowed the city with salt is likely a 19th-century invention. Many of the religious items and cult-statues which Carthage had pillaged from Sicilian cities and temples over the centuries were returned with great ceremony.\nAftermath.\nRome was determined that the city of Carthage remain in ruins. The Senate despatched a ten-man commission and Scipio was ordered to carry out further demolitions. A curse was placed on anyone who might attempt to resettle the site in the future. The former site of the city was confiscated as , public land. Scipio celebrated a triumph and took the \"agnomen\" \"Africanus\", as had his adoptive grandfather. Hasdrubal's fate is not known, although he had surrendered on the promise of a retirement to an Italian estate. The formerly Carthaginian territories were annexed by Rome and reconstituted to become the Roman province of Africa, with Utica as its capital. The province became a major source of grain and other food.\nThe Punic cities which had stood by Carthage to the end were forfeit to Rome as , or, as in the case of Bizerte, were destroyed. Surviving cities were permitted to retain at least elements of their traditional system of government and culture. The Romans did not interfere in the locals' private lives and Punic culture, language and religion survived, and is known to modern scholars as \"Neo-Punic civilization\". The Punic language continued to be spoken in north Africa until the 7th century AD.\nIn 123\u00a0BC a reformist faction in Rome led by Gaius Gracchus was eager to redistribute land, including publicly held land. This included the site of Carthage and a controversial law was passed ordering the establishment of a new settlement there, called Junonia. Conservatives argued against the law and after its passage spread rumours that markers delimitating the new settlement had been dug up by wolves\u00a0\u2013 a very poor omen. These rumours, and other political machinations, caused the plan to be scrapped. In 111\u00a0BC legislation repeated the injunction against any resettlement. A century after the war, Julius Caesar planned to rebuild Carthage as a Roman city, but little work was done. Augustus revived the concept in 29\u00a0BC and brought the plan to completion. Roman Carthage had become one of the main cities of Roman Africa by the time of the Empire.\nRome still exists as the capital of Italy; the ruins of Carthage lie east of modern Tunis on the North African coast; the modern town is a suburb of Tunis and the site of the Tunisian Presidential Palace. A symbolic peace treaty was signed by Ugo Vetere and Chedli Klibi, the mayors of Rome and modern Carthage, respectively, on 5 February 1985; 2,131 years after the war ended.\nNotes, citations and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57552", "revid": "1303543685", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57552", "title": "Yavapai (disambiguation)", "text": "The Yavapai are a Native American people of central and western Arizona.\nYavapai may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "57553", "revid": "33921713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57553", "title": "Carolina shag", "text": "Partner dance\nThe Carolina shag is a partner dance done primarily to beach music (100\u2013130+ beats per minute in 4/4 time signature). The shag is a recognized dance in modern national and international dance competitions. It became the official state dance of South Carolina in 1984 and the official popular dance of North Carolina in 2005.\nTechnique.\nThe basic step in Carolina shag is a six-count, eight-step pattern danced in a slot. The rhythm is similar to six-count swing in that it is triple step, triple step, rock step or counted as \"one-and-two, three-and-four, five-six\". Eight shag dance steps are in the basic pattern. The \"one-and-two\" and \"three-and-four\" steps should take about as much time to complete as the \"five-six.\"\nCarolina shag often bears only the faintest resemblance to other dances that share the \"shag\" designation.\nHistory.\nThe term \"Carolina shag\" is thought to have originated along the Atlantic Ocean in Cherry Grove Beach, South Carolina during the 1940s. According to Bo Bryan, a Carolina shag historian and resident of Beaufort County, the term was coined at Carolina Beach, North Carolina. The Carolina shag is a descendant of Carolina Jitterbug, and its predecessor, Little Apple, which was the white version of the Big Apple (whose origins can be traced to Columbia, South Carolina in 1937) after whites sat (after \"jumping the Jim Crow rope\") in the balconies in the black clubs to watch the dancing.\nCultural references.\nThe 1989 film \"Shag\" starring Bridget Fonda, Phoebe Cates, Annabeth Gish, and Page Hannah as four high-school friends on their last road trip together before graduation, was filmed in Myrtle Beach and features the Carolina shag.\nIn 1997, the country music band Alabama recorded the single called \"Dancin', Shaggin' on the Boulevard\" referencing this style of dance and the band's own history of playing at the Carolina shore where the dance originated.\nIn mid- to late August 2018, SiriusXM satellite radio added a channel called Carolina Shag. It replaced a summertime channel dedicated to The Beach Boys. SiriusXM describes the channel as being \"dedicated to the vintage R&amp;B sounds that have meant Summer in the Carolinas for decades\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57554", "revid": "50759730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57554", "title": "Flagstaff, Arizona", "text": "City in Arizona, United States\nFlagstaff ( ), known locally as Flag, is a city in and the county seat of Coconino County, Arizona, United States. As of the 2020 United States census, the city's population was 76,831.\nFlagstaff is the principal city of the Flagstaff metropolitan area, which includes all of Coconino County, and has a population of 145,101. Flagstaff lies near the southwestern edge of the Colorado Plateau and within the San Francisco volcanic field, along the western side of the largest contiguous ponderosa pine forest in the continental United States. The city sits at around and is next to Mount Elden, just south of the San Francisco Peaks, the highest mountain range in the state of Arizona. Humphreys Peak, the highest point in Arizona at , is about north of Flagstaff in Kachina Peaks Wilderness. The geology of the area includes exposed rock from the Mesozoic and Paleozoic eras, with Moenkopi Formation red sandstone having once been quarried in the city; many of the historic downtown buildings were constructed with it. The Rio de Flag river runs through the city, but only flows in response to rain or snowmelt.\nOriginally settled by the pre-Columbian native Sinagua people, the area of Flagstaff has fertile land from volcanic ash after eruptions in the 11th century. It was first settled as the present-day city in 1876. Local businessmen lobbied for Route 66 to pass through the city, which it did, turning the local industry from lumber to tourism and developing downtown Flagstaff. In 1930, Pluto was discovered from Flagstaff. The city developed further through to the end of the 1960s, with various observatories also used to choose Moon landing sites for the Apollo missions. Through the 1970s and 1980s, the downtown fell into disrepair, but was revitalized with a major cultural heritage project in the 1990s.\nThe city remains an important distribution hub for companies such as Nestl\u00e9 Purina PetCare, and is home to the U.S. Naval Observatory Flagstaff Station, the U.S. Geological Survey, and Northern Arizona University. Flagstaff has a strong tourism sector, due to its proximity to Grand Canyon National Park, Oak Creek Canyon, the Arizona Snowbowl, Meteor Crater, and Historic Route 66.\nEtymology.\nAt the time of Beale's wagon road, the area was known as Antelope Spring, after the spring at the foot of Mars Hill (now called Antelope/Old Town Spring). The name Flagstaff comes from an actual flagstaff made from a stripped pine tree that was erected at the spring, which McMillan was using as his sheep camp, on July 4, 1876.\nThe common story tells that the flag-raising for which the town was named occurred when a ponderosa pine flagpole made by a scouting party from Boston (known as the \"Second Boston Party\") was raised to celebrate the United States Centennial. Various other stories have been told of the circumstances. One says that on July 4, 1855, a surveyor for the railroad by the name of Samuel Clark Hudson, accompanied by his team, climbed a tall pine tree and tied a flag, with another saying it was Beale's men who raised the flag in 1859. The town was still known as Antelope Spring in 1871.\nAfter the town took the name Flagstaff, it began to be known as 'Old Town' for a period, and was known by different names when the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad was being built through the area in 1882. It may have been known as Flagstaff Spring for a while, and 'Old Town Spring' after this before simply 'Old Town', a name given after a fire destroyed much of the town, with a new community then raised a few hundred yards away called 'New Town'. Another version of the Old and New Town names says that the railroad depot was moved by half a mile to prevent hill starts, and business owners soon followed it, displacing the commerce of the town to Front Street of 'New Town' while the houses were still in 'Old Town' with the spring; when the fire burned down 'Old Town', 'New Town' remained. The name Flagstaff was reinstated in 1884 when a post office was introduced alongside the railroad depot.\nThe city has different names in local Native languages. In Navajo, it is known as \"\". This name is formed from Kin\u0142\u00e1n\u00ed, meaning \"many houses\" or city, Dook\u02bco\u02bcoos\u0142\u00ed\u00edd, the name for the San Francisco Peaks but literally \"the summit which never melts\", and Biyaagi, indicating 'below' (see translations of \"below; in a place beneath\" on wiktionary): the city below the San Francisco Peaks. The word Kin\u0142\u00e1n\u00ed alone may refer to Flagstaff, but also can refer to Durango, Colorado. In Havasupai, Flagstaff is known as \"Wii Hagnbaj\". This is also a name for the San Francisco Peaks, and literally means \"snowy mountain\".\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe Sinagua people were a pre-Columbian culture that occupied a large area in Arizona between c.\u2009500 and 1425\u00a0CE. The Northern Sinagua were living in the pine forests of northern Arizona before moving into the area that is now Flagstaff about 700\u00a0CE. The 1064 and 1066 eruptions of Sunset Crater covered the area in ash, which greatly enriched the soil for farming; this also caused a population growth in the area, with Ancestral Puebloans and Cohonina people also moving to the Wupatki site near the city.\nThe Northern Sinagua had various cultural phases, including Sunset Crater, the Rio de Flag (leaving the Picture Canyon site), Angell and Winona, Padre Canyon, Elden Pueblo, Turkey Hill Pueblo, Clear Creek, and Walnut Canyon. The Sinagua peoples left the area by the early 15th century, likely moving north and later becoming the Hopi. The San Francisco Peaks, which overlook Flagstaff, are a sacred site in Hopi culture.\nUntil western expansion in the 1860s, the Yavapai, specifically the Wi:pukba (Northeastern Yavapai), occupied the land up to the San Francisco Peaks. The Yavapai land in the area saw overlap with the land of the Northern Tonto Apache that stretched across the San Francisco Peaks to the Little Colorado River. Of the Northern Tonto Apache, two tribes lived within the area of present-day Flagstaff: the Oak Creek band and the Mormon Lake band. The Mormon Lake band were centered around Flagstaff and were exclusively hunter-gatherers, traveling around places like the foot of the San Francisco Peaks, at Mount Elden, Lake Mary, Stoneman Lake, and Padre Canyon.\n19th century.\nThe area of Flagstaff had a wagon road to California in the 1800s, constructed by Edward Fitzgerald Beale's men. The first White (non-Native) settlement in the area was established by Edward Whipple, who opened a saloon on the wagon road in 1871. The first permanent settlement came in 1876, when Thomas F. McMillan built a cabin just north of the present-day main town. McMillan was a key developer of Northern Arizona.\nDuring the 1880s, Flagstaff began to grow, and by 1886, Flagstaff was the largest city on the railroad line between Albuquerque and the West Coast of the United States. In 1888, McMillan purchased an unfinished building that sits at the present-day intersection of Leroux Street and Route 66/Santa Fe Avenue, turning it into a bank and hotel known as the Bank Hotel. Coconino County was created in 1891, and Flagstaff was chosen as its county seat over nearby Williams.\nIn 1894, A. E. Douglass recommended Flagstaff to Percival Lowell as the site for the Lowell Observatory, where it was built on Mars Hill. Flagstaff also became incorporated as a town in 1894. The city grew rapidly, primarily due to its location along the east\u2013west transcontinental railroad line in the United States. In the 1890s, the Arizona Lumber and Timber Company was founded by the Riordan brothers to process timber. Michael and Tim Riordan worked in Flagstaff, and introduced electricity to the town for this purpose. The Riordan brothers established the first library in Flagstaff. The CO Bar Ranch was opened in about 1886 by the Babbitt brothers for cattle. The Babbitt family would be very influential in northern Arizona for decades. In 1899, the Northern Arizona Normal School was established; it was renamed to Northern Arizona University (NAU) in 1966.\nOn January 1, 1900, John Weatherford opened the Weatherford Hotel in Flagstaff. Weatherford opened the town's first movie theater in 1911; it collapsed under heavy snowfall a few years later, but he soon replaced it with the Orpheum Theater. The Weatherford Hotel and Orpheum Theater are still in use today.\n1912\u20131969.\nThe state of Arizona was admitted to the Union in 1912. Flagstaff saw its first tourism boom in the early years of the 1900s, becoming known as the City of Seven Wonders, as the \"Seven Wonders\" of the wider Flagstaff area \u2013 listed as the Coconino National Forest, Grand Canyon, Oak Creek Canyon, San Francisco Peaks, Sunset Crater, Walnut Canyon, and Wupatki National Monument \u2013 were more widely known.\nU.S. Route 66.\nIn 1926, Route 66 was completed and ran through Flagstaff; the Babbitts and Riordans had staunchly supported it for the town. The railroad, which became the Santa Fe Railroad, had largely controlled Flagstaff until this point. The Santa Fe Railroad opened a new depot in Flagstaff in 1926, to combat Route 66. As part of the celebrations, Front Street was renamed Santa Fe Avenue. The people of Flagstaff collectively funded the Hotel Monte Vista, which opened on January 1, 1927, preparing for the next tourism boom. Flagstaff was then incorporated as a city in 1928, with over 3,000 residents, and in 1929, the city's first motel, the Motel Du Beau, was built at the intersection of Beaver Street and Phoenix Avenue. Flagstaff became a popular tourist stop along Route 66, particularly due to its proximity to the natural wonders. In the last years of the 1920s, tourism took over from traditional industries.\nDuring the Great Depression, Route 66 brought unemployed workers heading to California, known as \"auto nomads\" in Flagstaff, who became unpopular as they could not afford to buy gas or food, financially damaging the city by taxing its resources and not contributing to the economy. Flagstaff had also been highlighted on the map by Clyde Tombaugh's 1930 discovery of Pluto from the Lowell Observatory. However, the importance of Route 66 to cross-country travel, and thus to Arizona's interests on a national level, did mean that it received a large share of state funding through the Depression, with highway maintenance and unemployment acts providing over $1 million of funding in May 1933. In 1935, many residents had enough disposable income to remodel their homes or build new ones.\nIn 1955, the United States Naval Observatory Flagstaff Station was established. Through the 1950s the city conducted the Urban Renewal Project, improving housing quality in the Southside neighborhood that was largely populated by people of Spanish, Basque, and Mexican heritage. Flagstaff grew and prospered through the 1960s. During the Apollo program in the 1960s, the Lowell Observatory Clark Telescope was used by the United States Geological Survey (USGS) to map the Moon for the lunar expeditions, enabling the mission planners to choose a safe landing site for the lunar modules.\n1970s\u2013present.\nAs the baby boomer generation began to start their own families in the 1970s and 1980s, many moved to Flagstaff based on its small-town feel, and the population began to grow again; there were not enough jobs to support the many educated individuals moving to the city. The city did not expand its infrastructure downtown despite the growing population, causing problems. Several historic buildings from the 1800s were also destroyed for construction of new ones, or leveled completely. Downtown Flagstaff became an uninviting place, and many businesses started to move out of the area, causing an economic and social decline.\nDuring the 1990s, the city redeveloped. Store owners in downtown supported the Main Street programs of preservation-based revitalization, and in 1992, the city hired a new manager to improve the area: a different mix of shops and restaurants opened up to take advantage of the area's historical appeal. Heritage Square was built as the center of the revitalized downtown, the local Flagstaff Pulliam Airport began running more flights to Phoenix, and the school district was expanded with a third high school, Sinagua High School.\nOn October 24, 2001, Flagstaff was recognized by the International Dark-Sky Association as the world's first \"International Dark-Sky City\".\nGeography.\nFlagstaff is the county seat of Coconino County. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which only (0.08%) is water. Flagstaff lies at approximately elevation, and is surrounded by the largest contiguous ponderosa pine forest in North America. It is in a mountainous area, and lies along the Rio de Flag watercourse. It is about north of the State capital, Phoenix.\nThe geology of the area is in line with that of the Colorado Plateau on which it lies, with the Moenkopi red sandstone abundant in the city also used to build many of the distinctive buildings forming its cityscape. The cityscape of Flagstaff is its historic downtown area centered on Heritage Square, with the historic nature of its restored buildings and local theme iconic to the city and representative of its culture. Flagstaff is one of the United States' sunniest and snowiest cities, with a variable \"semi-arid\" climate and a monsoon season in summer.\nThe San Francisco Peaks are a main aspect of Flagstaff's local geography and can be seen from everywhere in the city. Humphreys Peak is the highest point in Arizona at . Several trails around the peaks provide views of the Grand Canyon. While the most popular access point is Arizona Snowbowl (southwest face), the peaks can also be approached from the north and east. The peaks are about northwest of downtown Flagstaff, with the Snowbowl resort just southwest of Humphreys Peak. The wildlife of the peaks include mule deer, elk, turkey vultures, and black bears, all visible from public trails.\nGeology and topography.\nFlagstaff lies on the southern edge of the Colorado Plateau, and is largely limestone under San Francisco volcanic field. The oldest rock types of the area are part of North America's original crust, Precambrian granite and schist from 1.7 to 1.8 billion years ago. On top of this is Paleozoic sandstone, limestone, shale and siltstone deposited on what was then (544 to 248 million years ago) different surfaces, including a shallow seabed, muddy land, and sandy desert. The rock layers from this period are (bottom to top): Tapeats Sandstone, Bright Angel Shale and Muav Limestone, Martin Formation, Redwall Limestone, Supai Group, Coconino Sandstone, Toroweap Formation, and Kaibab Limestone. The last three of these are still exposed. On top of the Paleozoic rock is Mesozoic Moenkopi Formation, from 248 to 65 million years ago. Other Mesozoic layers formed on top of this, but were eroded away. In the Flagstaff area, layers of rock from the Paleozoic and Mesozoic eras accumulated up to deep, but most of this was eroded. A soft basalt layer covers some of the rock at the surface.\nMoenkopi Formation red sandstone is a distinctive feature of Flagstaff, as it was used as a building material from the 1880s because of its fire retardant properties. The source used for quarrying most of this rock was a deposit 1 mile east of the town, which fell under the control of Charles Begg in 1887, who then began selling the stone across the southwest \u2013 after he made a successful sale in California that expanded the business, he was replaced in 1888 by a master quarryman. While it was used as building material across the West, some of Flagstaff's most prominent buildings are famous for the stone, including the Bank Hotel, Weatherford Hotel, Babbitt Brothers Building, Coconino County Courthouse, and various NAU buildings, including Old Main.\nIn the Laramide orogeny, which began about 65\u201375 million years ago, the Western United States underwent stress in rock formation; in the Four Corners region this pushed up the preexisting layers and ultimately formed the Colorado Plateau (and the Rocky Mountains). Around Flagstaff more specifically, this process deformed flat rock layers into folds, and allowed surface rivers to cut deep canyons in the younger rock layers. From about 25 million years ago, more faults were broken again in Flagstaff, and volcanic activity began about 6 million years ago with magma flowing up these faults to create lava flows. Eruptions occurred between 3 million and 1,000 years ago, affecting the Paleozoic and Mesozoic rocks. The city's Mount Elden is a lava dome made of dacite, Sunset Crater is the youngest feature of the San Francisco volcanic field and formed in the last 1,000 years by an explosive eruption, while S P Crater was formed between 75,000 and 70,000 years ago by piles of lapilli and volcanic bombs spouting from a lava lake.\nIn the 1960s, the geology and topography of the Flagstaff area, including formations like Meteor Crater, was seen as similar to environments that would be encountered on the Moon in terms of planetary geology. The Astrogeology Research Program was therefore moved to Flagstaff in 1962, with the program completing in 1963, to train astronauts.\nClimate.\nFlagstaff's climate type on the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system is variously reported as a warm dry-summer Mediterranean climate (\"Csb\"), a Hemiboreal climate (\"Dsb\" and \"Dfb\"), and a cold semi-arid climate (\"BSk\"). It is consistently described as \"semi-arid\". Flagstaff's K\u00f6ppen type is recorded as \"Dsb\" in the city center, with areas of \"BSk\", \"Csb\", \"Csa\" (hot-summer Mediterranean), \"Cwa\" (monsoon-influenced humid subtropical), \"Cwb\" (subtropical highland), \"Dwa\" (monsoon-influenced hot summer humid continental), \"Dwb\" (monsoon-influenced warm summer humid continental), and \"Dsa\" (Mediterranean-influenced hot summer humid continental) on the outskirts and bordering the city; it is mostly \"Dsb\", \"BSk\", and \"Csb\".\nThe hottest temperature on record is in July 1973. This is far below a normal summer day in lowland areas of the state. The coldest temperature on record is in January 1937. Warm summer nights are very uncommon with the all-time record being in July 2002 and a regular summer averages a very mild for the warmest low. Cold daily maximums are occasional, but rarely severe. The record low high is from January 1963, but the mean for the coldest maximum is relatively close to freezing at .\nLike most of the state, Northern Arizona experiences a summer monsoon season from July to September, with Flagstaff's wettest months being July and August, and its driest being June, all in the summer; Mediterranean climates have wet season only in the winter. Mediterranean climate categorization does not consider snowfall. Semi-arid climates will receive of annual rainfall, while Flagstaff experiences more.\nFlagstaff's hardiness zone is mostly 6a, with some areas 5b, meaning plants withstand temperatures down to . It is in the Transition life zone; the concept of life zones was first observed in the Flagstaff area. Wind in Flagstaff typically blows southwesterly throughout the year, based on topographical features. The city's climate data is observed from Flagstaff Pulliam Airport.\nThe city receives precipitation every year, with two distinct wet periods in the summer and winter; the summer monsoon season accounts for 34% of annual rainfall, with the winter producing 28%. The summer monsoon season, originating from the Mexican monsoon period, is also wetter than winter, with an average compared to the winter's . Before the summer monsoon each year there is a dry period in May and June. Long-term average precipitation is annually, with much heavier rainfall attributed to El Ni\u00f1o events. Comparatively, La Ni\u00f1a events have caused below-average rainfall.\nSince 1996 the city has been experiencing its driest period, known as the Early-21st Century Drought. As of 2007, Richard Hereford of USGS speculated that the effects of the drought, predicted to last until the late 2020s, may be severe because of Flagstaff's growing population and global warming. The summer wet season is more reliable and consistent than other times of year, but due to the high temperatures of the area this rainfall is quickly lost to evaporation. During the Early-21st Century Drought, rainfall has been consistently below average in all but the summer season, with temperature averages for all but the summer (which has remained consistent) also increasing.\nEqually, snowfall has been lower during the extended dry period, though the city set a new record for its highest daily snowfall on February 21, 2019, with and was still ranked as the United States' third-snowiest city in 2020 (based on 2018\u201319 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration data). Flagstaff has consistently been among the snowiest cities in the United States, and snow and winter culture is argued by Michael Weeks to be a large part of Flagstaff's identity. The Arizona Snowbowl is a major attraction, though it has had to make artificial snow during warmer seasons, and the city tried to launch a bid to be the host city of the 1960 Winter Olympics. The maximum daily snow cover was on December 20, 1967, although the mean maximum for a full winter is only . However, due to the infrequent and scattered nature of the snowstorms, persistent snowpack into spring is rare. One notable exception occurred during the severe winter of 1915\u201316, when successive Pacific storms buried the city under over of snow, and some residents were snowbound in their homes for several days. The earliest seasonal trace of snowfall occurred on September 19, 1965, and the latest on May 29 in both 1971 and 1990.\nThough one of the least-sunny cities in Arizona, Flagstaff still ranks among the United States' sunniest cities, having sunshine for an average 78% of the year. The city receives much more sunshine than other snowy cities, which are primarily in the north of the country.\nSeasonal weather.\nThere are four seasons in Flagstaff, with cool to cold winter temperatures averaging and warm summer temperatures averaging , much cooler than much of Arizona; the average annual snowfall is . Spring begins in April with cool or comfortable weather. Sometimes, snow reappears in May, but the spring period is typically mild and dry, lasting until early June. The summer is warm, measured between days when freezing temperatures occur, beginning in June \u2013 the last freezing temperature generally in early June \u2013 and ending in September. Flagstaff's summer will receive a few days of daytime temperatures above , with much cooler nighttime temperatures typically in the region of . Flagstaff's summers are also notable for the monsoon season in July and August, when thunderstorms occur almost daily. Thunderstorm activity happens mostly during the daytime.\nFreezing temperatures (below ) return towards the end of September, with the mild fall season having daytime temperatures around . With its many trees, leaves do change color in Flagstaff's fall, with the change starting at the end of September and happening throughout October. Fall lasts only until the snow comes in November, with winter marked between periods of snowfall, typically from November until mid-April at the latest. Temperatures in winter are usually below freezing, going no higher than around in the day, even in sunshine. Nights can regularly plummet below . A combination of snow cover and high pressure occurring during winter months will cause the temperature to drop further, once reaching a record low of . Flagstaff's winter wet season is caused by Pacific storms and lasts from November through April.\nFlora and fauna.\nFlagstaff is an area \"of great ecological variation\" due to its diverse habitat life zones. Tree species abound the area, which covers three arboreal life zones: Douglas fir and aspen forest, Ponderosa pine forest, and Pinyon-juniper woodland. It is at the heart of the Coconino National Forest. Within the Transition zone of the forest, including in the city, there are huge stands of ponderosa pine. Other species scattered among this region include Gambel oak, quaking aspen, and Rocky Mountain juniper trees.\nThe Coconino National Forest and Flagstaff are within the largest contiguous ponderosa pine forest in North America. Here, this tree type is formed as a climax forest, with groups of trees containing different ages spread among the forest. Some of the groups are only a few trees, some are acres large; other groups are even-aged. The irregularity of the tree groups leaves natural openings in the forest, allowing for other plants to thrive. A grass cover of Arizona fescue grows around the area and shrub exists, but there are few other tree species. As well as the Gambel oak, quaking aspen, and juniper trees, pinyons can be found among the pines. Some of the open forest space contains bunchgrass, and local animal species that roam on this include elk, mule deer, Merriam's Turkey, and Abert's squirrel.\nThe arboretum in Flagstaff has an extensive regional collection of the Penstemon genus and hosts an annual Penstemon Festival.\nCoconino is also home to a variety of bird species, which is further diversified by species from desert climates south of the Mogollon Rim still mixing in the area. The nearby lakes also attract wildlife. Birds that live around or visit Flagstaff include the thick-billed kingbird, only documented in the area since 2016, the red-faced warbler, a Madrean species, and waterfowl including the Eurasian wigeon and American wigeon.\nCityscape.\nFlagstaff has a diverse cityscape and exists in distinct areas. Downtown Flagstaff is a \"narrow and slender\" area between the NAU campus at its south and the Museum of Northern Arizona at the north. Flagstaff is a smaller city, so its downtown is largely local and independent. The city's mall is found in East Flagstaff, as is a Harkins movie theater and a country club and golf course. Residential properties in East Flagstaff are larger and more rural than other parts of the city. North West Flagstaff is directly north of downtown, and is where the Snowbowl and Museum of Northern Arizona are found. West Flagstaff encompasses the area south and west of downtown, including NAU and the Lake Mary neighborhood. It also covers the airport and Fort Tuthill (county park and the Pepsi Amphitheater), being bordered to the south by the urban areas of Kachina Village and Mountainaire. Outside of the city proper, these urban areas have a \"mountain-town feel\". Flagstaff has an \"urban forest park\", Buffalo Park, which sits on top of McMillan Mesa and used to be home to a zoo in the 1960s. Buffalo Park/McMillan Mesa bisects the city, separating East Flagstaff from West Flagstaff and downtown.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2010 census, the population of the city was 65,870. This accounted for a population density of , with 26,254 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 73.4% White, 1.9% Black or African American, 11.7% Native American, 1.9% Asian, 0.2% Pacific Islander, 7.3% from other races, and 3.6% from two or more races; 18.4% of the population were Hispanics or Latinos of any race. The city's African American population is considerably lower than the U.S. average (1.9% versus 12.6%), while the Native American population is markedly higher (11.7% vs. 0.9%). This is primarily attributable to the city's proximity to several Native American reservations. Flagstaff's Native American community is chiefly Navajo, and there are about 5,500 people of Navajo ancestry living in the city.\nA 1970 study found that while the Native American population of Flagstaff was generally under-counted in censuses, the Native residents found that Flagstaff as a border city with reservations was much more welcoming than similar towns, particularly noting Gallup, New Mexico, as one that was worse. The study also documented that while there was a distinctly Native neighborhood in the poorer Southside area of Flagstaff, the housing quality varied greatly, with middle class Native residencies elsewhere in the city.\nThough Flagstaff has a low African American population, it had seen large immigration of black people from the Southern United States in the middle of the 20th century during the Great Migration. Though most moved to California, there was a significant number that settled in Flagstaff after hearing that the lumber industry of northern Arizona was some of the best paid work going, and a familiar vocation for those from southern states.\nCrime.\nFlagstaff has two police departments: Flagstaff PD and NAU PD. NAU PD employs 30 officers and 25 students, and is responsible for law enforcement on the campus. Flagstaff PD will share information of concern about the neighborhoods surrounding the NAU campus to the NAU PD, and NAU PD may also respond to situations off-campus that involve students; NAU PD also investigates the missing person reports of students who are registered as resident on campus. From campus phones, all 911 calls will go to NAU PD.\nThe rate of crime in Flagstaff is above average, while its violent crime rate is below average, for the United States. For 2017, the FBI's Uniform Crime Report indicated for Flagstaff a rate of 290 cases of violent crime per 100,000 people and 2,710 cases of property crime per 100,000 population; the violent crime rate across the US was 382.9 per 100,000. In 2018, Flagstaff had a rate of 469.4 cases of all crimes per 100,000 people, up 10.7% on the total in 2017; this was below the average for Arizona, but above the average for the US. Until 2017, Flagstaff's crime rate was typically in line with the US average.\nThe safest neighborhood in Flagstaff is Elden Pueblo, with several downtown areas, NAU and the surrounding neighborhoods, Fort Valley, and Cosnino all in the top ten. In 2017, Flagstaff PD responded to four hostage situations, including in Tuba City, and fifteen explosive device removal calls. There were 3,262 criminal investigations. The Flagstaff narcotics task force headed up 'Operation Nightfall' between 2015 and 2017, aiming to prevent the use of I-40 through the city being used by Mexican drug cartels for trafficking, successfully seizing over of cocaine. Within Flagstaff, there were over 100 arrests relating to other narcotics crimes.\nNAU operates as a weapon-free and drug-free campus (even medical marijuana), with restrictions on alcohol possession for resident students over 21 within certain private areas of certain residence halls. In 2016, it became a tobacco-free campus. Additionally, alcohol may not be consumed in public on the campus. The overwhelming majority of NAU PD recorded crimes are related to drugs and alcohol, with hundreds of arrests each year and over 1500 disciplinary referrals in 2018. The second-most recorded area of crime on the campus is gender based violence (rape, domestic abuse), with a few dozen cases. There are over 160 blue light phones on the campus; each has a large button that connects directly to NAU PD and provides the location of the call to them.\nThe police in Flagstaff also deal with skunk-related problems, including suspected burglaries that turn out to be skunks. The skunks can be an issue in the city, as they start rabies epidemics among animals every few years.\nEconomy.\nIn its early days, the city's economic base comprised the lumber, railroad, and ranching industries. Today, that has largely been replaced by tourism, education, government, and transportation. Some of the larger employers in Flagstaff are Northern Arizona University, the Flagstaff Medical Center, and the Flagstaff Unified School District. Tourism is a large contributor to the economy, as the city receives over 5 million visitors per year.\nScientific and high tech research and development operations are in the city, including Lowell Observatory, Northern Arizona University, the United States Naval Observatory Flagstaff Station (NOFS) and the United States Geological Survey's (USGS) Flagstaff campus. Research is involved in observations of near-Earth phenomena such as asteroids and comets. In 2012 the observatory commissioned its Lowell Discovery Telescope, a 4.3-meter telescope with an instrument cube that can hold five instruments at once. Lowell Observatory and NOFS also are collaborators on the Navy Precision Optical Interferometer, on nearby Anderson Mesa. NOFS is heavily involved with the science of star catalogs and astrometry, or the positions and distances of stars and celestial objects.\nThere are five industrial parks in the city, situated near I-40 and I-17. Major manufacturers in Flagstaff include W. L. Gore &amp; Associates, widely known as the maker of Gore-Tex; Nestl\u00e9 Purina PetCare, manufacturer of pet food; SenesTech, a biotechnology research lab and manufacturer; SCA Tissue, a major tissue paper producer; and Joy Cone, manufacturer of ice cream cones. Walgreens operated a distribution center in the city until 2014.\nTourism.\nFlagstaff has a thriving tourism industry, and has since the early 1900s, primarily stemming from its proximity to the Grand Canyon National Park and other natural wonders, giving it the nickname 'City of Seven Wonders'. Other natural wonders and native ruins, Route 66, and its astronomical history also bring tourism from out of state, while people from further south in Arizona visit Flagstaff because of its cooler climate in the summer and its ski resort in the winter. The city has several hotels and restaurants, including its historic hotels. The first hotel of the Ramada Inn chain opened in 1954 at the intersection of Routes 66, 89, and 89A, adjacent to what was then Arizona State College (now NAU). The original building is still intact, operating as a Super 8 motel. Flagstaff is said to attract a lot of the tourism for the entire county as it is the only large population center that can cater to tourists, as well as being the location of information points for the National Park Service (NPS). In 1996, 39% of Coconino County residents were employed in tourism. There are large service sectors, particularly hotels and restaurants, in Flagstaff, with many of these companies having a close connection to NAU's School of Hotel and Restaurant Management, to employ these students.\nTourism to Flagstaff is a well-established industry, but still relies on environmental forces. Nature and weather conditions can damage tourism; having a mild but warm summer temperature attracts tourists from many locales, but storms and forest fires in its climate can be a detraction. Flagstaff also experiences very cold winters, and despite a successful ski resort still sees less tourism in this period; decreasing snow levels also threaten the winter industry. The pristine condition of the natural sites can also experience degradation due to overuse through tourism, losing its main selling point. The development of Tusayan into the Grand Canyon gateway town also affected Flagstaff's capture of some overnight tourists.\nThe Grand Canyon, a Wonder of the World, is about northwest of Flagstaff. The first stagecoach tours to the Grand Canyon from the city began running from the Bank Hotel in 1892. In 2000, about 5 million people visiting the Grand Canyon also visited Flagstaff. As Rick Heffernon wrote, \"the world recognizes only one Grand Canyon, and northern Arizona has it\". However, he also suggested this can act to the area's detriment, as the Grand Canyon is a world-class marvel and competes with other attractions of the same prestige for visitors, which are all equally impressive; Flagstaff itself also competes with its nearby towns for access to the Grand Canyon, several of which have growing themes based on it (like Tusayan and the Grand Canyon Village).\nLowell Observatory celebrated its 125th anniversary in 2019 and continues to be a leading astronomical research center, as well as a popular destination for visitors. More than 100,000 people visited in both 2018 and 2019; in 2019 the observatory opened its new Giovale Open Deck Observatory, an observation plaza with a suite of six advanced telescopes.\nArizona Snowbowl does not publish their revenue or make it public knowledge, which makes it hard to calculate its impact on the Flagstaff economy. The Snowbowl supports approximately 200 full-time jobs and $12.08 million in economic output for the city of Flagstaff.\nHeffernon suggested that the perception of tourism from the residents of Flagstaff could affect the industry, something researched in 1990 by NAU's Tim Schroeder. Schroeder saw six main areas of concern from Flagstaff residents: \"Standard of Living for Residents; Future Use of Parks; Quality of Fire Protection; Occurrences of Crime; Changes in Community Values, Norms and Customs; and Population Density\". He acknowledged that the focus on fire protection was anomalous, and likely caused by a particularly high concern surrounding recent wildfires at the time the survey had been conducted. The respondents to Schroeder's survey generally found that their \"Opportunity for Jobs, Opportunity for Shopping, Quality of Fire Protection, Understanding Different People, Quality of Health Care, Availability of Cultural Arts, and Overall Quality of Life\" had improved because of tourism to the area, but that standards in terms of \"Traffic and Road Conditions, General Prices for Goods and Services, Future Use of Forests, Noise, Litter, Air Quality, and Occurrences of Crime\" had worsened.\nArts and culture.\nLocal culture.\nFlagstaff has its own New Year's Eve tradition; in the city, people gather around the Weatherford Hotel as a , tall, metallic pine cone is dropped from the roof at midnight. The tradition originated in 1999, when Henry Taylor and Sam Green (owners of the hotel), decorated a garbage can with paint, lights, and pine cones, and dropped it from the roof of their building to mark the new millennium. By 2003 the event had become tradition, and the current metallic pine cone was designed and built by Frank Mayorga of Mayorga Welding in the city.\nLocal museums include the Museum of Northern Arizona, which features displays of the biology, archeology, photography, anthropology, and native art of the Colorado Plateau, and the Arboretum at Flagstaff, a arboretum containing 2,500 species of drought-tolerant native plants representative of the high desert region.\nA lot of the local culture is also focused on Route 66, which originally ran between Chicago and Los Angeles, greatly increased the accessibility to the area, and enhanced the culture and tourism in Flagstaff. Route 66 remains a historic route, passing through the city between Barstow, California, and Albuquerque, New Mexico. In early September, the city hosts an annual event, Route 66 Days, to highlight its connection to the famous highway.\nDark Sky City.\nFlagstaff takes one of its nicknames from its designation as the world's first International Dark Sky City, with deliberate measures to reduce light pollution beginning in 1958 supported by the environmentally-aware population and community advocates, government and elected officials, and the assistance of observatories in the area \u2013 including the United States Naval Observatory Flagstaff Station and Lowell Observatory.\nThe city's designation as an International Dark Sky City was on October 24, 2001, by the International Dark-Sky Association, after a proposal by the Flagstaff Dark Skies Coalition to start the recognition program. It is seen as a world precedent in dark sky preservation. Before this, it had been nicknamed the \"Skylight City\" in the 1890s, the same decade that the Lowell Observatory was founded. In 1958, it passed Ordinance 400, which outlawed using large or powerful searchlights within city limits. In the 1980s a series of measures were introduced for the city and Coconino County, and the Dark Sky Coalition was founded in 1999 by Chris Luginbuhl and Lance Diskan. Luginbuhl is a former U.S. Naval astronomer, and Diskan had originally moved to Flagstaff from Los Angeles so that his children could grow up able to see stars, saying that \"part of being human is looking up at the stars and being awestruck.\" It was reported that even though greater restrictions on types of public lighting were introduced in 1989, requiring them all to be low-emission, some public buildings like gas stations hadn't updated by 2002, after the Dark Sky designation.\nFlagstaff and the surrounding area is split into four zones, each permitted different levels of light emissions. The highest restrictions are in south and west Flagstaff (near NAU and its observatory), and at the Naval, Braeside, and Lowell Observatories. Photographs detecting emissions taken in 2017 show that Flagstaff's light is 14 times less than another Western city of comparable size, Cheyenne, Wyoming, which Luginbuhl described as \"even better than [they] might have expected\".\nArts.\nFlagstaff has an active cultural scene. The city is home to the Flagstaff Symphony Orchestra, which plays concerts from September through April at Ardrey Auditorium on the NAU campus. The city also attracts folk and contemporary acoustic musicians, and offers several annual music festivals during the summer months, such as the Flagstaff Friends of Traditional Music Festival, the Flagstaff Music Festival, and Pickin' in the Pines, a three-day bluegrass and acoustic music festival held at the Pine Mountain Amphitheater at Fort Tuthill Fairgrounds. Popular bands play throughout the year at the Orpheum Theater, and free concerts are held during the summer months at Heritage Square.\nBeyond music, Flagstaff has a popular theater scene, featuring several groups. Northern Arizona University's Department of Theatre produces productions for the community as well as the campus. The department has won awards, including multiple invitations to the Kennedy Center American College Theater Festival. NAU Theatre performs in two facilities: the Clifford E. White Theatre (named for long-time professor Clifford E. White) and the Studio Theatre. Both facilities are housed in the Fine and Performing Arts Building on campus. A local community theater company called Theatrikos was founded in 1972 in the basement of the Weatherford Hotel, and today puts on six major productions per year. In 2002, the company moved into a new venue now known as the Doris-Harper White Community Playhouse, a downtown building which was built in 1923 as an Elks Lodge and later became the Flagstaff library. Since 1995, the Flagstaff Light Opera Company has performed a variety of musical theater and light opera productions throughout the year at the Sinagua Middle School auditorium. There are several dance companies in Flagstaff, including Coconino Community College Dance Program, Northern Arizona Preparatory Company and Canyon Movement, which present periodic concerts and collaborate with the Flagstaff Symphony for free concerts during the summer and holiday seasons.\nA variety of weekend festivals occur throughout the year. The annual Northern Arizona Book Festival, held in the spring, brings together authors to read and display their works. The Flagstaff Mountain Film Festival is held every October, and features a variety of independent films and documentaries focusing on extreme sports, environmental issues, and global topics. The festival is four days long and consists of several sessions of films. The screenings are held at the Orpheum Theater in the historic downtown area. The summer months feature several festivals, including Hopi and Navajo Festivals of Arts and Crafts, the Arizona Highland Celtic Festival, Pride in the Pines, and the Made in the Shade Beer Tasting Festival. For more than 20 years Flagstaff has hosted the 10-day Flagstaff Festival of Science in September. It is a family event which features open houses, lectures, informal talks, and hands-on activities at area museums, observatories, other scientific facilities, and the university. In-school programs also are an important part of the festival. The festival begins with the annual Eugene Shoemaker keynote address. Guest speakers have included famous astronauts, arctic explorers, storm chasers, and scientists from many disciplines. The Coconino County Fair is held every September at the Fort Tuthill County Fairgrounds, featuring a demolition derby, livestock auction, carnival rides, and other activities.\nHistoric districts and properties.\nFlagstaff is home to seven National Register of Historic Places historic districts: Southside, Townsite, Fort Tuthill, North End, Northern Arizona Normal School, the Railroad Addition, and USFS Fort Valley Experimental Forest Station, as well as a variety of many other structures and areas. The Lowell Observatory is a National Historic Landmark.\nSports.\nFlagstaff has no professional sports of its own, but is home to the college sports teams of Northern Arizona University. It is a popular training destination for a variety of sports, largely due to its altitude and climate.\nNorthern Arizona Lumberjacks.\nNorthern Arizona University sponsors 15 sports at the NCAA Division I level, including a football team that competes at the Division I Football Championship Subdivision level. The NAU football team has a rivalry with the Southern Utah Thunderbirds, known as the Grand Canyon Rivalry, based on the universities residing on opposite sides of the Grand Canyon. All sports are members of the Big Sky Conference with the exception of the Women's Swimming &amp; Diving team, which competes in the Western Athletic Conference. The Men's Cross Country team has featured four straight top ten finishes at the NCAA Division I Cross Country championships. The track and field team has been home to several All-Americans, including NCAA Champion and Olympian Lopez Lomong (and brother Peter Lomong), two-time NCAA Champion David McNeill, and 2012 Olympian Diego Estrada.\nArizona Cardinals.\nFrom 1988 to 2012 (with the exception of the 2005 season), the Arizona Cardinals of the National Football League held their summer training camp at Northern Arizona University. The 2005 training camp relocated to Prescott because of a norovirus outbreak at the university that emerged from a summer wrestling training camp and infected over 100 people. The NAU training camp was named as one of the top five training camps in the NFL by \"Sports Illustrated\", citing the cooler temperature, scenic area, and the possibility for fans to get close to athletes as key points. Players have said that the altitude of Flagstaff was the key benefit, as well as seeing the dedication of fans traveling to the city, but that they did not enjoy living in the NAU dorm rooms.\nThe Cardinals left Flagstaff in summer 2013, placing NAU at fault after the team was put in the visitors' facilities, though NAU had offered the home facilities when the concern was raised, and moved their training camp to State Farm Stadium in Glendale. At Glendale, they train in a domed stadium rather than outside, which player Bertrand Berry said took away some of the feeling of training camp, saying \"there really isn't that need to practice outside when most of the games are inside, but when you talk about building a team and going through adverse situations and bonding together, I think they miss out on a little bit of that\". The Cardinals had trained at NAU since the franchise moved to Arizona, with Fox Sports reporting that \"some argued they pulled the plug on the team's only Arizona tradition\". Bill Bidwill, owner of the Cardinals, was inducted into the Flagstaff Sports Foundation's Hall of Fame in 2009, after bringing the team and resultant tourism boost to the city for over 20 years.\nAltitude training destination.\nFlagstaff is also a popular destination for altitude training. The first elite athletes to start altitude training in the city were those going to the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City. A 2009 analysis showed that groups of 35 athletes spent three to eight weeks training in Flagstaff, to positive effect. This was one of the highest number of athletes and longest periods among seventeen sites used in the research. Australian rules football team Collingwood Magpies regularly train at NAU facilities, as does the Olympic-medal-winning Team GB British Swimming team. Another British Olympian, Mo Farah, trains in Flagstaff.\nLong-distance runner Andrea Seccafien used to altitude train in Flagstaff but moved to Australia in 2018, saying \"We don't go to Flagstaff or St. Moritz anymore which are more populated by runners and the general public. [...] Flagstaff feels quite metropolitan compared to where we are now\"; the Canadian \"Running Magazine\" noted that the city becomes host to many professional runners in the spring. The popularity among runners is because of the altitude and pleasant climate, making it \"for distance runners [...] a practically unparalleled paradise\", known as the \"running mecca\". Runner Nick Hilton said that \"Flagstaff and Boulder, Colorado, are probably the two biggest centers for elite distance runners in the country\".\nThe HYPO2 altitude training center in the city is used by swimmers and runners alike, and is an elite facility that attracts many teams from around the world. HYPO2 was created in 2012, largely with staff from NAU's Center for High Altitude Training, which closed in 2009. As of 2019, over 85 Olympic medalists from 44 countries trained at the facility. In 2016, the city advertised NAU and the HYPO2 with promotions saying \"The Road to Rio Runs Through Flagstaff\", prominently noting that if Flagstaff (with its training athletes) was a country, it would be in the top 10 of Olympic-medal winning nations since 1996.\nParks and recreation.\nFlagstaff has acquired a reputation as a magnet for outdoor enthusiasts, and the region's varied terrain, high elevation, and amenable weather attract campers, backpackers, climbers, recreation and elite runners, and mountain bikers from throughout the southwestern United States. There are of city parks in Flagstaff, the largest of which are Thorpe Park and Buffalo Park. Wheeler Park, next to city hall, is the location of summer concerts and other events. The city maintains an extensive network of trails, the Flagstaff Urban Trails System, or \"FUTS\" includes more than 50 miles of paved and unpaved trails for hiking, running, and cycling. The trail network extends throughout the city and is widely used for both recreation and transportation. There are over of urban trails in Flagstaff.\nThe area is a recreational hub for road cycling and mountain biking clubs, organized triathlon events, and annual cross country ski races. Several major river running operators are headquartered in Flagstaff, and the city serves as a base for Grand Canyon and Colorado River expeditions.\nFlagstaff's proximity to Grand Canyon National Park, about north of the city, has made it a popular tourist destination since the mid-19th century. Other nearby outdoor attractions include Walnut Canyon National Monument, Sunset Crater Volcano National Monument, Wupatki National Monument, and Barringer Crater. Glen Canyon National Recreation Area and Lake Powell are both about north along U.S. Route 89.\nGovernment.\nThe city government is organized under a council\u2013manager form of government. The mayor of Flagstaff is Becky Daggett, who was elected in November 2022. The town council consists of the mayor and six councilmembers: Austin Aslan (vice mayor), Jim McCarthy, Miranda Sweet, Lori Matthews, Deborah Harris, and Khara House (appointed as an interim councilmember in May 2022). On July 2, 2019, the city council named Greg Clifton as city manager among 50 candidates. Regular meetings of the city council are held on the first and third Tuesday of every month. The last mayoral election occurred in November 2022.\nAt the state level, Flagstaff is in the 6th legislative district. In the Arizona State Senate, the 6th is represented by Wendy Rogers (R) of Flagstaff. In the House of Representatives, the 6th is represented by Brenda Barton (R) of Payson and Walter Blackman (R) of Snowflake.\nAt the federal level, Flagstaff was redistricted in 2023 within Arizona's 2nd congressional district, covering 20,219 sq. miles. The current 2nd is essentially the successor of what was Arizona's 1st congressional district from 2003 to 2023. The district is represented by Eli Crane (R) of Oro Valley.\nThe City of Flagstaff raised its minimum wage above the State minimum wage in 2017. This wage increase was the result of a ballot measure \u2013 Proposition 414 \u2013 on the November 8, 2016, ballot. The City Council of Flagstaff then passed Title 15 of the City Ordinance, which provided for implementation of the new law. The new minimum wage in Flagstaff on July 1, 2017, was $10.50, fifty cents more than the Arizona state minimum wage. On January 1, 2021, the minimum wage rose to $15.00.\nIn 2023, the city prohibited gun range companies from airing ads at airport, but upon accusations of First Amendment violations, subsequently banned all ads besides city ads. Although some say this poses other Constitutional issues since commercial speech has protection under the Central Hudson Doctrine.\nEducation.\nThere are 19 public schools, with 11,500 students and 800 faculty and staff, in the Flagstaff Unified School District. In 1997, Mount Elden Middle School was named an A+ School, citing an outstanding school climate, progressive use of technology and zero-tolerance approach to discipline. The 1999 National Science Teacher of the Year, David Thompson, teaches physics at Coconino High School. Three Arizona Teachers of the Year from 2001 through 2003 teach at Flagstaff High School. In 2012, Flagstaff was named America's first STEM Community.\nIn addition to the numerous public schools, there are several charter schools operating in the Flagstaff area including Flagstaff Junior Academy, Northland Preparatory Academy (ranked No. 52 in \"US News\"'s America's Top 100 Best High Schools), the Flagstaff Arts and Leadership Academy, Pine Forest Charter School, BASIS Flagstaff (ranked No. 2 in The Washington Post's America's Most Challenging High schools) and the Montessori Schools of Flagstaff.\nFlagstaff is home to three institutions of higher education, Northern Arizona University (one of the three public state universities in Arizona); Coconino Community College; and Flagstaff College (a very small upper-division college with only one major \u2013 sustainability and social justice).\nMedia.\nThe major daily newspaper in Flagstaff is the \"Arizona Daily Sun\". Northern Arizona University's weekly newspaper \"The Lumberjack\" also covers Flagstaff news, while the other publications that serve the city include weeklies \"Flagstaff Live\" and the \"Navajo Hopi Observer\", and monthlies \"Mountain Living Magazine\" and \"The Noise\". NAU runs several radio stations including KNAU and KPUB and their translator stations, which provide NPR and PRI news coverage, as well as classical music.\nFlagstaff is included in the Phoenix Designated market area (DMA), the 13th largest in the U.S. Over-the-air television service is provided mostly by low-powered repeaters of the Phoenix stations. There are two local broadcast television stations serving the city, KNAZ-2 (NBC), and KFPH-13 (UniM\u00e1s). In reality television, \"\" built a home just outside Flagstaff for slain soldier Lori Piestewa's two children and parents in 2005. In December 2007, talk show hostess Ellen DeGeneres selected Flagstaff as the winner of her show's \"Wish You Were Here\" contest.\nFilm production.\nIn the early 20th century, the city was considered as a site for the film \"The Squaw Man\" by Jesse Lasky and Cecil B. DeMille, but was abandoned in favor of Hollywood. During the 1940s and 1950s, over 100 Westerns were filmed in Sedona and Oak Creek Canyon. The Hotel Monte Vista in Flagstaff hosted many film stars during this era, including Jane Russell, Gary Cooper, Spencer Tracy, John Wayne, and Bing Crosby. A scene from the movie \"Casablanca\" was filmed in one of the rooms of the hotel.\nSeveral films then used Flagstaff's Route 66 in scenes: the 1969 film \"Easy Rider\" were filmed on Milton Road and Route 66 as well as near Sunset Crater; a moment in the film\" National Lampoon's Vacation\" was filmed at a truck stop gas station near Little America Hotel in 1983; a small scene in \"Midnight Run\" was filmed in Flagstaff at the train depot, and the city was referenced in the film; several of the running scenes in \"Forrest Gump\" were filmed in and around the area, including a memorable scene in which Forrest is seen jogging in downtown Flagstaff and gives inspiration to a bumper sticker designer; parts of 2007 Academy Award winner \"Little Miss Sunshine\" were filmed at the junction of I-40 and I-17 in Flagstaff; and \"Terminal Velocity\" was partially filmed in the city. Grizzly Peak Films also filmed \"Sasquatch Mountain\", a feature-length film for the Science Fiction Channel about a Yeti, in Flagstaff and Williams.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nRoad.\nThe city is connected to Phoenix by Interstate 17 (I-17), and to Los Angeles, Las Vegas (via Route 93), and Albuquerque by Interstate 40 (I-40). Page can be reached via Route 89 from the city, as can Salt Lake City and, ultimately, Canada. The main road through Flagstaff is Route 66/Santa Fe Avenue, which runs parallel to the Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) Railway line east\u2013west through the city. Downtown Flagstaff and the surrounding neighborhoods are separated from East Flagstaff by Buffalo Park, with the city connected by Route 66 and I-40. Route 66 is connected to the interstates in downtown by Milton Road, running roughly south alongside the NAU campus; Milton Road then merges into I-17. Flagstaff is connected to Sedona and Prescott by State Route 89A, which Beulah Boulevard merges into, and to the Grand Canyon by Route 180, which Fort Valley Road merges into just northwest of the city. It is the northern terminus of I-17 and Route 89A, and the southern terminus of Route 89.\nSeveral towns are close to Flagstaff along I-40 and I-17. Approximately south are the small urban areas of Kachina Village (west of I-17) and Mountainaire (east of I-17; ). About to the west is Williams, to the south is Munds Park, and to the south on Route 89A is Sedona. to the east of Flagstaff is the town of Winona.\nFrom the city, Amtrak provides connecting Amtrak Thruway service via Open Road Tours, which has an office inside the rail depot. Local bus service is provided throughout the city by the Mountain Line. Interstate bus service is provided by Greyhound Lines and Flixbus. Groome Transportation provides in-state shuttle service. Bus service to the Hopi Reservation is provided by Hopi Senom Transit, and to Tuba City and the Navajo Nation by Navajo Transit. Flagstaff is served by Navajo Transit Route 11 from Birdsprings to Tuba City.\nRail.\nThe major rail corridor running through Flagstaff is the Southern Transcon, originally built by the Santa Fe Railroad and now owned and operated by the BNSF Railway. Passenger rail service is provided by Amtrak at the downtown Flagstaff station, connecting on east\u2013west routes to Los Angeles and Albuquerque via the Southwest Chief line.\nAir.\nAir travel is available through Flagstaff Pulliam Airport (), just south of the city. The airport is primarily a small, general aviation airport with a single runway. The airport finished a major expansion project to add to the north end of the runway and lengthen the taxiway in 2007. The primary purpose of the project was to increase its viability for commercial and regional jets. As of January 2023, the airport offers year-round direct flights to Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport and Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport on American Airlines.\nCycle.\nFlagstaff is fairly bike-friendly; there are bike lanes on many major streets, and the Flagstaff Urban Trails System (FUTS) includes more than 50 miles of off-street trails that wind throughout the community. In 2006 Flagstaff was designated a Bicycle-Friendly Community by the League of American Bicyclists. About nine percent of trips in Flagstaff are made by bicycle.\nUtilities.\nElectricity generation in Flagstaff is provided by Arizona Public Service, an electric utility subsidiary operated by parent company Pinnacle West. The primary generating station near Flagstaff is the coal-fired, 995-MW Cholla Power Plant, near Holbrook, which uses coal from the McKinley Mine in New Mexico. Near Page is the coal-fired, 750-MW Navajo Power Plant, supplied by an electric railroad that delivers coal from a mine on the Navajo and Hopi reservations in northern Arizona. Flagstaff is also home to Arizona's first commercial solar power generating station, which was built in 1997 and provides 87\u00a0kW of electricity. Combined with 16 other solar power locations in Arizona, the system provides over 5\u00a0MW of electricity statewide.\nDrinking water in Flagstaff is produced from conventional surface water treatment at the Lake Mary Water Treatment Plant, on Upper Lake Mary, as well as from springs at the inner basin of the San Francisco Peaks. Groundwater from several water wells throughout the city and surrounding area provide additional sources of drinking water. Water and wastewater services are provided by the City of Flagstaff.\nNatural gas is provided by UniSource Energy Services. CenturyLink QC is the incumbent local exchange carrier. Cable television service is offered by Suddenlink Communications.\nHealth care.\nIn 1936, Charles Sechrist opened the city's first hospital. The city's primary hospital is the 267-bed Flagstaff Medical Center, on the north side of downtown Flagstaff. The hospital serves as the major regional trauma center for northern Arizona.\nSister cities.\nFlagstaff's sister cities are:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57555", "revid": "46524402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57555", "title": "Acid dissociation constant", "text": "Measure of an acid's strength in solution\nIn chemistry, an acid dissociation constant (also known as acidity constant, or acid-ionization constant; denoted &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) is a quantitative measure of the strength of an acid in solution. It is the equilibrium constant for a chemical reaction\n&lt;chem&gt;HA &lt;=&gt; A^- + H^+&lt;/chem&gt;\nknown as dissociation in the context of acid\u2013base reactions. The chemical species HA is an acid that dissociates into , called the conjugate base of the acid, and a hydrogen ion, . The system is said to be in equilibrium when the concentrations of its components do not change over time, because both forward and backward reactions are occurring at the same rate.\nThe dissociation constant is defined by\nformula_1 or by its logarithmic form\nformula_2\nwhere quantities in square brackets represent the molar concentrations of the species at equilibrium.{\\gamma_{A^-} \\gamma_{H^+}},&lt;/math&gt; is a constant with a value of 1 under a given set of experimental conditions.}} For example, a hypothetical weak acid having \"K\"a\u00a0=\u00a010\u22125, the value of log \"K\"a is the exponent (\u22125), giving p\"K\"a\u00a0=\u00a05. For acetic acid, \"K\"a\u00a0=\u00a01.8\u00a0x\u00a010\u22125, so p\"K\"a is 4.7. A lower \"K\"a corresponds to a weaker acid (an acid that is less dissociated at equilibrium). The form p\"K\"a is often used because it provides a convenient logarithmic scale, where a lower p\"K\"a corresponds to a stronger acid.\nTheoretical background.\nThe acid dissociation constant for an acid is a direct consequence of the underlying thermodynamics of the dissociation reaction; the p\"K\"a value is directly proportional to the standard Gibbs free energy change for the reaction. The value of the p\"K\"a changes with temperature and can be understood qualitatively based on Le Chatelier's principle: when the reaction is endothermic, \"K\"a increases and p\"K\"a decreases with increasing temperature; the opposite is true for exothermic reactions.\nThe value of p\"K\"a also depends on molecular structure of the acid in many ways. For example, Pauling proposed two rules: one for successive p\"K\"a of polyprotic acids (see Polyprotic acids below), and one to estimate the p\"K\"a of oxyacids based on the number of =O and \u2212OH groups (see Factors that affect p\"K\"a values below). Other structural factors that influence the magnitude of the acid dissociation constant include inductive effects, mesomeric effects, and hydrogen bonding. Hammett type equations have frequently been applied to the estimation of p\"K\"a.\nThe quantitative behaviour of acids and bases in solution can be understood only if their p\"K\"a values are known. In particular, the pH of a solution can be predicted when the analytical concentration and p\"K\"a values of all acids and bases are known; conversely, it is possible to calculate the equilibrium concentration of the acids and bases in solution when the pH is known. These calculations find application in many different areas of chemistry, biology, medicine, and geology. For example, many compounds used for medication are weak acids or bases, and a knowledge of the p\"K\"a values, together with the octanol-water partition coefficient, can be used for estimating the extent to which the compound enters the blood stream. Acid dissociation constants are also essential in aquatic chemistry and chemical oceanography, where the acidity of water plays a fundamental role. In living organisms, acid\u2013base homeostasis and enzyme kinetics are dependent on the p\"K\"a values of the many acids and bases present in the cell and in the body. In chemistry, a knowledge of p\"K\"a values is necessary for the preparation of buffer solutions and is also a prerequisite for a quantitative understanding of the interaction between acids or bases and metal ions to form complexes. Experimentally, p\"K\"a values can be determined by potentiometric (pH) titration, but for values of p\"K\"a less than about 2 or more than about 11, spectrophotometric or NMR measurements may be required due to practical difficulties with pH measurements.\nDefinitions.\nAccording to Arrhenius's original molecular definition, an acid is a substance that dissociates in aqueous solution, releasing the hydrogen ion (a proton):\n &lt;chem&gt;HA &lt;=&gt; A- + H+&lt;/chem&gt;\nThe equilibrium constant for this dissociation reaction is known as a dissociation constant. The liberated proton combines with a water molecule to give a hydronium (or oxonium) ion (naked protons do not exist in solution), and so Arrhenius later proposed that the dissociation should be written as an acid\u2013base reaction:\n&lt;chem&gt;HA + H2O &lt;=&gt; A- + H3O+&lt;/chem&gt;\nBr\u00f8nsted and Lowry generalised this further to a proton exchange reaction:\n formula_3\nThe acid loses a proton, leaving a conjugate base; the proton is transferred to the base, creating a conjugate acid. For aqueous solutions of an acid HA, the base is water; the conjugate base is and the conjugate acid is the hydronium ion. The Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry definition applies to other solvents, such as dimethyl sulfoxide: the solvent S acts as a base, accepting a proton and forming the conjugate acid .\n&lt;chem&gt;HA + S &lt;=&gt; A- + SH+&lt;/chem&gt;\nIn solution chemistry, it is common to use as an abbreviation for the solvated hydrogen ion, regardless of the solvent. In aqueous solution denotes a solvated hydronium ion rather than a proton.\nThe designation of an acid or base as \"conjugate\" depends on the context. The conjugate acid of a base B dissociates according to\n&lt;chem&gt;BH+ + OH- &lt;=&gt; B + H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\nwhich is the reverse of the equilibrium\nformula_4\nThe hydroxide ion , a well known base, is here acting as the conjugate base of the acid water. Acids and bases are thus regarded simply as donors and acceptors of protons respectively.\nA broader definition of acid dissociation includes hydrolysis, in which protons are produced by the splitting of water molecules. For example, boric acid () produces as if it were a proton donor, but it has been confirmed by Raman spectroscopy that this is due to the hydrolysis equilibrium:\n&lt;chem&gt;B(OH)3 + 2 H2O &lt;=&gt; B(OH)4- + H3O+&lt;/chem&gt;\nSimilarly, metal ion hydrolysis causes ions such as to behave as weak acids:\n &lt;chem&gt;[Al(H2O)6]^3+ + H2O &lt;=&gt; [Al(H2O)5(OH)]^2+ + H3O+&lt;/chem&gt;\nAccording to Lewis's original definition, an acid is a substance that accepts an electron pair to form a coordinate covalent bond.\nEquilibrium constant.\nAn acid dissociation constant is a particular example of an equilibrium constant. The dissociation of a monoprotic acid, HA, in dilute solution can be written as\n &lt;chem&gt;HA &lt;=&gt; A- + H+&lt;/chem&gt;\nThe thermodynamic equilibrium constant &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; can be defined by\nformula_5\nwhere formula_6 represents the activity, at equilibrium, of the chemical species X. formula_7 is dimensionless since activity is dimensionless. Activities of the products of dissociation are placed in the numerator, activities of the reactants are placed in the denominator. See activity coefficient for a derivation of this expression.\nSince activity is the product of concentration and activity coefficient (\"\u03b3\") the definition could also be written as\nformula_8\nwhere formula_9 represents the concentration of HA and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a quotient of activity coefficients.\nTo avoid the complications involved in using activities, dissociation constants are determined, where possible, in a medium of high ionic strength, that is, under conditions in which &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; can be assumed to be always constant. For example, the medium might be a solution of 0.1\u00a0molar (M) sodium nitrate or 3\u00a0M potassium perchlorate. With this assumption,\nformula_10\nformula_11\nis obtained. Note, however, that all published dissociation constant values refer to the specific ionic medium used in their determination and that different values are obtained with different conditions, as shown for acetic acid in the illustration above. When published constants refer to an ionic strength other than the one required for a particular application, they may be adjusted by means of specific ion theory (SIT) and other theories.\nCumulative and stepwise constants.\nA cumulative equilibrium constant, denoted by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is related to the product of stepwise constants, denoted by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; For a dibasic acid the relationship between stepwise and overall constants is as follows\n&lt;chem&gt;H2A &lt;=&gt; A^2- + 2H+&lt;/chem&gt;\nformula_12\nformula_13\nNote that in the context of metal-ligand complex formation, the equilibrium constants for the formation of metal complexes are usually defined as \"association\" constants. In that case, the equilibrium constants for ligand protonation are also defined as association constants. The numbering of association constants is the reverse of the numbering of dissociation constants; in this example formula_14\nAssociation and dissociation constants.\nWhen discussing the properties of acids it is usual to specify equilibrium constants as acid dissociation constants, denoted by \"K\"a, with numerical values given the symbol p\"K\"a.\nformula_15\nOn the other hand, association constants are used for bases. \nformula_16\nHowever, general purpose computer programs that are used to derive equilibrium constant values from experimental data use association constants for both acids and bases. Because stability constants for a metal-ligand complex are always specified as association constants, ligand protonation must also be specified as an association reaction. The definitions show that the value of an acid dissociation constant is the reciprocal of the value of the corresponding association constant:\n formula_17\n formula_18\n formula_19\nNotes\nformula_20\nTemperature dependence.\nAll equilibrium constants vary with temperature according to the van 't Hoff equation\nformula_21\n&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is the gas constant and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is the absolute temperature. Thus, for exothermic reactions, the standard enthalpy change, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, is negative and \"K\" decreases with temperature. For endothermic reactions, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is positive and \"K\" increases with temperature.\nThe standard enthalpy change for a reaction is itself a function of temperature, according to Kirchhoff's law of thermochemistry:\nformula_22\nwhere &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is the heat capacity change at constant pressure. In practice &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; may be taken to be constant over a small temperature range.\nDimensionality.\nIn the equation\nformula_23\n\"K\"a appears to have dimensions of concentration. However, since formula_24, the equilibrium constant, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, \"cannot\" have a physical dimension. This apparent paradox can be resolved in various ways. \nThe procedures, (1) and (2), give identical numerical values for an equilibrium constant. Furthermore, since a concentration &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is simply proportional to mole fraction &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and density &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_26\nand since the molar mass &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a constant in dilute solutions, an equilibrium constant value determined using (3) will be simply proportional to the values obtained with (1) and (2).\nIt is common practice in biochemistry to quote a value with a dimension as, for example, \"\"K\"a = 30\u00a0mM\" in order to indicate the scale, millimolar (mM) or micromolar (\u03bcM) of the concentration values used for its calculation.\nStrong acids and bases.\nAn acid is classified as \"strong\" when the concentration of its undissociated species is too low to be measured. Any aqueous acid with a p\"K\"a value of less than 0 is almost completely deprotonated and is considered a \"strong acid\". All such acids transfer their protons to water and form the solvent cation species (H3O+ in aqueous solution) so that they all have essentially the same acidity, a phenomenon known as solvent leveling. They are said to be \"fully dissociated\" in aqueous solution because the amount of undissociated acid, in equilibrium with the dissociation products, is below the detection limit. Likewise, any aqueous base with an association constant p\"K\"b less than about 0, corresponding to p\"K\"a greater than about 14, is leveled to OH\u2212 and is considered a \"strong base\".\nNitric acid, with a p\"K\" value of around \u22121.7, behaves as a strong acid in aqueous solutions with a pH greater than 1. At lower pH values it behaves as a weak acid.\np\"K\"a values for strong acids have been estimated by theoretical means. For example, the p\"K\"a value of aqueous HCl has been estimated as \u22129.3.\nMonoprotic acids.\nAfter rearranging the expression defining \"K\"a, and putting pH \n \u2212log10[H+], one obtains\nformula_27\nThis is the Henderson\u2013Hasselbalch equation, from which the following conclusions can be drawn.\n 1; since log(1) \n 0, the pH at half-neutralization is numerically equal to p\"K\"a. Conversely, when pH \n p\"K\"a, the concentration of HA is equal to the concentration of A\u2212.\nIn water, measurable p\"K\"a values range from about \u22122 for a strong acid to about 12 for a very weak acid (or strong base).\nA buffer solution of a desired pH can be prepared as a mixture of a weak acid and its conjugate base. In practice, the mixture can be created by dissolving the acid in water, and adding the requisite amount of strong acid or base. When the p\"K\"a and analytical concentration of the acid are known, the extent of dissociation and pH of a solution of a monoprotic acid can be easily calculated using an ICE table.\nPolyprotic acids.\nA polyprotic acid is a compound which may lose more than 1 proton. Stepwise dissociation constants are each defined for the loss of a single proton. The constant for dissociation of the first proton may be denoted as \"K\"a1 and the constants for dissociation of successive protons as \"K\"a2, etc. Phosphoric acid, , is an example of a polyprotic acid as it can lose three protons.\nWhen the difference between successive p\"K\" values is about four or more, as in this example, each species may be considered as an acid in its own right; In fact salts of H2PO4\u2212 may be crystallised from solution by adjustment of pH to about 5.5 and salts of may be crystallised from solution by adjustment of pH to about 10. The species distribution diagram shows that the concentrations of the two ions are maximum at pH\u00a05.5 and 10.\nWhen the difference between successive p\"K\" values is less than about four there is overlap between the pH range of existence of the species in equilibrium. The smaller the difference, the more the overlap. The case of citric acid is shown at the right; solutions of citric acid are buffered over the whole range of pH\u00a02.5 to 7.5.\nAccording to Pauling's first rule, successive p\"K\" values of a given acid increase (p\"K\"a2 &gt; p\"K\"a1). For oxyacids with more than one ionizable hydrogen on the same atom, the p\"K\"a values often increase by about 5 units for each proton removed, as in the example of phosphoric acid above.\nIt can be seen in the table above that the second proton is removed from a negatively charged species. Since the proton carries a positive charge extra work is needed to remove it, which is why p\"K\"a2 is greater than p\"K\"a1. p\"K\"a3 is greater than p\"K\"a2 because there is further charge separation. When an exception to Pauling's rule is found, it indicates that a major change in structure is also occurring. In the case of (aq), the vanadium is octahedral, 6-coordinate, whereas vanadic acid is tetrahedral, 4-coordinate. This means that four \"particles\" are released with the first dissociation, but only two \"particles\" are released with the other dissociations, resulting in a much greater entropy contribution to the standard Gibbs free energy change for the first reaction than for the others.\nIsoelectric point.\nFor substances in solution, the isoelectric point (p\"I\") is defined as the pH at which the sum, weighted by charge value, of concentrations of positively charged species is equal to the weighted sum of concentrations of negatively charged species. In the case that there is one species of each type, the isoelectric point can be obtained directly from the p\"K\" values. Take the example of glycine, defined as AH. There are two dissociation equilibria to consider.\n &lt;chem&gt;AH2+ &lt;=&gt; AH~+ H+ \\qquad [AH][H+] = \\mathit{K}_1 [AH2+]&lt;/chem&gt;\n &lt;chem&gt;AH &lt;=&gt; A^-~+H+ \\qquad [A^- ][H+] = \\mathit{K}_2 [AH]&lt;/chem&gt;\nSubstitute the expression for [AH] from the second equation into the first equation\n &lt;chem&gt;[A^- ][H+]^2 = \\mathit{K}_1 \\mathit{K}_2 [AH2+]&lt;/chem&gt;\nAt the isoelectric point the concentration of the positively charged species, , is equal to the concentration of the negatively charged species, , so\n formula_28\nTherefore, taking cologarithms, the pH is given by\n formula_29\np\"I\" values for amino acids are listed at proteinogenic amino acid. When more than two charged species are in equilibrium with each other a full speciation calculation may be needed.\nBases and basicity.\nThe equilibrium constant \"K\"b for a base is usually defined as the \"association\" constant for protonation of the base, B, to form the conjugate acid, .\n &lt;chem&gt;B + H2O &lt;=&gt; HB+ + OH-&lt;/chem&gt;\nUsing similar reasoning to that used before\n formula_30\n\"K\"b is related to \"K\"a for the conjugate acid. In water, the concentration of the hydroxide ion, , is related to the concentration of the hydrogen ion by , therefore\n formula_31\nSubstitution of the expression for into the expression for \"K\"b gives\n formula_32\nWhen \"K\"a, \"K\"b and \"K\"w are determined under the same conditions of temperature and ionic strength, it follows, taking cologarithms, that p\"K\"b\u00a0=\u00a0p\"K\"w\u00a0\u2212\u00a0p\"K\"a. In aqueous solutions at 25\u00a0\u00b0C, p\"K\"w is 13.9965, so\nformula_33\nwith sufficient accuracy for most practical purposes. In effect there is no need to define p\"K\"b separately from p\"K\"a, but it is done here as often only p\"K\"b values can be found in the older literature.\nFor an hydrolyzed metal ion, \"K\"b can also be defined as a stepwise \"dissociation\" constant\n formula_34\n formula_35\nThis is the reciprocal of an association constant for formation of the complex.\nBasicity expressed as dissociation constant of conjugate acid.\nBecause the relationship p\"K\"b\u00a0=\u00a0p\"K\"w\u00a0\u2212\u00a0p\"K\"a holds only in aqueous solutions (though analogous relationships apply for other amphoteric solvents), subdisciplines of chemistry like organic chemistry that usually deal with nonaqueous solutions generally do not use p\"K\"b as a measure of basicity. Instead, the p\"K\"a of the conjugate acid, denoted by p\"K\"aH, is quoted when basicity needs to be quantified. For base B and its conjugate acid BH+ in equilibrium, this is defined as\n formula_36\nA higher value for p\"K\"aH corresponds to a stronger base. For example, the values and indicate that (triethylamine) is a stronger base than (pyridine).\nAmphoteric substances.\nAn amphoteric substance is one that can act as an acid or as a base, depending on pH. Water (below) is amphoteric. Another example of an amphoteric molecule is the bicarbonate ion that is the conjugate base of the carbonic acid molecule H2CO3 in the equilibrium\nbut also the conjugate acid of the carbonate ion in (the reverse of) the equilibrium\nCarbonic acid equilibria are important for acid\u2013base homeostasis in the human body.\nAn amino acid is also amphoteric with the added complication that the neutral molecule is subject to an internal acid\u2013base equilibrium in which the basic amino group attracts and binds the proton from the acidic carboxyl group, forming a zwitterion.\nAt pH less than about 5 both the carboxylate group and the amino group are protonated. As pH increases the acid dissociates according to\nAt high pH a second dissociation may take place.\nThus the amino acid molecule is amphoteric because it may either be protonated or deprotonated.\nWater self-ionization.\nThe water molecule may either gain or lose a proton. It is said to be amphiprotic. The ionization equilibrium can be written\n &lt;chem&gt;H2O &lt;=&gt; OH- + H+&lt;/chem&gt;\nwhere in aqueous solution denotes a solvated proton. Often this is written as the hydronium ion , but this formula is not exact because in fact there is solvation by more than one water molecule and species such as , , and are also present.\nThe equilibrium constant is given by\nformula_37\nWith solutions in which the solute concentrations are not very high, the concentration can be assumed to be constant, regardless of solute(s); this expression may then be replaced by\nformula_38\nThe self-ionization constant of water, \"K\"w, is thus just a special case of an acid dissociation constant. A logarithmic form analogous to p\"K\"a may also be defined\nformula_39\nThese data can be modelled by a parabola with\n formula_40\nFrom this equation, p\"K\"w\u00a0=\u00a014 at 24.87\u00a0\u00b0C. At that temperature both hydrogen and hydroxide ions have a concentration of 10\u22127\u00a0M.\nAcidity in nonaqueous solutions.\nA solvent will be more likely to promote ionization of a dissolved acidic molecule in the following circumstances:\np\"K\"a values of organic compounds are often obtained using the aprotic solvents dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and acetonitrile (ACN).\nDMSO is widely used as an alternative to water because it has a lower dielectric constant than water, and is less polar and so dissolves non-polar, hydrophobic substances more easily. It has a measurable p\"K\"a range of about 1 to 30. Acetonitrile is less basic than DMSO, and, so, in general, acids are weaker and bases are stronger in this solvent. Some p\"K\"a values at 25\u00a0\u00b0C for acetonitrile (ACN) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). are shown in the following tables. Values for water are included for comparison.\nIonization of acids is less in an acidic solvent than in water. For example, hydrogen chloride is a weak acid when dissolved in acetic acid. This is because acetic acid is a much weaker base than water.\n &lt;chem&gt;HCl + CH3CO2H &lt;=&gt; Cl- + CH3C(OH)2+&lt;/chem&gt;\n formula_3\nCompare this reaction with what happens when acetic acid is dissolved in the more acidic solvent pure sulfuric acid:\n&lt;chem&gt;H2SO4 + CH3CO2H &lt;=&gt; HSO4- + CH3C(OH)2+&lt;/chem&gt;\nThe unlikely geminal diol species is stable in these environments. For aqueous solutions the pH scale is the most convenient acidity function. Other acidity functions have been proposed for non-aqueous media, the most notable being the Hammett acidity function, \"H\"0, for superacid media and its modified version \"H\"\u2212 for superbasic media.\nIn aprotic solvents, oligomers, such as the well-known acetic acid dimer, may be formed by hydrogen bonding. An acid may also form hydrogen bonds to its conjugate base. This process, known as homoconjugation, has the effect of enhancing the acidity of acids, lowering their effective p\"K\"a values, by stabilizing the conjugate base. Homoconjugation enhances the proton-donating power of toluenesulfonic acid in acetonitrile solution by a factor of nearly 800.\nIn aqueous solutions, homoconjugation does not occur, because water forms stronger hydrogen bonds to the conjugate base than does the acid.\nMixed solvents.\nWhen a compound has limited solubility in water it is common practice (in the pharmaceutical industry, for example) to determine p\"K\"a values in a solvent mixture such as water/dioxane or water/methanol, in which the compound is more soluble. In the example shown at the right, the p\"K\"a value rises steeply with increasing percentage of dioxane as the dielectric constant of the mixture is decreasing.\nA p\"K\"a value obtained in a mixed solvent cannot be used directly for aqueous solutions. The reason for this is that when the solvent is in its standard state its activity is \"defined\" as one. For example, the standard state of water:dioxane mixture with 9:1 mixing ratio is precisely that solvent mixture, with no added solutes. To obtain the p\"K\"a value for use with aqueous solutions it has to be extrapolated to zero co-solvent concentration from values obtained from various co-solvent mixtures.\nThese facts are obscured by the omission of the solvent from the expression that is normally used to define p\"K\"a, but p\"K\"a values obtained in a \"given\" mixed solvent can be compared to each other, giving relative acid strengths. The same is true of p\"K\"a values obtained in a particular non-aqueous solvent such a DMSO.\nA universal, solvent-independent, scale for acid dissociation constants has not been developed, since there is no known way to compare the standard states of two different solvents.\nFactors that affect p\"K\"a values.\nPauling's second rule is that the value of the first p\"K\"a for acids of the formula XO\"m\"(OH)\"n\" depends primarily on the number of oxo groups \"m\", and is approximately independent of the number of hydroxy groups \"n\", and also of the central atom X. Approximate values of p\"K\"a are 8 for \"m\"\u00a0=\u00a00, 2 for \"m\"\u00a0=\u00a01, \u22123 for \"m\"\u00a0=\u00a02 and &lt;\u00a0\u221210 for \"m\"\u00a0=\u00a03. Alternatively, various numerical formulas have been proposed including p\"K\"a\u00a0=\u00a08\u00a0\u2212\u00a05\"m\" (known as Bell's rule), p\"K\"a\u00a0=\u00a07\u00a0\u2212\u00a05\"m\", or p\"K\"a\u00a0=\u00a09\u00a0\u2212\u00a07\"m\". The dependence on \"m\" correlates with the oxidation state of the central atom, X: the higher the oxidation state the stronger the oxyacid.\nFor example, p\"K\"a for HClO is 7.2, for HClO2 is 2.0, for HClO3 is \u22121 and HClO4 is a strong acid (p\"K\"a \u226a 0). The increased acidity on adding an oxo group is due to stabilization of the conjugate base by delocalization of its negative charge over an additional oxygen atom. This rule can help assign molecular structure: for example, phosphorous acid, having molecular formula H3PO3, has a p\"K\"a near 2, which suggested that the structure is HPO(OH)2, as later confirmed by NMR spectroscopy, and not P(OH)3, which would be expected to have a p\"K\"a near 8.\nInductive effects and mesomeric effects affect the p\"K\"a values. A simple example is provided by the effect of replacing the hydrogen atoms in acetic acid by the more electronegative chlorine atom. The electron-withdrawing effect of the substituent makes ionisation easier, so successive p\"K\"a values decrease in the series 4.7, 2.8, 1.4, and 0.7 when 0, 1, 2, or 3 chlorine atoms are present. The Hammett equation, provides a general expression for the effect of substituents.\n log(\"K\"a)\u00a0=\u00a0log(\"K\")\u00a0+\u00a0\u03c1\u03c3.\n\"K\"a is the dissociation constant of a substituted compound, \"K\" is the dissociation constant when the substituent is hydrogen, \u03c1 is a property of the unsubstituted compound and \u03c3 has a particular value for each substituent. A plot of log(\"K\"a) against \u03c3 is a straight line with intercept log(\"K\") and slope \u03c1. This is an example of a linear free energy relationship as log(\"K\"a) is proportional to the standard free energy change. Hammett originally formulated the relationship with data from benzoic acid with different substituents in the \"ortho-\" and \"para-\" positions: some numerical values are in Hammett equation. This and other studies allowed substituents to be ordered according to their electron-withdrawing or electron-releasing power, and to distinguish between inductive and mesomeric effects.\nAlcohols do not normally behave as acids in water, but the presence of a double bond adjacent to the OH group can substantially decrease the p\"K\"a by the mechanism of keto\u2013enol tautomerism. Ascorbic acid is an example of this effect. The diketone 2,4-pentanedione (acetylacetone) is also a weak acid because of the keto\u2013enol equilibrium. In aromatic compounds, such as phenol, which have an OH substituent, conjugation with the aromatic ring as a whole greatly increases the stability of the deprotonated form.\nStructural effects can also be important. The difference between fumaric acid and maleic acid is a classic example. Fumaric acid is (E)-1,4-but-2-enedioic acid, a \"trans\" isomer, whereas maleic acid is the corresponding \"cis\" isomer, i.e. (Z)-1,4-but-2-enedioic acid (see cis-trans isomerism). Fumaric acid has p\"K\"a values of approximately 3.0 and 4.5. By contrast, maleic acid has p\"K\"a values of approximately 1.5 and 6.5. The reason for this large difference is that when one proton is removed from the \"cis\" isomer (maleic acid) a strong intramolecular hydrogen bond is formed with the nearby remaining carboxyl group. This favors the formation of the maleate H+, and it opposes the removal of the second proton from that species. In the \"trans\" isomer, the two carboxyl groups are always far apart, so hydrogen bonding is not observed.\nProton sponge, 1,8-bis(dimethylamino)naphthalene, has a p\"K\"a value of 12.1. It is one of the strongest amine bases known. The high basicity is attributed to the relief of strain upon protonation and strong internal hydrogen bonding.\nEffects of the solvent and solvation should be mentioned also in this section. It turns out, these influences are more subtle than that of a dielectric medium mentioned above. For example, the expected (by electronic effects of methyl substituents) and observed in gas phase order of basicity of methylamines, Me3N &gt; Me2NH &gt; MeNH2 &gt; NH3, is changed by water to Me2NH &gt; MeNH2 &gt; Me3N &gt; NH3. Neutral methylamine molecules are hydrogen-bonded to water molecules mainly through one acceptor, N\u2013HOH, interaction and only occasionally just one more donor bond, NH\u2013OH2. Hence, methylamines are stabilized to about the same extent by hydration, regardless of the number of methyl groups. In stark contrast, corresponding methylammonium cations always utilize all the available protons for donor NH\u2013OH2 bonding. Relative stabilization of methylammonium ions thus decreases with the number of methyl groups explaining the order of water basicity of methylamines.\nThermodynamics.\nAn equilibrium constant is related to the standard Gibbs energy change for the reaction, so for an acid dissociation constant\n formula_42.\n\"R\" is the gas constant and \"T\" is the absolute temperature. Note that p\"K\"a \n \u2212log(\"K\"a) and 2.303 \u2248 ln(10). At 25\u00a0\u00b0C, \u0394\"G\"\u2296 in kJ\u00b7mol\u22121 \u2248 5.708 p\"K\"a (1 kJ\u00b7mol\u22121 = 1000 joules per mole). Free energy is made up of an enthalpy term and an entropy term.\nformula_43\nThe standard enthalpy change can be determined by calorimetry or by using the van 't Hoff equation, though the calorimetric method is preferable. When both the standard enthalpy change and acid dissociation constant have been determined, the standard entropy change is easily calculated from the equation above. In the following table, the entropy terms are calculated from the experimental values of p\"K\"a and \u0394\"H\"\u2296. The data were critically selected and refer to 25\u00a0\u00b0C and zero ionic strength, in water.\nThe first point to note is that, when p\"K\"a is positive, the standard free energy change for the dissociation reaction is also positive. Second, some reactions are exothermic and some are endothermic, but, when \u0394\"H\"\u2296 is negative \"T\"\u0394S\u2296 is the dominant factor, which determines that \u0394\"G\"\u2296 is positive. Last, the entropy contribution is always unfavourable (\u0394\"S\"\u2296 &lt; 0) in these reactions. Ions in aqueous solution tend to orient the surrounding water molecules, which orders the solution and decreases the entropy. The contribution of an ion to the entropy is the partial molar entropy which is often negative, especially for small or highly charged ions. The ionization of a neutral acid involves formation of two ions so that the entropy decreases (\u0394\"S\"\u2296 &lt; 0). On the second ionization of the same acid, there are now three ions and the anion has a charge, so the entropy again decreases.\nNote that the \"standard\" free energy change for the reaction is for the changes \"from\" the reactants in their standard states \"to\" the products in their standard states. The free energy change \"at\" equilibrium is zero since the chemical potentials of reactants and products are equal at equilibrium.\nExperimental determination.\nThe experimental determination of p\"K\"a values is commonly performed by means of titrations, in a medium of high ionic strength and at constant temperature. A typical procedure would be as follows. A solution of the compound in the medium is acidified with a strong acid to the point where the compound is fully protonated. The solution is then titrated with a strong base until all the protons have been removed. At each point in the titration pH is measured using a glass electrode and a pH meter. The equilibrium constants are found by fitting calculated pH values to the observed values, using the method of least squares.\nThe total volume of added strong base should be small compared to the initial volume of titrand solution in order to keep the ionic strength nearly constant. This will ensure that p\"K\"a remains invariant during the titration.\nA calculated titration curve for oxalic acid is shown at the right. Oxalic acid has p\"K\"a values of 1.27 and 4.27. Therefore, the buffer regions will be centered at about pH\u00a01.3 and pH\u00a04.3. The buffer regions carry the information necessary to get the p\"K\"a values as the concentrations of acid and conjugate base change along a buffer region.\nBetween the two buffer regions there is an end-point, or equivalence point, at about pH\u00a03. This end-point is not sharp and is typical of a diprotic acid whose buffer regions overlap by a small amount: p\"K\"a2\u00a0\u2212\u00a0p\"K\"a1 is about three in this example. (If the difference in p\"K\" values were about two or less, the end-point would not be noticeable.) The second end-point begins at about pH\u00a06.3 and is sharp. This indicates that all the protons have been removed. When this is so, the solution is not buffered and the pH rises steeply on addition of a small amount of strong base. However, the pH does not continue to rise indefinitely. A new buffer region begins at about pH\u00a011 (p\"K\"w\u00a0\u2212\u00a03), which is where self-ionization of water becomes important.\nIt is very difficult to measure pH values of less than two in aqueous solution with a glass electrode, because the Nernst equation breaks down at such low pH values. To determine p\"K\" values of less than about 2 or more than about 11 spectrophotometric or NMR measurements may be used instead of, or combined with, pH measurements.\nWhen the glass electrode cannot be employed, as with non-aqueous solutions, spectrophotometric methods are frequently used. These may involve absorbance or fluorescence measurements. In both cases the measured quantity is assumed to be proportional to the sum of contributions from each photo-active species; with absorbance measurements the Beer\u2013Lambert law is assumed to apply.\nIsothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) may be used to determine both a p\"K\" value and the corresponding standard enthalpy for acid dissociation. Software to perform the calculations is supplied by the instrument manufacturers for simple systems.\nAqueous solutions with normal water cannot be used for 1H NMR measurements but heavy water, , must be used instead. 13C NMR data, however, can be used with normal water and 1H NMR spectra can be used with non-aqueous media. The quantities measured with NMR are time-averaged chemical shifts, as proton exchange is fast on the NMR time-scale. Other chemical shifts, such as those of 31P can be measured.\nMicro-constants.\nFor some polyprotic acids, dissociation (or association) occurs at more than one nonequivalent site, and the observed macroscopic equilibrium constant, or macro-constant, is a combination of micro-constants involving distinct species. When one reactant forms two products in parallel, the macro-constant is a sum of two micro-constants, formula_44 This is true for example for the deprotonation of the amino acid cysteine, which exists in solution as a neutral zwitterion . The two micro-constants represent deprotonation either at sulphur or at nitrogen, and the macro-constant sum here is the acid dissociation constant formula_45\nSimilarly, a base such as spermine has more than one site where protonation can occur. For example, mono-protonation can occur at a terminal group or at internal groups. The \"K\"b values for dissociation of spermine protonated at one or other of the sites are examples of micro-constants. They cannot be determined directly by means of pH, absorbance, fluorescence or NMR measurements; a measured \"K\"b value is the sum of the K values for the micro-reactions.\n formula_46\nNevertheless, the site of protonation is very important for biological function, so mathematical methods have been developed for the determination of micro-constants.\nWhen two reactants form a single product in parallel, the macro-constant formula_47 For example, the abovementioned equilibrium for spermine may be considered in terms of \"K\"a values of two tautomeric conjugate acids, with macro-constant In this case formula_48 This is equivalent to the preceding expression since formula_49 is proportional to formula_50\nWhen a reactant undergoes two reactions in series, the macro-constant for the combined reaction is the product of the micro-constant for the two steps. For example, the abovementioned cysteine zwitterion can lose two protons, one from sulphur and one from nitrogen, and the overall macro-constant for losing two protons is the product of two dissociation constants formula_51 This can also be written in terms of logarithmic constants as formula_52\nApplications and significance.\nA knowledge of p\"K\"a values is important for the quantitative treatment of systems involving acid\u2013base equilibria in solution. Many applications exist in biochemistry; for example, the p\"K\"a values of proteins and amino acid side chains are of major importance for the activity of enzymes and the stability of proteins. Protein p\"K\"a values cannot always be measured directly, but may be calculated using theoretical methods. Buffer solutions are used extensively to provide solutions at or near the physiological pH for the study of biochemical reactions; the design of these solutions depends on a knowledge of the p\"K\"a values of their components. Important buffer solutions include MOPS, which provides a solution with pH\u00a07.2, and tricine, which is used in gel electrophoresis. Buffering is an essential part of acid base physiology including acid\u2013base homeostasis, and is key to understanding disorders such as acid\u2013base disorder. The isoelectric point of a given molecule is a function of its p\"K\" values, so different molecules have different isoelectric points. This permits a technique called isoelectric focusing, which is used for separation of proteins by 2-D gel polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.\nBuffer solutions also play a key role in analytical chemistry. They are used whenever there is a need to fix the pH of a solution at a particular value. Compared with an aqueous solution, the pH of a buffer solution is relatively insensitive to the addition of a small amount of strong acid or strong base. The buffer capacity of a simple buffer solution is largest when pH\u00a0=\u00a0p\"K\"a. In acid\u2013base extraction, the efficiency of extraction of a compound into an organic phase, such as an ether, can be optimised by adjusting the pH of the aqueous phase using an appropriate buffer. At the optimum pH, the concentration of the electrically neutral species is maximised; such a species is more soluble in organic solvents having a low dielectric constant than it is in water. This technique is used for the purification of weak acids and bases.\nA pH indicator is a weak acid or weak base that changes colour in the transition pH range, which is approximately p\"K\"a\u00a0\u00b1\u00a01. The design of a universal indicator requires a mixture of indicators whose adjacent p\"K\"a values differ by about two, so that their transition pH ranges just overlap.\nIn pharmacology, ionization of a compound alters its physical behaviour and macro properties such as solubility and lipophilicity, log\u00a0\"p\"). For example, ionization of any compound will increase the solubility in water, but decrease the lipophilicity. This is exploited in drug development to increase the concentration of a compound in the blood by adjusting the p\"K\"a of an ionizable group.\nKnowledge of p\"K\"a values is important for the understanding of coordination complexes, which are formed by the interaction of a metal ion, Mm+, acting as a Lewis acid, with a ligand, L, acting as a Lewis base. However, the ligand may also undergo protonation reactions, so the formation of a complex in aqueous solution could be represented symbolically by the reaction\nformula_53\nTo determine the equilibrium constant for this reaction, in which the ligand loses a proton, the p\"K\"a of the protonated ligand must be known. In practice, the ligand may be polyprotic; for example EDTA4\u2212 can accept four protons; in that case, all p\"K\"a values must be known. In addition, the metal ion is subject to hydrolysis, that is, it behaves as a weak acid, so the p\"K\" values for the hydrolysis reactions must also be known.\nAssessing the hazard associated with an acid or base may require a knowledge of p\"K\"a values. For example, hydrogen cyanide is a very toxic gas, because the cyanide ion inhibits the iron-containing enzyme cytochrome c oxidase. Hydrogen cyanide is a weak acid in aqueous solution with a p\"K\"a of about 9. In strongly alkaline solutions, above pH\u00a011, say, it follows that sodium cyanide is \"fully dissociated\" so the hazard due to the hydrogen cyanide gas is much reduced. An acidic solution, on the other hand, is very hazardous because all the cyanide is in its acid form. Ingestion of cyanide by mouth is potentially fatal, independently of pH, because of the reaction with cytochrome c oxidase.\nIn environmental science acid\u2013base equilibria are important for lakes and rivers; for example, humic acids are important components of natural waters. Another example occurs in chemical oceanography: in order to quantify the solubility of iron(III) in seawater at various salinities, the p\"K\"a values for the formation of the iron(III) hydrolysis products , and were determined, along with the solubility product of iron hydroxide.\nValues for common substances.\nThere are multiple techniques to determine the p\"K\"a of a chemical, leading to some discrepancies between different sources. Well measured values are typically within 0.1 units of each other. Data presented here were taken at 25\u00a0\u00b0C in water. More values can be found in the Thermodynamics section, above. A table of p\"K\"a of carbon acids, measured in DMSO, can be found on the page on carbanions.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57557", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57557", "title": "Cocopah", "text": "Native Americans living in Baja California and Sonora, Mexico, and Arizona in the USA\nThe Cocopah (Cocopah: Xawi\u019a\u019a Kw\u00f1chawaay) are Native Americans who live in Baja California, Mexico, and Arizona, United States.\nIn the United States, Cocopah people belong to the federally recognized Cocopah Tribe of Arizona.\nName.\nThe Cocopah are also called the Cucap\u00e1 (in Cocopa: Kwapa or Kwii Cap\u00e1y).\nLanguage.\nThe Cocopah language belongs to the Delta\u2013California branch of the Yuman family. Their self-designation is Xawi\u019a\u019a kw\u00f1chawaay, translating to \u201cThose Who Live on the Cloudy River\u201d (from \"Xaw\u00ed\u019a\u019ay\" - \"river\", \"kwii\" - \"cloud\", \"(ny)way\" - \"to live\", \"llyay/nyaam\" - \"many\"). According to the U.S. Census, there were 1,009 Cocopah in 2010.\nAlternate spellings of Cocopah in Spanish documents include: C\u00f3copa, C\u00f3capa, C\u00f3cope, C\u00f3sopa, C\u00facapa.\nHistory.\nPrecontact.\nAncestors of the Cocopah inhabited parts of present-day Arizona, California, and Baja California and are known by western academics as belonging to the Patayan culture. Patayan is a term used by archaeologists to describe prehistoric Native American cultures who inhabited parts of modern-day Arizona, west to Lake Cahuilla in California, and in Baja California, between 700 and 1550 A.D. This included areas along the Gila River, Colorado River and in the Lower Colorado River Valley, the nearby uplands, and north to the vicinity of the Grand Canyon. They are mostly likely ancestors of the Cocopah and other Yuman-speaking tribes in the region. The Patayan peoples practiced floodplain agriculture where possible and relied heavily on hunting and gathering.\nPost-contact.\nThe first significant contact of the Cocopah with Europeans and Africans probably occurred in 1540, when the Spanish explorer Hernando de Alarc\u00f3n sailed into the Colorado River delta. The Cocopah were specifically mentioned by name by the expedition of Juan de O\u00f1ate in 1605.\nPost-Mexican cession.\nAfter the Mexican-American War, Cocopah lands were split between the U.S. and Mexico through the Mexican Cession resulting from the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.\nWestward expansion in the 1840s and the discovery of gold in California in 1849 brought many migrants through the area near the mouth of the Colorado River and the Grand Canyon region. The strategic importance of the river crossing was recognized by the U.S. government, and the United States Army established Camp Independence in 1850 to protect the entry route through the tribe's territories. Many tribes along the Colorado River entered the ferry business given its profitability, creating many jobs for the Cocopah.\nThe Cocopah agreed to join Garra's Tax Revolt of 1851, led by the Cupe\u00f1o, to fight against the U.S. government alongside the Quechan and nearby Kumeyaay bands. Together, the Cocopah sieged Camp Independence but the siege fell apart after disputes with the Quechan over the distribution of sheep confiscated from white sheepherders earlier.\nThe Cocopah also entered the Yuma War following the tax revolt initially on the side of the Quechan against the U.S. After making peace with the U.S., the Cocopah allied with the Paipai and Halyikwamai and turned against the Quechan, after accumulating tension between the two tribes. War broke out in May 1853, when the Cocopah besieged three Quechan villages holding them hostage. In retaliation, the Quechan-allied Mohave backed the Quechan and raided the Cocopah. The Yuma War came to an end when the U.S. threatened the Mojave that they would intervene on the side of the Cocopah.\nCocopah in the Mexican Revolution.\nDuring the Mexican Revolution, the Magonistas gained the support of the Cocopah, under the influence of Camilo Jim\u00e9nez, who was the tribal leader of the Cocopah in the Mexicali Valley. The Cocopah were sympathetic of the Magonist struggle against imperialism from both Mexico and the U.S., and the privatized ownership of their land. The Cocopah were joined by the Paipai, Kiliwa, and Kumeyaay, and prepared to fight alongside the Magonistas, as Jim\u00e9nez smuggled US arms to Mexico with the support of the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW).\nOn January 29, the Magonistas and the Cocopah captured Mexicali and provided further logistical support throughout their lands. Jim\u00e9nez carried out a campaign with the Cocopah, Paipai, and Kiliwa armies from El Rosario to Ensenada, raiding small towns and looting Chinese-Mexican businesses.\nThe Cocopah were eventually defeated by the Mexican forces in the following months and were forced off of their land by the Colorado River Land Company.\nModern era.\nIn 1964, the Cocopah Tribe of Arizona, on the U.S. side of the border, ratified its first constitution and formed a five-person Tribal Council in the Cocopah Indian Reservation. In the late 1970s and 1980s, the tribe acquired additional land, constructed homes, installed utilities, developed infrastructure, and initiated economic development.\nCocopah Tribe of Arizona.\nCocopah peoples in the United States are enrolled in the Cocopah Tribe of Arizona. As of the 2000 United States Census, the Cocopah Tribe of Arizona numbered 891 people. There is a casino, speedway, resort, family entertainment center and bingo hall on the reservation as well as a Museum and Cultural Center. Another Yuman group, the Quechan, lives in the adjacent Fort Yuma Indian Reservation. On important occasions, Cocopah people wear their customary ribbon shirts and ribbon dresses.\nSettlements.\nCocopah people live in Mexicali Municipality, Baja California (settlements of Campo Camerina (Colonia Terrenos Indios), Campo del Prado (Colonia el Mayor), Campo Flores, Campo Sonora (Colonia Terrenos Indios), Colonia la Puerta, Comunidad Ind\u00edgena Cucap\u00e1 el Mayor [Ejido el Mayor], Ejido Cucap\u00e1 Mestizo, Ejido Doctor Alberto Mota (El Indiviso), Ejido Durango, Ejido M\u00e9xico, Familia Regalado (Ejido Sonora 2 Campos Nuevos), La Casa de las Curvas (Colonia el Mayor), Mexicali, Sainz Dom\u00ednguez (Colonia el Mayor), and San Felipe) and San Luis R\u00edo Colorado Municipality, Sonora (settlements of Pozas de Arvizu (La Reserva), and San Luis R\u00edo Colorado), Mexico, and in Somerton, Arizona in the United States.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57558", "revid": "1325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57558", "title": "Disk jockey", "text": ""}
{"id": "57559", "revid": "47338731", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57559", "title": "Predation", "text": "Biological interaction\n \nPredation is a biological interaction in which one organism, the predator, kills and eats another organism, its prey. It is one of a family of common feeding behaviours that includes parasitism and micropredation (which usually do not kill the host) and parasitoidism (which always does, eventually). It is distinct from scavenging on dead prey, though many predators also scavenge; it overlaps with herbivory, as seed predators and destructive frugivores are predators.\nPredation behaviour varies significantly depending on the organism. Many predators, especially carnivores, have evolved distinct hunting strategies. Pursuit predation involves the active search for and pursuit of prey, whilst ambush predators instead wait for prey to present an opportunity for capture, and often use stealth or aggressive mimicry. Other predators are opportunistic or omnivorous and only practice predation occasionally.\nMost obligate carnivores are specialized for hunting. They may have acute senses such as vision, hearing, or smell for prey detection. Many predatory animals have sharp claws or jaws to grip, kill, and cut up their prey. Physical strength is usually necessary for large carnivores such as big cats to kill larger prey. Other adaptations include stealth, endurance, intelligence, social behaviour, and aggressive mimicry that improve hunting efficiency.\nPredation has a powerful selective effect on prey, and the prey develops anti-predator adaptations such as warning coloration, alarm calls and other signals, camouflage, mimicry of well-defended species, and defensive spines and chemicals. Sometimes predator and prey find themselves in an evolutionary arms race, a cycle of adaptations and counter-adaptations. Predation has been a major driver of evolution since at least the Cambrian period.\nDefinition.\nAt the most basic level, predators kill and eat other organisms. However, the concept of predation is broad, defined differently in different contexts, and includes a wide variety of feeding methods; moreover, some relationships that result in the prey's death are not necessarily called predation. A parasitoid, such as an ichneumon wasp, lays its eggs in or on its host; the eggs hatch into larvae, which eat the host, and it inevitably dies. Zoologists generally call this a form of parasitism, though conventionally parasites are thought not to kill their hosts. A predator can be defined to differ from a parasitoid in that it has many prey, captured over its lifetime, where a parasitoid's larva has just one, or at least has its food supply provisioned for it on just one occasion.\nThere are other difficult and borderline cases. Micropredators are small animals that, like predators, feed entirely on other organisms; they include fleas and mosquitoes that consume blood from living animals, and aphids that consume sap from living plants. However, since they typically do not kill their hosts, they are now often thought of as parasites. Animals that graze on phytoplankton or mats of microbes are predators, as they consume and kill their food organisms, while herbivores that browse leaves are not, as their food plants usually survive the assault. When animals eat seeds (\"seed predation\" or \"granivory\") or eggs (\"egg predation\"), they are consuming entire living organisms, which by definition makes them predators.\nScavengers, organisms that only eat organisms found already dead, are not predators, but many predators such as the jackal and the hyena scavenge when the opportunity arises. Among invertebrates, social wasps such as yellowjackets are both hunters and scavengers of other insects.\nTaxonomic range.\nWhile examples of predators among mammals and birds are well known, predators can be found in a broad range of taxa including arthropods. They are common among insects, including mantids, dragonflies, lacewings and scorpionflies. In some species such as the alderfly, only the larvae are predatory (the adults do not eat). Spiders are predatory, as well as other terrestrial invertebrates such as scorpions; centipedes; some mites, snails and slugs; nematodes; and planarian worms. In marine environments, most cnidarians (e.g., jellyfish, hydroids), ctenophora (comb jellies), echinoderms (e.g., sea stars, sea urchins, sand dollars, and sea cucumbers) and flatworms are predatory. Among crustaceans, lobsters, crabs, shrimps and barnacles are predators, and in turn crustaceans are preyed on by nearly all cephalopods (including octopuses, squid and cuttlefish).\nSeed predation is restricted to mammals, birds, and insects but is found in almost all terrestrial ecosystems. Egg predation includes both specialist egg predators such as some colubrid snakes and generalists such as foxes and badgers that opportunistically take eggs when they find them.\nSome plants, like the pitcher plant, the Venus fly trap and the sundew, are carnivorous and consume insects. Methods of predation by plants varies greatly but often involves a food trap, mechanical stimulation, and electrical impulses to eventually catch and consume its prey. Some carnivorous fungi catch nematodes using either active traps in the form of constricting rings, or passive traps with adhesive structures.\nMany species of protozoa (eukaryotes) and bacteria (prokaryotes) prey on other microorganisms; the feeding mode is evidently ancient, and evolved many times in both groups. Among freshwater and marine zooplankton, whether single-celled or multi-cellular, predatory grazing on phytoplankton and smaller zooplankton is common, and found in many species of nanoflagellates, dinoflagellates, ciliates, rotifers, a diverse range of meroplankton animal larvae, and two groups of crustaceans, namely copepods and cladocerans.\nForaging.\nTo feed, a predator must search for, pursue and kill its prey. These actions form a foraging cycle. The predator must decide where to look for prey based on its geographical distribution; and once it has located prey, it must assess whether to pursue it or to wait for a better choice. If it chooses pursuit, its physical capabilities determine the mode of pursuit (e.g., ambush or chase). Having captured the prey, it may also need to expend energy \"handling\" it (e.g., killing it, removing any shell or spines, and ingesting it).\nSearch.\nPredators have a choice of search modes ranging from \"sit-and-wait\" to \"active\" or \"widely foraging\". The sit-and-wait method is most suitable if the prey are dense and mobile, and the predator has low energy requirements. Wide foraging expends more energy, and is used when prey is sedentary or sparsely distributed. There is a continuum of search modes with intervals between periods of movement ranging from seconds to months. Sharks, sunfish, Insectivorous birds and shrews are almost always moving while web-building spiders, aquatic invertebrates, praying mantises and kestrels rarely move. In between, plovers and other shorebirds, freshwater fish including crappies, and the larvae of coccinellid beetles (ladybirds), alternate between actively searching and scanning the environment.\nPrey distributions are often clumped, and predators respond by looking for \"patches\" where prey is dense and then searching within patches. Where food is found in patches, such as rare shoals of fish in a nearly empty ocean, the search stage requires the predator to travel for a substantial time, and to expend a significant amount of energy, to locate each food patch. For example, the black-browed albatross regularly makes foraging flights to a range of around , up to a maximum foraging range of for breeding birds gathering food for their young. With static prey, some predators can learn suitable patch locations and return to them at intervals to feed. The optimal foraging strategy for search has been modelled using the marginal value theorem.\nSearch patterns often appear random. One such is the L\u00e9vy walk, that tends to involve clusters of short steps with occasional long steps. It is a good fit to the behaviour of a wide variety of organisms including bacteria, honeybees, sharks and human hunter-gatherers.\nAssessment.\nHaving found prey, a predator must decide whether to pursue it or keep searching. The decision depends on the costs and benefits involved. A bird foraging for insects spends a lot of time searching but capturing and eating them is quick and easy, so the efficient strategy for the bird is to eat every palatable insect it finds. By contrast, a predator such as a lion or falcon finds its prey easily but capturing it requires a lot of effort. In that case, the predator is more selective.\nOne of the factors to consider is size. Prey that is too small may not be worth the trouble for the amount of energy it provides. Too large, and it may be too difficult to capture. For example, a mantid captures prey with its forelegs and they are optimized for grabbing prey of a certain size. Mantids are reluctant to attack prey that is far from that size. There is a positive correlation between the size of a predator and its prey.\nA predator may assess a patch and decide whether to spend time searching for prey in it. This may involve some knowledge of the preferences of the prey; for example, ladybirds can choose a patch of vegetation suitable for their aphid prey.\nCapture.\nTo capture prey, predators have a spectrum of pursuit modes that range from overt chase (\"pursuit predation\") to a sudden strike on nearby prey (\"ambush predation\"). Another strategy in between ambush and pursuit is \"ballistic interception\", where a predator observes and predicts a prey's motion and then launches its attack accordingly.\nAmbush.\nAmbush or sit-and-wait predators are carnivorous animals that capture prey by stealth or surprise. In animals, ambush predation is characterized by the predator's scanning the environment from a concealed position until a prey is spotted, and then rapidly executing a fixed surprise attack. Vertebrate ambush predators include frogs, fish such as the angel shark, the northern pike and the eastern frogfish. Among the many invertebrate ambush predators are trapdoor spiders and Australian Crab spiders on land and mantis shrimps in the sea. Ambush predators often construct a burrow in which to hide, improving concealment at the cost of reducing their field of vision. Some ambush predators also use lures to attract prey within striking range. The capturing movement has to be rapid to trap the prey, given that the attack is not modifiable once launched.\nBallistic interception.\nBallistic interception is the strategy where a predator observes the movement of a prey, predicts its motion, works out an interception path, and then attacks the prey on that path. This differs from ambush predation in that the predator adjusts its attack according to how the prey is moving. Ballistic interception involves a brief period for planning, giving the prey an opportunity to escape. Some frogs wait until snakes have begun their strike before jumping, reducing the time available to the snake to recalibrate its attack, and maximising the angular adjustment that the snake would need to make to intercept the frog in real time. Ballistic predators include insects such as dragonflies, and vertebrates such as archerfish (attacking with a jet of water), chameleons (attacking with their tongues), and some colubrid snakes.\nPursuit.\nIn pursuit predation, predators chase fleeing prey. If the prey flees in a straight line, capture depends only on the predator's being faster than the prey. If the prey manoeuvres by turning as it flees, the predator must react in real time to calculate and follow a new intercept path, such as by parallel navigation, as it closes on the prey. Many pursuit predators use camouflage to approach the prey as close as possible unobserved (\"stalking\") before starting the pursuit. Pursuit predators include terrestrial mammals such as humans, African wild dogs, spotted hyenas and wolves; marine predators such as dolphins, orcas and many predatory fishes, such as tuna; predatory birds (raptors) such as falcons; and insects such as dragonflies.\nAn extreme form of pursuit is endurance or persistence hunting, in which the predator tires out the prey by following it over a long distance, sometimes for hours at a time. The method is used by human hunter-gatherers and by canids such as African wild dogs and domestic hounds. The African wild dog is an extreme persistence predator, tiring out individual prey by following them for many miles at relatively low speed.\nA specialised form of pursuit predation is the lunge feeding of baleen whales. These very large marine predators feed on plankton, especially krill, diving and actively swimming into concentrations of plankton, and then taking a huge gulp of water and filtering it through their feathery baleen plates.\nPursuit predators may be social, like the lion and wolf that hunt in groups, or solitary.\nHandling.\nOnce the predator has captured the prey, it has to handle it: very carefully if the prey is dangerous to eat, such as if it possesses sharp or poisonous spines, as in many prey fish. Some catfish such as the Ictaluridae have spines on the back (dorsal) and belly (pectoral) which lock in the erect position; as the catfish thrashes about when captured, these could pierce the predator's mouth, possibly fatally. Some fish-eating birds like the osprey avoid the danger of spines by tearing up their prey before eating it.\nSolitary versus social predation.\nIn social predation, a group of predators cooperates to kill prey. This makes it possible to kill creatures larger than those they could overpower singly; for example, hyenas, and wolves collaborate to catch and kill herbivores as large as buffalo, and lions even hunt elephants. It can also make prey more readily available through strategies like flushing of prey and herding it into a smaller area. For example, when mixed flocks of birds forage, the birds in front flush out insects that are caught by the birds behind. Spinner dolphins form a circle around a school of fish and move inwards, concentrating the fish by a factor of 200. By hunting socially chimpanzees can catch colobus monkeys that would readily escape an individual hunter, while cooperating Harris hawks can trap rabbits.\nPredators of different species sometimes cooperate to catch prey. In coral reefs, when fish such as the grouper and coral trout spot prey that is inaccessible to them, they signal to giant moray eels, Napoleon wrasses or octopuses. These predators are able to access small crevices and flush out the prey. Killer whales have been known to help whalers hunt baleen whales.\nSocial hunting allows predators to tackle a wider range of prey, but at the risk of competition for the captured food. Solitary predators have more chance of eating what they catch, at the price of increased expenditure of energy to catch it, and increased risk that the prey will escape. Ambush predators are often solitary to reduce the risk of becoming prey themselves. Of 245 terrestrial members of the Carnivora (the group that includes the cats, dogs, and bears), 177 are solitary; and 35 of the 37 wild cats are solitary, including the cougar and cheetah. However, the solitary cougar does allow other cougars to share in a kill, and the coyote can be either solitary or social. Other solitary predators include the northern pike, wolf spiders and all the thousands of species of solitary wasps among arthropods, and many microorganisms and zooplankton.\nSpecialization.\nPhysical adaptations.\nUnder the pressure of natural selection, predators have evolved a variety of physical adaptations for detecting, catching, killing, and digesting prey. These include speed, agility, stealth, sharp senses, claws, teeth, filters, and suitable digestive systems.\nFor detecting prey, predators have well-developed vision, smell, or hearing. Predators as diverse as owls and jumping spiders have forward-facing eyes, providing accurate binocular vision over a relatively narrow field of view, whereas prey animals often have less acute all-round vision. Animals such as foxes can smell their prey even when it is concealed under of snow or earth. Many predators have acute hearing, and some such as echolocating bats hunt exclusively by active or passive use of sound.\nPredators including big cats, birds of prey, and ants share powerful jaws, sharp teeth, or claws which they use to seize and kill their prey. Some predators such as snakes and fish-eating birds like herons and cormorants swallow their prey whole; some snakes can unhinge their jaws to allow them to swallow large prey, while fish-eating birds have long spear-like beaks that they use to stab and grip fast-moving and slippery prey. Fish and other predators have developed the ability to crush or open the armoured shells of molluscs.\nMany predators are powerfully built and can catch and kill animals larger than themselves; this applies as much to small predators such as ants and shrews as to big and visibly muscular carnivores like the cougar and lion.\nDiet and behaviour.\nPredators are often highly specialized in their diet and hunting behaviour; for example, the Eurasian lynx only hunts small ungulates. Others such as leopards are more opportunistic generalists, preying on at least 100 species. The specialists may be highly adapted to capturing their preferred prey, whereas generalists may be better able to switch to other prey when a preferred target is scarce. When prey have a clumped (uneven) distribution, the optimal strategy for the predator is predicted to be more specialized as the prey are more conspicuous and can be found more quickly; this appears to be correct for predators of immobile prey, but is doubtful with mobile prey.\nIn size-selective predation, predators select prey of a certain size. Large prey may prove troublesome for a predator, while small prey might prove hard to find and in any case provide less of a reward. This has led to a correlation between the size of predators and their prey. Size may also act as a refuge for large prey. For example, adult elephants are relatively safe from predation by lions, but juveniles are vulnerable.\nCamouflage and mimicry.\nMembers of the cat family such as the snow leopard (treeless highlands), tiger (grassy plains, reed swamps), ocelot (forest), fishing cat (waterside thickets), and lion (open plains) are camouflaged with coloration and disruptive patterns suiting their habitats.\nIn aggressive mimicry, certain predators, including insects and fishes, make use of coloration and behaviour to attract prey. Female \"Photuris\" fireflies, for example, copy the light signals of other species, thereby attracting male fireflies, which they capture and eat. Flower mantises are ambush predators; camouflaged as flowers, such as orchids, they attract prey and seize it when it is close enough. Frogfishes are extremely well camouflaged, and actively lure their prey to approach using an esca, a bait on the end of a rod-like appendage on the head, which they wave gently to mimic a small animal, gulping the prey in an extremely rapid movement when it is within range.\nVenom.\nMany smaller predators such as the box jellyfish use venom to subdue their prey, and venom can also aid in digestion (as is the case for rattlesnakes and some spiders). The marbled sea snake that has adapted to egg predation has atrophied venom glands, and the gene for its three finger toxin contains a mutation (the deletion of two nucleotides) that inactives it. These changes are explained by the fact that its prey does not need to be subdued.\nElectric fields.\nSeveral groups of predatory fish have the ability to detect, track, and sometimes, as in the electric ray, to incapacitate their prey by sensing and generating electric fields. The electric organ is derived from modified nerve or muscle tissue.\nPhysiology.\nPhysiological adaptations to predation include the ability of predatory bacteria to digest the complex peptidoglycan polymer from the cell walls of the bacteria that they prey upon. Carnivorous vertebrates of all five major classes (fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals) have lower relative rates of sugar to amino acid transport than either herbivores or omnivores, presumably because they acquire plenty of amino acids from the animal proteins in their diet.\nAntipredator adaptations.\nTo counter predation, prey have evolved defences for use at each stage of an attack. They can try to avoid detection, such as by using camouflage and mimicry. They can detect predators and warn others of their presence.\nIf detected, they can try to avoid being the target of an attack, for example, by signalling that they are toxic or unpalatable, by signalling that a chase would be unprofitable, or by forming groups. If they become a target, they can try to fend off the attack with defences such as armour, quills, unpalatability, or mobbing; and they can often escape an attack in progress by startling the predator, playing dead, shedding body parts such as tails, or simply fleeing.\nCoevolution.\nPredators and prey are natural enemies, and many of their adaptations seem designed to counter each other. For example, bats have sophisticated echolocation systems to detect insects and other prey, and insects have developed a variety of defences including the ability to hear the echolocation calls. Many pursuit predators that run on land, such as wolves, have evolved long limbs in response to the increased speed of their prey. Their adaptations have been characterized as an evolutionary arms race, an example of the coevolution of two species. In a gene centered view of evolution, the genes of predator and prey can be thought of as competing for the prey's body. However, the \"life-dinner\" principle of Dawkins and Krebs predicts that this arms race is asymmetric: if a predator fails to catch its prey, it loses its dinner, while if it succeeds, the prey loses its life.\nThe metaphor of an arms race implies ever-escalating advances in attack and defence. However, these adaptations come with a cost; for instance, longer legs have an increased risk of breaking, while the specialized tongue of the chameleon, with its ability to act like a projectile, is useless for lapping water, so the chameleon must drink dew off vegetation.\nThe \"life-dinner\" principle has been criticized on multiple grounds. The extent of the asymmetry in natural selection depends in part on the heritability of the adaptive traits. Also, if a predator loses enough dinners, it too will lose its life. On the other hand, the fitness cost of a given lost dinner is unpredictable, as the predator may quickly find better prey. In addition, most predators are generalists, which reduces the impact of a given prey adaption on a predator. Since specialization is caused by predator-prey coevolution, the rarity of specialists may imply that predator-prey arms races are rare.\nIt is difficult to determine whether given adaptations are truly the result of coevolution, where a prey adaptation gives rise to a predator adaptation that is countered by further adaptation in the prey. An alternative explanation is \"escalation\", where predators are adapting to competitors, their own predators or dangerous prey. Apparent adaptations to predation may also have arisen for other reasons and then been co-opted for attack or defence. In some of the insects preyed on by bats, hearing evolved before bats appeared and was used to hear signals used for territorial defence and mating. Their hearing evolved in response to bat predation, but the only clear example of reciprocal adaptation in bats is stealth echolocation.\nA more symmetric arms race may occur when the prey are dangerous, having spines, quills, toxins or venom that can harm the predator. The predator can respond with avoidance, which in turn drives the evolution of mimicry. Avoidance is not necessarily an evolutionary response as it is generally learned from bad experiences with prey. However, when the prey is capable of killing the predator (as can a coral snake with its venom), there is no opportunity for learning and avoidance must be inherited. Predators can also respond to dangerous prey with counter-adaptations. In western North America, the common garter snake has developed a resistance to the toxin in the skin of the rough-skinned newt.\nRole in ecosystems.\nPredators affect their ecosystems not only directly by eating their own prey, but by indirect means such as reducing predation by other species, or altering the foraging behaviour of a herbivore, as with the biodiversity effect of wolves on riverside vegetation or sea otters on kelp forests. This may explain population dynamics effects such as the cycles observed in lynx and snowshoe hares.\nTrophic level.\nOne way of classifying predators is by trophic level. Carnivores that feed on herbivores are secondary consumers; their predators are tertiary consumers, and so forth. At the top of this food chain are apex predators such as lions. Many predators however eat from multiple levels of the food chain; a carnivore may eat both secondary and tertiary consumers. This means that many predators must contend with intraguild predation, where other predators kill and eat them. For example, coyotes compete with and sometimes kill gray foxes and bobcats.\nTrophic transfer efficiency measures how effectively energy is passed up to higher trophic levels by predation. Each transfer decreases the available energy due to heat, waste, and the natural metabolic processes that occur as predators consume their prey. The result is that only about 10% of the energy at a trophic level is transferred to the next level. This limits the number of trophic levels that an individual ecosystem is capable of supporting.\nBiodiversity maintained by apex predation.\nPredators may increase the biodiversity of communities by preventing a single species from becoming dominant. Such predators are known as keystone species and may have a profound influence on the balance of organisms in a particular ecosystem. Introduction or removal of this predator, or changes in its population density, can have drastic cascading effects on the equilibrium of many other populations in the ecosystem. For example, grazers of a grassland may prevent a single dominant species from taking over.\nThe elimination of wolves from Yellowstone National Park had profound impacts on the trophic pyramid. In that area, wolves are both keystone species and apex predators. Without predation, herbivores began to over-graze many woody browse species, affecting the area's plant populations. In addition, wolves often kept animals from grazing near streams, protecting the beavers' food sources. The removal of wolves had a direct effect on the beaver population, as their habitat became territory for grazing. Increased browsing on willows and conifers along Blacktail Creek due to a lack of predation caused channel incision because the reduced beaver population was no longer able to slow the water down and keep the soil in place. The predators were thus demonstrated to be of vital importance in the ecosystem.\nPopulation dynamics.\nIn the absence of predators, the population of a species can grow exponentially until it approaches the carrying capacity of the environment. Predators limit the growth of prey both by consuming them and by changing their behavior. Increases or decreases in the prey population can also lead to increases or decreases in the number of predators, for example, through an increase in the number of young they bear.\nCyclical fluctuations have been seen in populations of predator and prey, often with offsets between the predator and prey cycles. A well-known example is that of the snowshoe hare and lynx. Over a broad span of boreal forests in Alaska and Canada, the hare populations fluctuate in near synchrony with a 10-year period, and the lynx populations fluctuate in response. This was first seen in historical records of animals caught by fur hunters for the Hudson's Bay Company over more than a century.\nA simple model of a system with one species each of predator and prey, the Lotka\u2013Volterra equations, predicts population cycles. However, attempts to reproduce the predictions of this model in the laboratory have often failed; for example, when the protozoan \"Didinium nasutum\" is added to a culture containing its prey, \"Paramecium caudatum\", the latter is often driven to extinction.\nThe Lotka\u2013Volterra equations rely on several simplifying assumptions, and they are structurally unstable, meaning that any change in the equations can stabilize or destabilize the dynamics. For example, one assumption is that predators have a linear functional response to prey: the rate of kills increases in proportion to the rate of encounters. If this rate is limited by time spent handling each catch, then prey populations can reach densities above which predators cannot control them. Another assumption is that all prey individuals are identical. In reality, predators tend to select young, weak, and ill individuals, leaving prey populations able to regrow.\nMany factors can stabilize predator and prey populations. One example is the presence of multiple predators, particularly generalists that are attracted to a given prey species if it is abundant and look elsewhere if it is not. As a result, population cycles tend to be found in northern temperate and subarctic ecosystems because the food webs are simpler. The snowshoe hare-lynx system is subarctic, but even this involves other predators, including coyotes, goshawks and great horned owls, and the cycle is reinforced by variations in the food available to the hares.\nA range of mathematical models have been developed by relaxing the assumptions made in the Lotka\u2013Volterra model; these variously allow animals to have geographic distributions, or to migrate; to have differences between individuals, such as sexes and an age structure, so that only some individuals reproduce; to live in a varying environment, such as with changing seasons; and analysing the interactions of more than just two species at once. Such models predict widely differing and often chaotic predator-prey population dynamics. The presence of refuge areas, where prey are safe from predators, may enable prey to maintain larger populations but may also destabilize the dynamics.\nEvolutionary history.\nPredation dates from before the rise of commonly recognized carnivores by hundreds of millions (perhaps billions) of years. Predation has evolved repeatedly in different groups of organisms. The rise of eukaryotic cells at around 2.7 Gya, the rise of multicellular organisms at about 2 Gya, and the rise of mobile predators (around 600 Mya - 2 Gya, probably around 1 Gya) have all been attributed to early predatory behavior, and many very early remains show evidence of boreholes or other markings attributed to small predator species. It likely triggered major evolutionary transitions including the arrival of cells, eukaryotes, sexual reproduction, multicellularity, increased size, mobility (including insect flight) and armoured shells and exoskeletons.\nThe earliest predators were microbial organisms, which engulfed or grazed on others. Because the fossil record is poor, these first predators could date back anywhere between 1 and over 2.7 Gya (billion years ago). Predation visibly became important shortly before the Cambrian period\u2014around https://\u00a0million years ago\u2014as evidenced by the almost simultaneous development of calcification in animals and algae, and predation-avoiding burrowing. However, predators had been grazing on micro-organisms since at least https://\u00a0million years ago, with evidence of selective (rather than random) predation from a similar time.\n\"Auroralumina attenboroughii\" is an Ediacaran crown-group cnidarian (557\u2013562 mya, some 20 million years before the Cambrian explosion) from Charnwood Forest, England. It is thought to be one of the earliest predatory animals, catching small prey with its nematocysts as modern cnidarians do.\nThe fossil record demonstrates a long history of interactions between predators and their prey from the Cambrian period onwards, showing for example that some predators drilled through the shells of bivalve and gastropod molluscs, while others ate these organisms by breaking their shells.\nAmong the Cambrian predators were invertebrates like the anomalocaridids with appendages suitable for grabbing prey, large compound eyes and jaws made of a hard material like that in the exoskeleton of an insect.\nSome of the first fish to have jaws were the armoured and mainly predatory placoderms of the Silurian to Devonian periods, one of which, the \"Dunkleosteus\", is considered the world's first vertebrate \"superpredator\", preying upon other predators.\nInsects developed the ability to fly in the Early Carboniferous or Late Devonian, enabling them among other things to escape from predators.\nAmong the largest predators that have ever lived were the theropod dinosaurs such as \"Tyrannosaurus\" from the Cretaceous period. They preyed upon herbivorous dinosaurs such as hadrosaurs, ceratopsians and ankylosaurs.\nIn human society.\nPractical uses.\nHumans, as omnivores, are to some extent predatory, using weapons and tools to fish, hunt and trap animals. They also use other predatory species such as dogs, cormorants, and falcons to catch prey for food or for sport. \nTwo mid-sized predators, dogs and cats, are the animals most often kept as pets in western societies.\nHuman hunters, including the San of southern Africa, use persistence hunting, a form of pursuit predation where the pursuer may be slower than prey such as a kudu antelope over short distances, but follows it in the midday heat until it is exhausted, a pursuit that can take up to five hours. \nIn biological pest control, predators (and parasitoids) from a pest's natural range are introduced to control populations, at the risk of causing unforeseen problems. Natural predators, provided they do no harm to non-pest species, are an environmentally friendly and sustainable way of reducing damage to crops and an alternative to the use of chemical agents such as pesticides.\nSymbolic uses.\nIn film, the idea of the predator as a dangerous if humanoid enemy is used in the 1987 science fiction horror action film \"Predator\" and its three sequels. A terrifying predator, a gigantic man-eating great white shark, is central, too, to Steven Spielberg's 1974 thriller \"Jaws\".\nAmong poetry on the theme of predation, a predator's consciousness might be explored, such as in Ted Hughes's \"Pike\". The phrase \"Nature, red in tooth and claw\" from Alfred, Lord Tennyson's 1849 poem \"In Memoriam A.H.H.\" has been interpreted as referring to the struggle between predators and prey.\nIn mythology and folk fable, predators such as the fox and wolf have mixed reputations. The fox was a symbol of fertility in ancient Greece, but a weather demon in northern Europe, and a creature of the devil in early Christianity; the fox is presented as sly, greedy, and cunning in fables from Aesop onwards. The big bad wolf is known to children in tales such as \"Little Red Riding Hood\", but is a demonic figure in the Icelandic Edda sagas, where the wolf Fenrir appears in the apocalyptic ending of the world. In the Middle Ages, belief spread in werewolves, men transformed into wolves. In ancient Rome, and in ancient Egypt, the wolf was worshipped, the she-wolf appearing in the founding myth of Rome, suckling Romulus and Remus. More recently, in Rudyard Kipling's 1894 \"The Jungle Book\", Mowgli is raised by the wolf pack. Attitudes to large predators in North America, such as wolf, grizzly bear and cougar, have shifted from hostility or ambivalence, accompanied by active persecution, towards positive and protective in the second half of the 20th century.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57560", "revid": "37263070", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57560", "title": "Diastase", "text": "Class of enzymes\nA diastase (; from Greek \u03b4\u03b9\u03ac\u03c3\u03c4\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2, \"separation\") is any one of a group of enzymes that catalyses the breakdown of starch into maltose. For example, the diastase \u03b1-amylase degrades starch to a mixture of the disaccharide maltose; the trisaccharide maltotriose, which contains three \u03b1 (1-4)-linked glucose residues; and oligosaccharides, known as dextrins, that contain the \u03b1 (1-6)-linked glucose branches.\nDiastase was the first enzyme discovered. It was extracted from malt solution in 1833 by Anselme Payen and Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Persoz, chemists at a French sugar factory. The \nname \"diastase\" comes from the Greek word \u03b4\u03b9\u03ac\u03c3\u03c4\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2 (\"diastasis\") (a parting, a separation), because when beer mash is heated, the enzyme causes the starch in the barley seed to transform quickly into soluble sugars and hence the husk to separate from the rest of the seed. Today, \"diastase\" refers to any \u03b1-, \u03b2-, or \u03b3-amylase (all of which are hydrolases) that can break down carbohydrates.\nThe commonly used -ase suffix for naming enzymes was derived from the name diastase.\nWhen used as a pharmaceutical drug, diastase has the ATC code A09AA01 (https://).\nAmylases can also be extracted from other sources including plants, saliva and milk.\nClinical significance.\nUrine diastase is useful in diagnosing uncertain abdominal cases (especially when pancreatitis is suspected), stones in the common bile duct (choledocholithiasis), jaundice and in ruling out post-operative injury to the pancreas; provided that the diastase level is correlated with clinical features of the patient.\nDiastase is also used in conjunction with periodic acid\u2013Schiff stain in histology. For example, glycogen is darkly stained by PAS but can be dissolved by diastase. Fungi, on the other hand, stain darkly with PAS even after treatment by diastase.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57561", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57561", "title": "Palm oil", "text": "Edible vegetable oil from the fruit of oil palms\nPalm oil is an edible vegetable oil derived from the reddish mesocarp (pulp) of the fruit of the African oil palm. The oil is used in food manufacturing, in beauty products, and as biofuel. Palm oil accounted for about 36% of global oils produced from oil crops in 2017. Palm oils are easier to stabilize and maintain quality of flavor and consistency in ultra-processed foods, so they are frequently favored by food manufacturers. Globally, humans consumed an average of of palm oil per person in 2015. Demand has also increased for other uses, such as cosmetics and biofuels, encouraging the growth of palm oil plantations in tropical countries.\nThe mass production of palm oil in the tropics is a topic for substantial concern for environmental and human rights groups. The palm oil industry is a significant contributor to deforestation in the tropics where palms are grown and has been cited as a factor in social problems due to allegations of human rights violations among growers. \nIn 2018, a report by the International Union for Conservation of Nature acknowledged that palm oil is much more efficient than other oils in terms of land and water usage; however, deforestation causes more biodiversity loss than switching to other oils. The biggest global producers of palm oil are Indonesia, which produced 60% of it in 2022, followed by Malaysia, Thailand, and Nigeria. Indonesia produces biodiesel primarily from palm oil.\nHistory.\nHumans used oil palms as far back as 5,000 years. In the late 1800s, archaeologists discovered a substance that they concluded was originally palm oil in a tomb at Abydos dating back to 3,000 BCE.\nPalm oil from \"Elaeis guineensis\" has long been recognized in West and Central African countries used widely as a cooking oil. European merchants trading with West Africa occasionally purchased palm oil for use as a cooking oil in Europe.\nPalm oil became a highly sought-after commodity by British traders for use as an industrial lubricant for machinery during Britain's Industrial Revolution. Palm oil formed the basis of soap products, such as Lever Brothers' (now Unilever) \"Sunlight\" soap, and the American Palmolive brand.\nBy around 1870, palm oil constituted the primary export of some West African countries, which often accompanied oppressive labor practices, as highlighted in the account of Abina Mansah's life (and, human rights group argue, still does). However, this was overtaken by cocoa in the 1880s with the introduction of colonial European cocoa plantations.\nProcessing.\nPalm oil is naturally reddish in color because of a high beta-carotene content. It is not to be confused with palm kernel oil derived from the kernel of the same fruit or coconut oil derived from the kernel of the coconut palm (\"Cocos nucifera\"). The differences are in color (raw palm kernel oil lacks carotenoids and is not red), and in saturated fat content: palm mesocarp oil is 49% saturated, while palm kernel oil and coconut oil are 81% and 86% saturated fats, respectively. However, crude red palm oil that has been refined, neutralized, bleached and deodorized, a common commodity called RBD (refined, bleached, and deodorized) palm oil, does not contain carotenoids. Many industrial food applications of palm oil use fractionated components of palm oil (often listed as \"modified palm oil\") whose saturation levels can reach 90%; these \"modified\" palm oils can become highly saturated, but are not necessarily hydrogenated.\nThe oil palm produces bunches containing many fruits with the fleshy mesocarp enclosing a kernel that is covered by a very hard shell. The FAO considers palm oil (coming from the pulp) and palm kernels to be primary products. The oil extraction rate from a bunch varies from 17 to 27% for palm oil, and from 4 to 10% for palm kernels.\nAlong with coconut oil, palm oil is one of the few highly saturated vegetable fats and is semisolid at room temperature. Palm oil is a common cooking ingredient in the tropical belt of Africa, Southeast Asia and parts of Brazil. Its use in the commercial food industry in other parts of the world is widespread because of its lower cost and the high oxidative stability (saturation) of the refined product when used for frying. One source reported that humans consumed an average of palm oil per person in 2015.\nExtraction.\nPalm oil is traditionally, and still industrially, produced by milling the fruits of oil palm.\nBesides milling, palm oil is produced by cold-pressing the fruit of the oil palm since the 1990s. This type of artisanal palm oil is usually not further refined, so it keeps the natural red color. It is bottled for use as a cooking oil, in addition to other uses such as being blended into mayonnaise and vegetable oil.\nThe result of milling or cold-pressing is a mixture of water, crude palm oil, and fibers from the palm fruit. A minimum degree of processing is required to obtain the oil. The mixture is first passed through a filter to remove the solids, then separated by density to remove the water. Density treatment can also act as a basic form of degumming, provided that the fruit is steamed before milling to hydrolyze the gum, at a cost of also losing some triglycerides to hydrolysis.\nThe result of basic processing is called a \"crude palm oil\" or a \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;red palm oil\", referring to its intense color due to the high carotenoid content. Red palm oil is a traditional cooking oil in West Africa. The free fatty acids within provide a \"bite\" to the flavor. The triglyceride part is around 50% saturated fat\u2014considerably less than palm kernel oil\u2014and 40% monounsaturated fat and 10% polyunsaturated fat. It is a source of Vitamin A and Vitamin E.\nRefining.\nCrude PO can be refined to remove its non-triglyceride components.\nRBD PO is also known as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;white palm oil. It can be further fractionated using the different melting points of its components. The part with a higher melting point, which crystalizes out as a solid earlier, is called palm stearin. It consists of mostly saturated fats. The remaining liquid part is called palm olein. It is also possible to fractionate at a different point of processing, even with crude palm oil.\nRBD PO, or \"palm shortening\", is extensively used in food manufacture. It is valued for its low polyunsaturated fat content, which offers high stability against rancidity and allows it to replace hydrogenated fats in a variety of baked and fried products.\nUses.\nIn food.\nThe highly saturated nature of palm oil renders it solid at room temperature in temperate regions, making it a cheap substitute for butter or hydrogenated vegetable oils in uses where solid fat is desirable, such as the making of pastry dough and baked goods. Palm oil is used in West African cuisine such as egusi soup and okra soup. Palm oil is sometimes used as a minor ingredient in calf milk replacer.\nNon-food consumer products.\nPalm oil is pervasively used in personal care and cleaning products, and it provides the foaming agent in nearly every soap, shampoo, or detergent. Around 70% of personal care products including soap, shampoo, makeup, and lotion, contain ingredients derived from palm oil. However, there are more than 200 different names for these palm oil ingredients and only 10% of them include the word \"palm\".\nBiomass and biofuels.\nPalm oil is used to produce both methyl ester and hydrodeoxygenated biodiesel. Palm oil methyl ester is created through a process called transesterification. Palm oil biodiesel is often blended with other fuels to create palm oil biodiesel blends. Palm oil biodiesel meets the European EN 14214 standard for biodiesels. Hydrodeoxygenated biodiesel is produced by direct hydrogenolysis of the fat into alkanes and propane. The world's largest palm oil biodiesel plant is the \u20ac550 million Finnish-operated Neste Oil biodiesel plant in Singapore, which opened in 2011 with a capacity of 800,000 tons per year and produces hydrodeoxygenated NEXBTL biodiesel from palm oil imported from Malaysia and Indonesia.\nSignificant amounts of palm oil exports to Europe are converted to biodiesel (as of early 2018: Indonesia: 40%, Malaysia 30%). In 2014, almost half of all the palm oil in Europe was burned as car and truck fuel. As of 2018, one-half of Europe's palm oil imports were used for biodiesel. Use of palm oil as biodiesel generates three times the carbon emissions as using fossil fuel, and, for example, \"biodiesel made from Indonesian palm oil makes the global carbon problem worse, not better.\"\nThere are pressures for increased oil palm production from Indonesian palm-based biodiesel programs. The biodiesel currently contains a 30:70 palm oil to conventional diesel ratio (known as B30) at the gas pumps. The Indonesian government is aiming to produce 100% palm oil biodiesel (or B100) to transition out of using conventional diesel. The Indonesian government has estimated it would need to establish approximately 15 million hectares of oil palm plantations to meet these future demands.\nThe organic waste matter that is produced when processing oil palm, including oil palm shells and oil palm fruit bunches, can also be used to produce energy. This waste material can be converted into pellets that can be used as a biofuel. Additionally, palm oil that has been used to fry foods can be converted into methyl esters for biodiesel. The used cooking oil is chemically treated to create a biodiesel similar to petroleum diesel.\nIn wound care.\nAlthough palm oil is applied to wounds for its supposed antimicrobial effects, research does not confirm its effectiveness.\nProduction.\nIn 2023\u20132024, world production of palm oil was 77.3 million tonnes, led by Indonesia with 57% of the total. The annual production of palm oil is projected to reach 240 million tonnes by 2050. During the 2022 food crises instigated by the Russian invasion of Ukraine and crop failures in other parts of the world due to extreme weather caused by climate change, the Indonesian government banned exports of palm oil. This combined with a reduced harvest in Malaysia greatly increased global prices, while reducing availability causing ripple effects in the global supply chain. On 23 May 2022, the Indonesian government reopened trading hoping to balance supplies.\nIndonesia.\nIndonesia is the world's largest producer of palm oil, producing 44 million tonnes in 2023\u201324.\nMalaysia.\nMalaysia is the world's second-largest producer of palm oil, producing 19.7 million tonnes in 2023\u201324. \nIn 1992, in response to concerns about deforestation, the Government of Malaysia pledged to limit the expansion of palm oil plantations by retaining a minimum of half the nation's land as forest cover.\nNigeria.\nAs of 2023\u201324, Nigeria was the fifth-largest producer, with 1.5 million tonnes. Both small- and large-scale producers participate in the industry. In much of the Niger Delta, palm oil is commonoly referred to as \"red oil\" (or red gold) to distinguish it from the \"black oil\" (crude oil) which dominates production.\nThailand.\nThailand is the world's third-largest producer of crude palm oil, producing 3.6 million tonnes in 2023\u201324. Nearly all of Thai production is consumed locally. Almost 85% of palm plantations and extraction mills are in south Thailand. At year-end 2016, 4.7 to 5.8 million rai () were planted in oil palms, employing 300,000 farmers, mostly on small landholdings of 20 rai (). ASEAN as a region accounts for of palm oil production, about 85% of the world total and more than 90% of global exports. Indonesia accounts for 52% of world exports. Malaysian exports total 38%. The biggest consumers of palm oil are India, the European Union, and China, with the three consuming nearly 50% of world exports. Thailand's Department of Internal Trade (DIT) usually sets the price of crude palm oil and refined palm oil Thai farmers have a relatively low yield compared to those in Malaysia and Indonesia. Thai palm oil crops yield 4\u201317% oil compared to around 20% in competing countries. In addition, Indonesian and Malaysian oil palm plantations are 10 times the size of Thai plantations.\nBenin.\nPalm is native to the wetlands of western Africa, and south Benin hosts many palm plantations. Its 'Agricultural Revival Programme' has identified many thousands of hectares of land as suitable for new oil palm export plantations. Non-governmental organisations (NGOs), such as Nature Tropicale, claim biofuels will compete with domestic food production in some existing prime agricultural sites. Other areas comprise peat land, whose drainage would have a deleterious environmental impact. There is also concern that genetically modified plants will be introduced into the region, jeopardizing the current premium paid for their non-GM crops.\nAccording to recent article by National Geographic, most palm oil in Benin is still produced by women for domestic use. The FAO additionally states that peasants in Benin practice agroecology. They harvest palm fruit from small farms and the palm oil is mostly used for local consumption.\nCameroon.\nCameroon had a production project underway initiated by Herakles Farms in the United States. However, the project was halted under the pressure of civil society organizations in Cameroon. Before the project was halted, Herakles left the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil early in negotiations. The project has been controversial due to opposition from villagers and the location of the project in a sensitive region for biodiversity.\nColombia.\nIn 2018, total palm oil production in Colombia reached , representing some 8% of national agricultural GDP and benefiting mainly smallholders (65% of Colombia's palm oil sector). According to a study from the Environmental, Science and Policy, Colombia has the potential to produce sustainable palm oil without causing deforestation. In addition, palm oil and other crops provide a productive alternative for illegal crops, like coca.\nEcuador.\nEcuador aims to help palm oil producers switch to sustainable methods and achieve RSPO certification under initiatives to develop greener industries.\nGhana.\nGhana has a lot of palm nut species, which may become an important contributor to the agriculture of the region. Although Ghana has multiple palm species, ranging from local palm nuts to other species locally called agric, it was only marketed locally and to neighboring countries. Production is now expanding as major investment funds are purchasing plantations because Ghana is considered a major growth area for palm oil.\nKenya.\nKenya's domestic production of edible oils covers about a third of its annual demand, estimated at . The rest is imported at a cost of around US$140 million a year, making edible oil the country's second most important import after petroleum. Since 1993 a new hybrid variety of cold-tolerant, high-yielding oil palm has been promoted by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in western Kenya. As well as alleviating the country's deficit of edible oils while providing an important cash crop, it is claimed to have environmental benefits in the region, because it does not compete against food crops or native vegetation and it provides stabilisation for the soil.\nMyanmar.\nPalm oil was introduced to British Burma (now Myanmar) in the 1920s. Beginning in the 1970s, smaller-scale palm oil plantations were developed in Tanintharyi Region, and Mon, Kayin, and Rakhine States. In 1999, the ruling military junta, the State Peace and Development Council, initiated the large-scale development of such plantations, especially in Tanintharyi, the southernmost region of Myanmar. As of 2019, over 401,814 ha of palm oil concessions have been awarded to 44 companies. 60% of the awarded concessions consist of forests and native vegetation, and some concessions overlap with national parks, including Tanintharyi and Lenya National Parks, which have seen deforestation and threaten conservation efforts for endemic species like the Indochinese tiger.\nSocial and environmental impact.\nForests have been cleared in parts of Indonesia and Malaysia to make space for oil-palm monoculture. This has significant impacts on the local ecosystems leading to deforestation and biodiversity loss. For example, these processes have resulted in significant acreage losses of the natural habitat of the three surviving species of orangutan. One species in particular, the Sumatran orangutan, has been listed as critically endangered because of habitat loss due to palm oil cultivation.\nSocial.\nIn addition to environmental concerns, palm oil development in specific regions that produce it has also led to significant social conflict. Regions with fast growing palm oil production have experienced significant violations of indigenous tribe land rights, influxes of illegal immigrant labor and labor practices, and other alleged related human rights violations.\nThe palm oil industry has had both positive and negative impacts on workers, indigenous peoples, and residents of palm oil producing communities. Palm oil production provides employment opportunities, and has been shown to improve infrastructure, social services and also help reduce poverty. However, in some cases, oil palm plantations have developed lands without consultation or compensation of the indigenous people inhabiting the land, resulting in social conflict. The use of illegal immigrants in Malaysia has also raised concerns about working conditions within the palm oil industry.\nSome social initiatives use palm oil cultivation as part of poverty alleviation strategies. Examples include the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation's hybrid oil palm project in Western Kenya, which improves incomes and diets of local populations, and Malaysia's Federal Land Development Authority and Federal Land Consolidation and Rehabilitation Authority, which both support rural development.\nFood vs. fuel.\nThe use of palm oil in the production of biodiesel has led to concerns that the need for fuel is being placed ahead of the need for food, leading to malnutrition in developing nations. This is known as the food versus fuel debate. According to a 2008 report published in the \"Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews\", palm oil was determined to be a sustainable source of both food and biofuel, and the production of palm oil biodiesel does not pose a threat to edible palm oil supplies. According to a 2009 study published in the \"Environmental Science and Policy\" journal, palm oil biodiesel might increase the demand for palm oil in the future, resulting in the expansion of palm oil production, and therefore an increased supply of food.\nHuman rights.\nOne report indicated numerous allegations of human rights violations in the production of palm oil in Indonesia and Malaysia, including exposure to hazardous pesticides, child labor, rape and sexual abuse, and unsafe carrying loads, among other human rights violations. These incidents may receive no response by the company, police, or other law enforcement group, or are left unreported because victims fear retaliation from their abuser. Pesticides used by palm oil plantations include paraquat, which has been banned in Europe over links to Parkinson's disease, and glyphosate, which has been involved in a US class-action lawsuit regarding cancer (the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) classified glyphosate as causing serious eye damage but did not find evidence implicating it as a carcinogen).\nReports of indigenous peoples and communities in Indonesia, indicate losing farmland and traditionally significant land due to palm oil industry expansion. In 2017, there were over 650 different land disputes between palm oil plantations and indigenous landowners. Indigenous communities also expressed concern over the loss of natural resources, such as wild rubber, reed, and \"adat\" forests (communal forests). Indigenous communities have made some ground when it comes to land disputes, either through protest or legal means.\nOther concerns when it comes to indigenous communities being impacted include lack of government oversight on palm oil plantations, political corruption, or the lack of enforcement of laws meant to protect indigenous lands. In countries such as Guatemala, palm oil plantations have significant leverage within the local justice system, leading local police to disregard land claims, going as far as using force to break up protests, and even murdering local leaders.\nEnvironmental.\nWhile only 5% of the world's vegetable oil farmland is used for palm plantations, palm cultivation produces 38% of the world's total vegetable oil supply. In terms of oil yield, a palm plantation is 10 times more productive than soybean, sunflower or rapeseed cultivation because the palm fruit and kernel both provide usable oil. Palm oil has garnered criticism from environmentalists due to the environmental importance of where it is grown. However, it is indisputably more efficient in comparison to other oil-producing plants. In 2016, it was found that palm oil farms produce around 4.17 metric tons of oil per hectare. By contrast other oils, such as sunflower, soybean, or peanut only produce 0.56, 0.39, and 0.16 metric tons respectively per hectare. Palm oil is the most sustainable vegetable oil in terms of yield, requiring one-ninth of land used by other vegetable oil crops. In the future, laboratory-grown microbes might achieve higher yields per unit of land at comparable prices.&lt;ref name=\"doi10.1016/j.rser.2012.01.003\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nHowever, palm oil cultivation has been criticized for its impact on the natural environment, including deforestation, loss of natural habitats, and greenhouse gas emissions which have threatened critically endangered species, such as the orangutan and Sumatran tiger. Slash-and-burn techniques are still used to create new plantations across palm oil producing countries. From January to September 2019, 857,000 hectares of land was burned in Indonesia; peatlands accounted for more than a quarter of the burned area. The widespread deforestation and other environmental destruction in Indonesia, much of which is caused by palm oil production has often been described by academics as an ecocide.\nFurthermore, a study of palm oil in Cameroon showed that land occupied by palm oil plantations can reduce ecosystem quality by 30\u201345% compared to the potential natural vegetation state. This land use change also creates a carbon debt, which can take approximately 45\u201353 years to offset greenhouse gas emissions reductions.\nEnvironmental groups such as Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth oppose the use of palm oil biofuels, claiming that the deforestation caused by oil palm plantations is more damaging for the climate than the benefits gained by switching to biofuel and using the palms as carbon sinks.\nA 2018 study by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) concluded that palm oil is \"here to stay\" due to its higher productivity compared with many other vegetable oils. The IUCN maintains that replacing palm oil with other vegetable oils would necessitate greater amounts of agricultural land, negatively affecting biodiversity. The IUCN advocates better practices in the palm oil industry, including the prevention of plantations from expanding into forested regions and creating a demand for certified and sustainable palm oil products.\nIn 2019, the Rainforest Action Network surveyed eight global brands involved in palm oil extraction in the Leuser Ecosystem, and said that none was performing adequately in avoiding \"conflict palm oil\". Many of the companies told The Guardian they were working to improve their performance. A WWF scorecard rated only 15 out of 173 companies as performing well.\nIn 2020 a study by Chain Reaction Research concluded that NDPE (No Deforestation, No Peat, No Exploitation) policies cover 83% of palm oil refineries. NDPE policies are according to the Chain Reaction Research the most effective private mechanism to cut the direct link with deforestation, due to the economic leverage refineries have over palm oil growers.\nPalm oil is one of seven commodities included in the 2023 EU Regulation on Deforestation-free products (EUDR), which aims to guarantee that the products European Union (EU) citizens consume do not contribute to deforestation or forest degradation worldwide.\nComparative environmental impacts with fossil fuels.\nCompared to fossil fuels, palm oil systems have lower non-renewable energy consumption, global warming potential (GWP, excluding land-use change), and acidification potential than fossil fuel alternatives. As a biofuel, palm oil increases eutrophication potential (EP).\nMarkets.\nAccording to the Hamburg-based \"Oil World\" trade journal, in 2008 global production of oils and fats stood at 160 million tonnes. Palm oil and palm kernel oil were jointly the largest contributor, accounting for 48 million tonnes, or 30% of the total output. Soybean oil came in second with 37 million tonnes (23%). About 38% of the oils and fats produced in the world were shipped across oceans. Of the 60 million tonnes of oils and fats exported around the world, palm oil and palm kernel oil made up close to 60%; Malaysia, with 45% of the market share, dominated the palm oil trade. Production of palm oil that complies with voluntary sustainability standards is growing at a faster rate than conventional production. Standard-compliant production increased by 110% from 2008 to 2016, while conventional production increased by 2%. The production of vegetable oils as a whole went up 125% between 2000 and 2020, driven by a sharp increase in palm oil.\nFood label regulations.\nPreviously, palm oil could be listed as \"vegetable fat\" or \"vegetable oil\" on food labels in the European Union (EU). From December 2014, food packaging in the EU is no longer allowed to use the generic terms \"vegetable fat\" or \"vegetable oil\" in the ingredients list. Food producers are required to list the specific type of vegetable fat used, including palm oil. Vegetable oils and fats can be grouped together in the ingredients list under the term \"vegetable oils\" or \"vegetable fats\" but this must be followed by the type of vegetable origin (e.g., palm, sunflower, or rapeseed) and the phrase \"in varying proportions\".\nIn Malaysia, it is illegal to label products in ways that discriminate against palm oil. Offenders can be fined up to RM250,000 or sent to prison for up to five years. One convenience store was raided for selling \"no palm oil\" ice cream, with all products seized.\nSupply chain institutions.\nConsumer Goods Forum.\nIn 2010, the Consumer Goods Forum passed a resolution that its members would reduce deforestation to net zero by 2020. They planned to do this through sustainable production of several commodities, including palm oil. As of 2023 that goal has not been met.\nNutrition, composition and health.\nPalm oil is a food staple in many cuisines, contributing significant calories and plant lipids. Globally, humans consumed an average of of palm oil per person in 2015. Although the relationship of palm oil consumption to disease risk has been previously assessed, the quality of the clinical research specifically assessing palm oil effects has been generally poor. Consequently, research has focused on the deleterious effects of palm oil and palmitic acid consumption as sources of saturated fat content in edible oils, leading to conclusions that palm oil and saturated fats should be replaced with polyunsaturated fats in the diet.\nA 2015 meta-analysis and 2017 advisory from the American Heart Association indicated that palm oil is among foods supplying dietary saturated fat which increases blood levels of LDL cholesterol and increases the risk of cardiovascular diseases, leading to recommendations for reduced use or elimination of dietary palm oil in favor of consuming unhydrogenated vegetable oils. The British National Health Service provided a 2023 guideline recommending that palm oil foods be replaced by those made with unsaturated fats.\nA 2019 meta-analysis found no association between total fat, saturated fatty acids, monounsaturated fatty acid, and polyunsaturated fatty acid intake with risk of cardiovascular disease.\nGlycidyl fatty acid esters (GE), 3-MCPD and 2-MCPD, are found especially in palm oils and palm fats because of their refining at high temperatures (approx. ). Since glycidol, the parent compound of GE, is considered genotoxic and carcinogenic, the EFSA did not set a safe level for GE. According to the chair of the CONTAM (EFSA's expert Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain), \"The exposure to GE of babies consuming solely infant formula is a particular concern as this is up to ten times what would be considered of low concern for public health\". The EFSA's tolerable daily intake (TDI) of 3-MCPD and its fatty acid esters was set to 0.8 micrograms per kilogram of body weight per day (\u03bcg/kg bw/day) in 2016 and increased to 2\u00a0\u03bcg/kg bw/day in 2017, based on evidence linking this substance to organ damage in animal tests and on possible adverse effects on the kidney and on male fertility. According to the EFSA, there is not enough data to set a safe level for 2-MCPD. As of December 2022, the Malaysian Palm Oil Board issued an amendment to its palm oil licensing conditions to include maximum limits of 1.25 ppm and 1 ppm, respectively, to the amount of 3-MCPDE and GE that can be found in processed palm oil.\nKey components.\nFatty acids.\nPalm oil, like all fats, is composed of fatty acids, esterified with glycerol. Palm oil has an unusually high concentration of saturated fat, specifically the 16-carbon saturated fatty acid, palmitic acid, to which it gives its name. Monounsaturated oleic acid is also a major constituent of palm oil. Unrefined palm oil is a significant source of tocotrienol, part of the vitamin E family.\nThe linoleic acid content of palm oil is about 6.4\u201315%.\nThe approximate concentration of esterified fatty acids in palm oil is:\nCarotenes.\nRed palm oil is rich in carotenes, such as alpha-carotene, beta-carotene and lycopene, which give it a characteristic dark red color. However, palm oil that has been refined, bleached and deodorized from crude palm oil (called \"RBD palm oil\") does not contain carotenes.\nPalmitic acid.\nExcessive intake of palmitic acid, which makes up 44% of palm oil, increases blood levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and total cholesterol, and so increases risk of cardiovascular diseases. Other reviews, the World Health Organization, and the US National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute have encouraged consumers to limit the consumption of palm oil, palmitic acid and foods high in saturated fat.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0 (https://). Text taken from https://, FAO, FAO. "}
{"id": "57562", "revid": "27585727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57562", "title": "Go Fly", "text": "Airline\nGo Fly (styled and trading as gogo) was the name of a British low-cost airline, founded by British Airways in 1998. It operated flights between London Stansted Airport and destinations in Europe. The airline was purchased from BA in a management buyout backed by the private equity firm 3i in 2001. In 2002, it was bought by its rival EasyJet and was merged into that airline's operations by 2003.\nIts head office was in Enterprise House at London Stansted Airport in Stansted Mountfitchet, Essex.\nHistory.\nBob Ayling, CEO of British Airways, approached EasyJet founder Stelios Haji-Ioannou to ask whether they could meet, claiming that he was fascinated by how the Greek entrepreneur had made the budget airline formula work. Haji-Ioannou not only agreed, but allegedly showed Ayling his business plan.\nIn 1997, BA announced that, under the project name Operation Blue Sky, it would launch its own low-cost airline to meet the changing demand for air travel in Europe. According to Ayling, the new airline would \"quickly become a favourite with the budget traveller\" via its pricing scheme and available flights. Barbara Cassani, who had been British Airways' General Manager in New York and had been credited with turning around the airline's flagging fortunes in the transatlantic market in the early 1990s, was chosen by Ayling to set up the new venture. The new airline would be run separately from British Airways as a wholly owned subsidiary, and would compete in the European low-cost carrier market, dominated by Ryanair and EasyJet. In 1998, the name of the new airline was announced as Go Fly Limited, following a lengthy debate over how to choose a name that would best suit the positioning of this new airline, which was already facing challenges from EasyJet, and Virgin Atlantic, among others.\nThe airline's fleet consisted of Boeing 737s. The first two, 737-300s G-IGOC and G-IGOE, were acquired via lease from Philippine Airlines.\nAn additional plane, a 737-3Q8 G-IGOF, was leased in 1998. On Friday 22 May 1998, Go Fly flew for the first time from its base at London Stansted Airport to Rome Ciampino. The following afternoon saw the airline's inaugural flight to Milan Malpensa Airport. The Italian launch of Go's operation was managed by former American Airlines executive Luca Berti.\nAs part of EasyJet's campaign against Go Fly, Haji-Ioannou and nine other EasyJet staff booked tickets for the flight, arriving in orange boiler suits. Other early routes were to Copenhagen, Bologna and Lisbon. In July flights to Glasgow were started, then to Munich in November and Venice in December 1998, followed by M\u00e1laga, Faro, Bilbao in April 1999 and Madrid.\nAfter leasing three further planes, including a former Air Libert\u00e9 plane and another ex-British Midland jet in 1998 and 1999, six additional planes were delivered direct from Boeing, leased from GE Commercial Aviation Services, bringing the total to 13. Although this was four more than originally envisaged, additional routes helped to spread the overheads.\nTo stem mounting losses, a significant change in strategy was announced in June 1999, cutting back on the existing schedules in favour of new routes tapping into the summer holiday market to Alicante, Ibiza and Palma de Mallorca. This was followed by winter schedules targeting skiers travelling to Lyon and Z\u00fcrich, together with a new route to Prague.\nIn 2001, Go Fly expanded its UK operations, opening a second base at Bristol Airport, bringing low-cost travel to South West England for the first time.\nGo was very much the brainchild of Bob Ayling, and when he left British Airways, Go Fly's future was rendered shaky. In 2000, BA announced it planned to sell Go as part of efforts to improve profits, coupled with concerns that Go was attracting customers from BA's own services.\nEstimated gains from the sale fluctuated and in January 2001, BA admitted that its initial estimates may have been incorrect, and that they now valued Go Fly at \u00a3200 million. Go was sold later that year for \u00a3100 million in a management buyout led by Cassani with the support of private equity firm 3i. The airline's management team remained in place. In 2001, Go reported that it had carried 57.3% more passengers that year than in 2000.\nIn 2002, EasyJet announced that it would buy Go Fly for \u00a3374 million to expand its own operations. By December of that year, Go Fly was operating under the easyJet Air Operators Certificate (AOC) and was absorbed into the EasyJet brand the following year. Although it was reported that Cassani might seek to block the deal with EasyJet, this did not happen. She did not accept a position with the new entity, and in November 2003, Barbara Cassani published \"Go, An Airline Adventure\", which chronicled the airline's existence.\nFleet.\nGo Fly's fleet consisted of the following aircraft:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "57563", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57563", "title": "Go Fly Limited", "text": ""}
{"id": "57564", "revid": "6461451", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57564", "title": "Anselme Payen", "text": "French chemist (1795\u20131871)\nAnselme Payen (; 6 January 1795 \u2013 12 May 1871) was a French chemist known for discovering the enzyme diastase, and the carbohydrate cellulose.\nBiography.\nPayen was born in Paris, the son of Jean-Baptiste Pierre Payen and Marie-Francoise Jeanson de Courtenay. He began studying science with his father, a graduate of the College de Navarre, when he was a 13-year-old, and later studied Chemistry at the \u00c9cole Polytechnique under the chemists Louis Nicolas Vauquelin and Michel Eug\u00e8ne Chevreul.\nAt the age of 23, Payen became manager of a borax-refining factory, where he developed a process for synthesizing borax from soda and boric acid. Previously, all borax had been imported from the East Indies exclusively by the Dutch. Payen's new method of synthesizing borax allowed him to sell the mineral at one third the going price, and break the Dutch monopoly.\nPayen also developed processes for refining sugar, along with a way to refine starch and alcohol from potatoes, and a method for determination of nitrogen. Payen invented a decolorimeter, which dealt with the analysis, decolorization, bleaching, and crystallization of sugar.\nPayen discovered the first enzyme, diastase, in 1833. He is also known for isolating and naming the carbohydrate cellulose.\nIn 1835, Payen became a professor at \u00c9cole Centrale Paris. He was later elected professor at the Conservatoire National des Arts et M\u00e9tiers. He died in Paris on May 13, 1871.\nLegacy.\nThe rue Anselme Payen, near the Gare Montparnasse, Paris, is named after him.\nThe American Chemical Society's Cellulose and Renewable Materials Division has established an annual award in his honor, the Anselme Payen Award."}
{"id": "57566", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57566", "title": "RQ-1 Predator UAV", "text": ""}
{"id": "57567", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57567", "title": "Golden goal", "text": "Tie-breaking method used in sports\nThe golden goal is a tie-breaking method used in association football, Australian rules football, bandy, field hockey, ice hockey, lacrosse, and rugby league to decide the winner of a match (typically a knock-out match) in which scores are tied at the end of regular time. It is a type of sudden death. Under this rule, the game ends when a goal is scored; the team that scores that goal during extra time is the winner. Introduced formally in 1993, though with some history before that, the rule ceased to apply to most FIFA-authorized football games in 2004. The similar silver goal supplemented the golden goal between 2002 and 2004.\nThe golden goal was played in NCAA soccer matches up to 2021, was eliminated in 2022, and then reinstated for post-season play in 2024. It is still used in FIH sanctioned field hockey games. A related concept, the golden point, is used in National Rugby League games. A similar golden goal rule is also used in all National Hockey League (NHL) overtime games (followed by a shootout if needed, in the regular season and preseason); however, the term \"golden goal\" is not used. A rule similar to the golden goal also applies in National Football League regular season games (only if a touchdown or safety is scored, or any score on any possession after the first possession unless both teams score a field goal in the first two possessions then the game becomes true sudden death), although again the term itself is not used.\nAssociation football.\nHistorical context.\nThe rules of the first known organized inter-club tournament in any code of football, the English Youdan Cup of 1867, featured a sudden-death rule. If scores were tied after 90 minutes, up to an hour of extra time was played, with the first team to score a goal or rouge being declared the winner. This rule came into effect in the second round tie between Norfolk FC and Broomhall FC played on 23 February 1867, when Norfolk scored a goal after two minutes of extra time to win the match, 1\u20130.\nA similar rule was used the following year in the Cromwell Cup, which like the Youdan Cup was played under Sheffield Rules. In the final of this competition, played at Bramall Lane, Sheffield in 1868, the deciding goal was scored by the then newly formed team called The Wednesday, now known as Sheffield Wednesday.\nThe golden goal was introduced due to perceived failings of other means of resolving a draw (tie) in round-robin or knock-out tournaments where a winner is required. In particular, extra time periods can be tense and unentertaining as sides are too tired and nervous to attack, preferring to defend and play for penalties; whilst penalty shootouts are often described as based upon luck, and unrepresentative of football. FIFA introduced the golden goal rule in 1993. It was hoped that the golden goal would produce more attacking play during extra time, and would reduce the number of penalty shootouts.\nFIFA competitions.\nThe term \"golden goal\" was introduced by FIFA in 1993 along with the rule change because the alternative term, \"sudden death\", was perceived to have negative connotations. In a knockout competition, following a draw, two fifteen-minute periods of extra time are played. If either team scores a goal during extra time, the game ends immediately and the scoring team becomes the winner. The winning goal is known as the \"golden goal\". If there have been no goals scored after both periods of extra time, a penalty shoot-out decides the game. The golden goal was not compulsory, and individual competitions using extra time could choose whether to apply it during extra time. The first European Championship played with the rule was in 1996, as was the first MLS Cup that year; the first World Cup played with the rule was in 1998.\nThe first golden goal recorded was on 13 March 1993 by Australia against Uruguay in a quarter-final match of the World Youth Championship. The first major tournament final to be decided by such a goal was the 1995 Football League Trophy, where Birmingham City beat Carlisle United 1\u20130, with a goal from Paul Tait, followed by the 1996 European Championship final, won by Germany over the Czech Republic. The golden goal in this final was scored by Oliver Bierhoff. In MLS Cup 1996, Eddie Pope scored 3:25 into extra time as D.C. United beat the LA Galaxy 3\u20132. The first golden goal in World Cup history took place in 1998, as Laurent Blanc scored to enable France to defeat Paraguay in the round of 16.\nIn a qualification game for the 1994 Caribbean Cup, Barbados deliberately scored a late own goal in a successful attempt to qualify for the finals by forcing golden-goal extra time against Grenada, as an unusual tournament rule stated that golden goals counted double in calculating goal difference. Needing a two-goal victory to qualify, Barbados found themselves 2\u20131 up with three minutes left of normal time. After the Barbadians scored an own goal to bring the scoreline level at 2\u20132, Grenada tried to score in either net while Barbados defended both goals for the final three minutes of normal time. Barbados won the game in extra time and advanced to the next round.\nIn 2000, France defeated Italy in extra time in the 2000 European Championship final when David Trezeguet scored a golden goal. France thus became the first holder of both the FIFA World Cup and UEFA European Championship since West Germany in 1974.\nAlso in 2000, Galatasaray had a 2\u20131 victory over Real Madrid in the 2000 UEFA Super Cup in Stade Louis II. The 90 minutes had produced a 1-1 draw and in extra time the Brazilian player M\u00e1rio Jardel scored the golden goal and won the first ever UEFA Super Cup in club history.\nThe following year, Liverpool overcame Deportivo Alav\u00e9s in the UEFA Cup final with a golden own goal by Delf\u00ed Geli to make the score 5\u20134 to Liverpool.\nThe UEFA Champions League is one of few tournaments not to have been settled by a 'golden goal'.\nThe golden goal was used in the FIFA World Cup for the last time in 2002, when Turkey defeated Senegal in the quarter-finals when \u0130lhan Mans\u0131z scored what would be the final golden goal in male tournaments. However, the 2003 Women's World Cup final was decided by a golden goal as Germany defeated Sweden 2\u20131 with a header by Nia K\u00fcnzer in the 98th minute. It was the last golden goal in FIFA Women's World Cup history.\nFIFA Men's World Cup golden goals\nFIFA Confederations Cup golden goals\nSilver goal.\nFor the 2002\u201303 season, UEFA introduced a new rule, the silver goal, to decide a competitive match. If a team leads after the first fifteen-minute half of extra time, it is the winner, but the game no longer ends the instant a team scores like it did under golden goal. Competitions that operated extra time would be able to decide whether to use the golden goal, the silver goal, or neither procedure. The silver goal was seen as a means to \"reduce the odds of a penalty shoot-out without the immediate jeopardy (and perceived unfairness) of Golden Goal\" as it gave the losing team the remainder of the first fifteen-minute period of extra time to make a comeback.\nOn 27 August 2003, Dutch club Ajax qualified for the group stage of the 2003\u201304 UEFA Champions League by virtue of the silver goal against Austrian club GAK after the two legs finished 1\u20131 each after 90 minutes. In extra time, Ajax was able to take advantage of GAK having two players sent off when Tom\u00e1\u0161 Gal\u00e1sek scored from a penalty in the 103rd minute.\nLess than a year later on 1 July 2004, Gal\u00e1sek was on the field when the silver goal was featured in the only major competitive match to be decided by a silver goal: that of the semi-final match at Euro 2004 between Greece and the Czech Republic. However, the silver goal would eliminate the Czech Republic as Traianos Dellas scored for Greece after a corner kick in the last two seconds of the first period of extra time. The Czech team had been known for their come-from-behind wins earlier in the tournament against Latvia, Netherlands, and Germany, but the extremely late Greek score left the Czechs no chance to equalize. On the other hand if the Greeks had scored at the start of either period of extra time, the Czechs would have had a decent opportunity to come back in the match. As well as being the only silver goal ever seen in an international match, it was also the only goal Dellas ever scored in his international career.\nAbolition.\nAlthough both the golden goal and silver goal had their fans, both were also widely perceived as failed experiments. The golden goal in particular had not brought about more active and attacking play as originally intended and instead led to more cautious play along with furious angry reactions from a lot of players on the losing side. The silver goal, while in theory giving the remainder of the first fifteen-minute period of extra time to make a comeback, nonetheless could still effectively end the game if scored near the end of that period. Furthermore, there was also confusion about when events could choose among several different extra time rules.\nIn February 2004, the IFAB announced that, after Euro 2004, both the golden goal and silver goal methods would be removed from the Laws of the Game. Since the 2006 FIFA World Cup in Germany, the golden goal has never been used in the event of a drawn match during the knockout stage, as FIFA restored the previous rules: in the event of a drawn game after the regular 90 minutes, two straight 15-minute periods of extra time are played. If scores remain level, the winner is decided by a penalty shoot-out.\nThe golden goal rule was abolished in NCAA soccer in 2022, used the FIFA overtime procedure as above, but was reinstated for post-season play in 2024. The championship games of the 1995, 1996, 2002, and 2013 women's tournaments were decided by a golden goal; this situation also happened in the men's tournament in 2017 and 2020.\nOther sports.\nAustralian rules football.\nPrior to a rule change in 2016, the Australian Football League (AFL) replayed the entire AFL Grand Final if the game was tied at the end of regular time. This was known as a grand final replay and occurred three times in the AFL (1948, 1977, 2010). Because of the inconvenience of this, from the 2016 AFL season onwards drawn grand finals were then to be resolved with two five-minute periods of extra time; if the scores are still tied at the end of the extra time period, play would continues until the next score. This was removed after the 2019 season, with level scores after an initial two three-minute extra time periods to be determined instead by further periods of extra time. Golden goal was never used in the four years it was part of the rules.\nBandy.\nAt the 2022 Women's Bandy World Championship, the final of Pool B (second division) was decided by a golden goal.\nField hockey.\nInternational field hockey tournaments such as the Hockey World Cup and Champions Trophy had used golden goals to decide the winners of elimination matches. During these matches, two extra periods of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7+1\u20442 minutes each were played, and if no golden goals were scored after both periods of extra time, a penalty stroke competition decided the game. FIH, the sport's governing body, did away with the overtime procedure in 2013, and now teams go directly to the shootout.\nIce hockey.\nThe golden goal rule comes into use at the end of regulation of every National Hockey League game where the score is tied. In the regular season, five minutes of three-on-three sudden-death overtime are played, with the first goal winning the game. If, however, neither team scores after this period, a shootout determines the winner. In playoff games, shootouts are not used; 20-minute periods of five-on-five hockey are played until a goal is scored to end the game. This has resulted in extremely long contests, such as the \"Easter Epic\", a playoff series-deciding match which ended in the midst of its fourth overtime. The term \"golden goal\" is not a commonly used term in hockey, rather the winning goal is known as an \"overtime winner\" or \"overtime goal,\" while the format is known as \"sudden death\" in the NHL and \"sudden victory\" in college.\nThe Winter Olympics ice hockey tournament used the golden goal rule only in the gold medal game, with a 20-minute period of 5-on-5. The game ended if a goal is scored; otherwise, a penalty shootout determined the winner. This method was used to determine the 2010 men's final, where Sidney Crosby scored the game-winning goal 7:40 into overtime. As that goal won Canada the Gold Medal, it has become known as \"The Golden Goal.\" Another happened at the 2014 women's final, as Marie-Philip Poulin scored at 8:10 of overtime for Canada. In both instances, the team they beat was the United States. The two teams met in the rematch four years later, and lasted the whole 20-minute overtime without a goal before the United States prevailed in a shootout for their first gold in 20 years. Jocelyne Lamoureux scored in the sixth round of the shootout while Meghan Agosta failed. Kirill Kaprizov scored at 9:40 of overtime as the Russian Olympic Committee beat Germany in the 2018 men's final. Since 2022, the overtime procedure changed to multiple 20-minute periods of 3-on-3, until one team scores, and applies to both genders.\nRugby league.\nA \"Golden point\" system, whereby a rugby league game whose 80 minutes have ended in a draw is decided by whichever team scores the first point (by whatever means) during a period of extra time is the winner. It was first used in 1997's Super League Tri-series."}
{"id": "57568", "revid": "44085581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57568", "title": "The Cure", "text": "English rock band\nThe Cure are an English rock band formed in Crawley in 1976 by Robert Smith (vocals, guitar) and Lol Tolhurst (drums). The band's current line-up comprises Smith, Simon Gallup (bass), Roger O'Donnell (keyboards), Perry Bamonte (guitar and keyboards), Jason Cooper (drums) and Reeves Gabrels (guitar). Smith has remained the only constant member throughout numerous line-up changes since the band's formation, though Gallup has been present for all but two of the band's studio albums.\nThe Cure's debut album \"Three Imaginary Boys\" (1979), along with several early singles, placed the band at the forefront of the emerging post-punk and new wave movements that were gaining prominence in the United Kingdom. The band adopted a new, increasingly dark and tormented style beginning with their second album \"Seventeen Seconds\" (1980), which had a strong influence on the emerging genre of gothic rock. After the release of their fourth album \"Pornography\" (1982), Smith started to introduce more pop into the band's music, leading them to worldwide mainstream success. The band reached their commercial peak with the albums \"Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me\" (1987), \"Disintegration\" (1989) and \"Wish\" (1992) recorded with guitarist Porl Thompson and drummer Boris Williams.\nThe Cure have released 14 studio albums, two EPs, and over 40 singles, selling more than 30 million records worldwide. They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2019. Their 14th album \"Songs of a Lost World\" (2024) was their first release of all-new material in 16 years and received widespread acclaim, topping the charts in multiple countries (including the UK, their first number one album in the country since 1992) and becoming one of the year's fastest selling albums.\nHistory.\n1973\u20131979: Formation and early years.\nThe founding members of the Cure were school friends at Notre Dame Middle School in Crawley. They first performed in public at an end-of-year show in April 1973 as members of a one-off school band called Obelisk. That band consisted of Robert Smith on piano, Michael Dempsey on guitar, Lol Tolhurst on percussion, Marc Ceccagno on lead guitar, and Alan Hill on bass. In January 1976, while at St Wilfrid's Comprehensive School, Ceccagno formed a five-piece rock band with Smith on guitar and Dempsey on bass, along with two other school friends. They called themselves Malice and rehearsed David Bowie, Jimi Hendrix and Alex Harvey songs in a local church hall. By late April 1976, Ceccagno and the other two members had left, and Tolhurst (drums), Martin Creasy (vocals), and Porl Thompson (guitar) had joined the band. This lineup played all three of Malice's only documented live shows during December 1976. In January 1977, following Creasy's departure, and increasingly influenced by the emergence of punk rock, Malice's remaining members became known as Easy Cure \u2013 after a song written by Tolhurst.\nAfter winning a talent competition, Easy Cure signed a recording contract with German record label Ariola-Hansa on 18 May 1977. In September 1977, Peter O'Toole (no relation to the actor), who had been the group's vocalist for several months, left the group to live on a kibbutz in Israel. The band auditioned several vocalists that month before Smith assumed the role. The new four-piece of Dempsey, Smith, Thompson, and Tolhurst recorded their first studio demo sessions as Easy Cure for Hansa at SAV Studios in London in October and November 1977. None were ever released.\nThe band continued to perform regularly around Crawley (including the Rocket, St Edward's, and Queen's Square in particular) throughout 1977 and 1978. On 19 February 1978 they were joined at the Rocket for the first time by a support band from Horley called Lockjaw, featuring bassist Simon Gallup. Hansa, dissatisfied with the group's demos, did not wish to release their original song \"Killing an Arab\". The label suggested that the band attempt cover versions instead. They refused, and by March 1978 Easy Cure's contract with the label had been dissolved. Smith later recalled, \"We were very young. They just thought they could turn us into a teen group. They actually wanted us to do cover versions and we always refused.\"\nOn 22 April 1978, Easy Cure played their last gig at the Montefiore Institute Hall (in the Three Bridges neighbourhood of Crawley) before guitarist Porl Thompson was dropped from the lineup because his lead-guitar style was at odds with Smith's growing preference for minimalist songwriting. Smith soon renamed the remaining trio the Cure. Later that month the band recorded their first sessions as a trio at Chestnut Studios in Sussex, producing a demo tape for distribution to a dozen major record labels. The demo found its way to Polydor Records scout Chris Parry, who signed the Cure to his newly formed Fiction label \u2013 distributed by Polydor \u2013 in September 1978. The Cure released their debut single \"Killing an Arab\" in December 1978 on the Small Wonder label as a stopgap until Fiction finalised distribution arrangements with Polydor. \"Killing an Arab\" garnered both acclaim and controversy. While the single's provocative title led to accusations of racism, the song is based on French author Albert Camus's novel \"The Stranger\". The band placed stickers that denied the racist connotations on the single's 1979 reissue on Fiction. An early \"NME\" article on the band wrote that the Cure \"are like a breath of fresh suburban air on the capital's smog-ridden pub-and-club circuit,\" and noted: \"With a John Peel session and more extensive London gigging on their immediate agenda, it remains to be seen whether the Cure can retain their refreshing joie de vivre.\"\nThe Cure released their debut album \"Three Imaginary Boys\" in May 1979. Because of the band's inexperience in the studio, Parry and engineer Mike Hedges took control of the recording. The band, particularly Smith, were unhappy with the album; in a 1987 interview, he admitted: \"a lot of it was very superficial \u2013 I didn't even like it at the time. There were criticisms made that it was very lightweight, and I thought they were justified. Even when we'd made it, I wanted to do something that I thought had more substance to it.\" The band's second single, \"Boys Don't Cry\", was released in June. The Cure then embarked as the support band for Siouxsie and the Banshees' \"Join Hands\" promotional tour of England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales between August and October. The tour saw Smith pull double-duty each night by performing with the Cure and as the guitarist with the Banshees when John McKay quit the group in Aberdeen. That musical experience had a strong impact on him: \"On stage that first night with the Banshees, I was blown away by how powerful I felt playing that kind of music. It was so different to what we were doing with the Cure. Before that, I'd wanted us to be like the Buzzcocks or Elvis Costello; the punk Beatles. Being a Banshee really changed my attitude to what I was doing.\"\nThe Cure's third single, \"Jumping Someone Else's Train\", was released in October 1979. Soon afterwards, Dempsey was dropped from the band because of his cold reception to material Smith had written for the upcoming album. Dempsey joined the Associates, while Simon Gallup (bass) and Matthieu Hartley (keyboards) from the Magspies joined the Cure. The Associates toured as support band for the Cure and the Passions on the \"Future Pastimes Tour\" of England between November and December \u2013 all three bands were on the Fiction Records roster \u2013 with the new Cure line-up already performing a number of new songs for the projected second album. Meanwhile, a spin-off band comprising Smith, Tolhurst, Dempsey, Gallup, Hartley, and Thompson, with backing vocals from assorted family and friends and lead vocals provided by their local postman Frankie Bell, released a 7-inch single in December under the name Cult Hero.\n1980\u20131982: Early gothic phase.\nDue to the band's lack of creative control on their first album, Smith exerted a greater influence on the recording of their second album \"Seventeen Seconds\", which he co-produced with Mike Hedges. The album was released in 1980 and reached number 20 on the UK charts. A single from the album, \"A Forest\", became the band's first UK hit single, reaching number 31 on the singles chart. The album was a departure from the Cure's sound up to that point, with Hedges describing it as \"morose, atmospheric, very different to \"Three Imaginary Boys\".\" In its review of \"Seventeen Seconds\" the \"NME\" said, \"For a group as young as the Cure, it seems amazing that they have covered so much territory in such a brief time.\" At the same time, Smith became concerned about the concept of an alleged \"anti-image\". Smith told the press he was fed up with the anti-image association that some considered to be \"elaborately disguising their plainness\", stating, \"We had to get away from that anti-image thing, which we didn't even create in the first place. And it seemed like we were trying to be more obscure. We just didn't like the standard rock thing. The whole thing really got out of hand.\" That same year \"Three Imaginary Boys\" was repackaged for the American market as \"Boys Don't Cry\", with new artwork and a modified track list. The Cure set out on their first world tour to promote both releases. At the end of the tour, Matthieu Hartley left the band. Hartley said, \"I realised that the group was heading towards suicidal, sombre music \u2013 the sort of thing that didn't interest me at all.\"\nThe band reconvened with Hedges to produce their third album, \"Faith\" (1981), which furthered the dour mood present on \"Seventeen Seconds\". The album peaked at number 14 on the UK charts. Included with cassette copies of \"Faith\" was an instrumental soundtrack for \"Carnage Visors\", an animated film shown in place of an opening act for the band's 1981 Picture Tour. In late 1981 the Cure released the non-album single \"Charlotte Sometimes\". By this point, the sombre mood of the music had a profound effect on the attitude of the band and they were \"stuck in a ghoulish rut\". Sometimes Smith would be so absorbed by the persona he projected onstage that he would leave at the end in tears.\nIn 1982 the Cure recorded and released \"Pornography\", the third and final album of an \"oppressively dispirited\" trio that cemented the Cure's stature as one of the purveyors of the emerging gothic rock genre. Smith has said that during the recording of \"Pornography\" he was \"undergoing a lot of mental stress. But it had nothing to do with the group, it just had to do with what I was like, my age and things. I think I got to my worst round about \"Pornography\". Looking back and getting other people's opinions of what went on, I was a pretty monstrous sort of person at that time\". Gallup described the album by saying, \"Nihilism took over ... We sang 'It doesn't matter if we all die' and that is exactly what we thought at the time.\" Parry was concerned that the album did not have a hit song for radio play and instructed Smith and producer Phil Thornalley to polish the track \"The Hanging Garden\" for release as a single. Despite the concerns about the album's uncommercial sound, \"Pornography\" became the band's first UK Top 10 album, charting at number eight.\nThe release of \"Pornography\" was followed by the Fourteen Explicit Moments tour, in which the band finally dropped the anti-image angle and first adopted their signature look of big, towering hair, and smeared lipstick on their faces. Simon Gallup left the Cure at the tour's conclusion after a bar fight with Smith; the two did not talk to each other for the following eighteen months. Smith then placed the Cure on hold and rejoined Siouxsie and the Banshees as their lead guitarist in November 1982. He subsequently became a full-time member of that band, and was featured on the live video and album \"Nocturne\". He then recorded the album \"Hy\u00e6na\" with them, but left the group two weeks before its June 1984 release to concentrate on the Cure.\n1983\u20131988: Commercial success.\nWith Gallup's departure from the Cure and Smith's work with Siouxsie and the Banshees, rumours spread that the Cure had broken up. In December 1982, Smith remarked to \"Melody Maker\", \"Do the Cure really exist any more? I've been pondering that question myself ... it has got to a point where I don't fancy working in that format again.\" He added, \"Whatever happens, it won't be me, Laurence and Simon together any more. I know that.\"\nParry was concerned about the state of his label's top band, and became convinced that the solution was for the Cure to reinvent its musical style. Parry managed to convince Smith and Tolhurst of the idea; Parry said, \"It appealed to Robert because he wanted to destroy the Cure anyway.\" With Tolhurst now playing keyboards instead of drums, the duo released the single \"Let's Go to Bed\" in late 1982. While Smith wrote the single as a throwaway, \"stupid\" pop song to the press, it became a minor hit in the UK, reaching number 44 on the singles chart, and entered the Top 20 in Australia and New Zealand. It was followed in 1983 by two more successful songs: the synthesiser-based \"The Walk\" which reached number 12, and \"The Love Cats\", which became the band's first British Top 10 hit, reaching number seven. These singles and their B-sides were compiled on the \"Japanese Whispers\" compilation, which was released in December 1983.\nIn 1984, the Cure released \"The Top\", a generally psychedelic album on which Smith played most of the instruments except drums (played by Andy Anderson) and saxophone (played by early Malice member Porl Thompson, who then officially joined the Cure). The album was a Top 10 hit in the UK, and was their first studio album to crack the \"Billboard\" 200 in the US, reaching number 180. \"Melody Maker\" praised the album as \"psychedelia that can't be dated\", while pondering, \"I've yet to meet anyone who can tell me why the Cure are having hits now of all times.\" The Cure then embarked on their worldwide Top Tour with Thompson and Anderson, along with Phil Thornalley who had produced \"The Top\" and assumed bass duties for live performances. Released in late 1984, the Cure's first live album, \"Concert\", consisted of performances from this tour. Near the tour's end, Anderson was fired for destructive behaviour, and was temporarily replaced for a few shows by Vince Ely of the Psychedelic Furs. The drummer position was then officially filled by Boris Williams, who had previously been the touring drummer for Thompson Twins. Ely and Williams had both been recommended by Phil Thornalley, from his previous experiences as a producer and engineer. Soon thereafter, Thornalley also left because of the stress of touring. Former Cure bassist Simon Gallup, who had formed the band Fools Dance in the interim, rejoined the Cure after roadie Gary Biddles brokered a reconciliation between Gallup and Smith. Smith was ecstatic about Gallup's return and declared to \"Melody Maker\", \"It's a group again.\"\nIn 1985, the new line-up of Smith, Tolhurst, Gallup, Williams, and Thompson (now on guitar and keyboards) released \"The Head on the Door\", an album that managed to bind together the optimistic and pessimistic aspects of the band's music between which they had previously shifted. \"The Head on the Door\" reached number seven in the UK and number 59 in the US, a success partly due to the international impact of the album's two singles, \"In Between Days\" and \"Close to Me\". Following the album and world tour, the band released the singles compilation \"Standing on a Beach\" in three formats (each with a different track listing and a specific title) in 1986, accompanied by a VHS and LaserDisc \"Staring at the Sea\", which featured videos for each track on the compilation. This compilation made the US top 50, and saw the re-issue of three previous singles: \"Boys Don't Cry\" (in a new form), \"Let's Go to Bed\" and, later, \"Charlotte Sometimes\". The Cure toured to support the compilation and released a live concert VHS and LaserDisc of the show, filmed in the south of France and called \"The Cure in Orange\". During this time, the band became very popular in Europe (particularly in France, Germany, and the Benelux countries) and increasingly popular in both the US and Canada.\nThe band kicked off 1987 by performing in Buenos Aires, Argentina, becoming one of the first British alternative rock bands to perform a large-scale concert there. The concert ended in a riot after fans who had purchased counterfeit tickets were denied entry to the venue. The Cure did not play in Argentina again until 2013.\nIn May, the Cure released the eclectic double album \"Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me\", which reached number six in the UK, the top 10 in several countries, and was the band's first entry into the US top 40 at number 35; the album was also certified platinum in the US. The album's third single, \"Just Like Heaven\", was the band's most successful single to date in the US, being their first to enter the \"Billboard\" Top 40. The album produced three other hit singles. After the album's release, the band recruited Roger O'Donnell, previously the touring keyboardist for the Psychedelic Furs and a longtime friend of Williams, to supplement the work of Tolhurst while allowing Thompson to focus on guitar. During the subsequent tour, Tolhurst's alcohol consumption began to interfere with his ability to perform.\n1989\u20131993: \"Disintegration\" and worldwide stardom.\nIn 1989, the Cure returned to a darker form of music with the album \"Disintegration\", which was critically praised and became their highest-charting album to date, entering at number three in the UK and featuring three Top 30 singles in the UK and Germany: \"Lullaby\", \"Lovesong\" and \"Pictures of You\". \"Disintegration\" also reached number 12 on the US charts. The first single in the US, \"Fascination Street\", was heavily played on American radio stations and reached number one on the Modern Rock chart, but was quickly overshadowed by its third US single, \"Lovesong\", which reached number two on the American \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart (the only Cure single to reach the US Top 10). By 1992, \"Disintegration\" had sold over three million copies worldwide.\nDuring the \"Disintegration\" sessions, the band gave Smith an ultimatum that either Tolhurst would have to leave the band or they would. In February 1989, Tolhurst's exit was made official and announced to the press; this resulted in O'Donnell becoming a full-fledged member of the band and left Smith as the Cure's only remaining founding member. Smith attributed Tolhurst's dismissal to an inability to exert himself and issues with alcohol, concluding, \"He was out of step with everything. It had just become detrimental to everything we'd do.\" Because Tolhurst was still on the payroll during the recording of \"Disintegration\", he is credited in the album's liner notes as playing \"other instruments\" and is listed as a co-writer of every song; however, it has since been revealed that while Tolhurst had contributed to the song \"Homesick\", his contributions to the rest of the album were minimal due to his alcoholism.\nThe Cure then embarked on a successful tour which saw the band playing stadiums in the US. On 6 September 1989, the Cure performed \"Just Like Heaven\" at the 1989 MTV Video Music Awards at the Universal Amphitheatre in Los Angeles. In May 1990, O'Donnell quit and was replaced by Perry Bamonte, who played both keyboards and guitar and had been a member of the band's road crew since 1984. That November, the Cure released a collection of remixes called \"Mixed Up\". The one new song on the collection, \"Never Enough\", was released as a single. In 1991, the Cure were awarded the Brit Award for Best British Group. That same year, Tolhurst filed a lawsuit against Smith and Fiction Records over royalties payments and claimed that he and Smith jointly owned the name \"The Cure\"; the lawsuit finally ended in 1994 in favour of Smith. In the meantime, the band returned to the studio to record their next album. \"Wish\" (1992) reached number one in the UK and number two in the US and yielded the international hits \"High\" and \"Friday I'm in Love\". The album was also nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album in 1993. In the autumn of 1993, the band released two live albums, \"Show\" and \"Paris\", featuring recordings from concerts on their \"Wish\" world tour.\n1994\u20131998: Transition.\nIn 1994, the band composed the original song \"Burn\" for the to the movie \"The Crow\", which went to number one on the \"Billboard\" 200 albums chart. Between the release of \"Wish\" and the start of sessions for the Cure's next studio album, the band's line-up shifted again. Porl Thompson left the band to tour with Page and Plant and was not replaced, while Boris Williams quit and was replaced by new drummer Jason Cooper (formerly of My Life Story). After a four-year absence, Roger O'Donnell returned to play keyboards. The sessions for their next album began in 1994 with only Robert Smith and Perry Bamonte present; Simon Gallup then returned from a health-related leave of absence, after which Cooper and O'Donnell joined the sessions.\n\"Wild Mood Swings\", finally released in 1996, was poorly received compared with previous albums and marked the end of the band's commercial peak. Early in 1996, the Cure played festivals in South America, followed by a world tour in support of the album. In 1997 the band released \"Galore\", a compilation album containing all of their singles released between 1987 and 1997, as well as the new single \"Wrong Number\", which featured longtime David Bowie guitarist Reeves Gabrels. In 1998 the Cure contributed the song \"More Than This\" to the for \"The X-Files\" film, as well as a cover of \"World in My Eyes\" for the Depeche Mode tribute album \"For the Masses\".\n1999\u20132005: The Trilogy and more personnel changes.\nWith only one album left in their record contract and with commercial response to \"Wild Mood Swings\" and the \"Galore\" compilation lacklustre, Smith once again considered that the end of the Cure might be near and thus wanted to make an album that reflected the more serious side of the band. The Grammy-nominated album \"Bloodflowers\" was released in 2000 after being delayed since 1998. According to Smith, the album was the third of a trilogy along with \"Pornography\" and \"Disintegration\". The band embarked on the nine-month Dream Tour, which included 20 dates in the United States. In 2001, the Cure left Fiction and released their \"Greatest Hits\" album and DVD, which featured the music videos for a number of their songs. The band released \"\" as a double live album video, on two double layer DVD-9 discs, and later on a single Blu-ray disc. It documents the Trilogy Concerts, in which the three albums \"\u2013 Pornography\", \"Disintegration,\" and \"Bloodflowers\" \"\u2013\" were played live in their entirety one after the other each night, the songs being played in the order in which they appeared on the albums. \"Trilogy\" was recorded on two consecutive nights, 11\u201312 November 2002, at the Tempodrom Arena in Berlin.\nIn 2003, the Cure signed with Geffen Records. In 2004, they released a new four-disc boxed set on Fiction Records titled \", 1978\u20132001 (The Fiction Years)\". The album peaked at number 106 on the \"Billboard\" 200 albums chart. The band released their twelfth album, \"The Cure\", on Geffen in 2004. It made a top ten debut on both sides of the Atlantic in July 2004. To promote the album, the band headlined the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival that May. From 24 July to 29 August, the Cure headlined the \"Curiosa\" concert tour of North America, which was formatted as a traveling festival and also featured Interpol, the Rapture, Mogwai, Muse, and Thursday, among other groups. While attendances were lower than expected, \"Curiosa\" was still one of the more successful American summer festivals of 2004. The same year the band was honoured with an MTV Icon award in a television special presented by Marilyn Manson.\nIn May 2005, O'Donnell and Bamonte were fired from the band. O'Donnell claims Smith informed him he was reducing the band to a three-piece. Previously O'Donnell said he had only found out about the band's upcoming tour dates via a fan site and added, \"It was sad to find out after nearly twenty years the way I did, but then I should have expected no less or more.\" The remaining members of the band \"\u2013\" Smith, Gallup and Cooper \"\u2013\" made several appearances as a trio before Porl Thompson returned to the Cure's lineup for their summer 2005 tour. In July 2005, the band performed a set at the Paris concert of the Live 8 series of benefit concerts.\n2006\u20132015: \"4:13 Dream\" and Reflections.\nThe Cure began writing and recording material for their thirteenth album in 2006. The Cure postponed their autumn 2007 North American 4Tour in August to continue working on the album, rescheduling the dates for spring 2008. The group released four singles and an EP \"\u2013\" \"The Only One\", \"Freakshow\", \"Sleep When I'm Dead\", \"The Perfect Boy\" and \"Hypnagogic States\" respectively \"\u2013\" on or near to the 13th of each month, in the months leading up to the album's release. Released in October 2008, \"\" was a commercial failure in the UK compared to their previous album releases, only staying in the charts two weeks and not peaking higher than number 33. In February 2009, the Cure received the 2009 Shockwaves NME Award for Godlike Genius.\nO'Donnell officially rejoined the Cure in 2011 before the band performed at the Vivid Sydney festival in Australia. This concert was the first in their concert series, in which they performed their first three albums in their entireties. The band performed seven additional Reflections concerts in 2011, one in London, three in New York City and three in Los Angeles. On 27 September, the Cure was announced as a nominee for 2012 induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.\nIn \"NME\"'s cover article for March 2012, the Cure announced that they would be headlining a series of summer music festivals across Europe, including the Leeds/Reading Festival. On 1 May, Porl Thompson announced that he had left the Cure for the second time. On 26 May, the Cure embarked on a 19-date summer festival tour of Europe, commencing at the Pinkpop Festival, joined by Reeves Gabrels on guitar. On the same day, it was announced that Gabrels would be standing in for the tour, but at that point was not a full-fledged member of the band. Several weeks into the tour, the band invited Gabrels to become a member and he accepted. In 2013, the Cure toured South America, where they had not performed since 1987 apart from two 1996 concerts in Brazil.\nIn early 2014, Smith announced that the band would release a follow-up to \"4:13 Dream\" later that year titled \"4:14 Scream\". The releases would be compiled together as a double album named \"4:26 Dream.\" However, this project was eventually abandoned. The Cure paid tribute to Paul McCartney on the album titled \"The Art of McCartney\", which was released on 18 November 2014. The Cure covered the Beatles' song \"Hello, Goodbye\" which featured guest vocals and keyboards from Paul's son James McCartney. A video of the band and James performing the song was released on 9 September 2014; it was filmed at Brighton Electric Studio in Brighton. Robert Smith also covered McCartney's \"C Moon\" on the album's bonus disc. In the summer of 2015, the \"Disintegration\" track \"Plainsong\" was featured in a humorous moment in the movie \"Ant-Man\", but did not appear on the movie's soundtrack.\n2017\u2013present: \"Songs of a Lost World\".\nIn June 2018, the Cure headlined the 25th annual Meltdown Festival in London. Smith also selected the festival's lineup, which included several of his personal favourite artists, including Nine Inch Nails, My Bloody Valentine, Deftones, Placebo, Manic Street Preachers, and Kristin Hersh, among others. On 7 July 2018, Cure performed a 40th anniversary concert at Hyde Park as part of the British Summer Time concert series. For Record Store Day 2018, the Cure released a remastered, deluxe edition of \"Mixed Up\", along with a sequel titled \"Torn Down\" featuring 16 new remixes all created by Robert Smith.\nIn a 30 March 2019 interview with \"Rolling Stone\", Smith commented on the band's next album, saying, \"For the first time in 20 years, we went into a studio \u2013 we actually went into the studio where they [Queen] did 'Bohemian Rhapsody'. The songs are like 10 minutes, 12 minutes long. We recorded 19 songs. So I have no idea what to do now... We'll finish it before we start in the summer, and it'll be mixed through the summer. And then so release date, I don't know, October? Halloween! Come on!\" In an interview published on 5 July in \"NME\", he noted that the band would be re-recording three or four songs in August 2019 but that, \"I feel intent on it being a 2019 release and would be extremely bitter if it isn't.\" The year passed with no new studio release, as did the following four years.\nIn 2019, the Cure embarked on a 23-date summer tour, consisting mostly of festival performances along with four dates in Sydney, Australia. The final Sydney show on 30 May was live-streamed. The band performed at the Austin City Limits Music Festival in October 2019. Later that same month, the band issued \"40 Live: CUR\u00c6TION-25 + Anniversary\", a Blu-ray, DVD and CD box set featuring their Meltdown and Hyde Park performances from 2018 in their entireties.\nIn interviews in June 2021, Smith referenced the recording of two new Cure albums, saying \"One of them's very, very doom and gloom and the other one isn't,\" and that the recordings have been completed, \"I just have to decide who's going to mix them.\" On 15 August 2021, bassist Simon Gallup posted on his social media that he had left the Cure. No official statement concerning his departure was made by Smith or the band and Gallup subsequently deleted the post. On 14 October 2021, Gallup confirmed that he was still in the band.\nIn March 2022, Smith confirmed that the first of the band's two projected new albums would be titled \"Songs of a Lost World\". An update was provided in May 2022, when Smith claimed that the album would be released prior to the band's European tour in October 2022. This, however, did not happen, as the tour got underway with no new album being released, although new material was performed. Perry Bamonte returned to the band for their Lost World tour beginning with their 6 October 2022 concert in Riga, Latvia. In March 2023, the Cure announced a 30-date North American tour called Shows of a Lost World, set to take place in May through July, the band's first full United States tour since 2016. Smith was outspoken against Ticketmaster's dynamic pricing model and ticket scalpers, setting base prices as low as $20 before fees; he also negotiated with the company to issue partial refunds to fans who were subjected to excessive fees above the list price.\nThe Cure released a 12-inch single on 1 October 2024 featuring live recordings of two new songs, \"And Nothing Is Forever\" and \"I Can Never Say Goodbye\", that were recorded at a concert in France in 2022.\nIn September 2024, the band began sending out cryptic postcard messages to fans who signed up for their mailing list along with a poster unveiled in a pub in Robert Smith's hometown where the band played some of their earliest shows. On 26 September, the first single from the album, \"Alone\", was released. The album was produced by Smith and Paul Corkett, who Smith previously worked with to produce \"Bloodflowers\". \"Songs of a Lost World\", their first studio album in sixteen years, was released on 1 November 2024. \"Songs of a Lost World\" reached number one on the UK Albums Chart, and was the Cure's first chart-topping album since \"Wish\" in 1992. In the United States, \"Songs of a Lost World\" debuted at number four on the \"Billboard\" 200, and was the band's first top ten album there since \"The Cure\" in 2004. \nIn October 2024, Smith said the Cure would release a follow-up album to \"Songs of a Lost World\" and tour in 2025, and would release a documentary in 2028. He also suggested that the Cure would retire in 2029, which would be the year he turns 70 and the 50th anniversary of their debut album \"Three Imaginary Boys\". A 24-track album \"Mixes of a Lost World\" was released in June 2025, featuring remixes of songs from \"Songs of a Lost World\" by artists including Chino Moreno, Trentem\u00f8ller, and Paul Oakenfold.\nMusical style.\nThe Cure are often identified with the gothic rock genre, and are viewed as one of the form's definitive bands. However, the band has routinely rejected classification, particularly as a gothic rock band. Robert Smith said in 2006, \"It's so pitiful when 'goth' is still tagged onto the name The Cure\", and added, \"We're not categorisable. I suppose we were post-punk when we came out, but in total it's impossible ... I just play Cure music, whatever that is.\" While typically viewed as producers of dark and gloomy music, the Cure have also yielded a number of upbeat songs and been part of the new wave movement. \"Spin\" has said \"the Cure have always been an either/or sort of band: either ... Robert Smith is wallowing in gothic sadness or he's licking sticky-sweet cotton-candy pop off his lipstick-stained fingers.\" In 2004, Smith observed, \"It's always been paradoxical that it's pushed down people's throats that we're a goth band. Because, to the general public, we're not. To taxi drivers, I'm the bloke that sings 'Friday I'm in Love'. I'm not the bloke who sings 'Shake Dog Shake' or 'One Hundred Years'.\"\nThe Cure's primary musical traits have been listed as \"dominant, melodic bass lines; whiny, strangulated vocals; and a lyric obsession with existential, almost literary despair.\" Most Cure songs start with Smith and Gallup writing the drum patterns and bass lines. Both record demos at home and then bring them into the studio for fine-tuning. Smith said in 1992, \"I think when people talk about the 'Cure sound', they mean songs based on six-string bass, acoustic guitar and my voice, plus the string sound from the Solina.\" On top of this foundation is laid \"towering layers of guitars and synthesisers\". Keyboards have been a component of the band's sound since \"Seventeen Seconds\", and their importance increased with their extensive use on \"Disintegration\".\nMusic videos.\nThe band's early music videos have been described as \"dreadful affairs\" and have been maligned for their poor quality, particularly by the band itself. Tolhurst said, \"Those videos were unmitigated disasters; we weren't actors and our personalities weren't coming across.\" The video for \"Let's Go to Bed\" was their first collaboration with Tim Pope. The director added a playful element to the band's videos; the director insisted in a 1987 \"Spin\" interview, \"I think that side of them was always there, but was never brought out.\"\nPope would go on to direct the majority of the Cure's videos, which became synonymous with the band, and expanded their audience during the 1980s. Pope explained the appeal of working with the Cure by saying, \"the Cure is the ultimate band for a filmmaker to work with because Robert Smith really understands the camera. His songs are so cinematic. I mean on one level there's this stupidity and humour, right, but beneath that there are all [Smith's] psychological obsessions and claustrophobia.\"\nLegacy.\nThe Cure are often regarded as one of the most significant alternative artists of the 1980s. They were one of the first alternative bands to have chart and commercial success in an era before alternative rock had broken into the mainstream; in 1992, \"NME\" declared that the Cure had during the 1980s become \"a goth hit machine (19 to date), an international phenomenon and, yet, the most successful alternative band that ever shuffled disconsolately about the earth\". \"Pitchfork\" dubbed the Cure the \"unlikeliest alt-rock heroes\" of the 1980s.\nThe Cure have influenced a number of musical artists spanning multiple genres. Artists who have cited their influence by or appreciation for the Cure include Billy Corgan of the Smashing Pumpkins, Slowdive, Ride, My Bloody Valentine, Miki Berenyi of Lush, Britt Daniel of Spoon, Beach House, Chvrches, Blink-182, Interpol, Manic Street Preachers, AFI, Deftones, Placebo, Mogwai, Korn, Foals, Failure, Drab Majesty, Converge, Tim Kasher of Cursive, Geoff Rickly of Thursday, Olivia Rodrigo, Alvvays, and Brandon Flowers of the Killers.\nThe Rock and Roll Hall of Fame chose the Cure for induction in its Class of 2019. Although the Cure had been eligible for the Hall of Fame since 2004, they were only nominated once previously, in 2012. The formal induction ceremony was held 29 March 2019 at the Barclays Centre in Brooklyn, New York. The members named by the Rock Hall for induction as part of the band were Perry Bamonte, Jason Cooper, Michael Dempsey, Reeves Gabrels, Simon Gallup, Roger O'Donnell, Robert Smith, Porl Thompson, Lol Tolhurst, and Boris Williams. Gabrels was initially not included in the induction, but was added in February 2019. At the ceremony, the Cure were inducted by Trent Reznor before performing five songs.\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAwards and nominations.\nAt the Brit Awards, the British Phonographic Industry's (BPI) annual pop music awards, the Cure have won two awards from eight nominations (Best British Video for \"Lullaby\" in 1990, and Best British Group in 1991). They were nominated for three awards in 2025.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nThe European Festivals Awards were established in 2009. They are voted for by the public via the European Festival Awards website and receive hundreds of thousands of votes annually.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nThe Grammy Awards are awarded annually by the Recording Academy of the United States for outstanding achievements in the music industry. Often considered the highest music honour, the awards were established in 1958.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nThe Ivor Novello Awards are awarded for songwriting and composing. The awards, named after the Cardiff born entertainer Ivor Novello, are presented annually in London by the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors (BASCA).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nThe Juno Awards are presented annually to Canadian musical artists and bands to acknowledge their artistic and technical achievements in all aspects of music. New members of the Canadian Music Hall of Fame are also inducted as part of the awards ceremonies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nThe Los Premios MTV Latinoam\u00e9rica is the Latin American version of the MTV Video Music Awards. It was established in 2002 to celebrate the top music videos of the year in Latin America and the world.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nLunas del Auditorio are sponsored by the National Auditorium in Mexico to honour the best live shows in the country.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nThe MTV Europe Music Awards were established in 1994 by MTV Networks Europe to celebrate the most popular music videos in Europe.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nThe MTV Video Music Awards were established in the end of the summer of 1984 by MTV to celebrate the top music videos of the year.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nThe MVPA Awards are annually presented by a Los Angeles-based music trade organization to honour the year's best music videos.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nMusic Television Awards\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nThe NME Awards were created by the magazine \"NME\" and first held in 1953.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nThe Pollstar Concert Industry Awards is an annual award ceremony to honour artists and professionals in the concert industry. The Cure has been nominated seven times.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nThe Q Awards are the United Kingdom's annual music awards run by the music magazine \"Q\" to honour musical excellence. Winners are voted by readers of \"Q\" online, with others decided by a judging panel.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\n\u017deb\u0159\u00edk Music Awards\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\n!Ref.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57569", "revid": "30", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57569", "title": "Admiral Canaris", "text": ""}
{"id": "57570", "revid": "9023670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57570", "title": "Sachin Tendulkar", "text": "Indian cricketer (born 1973)\n |{{br separated entries\n |2={{#switch:Sachin Tendulkar\n | #default = Sachin Tendulkar\n |2={{#if: Bombay, India\n |{{#if:\n |{{#if:\n |{{#if:\n | International information\n |{{unbulleted list\n |Only Test\n |Test debut\n }}{{#if:187\n |{{sp}}(cap\u00a0{{#if:187|}}{{#if:|{{#if:187 |/}}}})\n |{{#if:West Indies\n |Only ODI\n |ODI debut\n }}{{#if:74\n |{{sp}}(cap\u00a0{{#if:74|}}{{#if:|{{#if:74 |/}}}})\n |{{#if:Pakistan\n |Only T20I\n |T20I debut\n }}{{#if:11\n |{{sp}}(cap\u00a0{{#if:11|}}{{#if:|{{#if:11 |/}}}})\n | Domestic team information\n {{infobox|child=yes\n | labelstyle = font-weight:normal; padding-right:3em\n | data1 = {{#if: Mumbai\n | data2 = {{#if: Yorkshire\n | data3 = {{#if: East Bengal\n | data4 = {{#if: Mumbai Indians\n |Only \n | debut\n |{{#if:true\n |{{#if:true\n |{{#if:\n |Only \n | debut\n |{{#if:true\n |{{#if:true\n |{{#if:\n | Umpiring information {{infobox|child=yes\n | label1 = Tests\u00a0umpired\n | label2 = ODIs\u00a0umpired\n | label3 = T20Is\u00a0umpired\n | label4 = WTests\u00a0umpired\n | label5 = WODIs\u00a0umpired\n | label6 = WT20Is\u00a0umpired\n | label7 = FC\u00a0umpired\n | label8 = LA\u00a0umpired\n | label9 = T20\u00a0umpired\n | Head coaching information\n {{infobox|child=yes\n | labelstyle = font-weight:normal; padding-right:3em\n | columns = 4\n | column1 = Test\n | column2 = ODI\n | column3 = FC\n | column4 = LA\n | matches1 = 200\n | matches2 = 463\n | matches3 = 310\n | matches4 = 551\n | runs1 = 15,921\n | runs2 = 18,426\n | runs3 = 25,396\n | runs4 = 21,999\n | bat avg1 = 53.78\n | bat avg2 = 44.83\n | bat avg3 = 57.84\n | bat avg4 = 45.54\n | 100s/50s1 = 51/68\n | 100s/50s2 = 49/96\n | 100s/50s3 = 81/116\n | 100s/50s4 = 60/114\n | top score1 = 248*\n | top score2 = 200*\n | top score3 = 248*\n | top score4 = 200*\n | hidedeliveries = \n | deliveries1 = 4,240\n | deliveries2 = 8,054\n | deliveries3 = 7,605\n | deliveries4 = 10,230\n | wickets1 = 46\n | wickets2 = 154\n | wickets3 = 71\n | wickets4 = 201\n | bowl avg1 = 54.17\n | bowl avg2 = 44.48\n | bowl avg3 = 61.74\n | bowl avg4 = 42.17\n | fivefor1 = 0\n | fivefor2 = 2\n | fivefor3 = 0\n | fivefor4 = 2\n | tenfor1 = 0\n | tenfor2 = 0\n | tenfor3 = 0\n | tenfor4 = 0\n | best bowling1 = 3/10\n | best bowling2 = 5/32\n | best bowling3 = 3/10\n | best bowling4 = 5/32\n | catches/stumpings1 = 115/\u2013\n | catches/stumpings2 = 140/\u2013\n | catches/stumpings3 = 186/\u2013\n | catches/stumpings4 = 175/\u2013\n! colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;vertical-align:middle;background-color:#eeeeee;color:inherit;\" | Men's cricket\n! colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;vertical-align:middle;background-color:#eeeeee;color:inherit;\" class=\"adr\" | Representing \n! colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;vertical-align:middle;background-color:#cccccc;color:inherit;\" | ODI World Cup\n! colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;vertical-align:middle;background-color:#cccccc;color:inherit;\" | Champions Trophy\n! colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;vertical-align:middle;background-color:#cccccc;color:inherit;\" | Asia Cup\n |medals = \n! colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;vertical-align:middle;background-color:#eeeeee;color:inherit;\" | Men's cricket\n! colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;vertical-align:middle;background-color:#eeeeee;color:inherit;\" class=\"adr\" | Representing \n! colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;vertical-align:middle;background-color:#cccccc;color:inherit;\" | ODI World Cup\n! colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;vertical-align:middle;background-color:#cccccc;color:inherit;\" | Champions Trophy\n! colspan=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;vertical-align:middle;background-color:#cccccc;color:inherit;\" | Asia Cup\n}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n}}}}{{#if:||\n | Manner |{{#if:|Manner|Cause}} }}\u00a0of\u00a0death\n \u00a0Indian Air Force\nIn 2001, Tendulkar appeared on \"[[Kaun Banega Crorepati]]\" on [[Star Plus]] with [[Vinod Kambli]].\nIn 2011, \"Tendulkar Opus\" was released by [[Kraken Opus]], a speciality book publisher. Ten copies were part of the \"Blood Edition\", in which Tendulkar's blood was \"mixed into the paper pulp\" of the signature page. The proceeds from the \"Blood Editions\", which cost US$75,000 each, went to Tendulkar's charitable organisation. Other editions were offered: about a thousand hardback copies at US$2,000\u2013$3,000, a smaller edition at US$200\u2013$300, and a digital edition.\nTendulkar's autobiography, \"[[Playing It My Way]]\", was released on 6 November 2014. It was listed in the 2016 \"[[Limca Book of Records]]\" for breaking the record for adult hardback pre-publication orders, with 150,289. It was written by a [[ghostwriter]], [[Boria Majumdar]].\nIn 2017, \"[[Sachin: A Billion Dreams]]\", directed by [[James Erskine (filmmaker)|James Erskine]], was released. It is a [[docudrama]] film about Tendulkar, featuring interviews with cricket players and sports commentators. The film received mixed reviews.\nThe 2023, the film \"[[Sachin: The Ultimate Winner]]\" was released. It depicts a child called Sachin who is inspired by Tendulkar, his hero and namesake, to return to cricket after becoming severely injured.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nThe following is a list of books focused on Tendulkar's career:\nExternal links.\n[[Category:Sachin Tendulkar| ]]\n[[Category:1973 births]]\n[[Category:Living people]]\n[[Category:Indian Hindus]]\n[[Category:Marathi sportspeople]]\n[[Category:Followers of Sathya Sai Baba]]\n[[Category:Indian cricketers]]\n[[Category:Indian autobiographers]]\n[[Category:Cricketers from Mumbai]]\n[[Category:India Test cricket captains]]\n[[Category:India Test cricketers]]\n[[Category:India One Day International cricketers]]\n[[Category:India Twenty20 International cricketers]]\n[[Category:21st-century Indian sportsmen]]\n[[Category:Cricketers at the 1992 Cricket World Cup]]\n[[Category:Cricketers at the 1996 Cricket World Cup]]\n[[Category:Cricketers at the 1998 Commonwealth Games]]\n[[Category:Cricketers at the 1999 Cricket World Cup]]\n[[Category:Cricketers at the 2003 Cricket World Cup]]\n[[Category:Cricketers at the 2007 Cricket World Cup]]\n[[Category:Cricketers at the 2011 Cricket World Cup]]\n[[Category:Mumbai cricketers]]\n[[Category:Yorkshire cricketers]]\n[[Category:West Zone cricketers]]\n[[Category:India Blue cricketers]]\n[[Category:Mumbai Indians cricketers]]\n[[Category:Kerala Blasters FC owners]]\n[[Category:Recipients of the Bharat Ratna]]\n[[Category:Honorary members of the Order of Australia]]\n[[Category:Recipients of the Padma Vibhushan in sports]]\n[[Category:Recipients of the Padma Shri in sports]]\n[[Category:Recipients of the Khel Ratna Award]]\n[[Category:Recipients of the Arjuna Award]]\n[[Category:Recipients of the Maharashtra Bhushan Award]]\n[[Category:Wisden Cricketers of the Year]]\n[[Category:Wisden Leading Cricketers in the World]]\n[[Category:ICC Cricketer of the Year]]\n[[Category:Man of the Tournament in ODI Worldcup]]\n[[Category:Indian Air Force officers]]\n[[Category:Commonwealth Games competitors for India]]\n[[Category:Nominated members of the Rajya Sabha]]\n[[Category:People named in the Pandora Papers]]\n[[Category:20th-century Indian people]]\n[[Category:UNICEF goodwill ambassadors]]\n[[Category:Indian expatriate cricketers in England]]\n[[Category:Child sportspeople]]"}
{"id": "57572", "revid": "48944631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57572", "title": "Cake", "text": "Flour-based baked sweet\n \nCake is a baker's confectionery usually made from flour, sugar, and other ingredients and is usually baked. In their oldest forms, cakes were modifications of bread, but cakes now cover a wide range of preparations that can be simple or elaborate and which share features with desserts such as pastries, meringues, custards, and pies.\nThe most common ingredients include flour, sugar, eggs, fat (such as butter, oil, or margarine), a liquid, and a leavening agent, such as baking soda or baking powder. Common additional ingredients include dried, candied, or fresh fruit, nuts, cocoa, and extracts such as vanilla, with numerous substitutions for the primary ingredients. Cakes can also be filled with fruit preserves, nuts, or dessert sauces (like custard, jelly, cooked fruit, whipped cream, or syrups), iced with buttercream or other icings, and decorated with marzipan, piped borders, or candied fruit.\nCake is often served as a celebratory dish on ceremonial occasions, such as weddings, anniversaries, and birthdays. There are countless cake recipes; some are bread-like, some are rich and elaborate, and many are centuries old. Cake making is no longer a complicated procedure; while at one time considerable labor went into cake making (particularly the whisking of egg foams), baking equipment and directions have been simplified so that even the most amateur of cooks may bake a cake.\nHistory.\nThe term \"cake\" has a long history. The word itself is of Viking origin, from the Old Norse word \"kaka\".\nThe ancient Greeks called cake \u03c0\u03bb\u03b1\u03ba\u03bf\u1fe6\u03c2 (\"plakous\"), which was derived from the word for \"flat\", \u03c0\u03bb\u03b1\u03ba\u03cc\u03b5\u03b9\u03c2 (\"plakoeis\"). It was baked using flour mixed with eggs, milk, nuts, and honey. They also had a cake called \"satura\", which was a flat, heavy cake. During the Roman period, the name for cake became \"placenta\", which was derived from the Greek term. A placenta was baked on a pastry base or inside a pastry case.\nThe Greeks invented beer as a leavener, frying fritters in olive oil, and cheesecakes using goat's milk. In ancient Rome, the basic bread dough was sometimes enriched with butter, eggs, and honey, which produced a sweet and cake-like baked good. The Latin poet Ovid refers to his and his brother's birthday party and cake in his first book of exile, \"Tristia\".\nEarly 14th century cakes in England were also essentially bread: the most obvious differences between a \"cake\" and \"bread\" were the round, flat shape of the cakes and the cooking method, which turned cakes over once while cooking, while bread was left upright throughout the baking process.\nSponge cakes, leavened with beaten eggs, originated during the Renaissance, possibly in Spain.\nCake mixes.\nDuring the Great Depression, there was a surplus of molasses and the need to provide easily made food to millions of economically depressed people in the United States. One company patented a cake-bread mix to deal with this economic situation and thereby established the first line of cake in a box. In doing so, cake, as it is known today, became a mass-produced good rather than a home- or bakery-made specialty.\nLater, during the post-war boom, other American companies (notably General Mills) developed this idea further, marketing cake mix on the principle of convenience, especially to housewives. When sales dropped heavily in the 1950s, marketers discovered that baking cakes, once a task at which housewives could exercise skill and creativity, had become dispiriting. This was a period in American ideological history when women, retired from the war-time labor force, were confined to the domestic sphere while still exposed to the blossoming consumerism in the US. This inspired psychologist Ernest Dichter to find a solution to the cake mix problem in the frosting. Since making the cake was so simple, housewives and other in-home cake makers could expend their creative energy on cake decorating inspired by, among other things, photographs in magazines of elaborately decorated cakes.\nEver since boxed cake mix has become a staple of supermarkets, it is often complemented with frosting in a can.\nVarieties.\nCakes are broadly divided into several categories, based primarily on ingredients and mixing techniques. There are about \"hundreds\" of different types of cakes, but there are two broad categories, that culinary divide them into: \"shortened,\" and \"unshorted cakes.\" Unshortened cakes contain no fat while \"shortened cakes\" do. These types may be combined in baking.\nAlthough clear examples of the difference between cake and bread are easy to find, the precise classification has always been elusive.\nButter cake.\nButter cakes are made from creamed butter, sugar, eggs, and flour. They rely on the combination of butter and sugar beaten for an extended time to incorporate air into the batter. A classic pound cake is made with a pound each of butter, sugar, eggs, and flour. Another type of butter cake that takes its name from the proportion of ingredients used is 1-2-3-4 cake: 1 (~) butter, 2 (~) sugar, 3 (~) flour, and 4 eggs. According to Beth Tartan, this cake was one of the most common among the American pioneers who settled North Carolina.\nBaking powder is in many butter cakes, such as Victoria sponge. \nSponge cake.\nSponge cakes (or foam cakes) are made from whipped eggs, sugar, and flour. Traditional sponge cakes are leavened only with eggs. They rely primarily on trapped air in a protein matrix (generally beaten eggs) to provide leavening, sometimes with a bit of baking powder or other chemical leaveners added. Egg-leavened sponge cakes are thought to be the oldest cakes made without yeast.\nAngel food cake is a white cake that uses only the whites of the eggs and is traditionally baked in a tube pan. The French G\u00e9noise is a sponge cake that includes clarified butter. Highly decorated sponge cakes with lavish toppings are sometimes called \"gateau\", the French word for cake. Chiffon cakes are sponge cakes with vegetable oil, which adds moistness.\nChocolate cake.\nChocolate cakes are butter cakes, sponge cakes, or other cakes flavored with melted chocolate or cocoa powder. German chocolate cake is a variety of chocolate cake.\nCoffee cake.\nCoffee cake is generally thought of as a cake to serve with coffee or tea at breakfast or a coffee break. Some types use yeast as a leavening agent, while others use baking soda or baking powder. These cakes often have a crumb topping called streusel or a light glaze drizzle.\nFlourless cake.\nBaked flourless cakes include clementine cakes, baked cheesecakes, and flourless chocolate cakes.\nLayer cakes.\nLayer cakes are cakes made of stacked layers of sponge or butter cake filled with cream, jam, or other filling in between the layers to hold them together.\nOne-egg cake.\nOne-egg cakes are made with one egg. They can be made with butter or vegetable shortening. One egg cake was an economical recipe when using two eggs for each cake was too costly.\nComparison with bread.\nAlthough clear examples of the difference between cake and bread are easy to find, the precise classification has always been elusive. For example, banana bread may be properly considered either a quick bread or a cake. Yeast cakes are the oldest and are very similar to yeast bread. Such cakes are often very traditional in form and include such as babka, a Viennoiserie, and stollen.\nSpecial-purpose cakes.\nCakes may be classified according to the occasion for which they are intended. For example, wedding cakes, birthday cakes, cakes for first communion, Christmas cakes, Halloween cakes, and Passover plava (a type of sponge cake sometimes made with matzo meal) are all identified primarily according to the celebration they are intended to accompany. The cutting of a wedding cake constitutes a social ceremony in some cultures. The Ancient Roman marriage ritual of originated in the sharing of a cake.\nParticular types of cake may be associated with particular festivals, such as stollen or chocolate log (at Christmas), babka and simnel cake (at Easter), or mooncake. There has been a long tradition of decorating an iced cake at Christmas time; other cakes associated with Christmas include chocolate log and mince pies.\nA Lancashire Courting Cake is a fruit-filled cake baked by a fianc\u00e9e for her betrothed. The cake has been described as \"somewhere between a firm sponge \u2013 with a greater proportion of flour to fat and eggs than a Victoria sponge cake \u2013 and a shortbread base and was proof of the bride-to-be's baking skills\". Traditionally it is a two-layer cake filled and topped with strawberries or raspberries and whipped cream.\nSometimes a cake is made less for its value as food, and more for its value as a novelty. That includes the pop out cake, which is usually a large cardboard box, covered with cake or at least frosting. A person hides inside the box and jumps out as a surprise. A cake dress is a wearable dress that is made mostly out of cake (e.g., cake stacked on shelves attached to a crinoline skirt).\nShapes.\nCakes are frequently described according to their physical form. Cakes may be small and intended for individual consumption. Larger cakes may be made to be sliced and served as part of a meal or social function. Common shapes include:\nFlour.\nIn the US, special cake flour is available, which has a high starch-to-gluten ratio that is made from fine-textured, soft, low-protein wheat. It is strongly bleached and compared to all-purpose flour, and cake flour tends to result in cakes with a lighter, less dense texture. In Europe, Australia and New Zealand, cake flour is banned because it is bleached, with recipes stipulating using either plain (US:All-purpose) or self-raising flour. In US recipes, cake flour is frequently specified or preferred in cakes meant to be soft, light or bright white, such as angel food cake. However, if cake flour is called for, a substitute can be made by replacing a small percentage of all-purpose flour with cornstarch or removing two tablespoons from each cup of all-purpose flour. Some recipes explicitly specify or permit all-purpose flour, notably where a firmer or denser cake texture is desired.\nCooking.\nA cake can fail to bake properly, which is called \"falling\". In a cake that \"falls\", parts may sink or flatten, because it was baked at a temperature that is too low or too hot, when it has been underbaked and when placed in an oven that is too hot at the beginning of the baking process. The use of excessive amounts of sugar, flour, fat or leavening can also cause a cake to fall. A cake can also fall when subjected to cool air that enters an oven when the oven door is opened during the cooking process.\nCake decorating.\nA finished cake is often enhanced by covering it with icing, or frosting, and toppings such as sprinkles, which are also known as \"jimmies\" in certain parts of the United States and \"hundreds and thousands\" in the United Kingdom. The frosting is usually made from powdered (icing) sugar, sometimes a fat of some sort, milk or cream, and often flavorings such as a vanilla extract or cocoa powder. Some decorators use a rolled fondant icing. Commercial bakeries tend to use lard for the fat, and often whip the lard to introduce air bubbles. This makes the icing light and spreadable. Home bakers either use lard, butter, margarine, or some combination thereof. Sprinkles are small firm pieces of sugar and oils that are colored with food coloring. In the late 20th century, new cake decorating products became available to the public. These include several specialized sprinkles and even methods to print pictures and transfer the image onto a cake.\nSpecial tools are needed for more complex cake decorating, such as piping bags and various piping tips, syringes and embossing mats. To use a piping bag or syringe, a piping tip is attached to the bag or syringe using a coupler. The bag or syringe is partially filled with icing which is sometimes colored. Using different piping tips and various techniques, a cake decorator can make many different designs. Basic decorating tips include open star, closed star, basketweave, round, drop flower, leaf, multi, petal, and specialty tips. An embossing mat is used to create embossed effects. A cake turntable that cakes are spun upon may be used in cake decoration.\nRoyal icing, marzipan (or a less sweet version, known as almond paste), fondant icing\n(also known as sugar paste), and buttercream are used as covering icings and to create decorations. Floral sugarcraft or wired sugar flowers are an important part of cake decoration. Cakes for special occasions, such as wedding cakes, are traditionally rich fruit cakes or occasionally Madeira cakes, that are covered with marzipan and iced using royal icing or sugar-paste. They are finished with piped borders (made with royal icing) and adorned with a piped message, wired sugar flowers, hand-formed fondant flowers, marzipan fruit, piped flowers, or crystallized fruits or flowers such as grapes or violets.\nFood safety.\nThe shelf life of cakes packages for commercial sale depends on several factors. Cakes are intermediate moisture products prone to mold growth. Commercial cakes are frequently and commonly exposed to different mold varieties before they are packaged for sale, including \"Aspergillus flavus\" and various penicillins, and \"Aspergillus niger\". Preservatives and oxygen absorbents are currently used to control and inhibit mold growth.\nThe CDC has recommended not to eat raw cake batter because it can contain pathogens like \"Salmonella\" and \"E. coli\". Cake batter uses raw flour which can contain live bacteria and present a hazard if consumed.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57573", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57573", "title": "Olomouc", "text": "City in the Czech Republic\nOlomouc (; ) is a city in the Czech Republic. It has about 103,000 inhabitants, making it the sixth largest city in the country. It is the administrative centre of the Olomouc Region.\nLocated on the Morava River, the city is the ecclesiastical metropolis and was a historical co-capital city of Moravia, before having been occupied by the Swedish army during the Thirty Years' War. The historic city centre is well preserved and is protected as urban monument reservation. The Holy Trinity Column was listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2000 for its quintessential Baroque style and symbolic value.\nAdministrative division.\nOlomouc consists of 26 municipal parts (in brackets population according to the 2021 census):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the name is unknown. According to the most frequently considered theory, it was derived from the personal name Olm\u00fat, meaning \"Olm\u00fat's (castle, court)\". Another theory says that the name was derived from the Proto-Slavic words ('beer') and ('to make noise').\nAccording to legend, there was a Roman fort founded by Roman legionnaires under the command of Julius Caesar. The fort was called or , and the name Olomouc was derived from it. Although archaeologists have found traces of a camp of Roman legionnaires, the legend of the presence of Julius Caesar originated in the Renaissance period and nothing confirms it.\nGeography.\nOlomouc is located about northeast of Brno and southeast of Prague. It lies mostly in a flat fertile land of the Upper Morava Valley. The eastern spur of the municipal territory (the villages of Lo\u0161ov, Rad\u00edkov and Svat\u00fd Kope\u010dek) extends into the N\u00edzk\u00fd Jesen\u00edk range and includes the highest point of Olomouc, a hill at above sea level. The Litovelsk\u00e9 Pomorav\u00ed Protected Landscape Area extends into the territory of Olomouc in the north.\nThe Morava River and the stream of Ml\u00fdnsk\u00fd potok, which is a branch of the Morava, flow through the city. The Byst\u0159ice flows into the Morava at the city centre. The Oskava briefly forms the northern municipal border, before it joins the Morava.\nLake Chomoutovsk\u00e9 jezero, located in the northern tip of the municipal territory, was created by flooding a gravel quarry and has an area of . Together with the immediate surroundings, it is protected as a nature monument. The lake is an important stop for migratory birds and is home to one of the largest colonies of black-headed gulls and Mediterranean gulls in the country.\nClimate.\nOlomouc's climate is classified as humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfb\"; Trewartha: \"Dcbo\"). Among them, the annual average temperature is , the hottest month is July with a mean daily temperature , and the coldest month is January with . The annual precipitation is , of which July is the wettest with , while February is the driest with only . The extreme temperature throughout the year ranged from on 11 February 1929 to on 3 and 8 August 2013.\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nAs early as the 7th century, a gord of the early Slavs developed in the present-day quarter of Povel. It was probably an administrative centre of a larger unit. Povel is considered one of the three most important Moravian localities of the early Middle Ages. In the early 9th century, the gord was conquered and completely disappeared.\nA new centre, where the Great Moravian governor resided, developed at the gord at P\u0159edhrad\u00ed, a quarter of the inner city (the eastern, smaller part of the medieval centre). This settlement survived the defeat of the Great Moravia (c. 907) and gradually became the capital of the province of Moravia.\nThe bishopric of Olomouc was founded in 1063. It was possibly re-founded because there are some unclear references to bishops of Moravia in the 10th century\u2014if they were not only missionary bishops, but representatives of some remains of regular church organization, then it is very likely that these bishops had their seat in Olomouc. Centuries later in 1777, it was raised to the rank of an archbishopric. The bishopric was moved from the church of St. Peter (since destroyed) to the church of Saint Wenceslaus in 1141 (the date is still disputed, other suggestions are 1131, 1134) under bishop Jind\u0159ich Zd\u00edk. The bishop's palace was built in the Romanesque architectural style. The bishopric acquired large tracts of land, especially in northern Moravia, and was one of the richest in the area.\nOlomouc became one of the most important settlements in Moravia and a seat of the P\u0159emyslid government and one of the \"appanage\" princes. In 1306 King Wenceslas III stopped here on his way to Poland. He was going to fight W\u0142adys\u0142aw I the Elbow-high to claim his rights to the Polish crown and was assassinated. With his death, the whole P\u0159emyslid dynasty died out.\nThe city was officially founded in the mid-13th century and became one of the most important trade and power centres in the region. In the Middle Ages, it was the biggest town in Moravia and competed with Brno for the position of capital. Olomouc finally lost after the Swedes took the city and held it for eight years (1642\u20131650).\nIn 1235, the Mongols launched an invasion of Europe. After the Battle of Legnica in Poland, the Mongols carried their raids into Moravia, but were defensively defeated at the fortified town of Olomouc. The Mongols subsequently invaded and defeated Hungary.\nIn 1454 the city expelled its Jewish population as part of a wave of anti-Semitism, also seen in Spain and Portugal. The second half of the 15th century is considered the start of Olomouc's golden age. It hosted several royal meetings, and Matthias Corvinus was elected here as King of Bohemia (in fact anti-king) by the estates in 1469. In 1479 two kings of Bohemia (Vladislaus II and Matthias Corvinus) met here and concluded an agreement (Peace of Olomouc of 1479) for splitting the country.\nModern era.\nParticipating in the Protestant Reformation, Moravia became mostly Protestant. During the Thirty Years' War, in 1640 Olomouc was occupied by the Swedes for eight years. They left the city in ruins, and as a result it lost its predominant place in Moravia, becoming second to Brno.\nIn 1740 the town was captured and briefly held by the Prussians. Olomouc was fortified by Maria Theresa during the wars with Frederick the Great, who besieged the city unsuccessfully for seven weeks in 1758. In 1848 Olomouc was the scene of the emperor Ferdinand's abdication. Two years later, Austrian and German statesmen held a conference here called the Punctation of Olm\u00fctz. At the conference, they agreed to restore the German Confederation and Prussia accepted leadership by the Austrians.\nIn 1746 the first learned society in the lands under control of the Austrian Habsburgs, the \"Societas eruditorum incognitorum in terris Austriacis\", was founded in Olomouc to spread Enlightenment ideas. Its monthly \"Monatliche Ausz\u00fcge\" was the first scientific journal published in the Habsburg empire.\nLargely because of its ecclesiastical links to Austria, Salzburg in particular, the city was influenced by German culture since the Middle Ages. Demographics before censuses can only be interpreted from other documents. The town's ecclesiastical constitution, the meetings of the Diet and the locally printed hymnal, were recorded in Czech in the mid-16th and 17th centuries. The first treatise on music in Czech was published in Olomouc in the mid-16th century. The political and social changes that followed the Thirty Years' War increased the influence of courtly Habsburg and Austrian/German-language culture. The \"Germanification\" of the town likely resulted from the cosmopolitan nature of the city; as the cultural, administrative and religious centre of the region, it drew officials, musicians and traders from all over Europe.\nDespite these influences, Czech dominated, particularly in ecclesiastical publications throughout the 17th and 18th centuries. When the Austrian-born composer and musician Philip J. Rittler accepted a post at the Wenceslas Cathedral in the latter 17th century, he felt it necessary to learn Czech. With the continued dominance of the Habsburgs and migration of ethnic Germans into the area, the use of Czech declined. By the 19th century, the number of ethnic Germans in the city were recorded as three times higher than the number of Czechs.\nAfter the 1848 revolution, the government rescinded its Jewish expulsion order of 1454. Jews returned to the city and, in 1897, built a synagogue. The Jewish population reached 1,676 in 1900.\nOlomouc retained its defensive city walls almost until the end of the 19th century. This suited the city council, because demolishing the walls would have allowed for expansion of the city and attracted more Czechs from neighbouring villages. The city council preferred Olomouc to be smaller and predominantly German. Greater expansion came after World War I and the establishment of Czechoslovakia. In 1919 Olomouc annexed two neighbouring towns and 11 surrounding villages, gaining new space for additional growth and development.\nSerious tensions arose between ethnic Czechs and Germans during both world wars. During World War II, the city was under German occupation and most of the city's ethnic German residents sided with the Nazis; the German-run city council renamed the main square (until then named after president Tom\u00e1\u0161 Garrigue Masaryk) after Adolf Hitler. World War II brought a rise in anti-semitism and attacks on the Jews that reflected what was happening in Germany. On Kristallnacht (10 November 1938), townspeople destroyed the synagogue. In March 1939, city police arrested 800 Jewish men, and had some deported to the Dachau concentration camp. During 1942\u20131943, ethnic Germans sent the remaining Jews to Theresienstadt and other German concentration camps in occupied Poland. Fewer than 300 of the city's Jews survived the Holocaust. The Germans also established and operated a Gestapo prison in the city, and a forced labour camp in the Chv\u00e1lkovice district.\nAfter Olomouc was liberated, Czech residents took back the original name of the city square. When the retreating German army passed through the city in the final weeks of the war, they shot at its 15th-century astronomical clock, leaving only a few pieces intact (these are held in the local museum). The city was restored to Czechoslovakia, although with a Soviet-installed communist regime with stayed in power until the Fall of Communism in the 1980s. In the 1950s, the clock was reconstructed under the influence of Soviet government; it features a procession of proletarians rather than saints. After the war, the government participated in the expulsion of ethnic Germans from the country, following the Allied leaders' Potsdam Agreement, which redefined the Central European borders, although many of these people's families had lived for two centuries in the region. There were the statue of the first president T. G. Masaryk reconstructed as a symbol of come back of democracy on Masaryk street after \"velvet revolution\" in 1990. Its inner city is the third-largest urban monument reservation in the country, after Prague. \nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nThe Olomouc agglomeration was defined as a tool for drawing money from the European Structural and Investment Funds. It is an area that includes the city and its surroundings, linked to the city by commuting and migration. It has about 401,000 inhabitants and also includes the cities of P\u0159erov and Prost\u011bjov. \nTransport.\nPublic transport in Olomouc is provided by trams and buses.\nThe first train arrived in Olomouc on 17 October 1841 from Vienna. In 1845, the first omnibuses connected the railway station and the centre of Olomouc. In 1899, omnibuses were replaced with trams.\nThe main railway station in Olomouc (Olomouc hlavn\u00ed n\u00e1dra\u017e\u00ed) is an important railway junction. The city is connected with Prague, Ostrava, Brno, Zl\u00edn and B\u0159eclav. Passenger trains of all categories operated by \u010cesk\u00e9 dr\u00e1hy, RegioJet and LEO Express make stops there.\nThe D35 motorway goes along the southern and western municipal border. The D46 motorway splits from it and connects Olomouc with Prost\u011bjov.\nCulture.\nThe city is the home of the Moravian Theatre Olomouc (\"Moravsk\u00e9 divadlo\") and the Moravian Philharmonic (\"Moravsk\u00e1 filharmonie Olomouc\"). In 2023 it was decided, they will be merged in one institution. Olomouc is also the centre of the ethnographic region of Han\u00e1. As a student city with 2nd oldest university in town, Olomouc offers many cultural events and festivals: Academia Film Olomouc, Festival of Animated Film (PAF), Divadeln\u00ed Flora and many others. There are several theatre venues (including Divadlo na cucky, Divadlo Tramtarie or Divadlo K3). Cinema is represented by a single screen Kino Metropol (opened in 1933) and three multiplexes.\nEducation.\nPalack\u00fd University, the oldest in Moravia and second oldest in the Czech Republic, was founded in 1573 as part of an effort to reestablish Roman Catholicism in the country. At the time, roughly nine out of ten inhabitants of the Czech Crown lands were Protestants. Most of its faculties were suppressed in the 1850s by the Habsburg r\u00e9gime in retaliation for professor and student support for the 1848 revolution and the Czech National Revival. The university was fully restored in 1946; it was renamed Palack\u00fd University of Olomouc.\nThe university plays a very important role in the life of the city: with over 25,200 students (including those at Moravian College Olomouc), Olomouc has the highest density of university students in Central Europe. Many of the city's services are student-oriented. They close during holidays and the university exam periods. During the summer holiday, the trams run solo (apart from rush-hours), while during the university sessions, the lines are served by two coupled trams.\nThe university buildings comprise about a third of the city's heritage centre; notable ones include the University Art Centre and the so-called Armoury (now Central Library).\nThe city was also the inaugural host for the first International Biology Olympiad in 1990.\nSport.\nOlomouc is home to the professional football club SK Sigma Olomouc playing in the Czech First League. Its reserve team, SK Sigma Olomouc B, plays in the Czech National Football League. Sigma Olomouc plays its home matches at Andr\u016fv stadion with a capacity of 12,474 seats, which regularly hosts international matches as well. The second football club in the city is 1. HFK Olomouc.\nThe city's ice hockey club is HC Olomouc, playing in the Czech Extraliga (top tier). It plays its home matches at Zimn\u00ed stadion Olomouc. RC Olomouc is a rugby club, playing in the third-tier competition.\nOn the north west side and adjacent of the Andr\u016fv stadion was a facility called the Spartakiad Stadium, which was built after World War II. The stadium was used for various purposes and promoted the Spartakiad, most notably during the 1950s and 1960s. The site also held motorcycle speedway and hosted a final round of the Czechoslovak Individual Speedway Championship in 1964, 1968 and 1969.\nSights.\nOlomouc contains several large squares, the chief of which is adorned with the Holy Trinity Column, designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The column is high and was built between 1716 and 1754.\nThe city has numerous historic religious buildings. The most prominent church is Saint Wenceslas Cathedral founded before 1107 in the compound of the Olomouc Castle. At the end of the 19th century, the cathedral was rebuilt in the neo-Gothic style. It kept many features of the original church, which had renovations and additions reflecting styles of different ages: Romanesque crypt, Gothic cloister, Baroque chapels. The highest of the three spires is , the second-highest in the country (after Cathedral of St. Bartholomew in Plze\u0148). The church is next to the Bishop Zd\u00edk's Palace (also called the P\u0159emyslid Palace), a Romanesque building built after 1141 by the bishop Jind\u0159ich Zd\u00edk. It remains one of the most precious monuments of Olomouc: Such an early bishop's palace is unique in Central Europe. The P\u0159emyslid Palace, used as the residence of Olomouc dukes from the governing P\u0159emyslid dynasty, stood nearby.\nChurch of Saint Maurice, a fine Gothic building of the 15th century, has the 6th-largest church organ in Central Europe.\nChurch of Saint Michael is notable. The Neo-baroque Chapel of Saint John Sarkander stands on the site of a former town prison. At the beginning of the Thirty Years' War, the Catholic priest John Sarkander was imprisoned here. Accused of collaboration with the enemy, he was tortured but did not reveal anything because of the Seal of Confession and died. The torture rack and Sarkander's gravestone are preserved here. He was canonized by Pope John Paul II during his visit in Olomouc in 1995.\nJohn Paul II also visited \"Svat\u00fd Kope\u010dek\" (\"The Holy Hillock\"), which has the magnificent Baroque Church of the Visitation of the Virgin Mary. It overlooks the city. The Pope promoted the church to Minor Basilica. Several monasteries are in Olomouc, including Hradisko Monastery, Convent of Dominican Sisters in Olomouc and others.\nOther notable destinations are the Olomouc Orthodox Church, consecrated to Saint Gorazd, and the Mausoleum of Yugoslav Soldiers. This monument commemorates 1,188 Yugoslav soldiers who died during World War I in local hospitals after being wounded on battlefields.\nThe principal secular building is the city hall, completed in the 15th century. It is flanked on one side by a gothic chapel, now adapted and operated as the Olomouc Museum of Art. It has a tower high, adorned with an astronomical clock in an uncommon Socialist Realist style. The original 15th-century clock was destroyed at the end of World War II. It was reconstructed in 1947\u20131955 by Karel Svolinsk\u00fd, who used the government-approved style of the time, featuring proletarians rather than saints. This is also the reason why the clock's calendar represents some of the most important days of the Communist regime.\nOlomouc has unique set of six Baroque fountains. They survived in such number thanks to the city council's caution. While most European cities were removing old fountains after building water-supply piping, Olomouc decided to keep them as reservoirs in case of fire. The fountains feature ancient Roman motifs; five portray the Roman gods Jupiter , Mercury , Triton , Neptune and Hercules . One features Julius Caesar, the legendary founder of the city . In the 21st century, an Arion fountain was added to the main square, inspired by the older project.\nIn front of the astronomical clock on the Horn\u00ed (\"Upper\") Square, which is the largest square in Olomouc, is a scale model of the entire old town in bronze.\nHonours.\nAsteroid 30564 Olomouc was named after the city.\nNotable people.\nArts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSport.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nOlomouc is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57574", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57574", "title": "Olomouc, Czech Republic", "text": ""}
{"id": "57575", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57575", "title": "Brno", "text": "Statutory city in the Czech Republic\nBrno ( , ; ) is a city in the South Moravian Region of the Czech Republic. Located at the confluence of the Svitava and Svratka rivers, Brno has about 403,000 inhabitants, making it the second-largest city in the Czech Republic after the capital, Prague, and one of the 100 largest cities in the European Union. The Brno metropolitan area has approximately 730,000 inhabitants.\nBrno served as the capital of Moravia from the Middle Ages until 1948, and remains the political and cultural hub of the South Moravian Region. Brno is an important centre of the Czech judiciary. The Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court, the Supreme Administrative Court, the Supreme Public Prosecutor's Office, as well as state authorities, such as the Ombudsman and the Office for the Protection of Competition, are all located here. Brno is also an important centre of learning and higher education, with 10 universities, 29 faculties and a student population of over 65,000, as well as more than 60 secondary schools throughout the city.\nThe Brno Exhibition Centre is one of the largest in Europe. The complex opened in 1928 and has a long history of hosting international trade fairs and expositions. The Masaryk Circuit has been hosting motorsport events since 1930, including the Road Racing World Championship Grand Prix. Another local tradition is the international fireworks competition and drone show \"Ignis Brunensis\", which attracts over a million visitors annually.\nTwo medieval landmarks, the historic \u0160pilberk Castle and its fortifications, as well as the Cathedral of Saints Peter and Paul on Petrov Hill, dominate the cityscape and are seen as Brno's traditional symbols. Another historic landmark is the Veve\u0159\u00ed Castle near the Brno Reservoir. The Villa Tugendhat, a seminal example of functionalist architecture, was added to the UNESCO World Heritage Sites List in 2001. One of the natural sights outside the city is the Moravian Karst. Brno is a member of the UNESCO Creative Cities Network and was designated a \"City of Music\" in 2017.\nAdministrative division.\nBrno consists of 29 self-governing districts and 48 municipal parts, whose borders respect the boundaries of the districts. The districts of Brno are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNames.\nThe etymology of the name Brno is disputed. It might be derived from Old Czech ', i.e. 'muddy', 'swampy'. Alternatives are the Slavic verb \"brniti\" ('to armour' or 'to fortify') or a Celtic origin. The latter theory would make it cognate with other Celtic words for hill, such as the Welsh word '. Throughout its history, locals in Brno have also referred to their city in different languages, including ' in German, \u05d1\u05e8\u05d9\u05df (') in Yiddish, and \"\" in Latin. The town was also referred to as Brunn () in English, but this variant is no longer common today. The asteroid 2889 Brno was named after the city, as was the Bren light machine gun. The latter was in wide use during World War II, and its name derives from 'Brno' and 'Enfield', the site of the Royal Small Arms Factory.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe Brno basin has been inhabited since prehistoric times, as evidenced by a 2024 discovery of mammoth bones and prehistoric tools dating back 15,000 years. Doln\u00ed V\u011bstonice, a globally significant Paleolithic site, is located south of Brno. Traces of Neanderthal activity were found at \"\u0160v\u00e9d\u016fv st\u016fl\" in the Moravian Karst, to the northeast. The city's direct precursor was a fortified settlement, \"Star\u00e9 Z\u00e1mky,\" established during the Great Moravian Empire, which was inhabited from the Neolithic Age until the early 11th century. The site of the Star\u00e9 Z\u00e1mky Hillfort is located northeast of Brno-L\u00ed\u0161e\u0148. During the Great Moravian period, the Hillfort played a crucial role as a strategic hub, connecting the empire's centre with the ironworks in the Moravian Karst. Around the turn of the 9th and 10th centuries, the Hillfort experienced a catastrophic fire. Its remnants are protected as an archaeological monument.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the early 11th century, Brno was established as the seat of a non-ruling prince from the House of P\u0159emyslid, and it became one of the centres of Moravia, along with Olomouc and Znojmo. Brno was first mentioned in Cosmas' \"Chronica Boemorum,\" dating to 1091, when King Vratislaus II besieged his brother, Conrad, at Brno castle. In the mid-11th century, Moravia was divided into three separate territories. Each had its own ruler, who came from the P\u0159emyslids dynasty but was independent of the other two, and subordinate to the Bohemian ruler in Prague. The seats of these rulers and thus the \"capitals\" of these three territories were the castles and towns of Brno, Olomouc, and Znojmo. In the late 12th century, Moravia began to reunify, forming the Margraviate of Moravia. From then until the middle of the 17th century, political power was divided between Brno and Olomouc, with Znojmo playing a tertiary role. Olomouc had a larger population than Brno and was also the seat of the Diocese of Olomouc, the sole bishopric in Moravia until 1777. The Moravian Diet, the Moravian Land Tables, and the Moravian Land Court convened in both cities. These assemblies made political, legal, and financial decisions. \nBefore the 13th century, there were virtually no Germans living in the Bohemian Lands. Bohemia and Moravia-Silesia were inhabited by an essentially all-Slavic population. In 1243, the separate settlements that made up Brno were consolidated into a single fortified settlement and granted a royal city charter by King Wenceslaus I of Bohemia. As was common throughout Central and Eastern Europe at the time, the royal city charter was closely tied to the arrival of German settlers and other migrants. \nAround the turn of the 13th century, merchants on the main market, now known as Zeln\u00fd trh, one of Brno's oldest squares, began building cellars to store food, wine, and beer. Although these vaults initially supported only local commerce, they became a vital part of the city's infrastructure and served as temporary shelters in wartime. They expanded over time, particularly in the Baroque period, and are now known as Labyrinth Under the Vegetable Market (). In 1324, Queen Elisabeth Richeza of Poland built the Basilica of the Assumption of Our Lady, where she is now buried, along with a Cistercian convent, which later became an Augustinian Abbey. \nFrom the mid-14th century to the early 15th century, during the rule of the Moravian branch of the Luxembourg dynasty, \u0160pilberk Castle served as the official seat of the Moravian margraves. One of them, Jobst of Moravia, was elected the King of the Romans. The Margraviate of Moravia was reunited under the Bohemian crown after his death. During the Hussite Wars, Brno was besieged by the Hussites twice, in 1428 and in 1430. Both attempts to conquer the city were unsuccessful.\n17th and 18th century.\nIn 1641, during the Thirty Years' War, the Holy Roman Emperor and the margrave of Moravia, Ferdinand III, ordered the permanent relocation of the Diet, the Land Court, and the Land Tables from Olomouc to Brno, as Collegium Nordicum had made Olomouc the primary target of the Swedish armies. In 1642, Olomouc surrendered to the Swedish Army, which occupied it for eight years. Brno, under the leadership of Jean-Louis Raduit de Souches, successfully resisted the siege of Brno in 1645, the only Moravian city that succeeded in defending itself from the Swedes, who were commanded by Field Marshal Lennart Torstensson. Brno subsequently served as the sole capital of the Margraviate of Moravia. \nAfter the conclusion of the Thirty Years' War in 1648, Brno retained its status as the sole capital of the region. That was later confirmed by the Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II in 1782, and again in 1849 by the Moravian constitution..\"&gt;[#endnote_] Today, the Moravian Land Tables are stored in the Moravian Regional Archive and are designated as a national cultural heritage site of the Czech Republic. During the 17th century, \u0160pilberk Castle was rebuilt as a massive baroque citadel. Brno was besieged by the Prussian Army led by Frederick the Great during the War of the Austrian Succession in 1742, but the siege was ultimately unsuccessful. In 1777, the bishopric of Brno was established by Pope Pius VI, with Mathias Franz Graf von Chorinsky Freiherr von Ledske as its first bishop.\nDuring the 18th century, Brno experienced a significant textile industry boom, resulting in the rapid expansion of its suburbs and earning it the nickname \"Moravian Manchester\". Brno flourished economically through the end of the 19th century. The city infrastructure, including sewer and water supply systems, was improved, and the fortifications around \u0160pilberk Castle were reinforced. Rapid industrialisation brought about poor housing and working conditions for factory workers. Child labour, tuberculosis, inhumanely long shifts, and unequal relations between employees and employers were commonplace.\n19th century.\nIn December 1805, the Battle of Austerlitz was fought near the city; the battle is also known as the \"Battle of the Three Emperors\". Although Brno itself was not directly involved in the battle, the city was under French occupation, which conferred significant hardship on the local population. In the wake of the hostilities, there was a devastating typhoid fever outbreak due to the mild winter temperatures that year. The French Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte stayed in Brno from 20 November to 12 December 1805. The French returned in 1809 and occupied the city for four months after the Battle of Znaim. Napoleon ordered the fortification around \u0160pilberk Castle dismantled and leveled, and the Castle lost its military significance as a fortress. These events are the theme of re-enactments that attract an international audience every year.\nIn 1839, the first train arrived in Brno from Vienna via the Emperor Ferdinand Northern Railway. That marked the beginning of rail transport in the Czech Republic and Austria. Between 1859 and 1864, city fortifications were almost completely removed. In 1869, a horsecar service began operating in Brno, marking it the first tram service in what would later become the Czech Republic. Gregor Mendel, an Augustinian monk and geneticist, conducted groundbreaking genetics experiments with pea plants at St. Thomas's Abbey in Brno during the 1850s. The monastery served as a local hub for education, culture, and the arts, with a well-stocked library and other amenities. Mendel's work was not recognized during his lifetime, and he abandoned it after he was elected abbot of the monastery in 1868. Brno is home to Mendel University, which has been located there since the mid-1990s, when the former University of Agriculture, the nation's oldest agricultural school, was renamed in his honour. \nTom\u00e1\u0161 Masaryk, the first president and founding father of Czechoslovakia, attended a German-language grammar school () in Brno between 1865 and 1869. His school served as a military hospital during the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, which led to the creation of the dual monarchy of Austria-Hungary. Although no major conflict took place in Brno during the war, the Prussian Army occupied the city following the Battle of K\u00f6niggr\u00e4tz. Several days later, a cholera epidemic that claimed the lives of more than 1,400 residents broke out. Masaryk later became a proponent of a second Czech university, alongside Charles University, which was established in Brno in 1919 and named after him. The Masaryk Circuit and Masarykova Street, connecting Liberty Square and the train station, are also named in his honour.\nLeo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek, ranked among most-performed opera composers in the world, accepted a chorister scholarship at St. Thomas's Abbey in 1865. He would spend the rest of his life in Brno, except for the period between 1872 and 1881 when he pursued advanced musical studies in Prague, Vienna, and Leipzig. He founded the Brno Organ School, which is now part of the Jan\u00e1\u010dek Academy of Music and Performing Arts (JAMU), upon his return in 1881. Jan\u00e1\u010dek had a profound impact on Brno and its cultural life. His legacy helped transform the city into a major cultural hub. Owing to his significance to Brno's history, several places and institutions have been named in his honour. In addition to JAMU, there is also the Jan\u00e1\u010dek Theatre, an opera house and the largest of the three theatres belonging to the National Theatre Brno. \n20th century and Greater Brno.\nAt the turn of the 20th century, roughly two-thirds of Brno's residents spoke German, and its suburbs and neighbouring towns were predominantly Czech-speaking. Everyday life in the city was bilingual. The local German dialect, known as , incorporated elements from both languages. The end of World War I brought about the partition of Austria-Hungary, and more than three million Germans found themselves separated from Austria and under Czech control. After the Czechoslovak Republic was proclaimed on 28 October, 1918, the Sudeten Germans asserted their right to self-determination and peacefully opposed the Czech military taking control of their homeland. Fighting broke out sporadically, resulting in casualties. Moravia contained patches of \"landlocked\" German territory to the north and south. German-language islands and towns inhabited by German-speaking populations, surrounded by Czech speakers, were common, much like in Brno. \nUntil 1918, the city of Brno was significantly smaller, and in administrative terms, it consisted only of the city centre. In 1919, two neighboring towns, Kr\u00e1lovo Pole and Husovice, along with 21 other surrounding municipalities, were annexed by Brno, creating Greater Brno () in an effort to dilute the German-speaking population majority, which comprised approximately 55,000 residents, by adding Czech speakers from the city's vicinity. A significant portion of the German-speaking population was Jewish, comprising nearly 12,000 individuals, including several of the city's better-known personalities, who made a substantial contribution to the city's cultural life. Greater Brno was almost seven times larger in area, with a population of about 222,000 \u2013 before that, Brno proper had about 130,000 inhabitants. \nThe size of Brno's German population was virtually unchanged in the 1930 census, the last census before the war, when 200,000 residents declared Czech nationality, and approximately 52,000 identified as German. Both groups included Jewish citizens. Although Czechoslovakia experienced a peaceful and prosperous decade during the 1920s, ethnic tensions escalated in the 1930s following the onset of the Great Depression. Hitler's rise to power further inflamed the situation. Particularly when the Sudeten German Party became the second-largest party in Czechoslovakia, and it became known that the party received financial support from Berlin. During the interwar period, Brno served as the capital of the administrative region of Moravia () from 1921 to 1928, and as the capital of Moravia-Silesia () from 1928 to 1948. The city emerged as the preeminent site of modernist architecture during this period.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the German occupation of the Czech lands between 1939 and 1945, all Czech universities were closed by the Nazis, including those in Brno. The Faculty of Law became the local headquarters of the Gestapo, and the Nazis used the Kounic Residence Hall at Masaryk University as a political prison for anti-fascists. Along with the firing range in Kobylisy, the Kounic dormitories were the most frequently used execution grounds in the Protectorate. About 35,000 Czechs and some American and British POWs were imprisoned and tortured there; about 800 civilians were executed or died. The executions were public. The Nazis also operated a subcamp of the Auschwitz concentration camp, which mainly held Polish prisoners, an internment camp for Romani people in the city, and a forced labour \"re-education\" camp in the present-day district of Dvorska. \nBetween 1941 and 1942, transports from Brno deported 10,081 Jews to the Theresienstadt (Terez\u00edn) concentration camp. At least another 960 people, mostly of mixed ancestry, followed in 1943 and 1944. From Terez\u00edn, many of them were sent to the Auschwitz concentration camp, the Minsk Ghetto, Rejowiec, and other ghettos and concentration camps. Although Terez\u00edn was not an extermination camp, 995 deportees from Brno perished there. Only 1,033 people from over 11,000 returned after the war. In 1944 and 1945, the city centre and several industrial facilities, such as the \u010ceskoslovensk\u00e1 zbrojovka small arms factory and the Flugmotorenwerke Zweigwerk aircraft engine factory, were targeted by Allied bombing raids. \nAir strikes and artillery fire killed some 1,200 people and destroyed 1,278 buildings. More than 12,000 buildings, or about half of the city's building stock, were damaged. In the wake of the occupation by the Red Army on 26 April 1945 and the end of the war, President Edvard Bene\u0161 arrived in Brno and delivered a speech demanding the expulsion of Germans. Subsequently, beginning on 31 May 1945, remaining German inhabitants, comprising over 20,000 individuals, were marched to the Austrian border. According to testimony collected by German sources, about 5,200 of them died during the march. Later Czech estimates put the death toll at about 1,700, with most of the fatalities attributed to an epidemic of shigellosis. In 2015, seventy years after the end of World War II, the city council issued a formal apology and expressed regret about the expulsion of German residents. The event is commemorated every year.\nCommunism and beyond.\nAfter the communist coup d'\u00e9tat, the newly formed Czechoslovak Socialist Republic abolished Moravian autonomy, and Brno ceased to be the capital of Moravia. Since then, Moravia has been divided into administrative regions, with Brno serving as the administrative centre of the South Moravian Region. In the 1960s and 1970s, large prefab high-rise housing estates were built on the city outskirts, such as Bohunice, L\u00ed\u0161e\u0148, Bystrc, and Vinohrady. During the communist era, the vast majority of jobs created were in manufacturing and machine-building industries. \nCountless monuments and historic buildings fell into disrepair and ruin during the decades-long communist rule. Some were left abandoned, deteriorating beyond repair, and others were razed to the ground. Following the Velvet Revolution of 1989, a substantial portion of Brno's workforce shifted from the manufacturing industry to services and light industry. In particular, Brno became the information technology centre of the Czech Republic. New industrial areas sprang up on the outskirts of the city, such as \u010cernovick\u00e1 terasa east of the city. The city has also experienced a significant cultural renaissance and historic revival.\nGeography.\nBrno is situated at the confluence of the Svitava and Svratka rivers, located between the Bohemian-Moravian Highlands and the Dyje\u2013Svratka Valley in the southeastern part of the Czech Republic. The city is at the crossroads of ancient trade routes, which have linked northern and southern Europe since time immemorial. Brno is historically closely connected with Vienna, which lies to the south. The city is in diameter east to west with a total area of . Wooded hills surround Brno on three sides. About 28% of the city area, or , is forested. \nThe city is relatively low-lying, with elevations ranging between and . The highest peak within the municipal area is Kope\u010dek Hill, at , and the highest elevation overall is \u00dat\u011bchov, located on the border with Vranov. Brno is located within the Danube basin. The length of the Svratka River waterway through the city is about , and the Svitava River's waterway is about . Several smaller streams flow through Brno, including the Veverka Creek, the Pon\u00e1vka, and the \u0158\u00ed\u010dka. Of note is the Brno Reservoir, as well as numerous ponds, and other standing bodies of water, such as the reservoirs in the Marian Valley and the fishpond \u017deb\u011bt\u00ednsk\u00fd rybn\u00edk. \nClimate.\nBrno has a moderate climate and moderate air quality. No severe weather events or disasters have been recorded. Under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Brno has an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\") for \u22123 \u00b0C original isoterm, but near the \u22122.5 \u00b0C average temperature in January, the coldest month. It is classified as a humid continental climate (\"Dfb\") in the updated classification, characterized by cold winters and warm to hot summers. A warming trend has been observed over the past two decades, and summer days with temperatures above are relatively common. The average temperature is , and the average annual precipitation is approximately with an average of 150 rainy days. Average annual sunshine hours are 1,771 hours, and the prevailing wind direction is northwest. Weather data from 1961 to 1990 is tabulated in the weather box below. \nAdministration.\nBrno is a statutory city, consisting of 29 administrative divisions known as city districts. The highest body of self-government is the Brno City Assembly. The city is headed up by the mayor, who has the right to use the mayor's insignia and represents the city externally. As of 2025, the mayor is Mark\u00e9ta Va\u0148kov\u00e1 of the Civic Democratic Party (ODS). The executive body is the city council and local councils of the city districts; the city council has 11 members, including the mayor and four deputies. The assembly of the city elects the mayor and other members of the city council, establishes the local police, and is also entitled to grant citizenship of honour and the Awards of the City of Brno. \nThe head of the Assembly of the City of Brno in personal matters is the Chief Executive, who, according to certain special regulations, carries out the function of employer of the other members of the city management. The Chief Executive is directly responsible to the mayor. \nBrno proper forms a separate district, the Brno-City District, surrounded by the Brno-Country District. The city is divided into 29 administrative divisions (city districts) and consists of 48 cadastral areas. The \"Brno-City District\" and \"Brno-Country District\" are not to be confused with the \"city districts\" of Brno. The city districts of Brno vary widely by both population and area. The most populous city district of Brno is Brno-Centre, which has over 91,000 residents, and the least populous is Brno-O\u0159e\u0161\u00edn and Brno-\u00dat\u011bchov, with about 500 residents. By area, the largest district is Brno-Bystrc () and the smallest one is Brno-Nov\u00fd L\u00edskovec (). Brno is the home to the highest courts of the Czech judiciary. The Supreme Court is on Bure\u0161ova Street, the Supreme Administrative Court is on Moravsk\u00e9 n\u00e1m\u011bst\u00ed (), the Constitutional Court is on Jo\u0161tova Street, and the Supreme Public Prosecutor's Office of the Czech Republic is on Jezuitsk\u00e1 Street.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2021 census, Brno had a population of 398,510 inhabitants. The city experienced the most significant population growth in the 19th century during the Industrial Revolution and after World War I, when it annexed nearly two dozen surrounding municipalities to create Greater Brno.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEthnicity and nationality.\nThe largest ethnic groups in the 2021 census were Czechs (44.60%), Moravians (14.08%), Slovaks (1.74%), Ukrainians (1.04%), Russians (0.36%), Vietnamese (0.35%), and Poles (0.10%). About 26% of respondents did not specify their nationality. In the 2001 census, with different reporting requirements, 76.1% identified as Czechs and 18.7% as Moravians. And in the 1991 census, 35.8% identified as Czechs and 60.9% as Moravians. The outcome of the 1980 census is included for historical completeness. Censuses conducted under communist rule in Czechoslovakia were heavily politicized, particularly concerning the registration of nationality and religion. Beyond manipulating the categories and responses, the communist regime also controlled the dissemination of the census data itself.\nForeign nationals.\nAs of August 2025, foreign nationals accounted for about 66,415, or about 16.7% of Brno's population. Out of that total, approximately 18,839 had permanent residency, and 47,576 had a temporary status. The following nationalities had the most significant presence:\nEconomy.\nAfter World War II, the site of Flugmotorenwerke Zweigwerk in Brno-L\u00ed\u0161e\u0148 became the Zetor factory. Though it initially operated as a subsidiary of Zbrojovka, it became an independent manufacturer of tractors and agricultural equipment. At its peak in the 1970s, Zetor manufactured more than 70,000 tractors annually and employed thousands of people. The iron foundry, which was part of the site, was later acquired by the German company Heunisch-Guss. Zbrojovka itself, which once employed over 10,000 people, went bankrupt in the early 2000s and was subsequently acquired by \u010cesk\u00e1 Zbrojovka. The entire group is now named Colt CZ Group SE after it acquired Colt Holding in 2021 and rebranded itself.\nThere has been a significant shift in the local economy since the Velvet Revolution in 1989. Many new companies were created or spun off from state enterprises as part of the privatization process, while several others ceased to exist entirely. Before 1990, manufacturing and machine-building companies were pillars of Brno's economy. Since then, the city's economy has largely realigned itself with market demand for light industry, logistics, and services. Brno later gained some traction in newer engineering industries, especially in software development. After the turn of the millennium, foreign technology companies began to establish subsidiaries in Brno. Several Czech companies, with both local and global reach, also have headquarters in the city.\nNotable companies based in Brno include Gen Digital (one of the headquarters, brand AVG Technologies still used), Kyndryl (Collaborative), AT&amp;T, Honeywell (Global Design Center), Siemens, Red Hat (Czech headquarters), an office of Zebra Technologies, and formerly Silicon Graphics International (Czech headquarters). In recent years, knowledge-based drivers of economic growth, including science, research, and education, have become increasingly critical to the city's economy. Examples include AdMaS (Advanced Materials, Structures, and Technologies) or CETOCOEN (Center for Research on Toxic Substances in the Environment). The city cultivates this sector via its South Moravian Innovation Centre and the VUT Technology Incubator.\nTransport.\nBrno's public transit network is extensive. There are 11 tram lines, 13 trolleybus lines, and 47 bus routes. Trams, locally known as \"\u0161aliny\", are so ubiquitous that Brno has been nicknamed \u0160alingrad. They first appeared in 1869 with the premiere of a horse-drawn tram on the territory of the Czech Republic. The trolleybus fleet, with 157 vehicles, is the largest in the nation. Local public transit integrates with regional transit into one system, IDS JMK, and links surrounding municipalities to the city. Its operator, Dopravn\u00ed podnik m\u011bsta Brna, also operates a ferry on the Brno Reservoir. A visitor minibus provides sightseeing tours of the city. In 2024, more than half of Brno's residents relied exclusively or almost exclusively on public transit. Approximately one-third of the population relied on personal motor vehicles. Pedestrians and cyclists/scooter riders accounted for 10% combined. The base 60-minute fare, valid for rides within the city, is 25 CZK (approx. \u20ac1). \nTickets can be purchased at vending machines, at newsstands, through the operator's website or app, or through SMS from a domestic phone number. Various discounts, subsidies, and exemptions, including discounted monthly, quarterly, or annual passes (), are available. In 2022, about 32,000 residents applied for a subsidy available on the annual pass. That discounted the pass from CZK 4,750 (\u20ac195) to CZK 3,325 (\u20ac137). The city allocated CZK 54 million (\u20ac2.2 million) for this benefit. With the annual pass, another adult and up to three children under 15 ride free on weekends. In 2022, Dopravn\u00ed podnik m\u011bsta Brna converted to electronic-only passes. In 2023, approximately 153,000 prepaid passes were sold, and 70% of passengers used a \u0160alinkarta pass. Brno operates a night-time bus service, which is unique in the Czech Republic for its regular central meeting point of all lines. Over the past 25 years, more than 150 million passengers have used this service. The busiest nights are Friday and Saturday, when 22 buses serving 11 bus routes transport approximately 20,000 passengers. \nA railway service started in 1839 on the Brno\u2013Vienna line, the first operational train line in the country. Today, Brno is a transnational railway hub with two train stations, several intermediate stops, and 24 regional train lines. There are 13 direct rail connections to national destinations and 21 non-stop international routes. Brno hlavn\u00ed n\u00e1dra\u017e\u00ed, the main railway station, sees about 50,000 passengers and 500 trains every day, and is the hub of regional train travel. The historic station building is outdated and has insufficient operating capacity. A referendum about the future location of the station was held twice, first in 2004 and again in 2016. Although an overwhelming majority of residents wanted to keep the main train station in its current location, the referendum results are not binding due to low turnout. In 2024, the Czech Ministry of Transport approved the construction of a new main railway station on the site of the current Brno doln\u00ed n\u00e1dra\u017e\u00ed station. The project is scheduled for completion in 2035.\nBrno is also a motorway node. Two motorways on the southern edge of the city, the D1 and the D2, connect Brno with Ostrava and Prague, as well as Bratislava, respectively. The D1 and D2 interchange is one of the busiest junctions in the Czech Republic with up to 80,000 vehicles passing through daily. Further beyond the city limits is the D52, which leads to Vienna. Another planned motorway, the D43, will connect Brno to northwestern Moravia. A motorway ring, the I/42, is under construction to divert traffic around the city. Several road tunnels have been built, at Pis\u00e1rky, Husovice, Hlinky, and Kr\u00e1lovo Pole, as part of the I/42 project, with more planned. Brno utilizes a zone-based parking system, offering free parking to residents and charging visitors for parking. The historic city centre is subject to more restrictions. Additional car parks, including underground, are being built to alleviate congestion. In 2024, there were approximately 598 cars per 1,000 residents in Brno, with about nine cars added per thousand inhabitants each year. Brno utilizes a traffic management system that integrates real-time data and prioritizes public transit to reduce congestion and air emissions.\nBrno-Tu\u0159any Airport is an international airport located about southeast of Brno's city centre. In 2024, it recorded a passenger volume of 749,513 and a cargo throughput of , a slight increase over the previous year. Two major carriers, Ryanair and Aegean, and other airlines, including Smartwings, AeroItalia and Air Montenegro, operate scheduled services to European destinations, but the airport primarily serves seasonal charter flights. Brno-Tu\u0159any also serves as a police helicopter base, the only one outside of Prague. There is also the municipal Medl\u00e1nky Airport, which serves as a hub for ultralight general aviation and recreational activities, including hot air balloon flying, gliding, and model aircraft. The airport is home to Aeroklub Brno-Medl\u00e1nky, which also operates the airfield.\nCycling is a popular and widespread activity in Brno, due to the city's favorable topography. Despite Brno's car-centric layout and limited availability of bike lanes, 4% of the city's residents use bicycles as a means of transportation. There are seven well-maintained bicycle paths, including those along the Svratka and Svitava rivers, totaling . Regional bike routes include a bikeway to Vienna. Additionally, several hiking trails maintained by the Czech Tourist Club (K\u010cT) pass through or near Brno, including the Stezka \u010ceskem national trail and numerous local marked trails. As of 2025, two bicycle-sharing companies operated in Brno: Nextbike and Rekola. Bolt and Lime operate a fleet of rental scooters. In 2024, approximately 16,000 residents used bike-sharing services for 160,000 journeys, covering a distance of .\nCulture.\nIn 2023, the city spent approximately CZK 1.73 billion (\u20ac71 million) on culture. A university city with approximately 65,000 students, Brno is home to numerous museums, theatres, and other cultural institutions, and hosts a variety of festivals and cultural events. On average, Brno spent CZK 3,878.5 (\u20ac160) per capita on culture annually, significantly ahead of cities such as Ostrava (CZK 3,137.74), Olomouc (CZK 2,812.07), and Prague (CZK 1,790.51). Brno features a rich cultural life, with a diverse range of institutions and artists. More than 11,000 entities and approximately 21,000 residents (comprising about 12% of Brno's economy) are engaged in creative industries and culture. The estimated annual turnover of the entire sector exceeds CZK 24 billion (\u20ac990 million). \nBrno has experienced a significant cultural \"rebirth\" since the Velvet Revolution of 1989. The fa\u00e7ades of historical monuments have been repaired, and various exhibitions, shows, and other events are being established or expanded. In 2007, a summit of 15 presidents of EU Member States was held in Brno. Despite its urban character, some of the city's districts still preserve traditional Moravian folklore, including folk festivals featuring traditional Moravian costumes, local wines, folk music, and dances, held in several city districts, including \u017didenice, L\u00ed\u0161e\u0148, and Ivanovice. A local dialect, Hantec, originated in Brno. While the dialect itself is no longer in common use, certain words are still used, such as \"\u0161alina\" (the common local term for a tram), \"\u0161tatl\", (the city centre), and \"rola\", (a railway station).\nFestivals.\nThe largest festival in Brno is the Ignis Brunensis (Latin for \"Flame of Brno\") fireworks competition and drone show, held annually in June as part of the \"Brno \u2013 City in the Centre of Europe\" festival. Ignis Brunensis is the largest event of its kind in Central Europe, with over 1.3 million attendees in 2014. \"Cinema Mundi\" was an international film festival held annually at the end of winter between 2010 and 2016. Approximately 60 films competed for an Oscar nomination in the category of Best Foreign Language Film. It resumed in 2024 with its 8th edition. \"Theatre World Brno\" is one of the largest theatre festivals in the Czech Republic. It is a collaboration between the National Theatre Brno, Husa na prov\u00e1zku Theatre, Municipal Theatre Brno, JAMU, and several other venues. It features dozens of performances by national and international ensembles.\nOther festivals held regularly in Brno include the Spilberk International Music Festival and the Summer Shakespeare Festival. Every September, Brno hosts the \"Slavnosti v\u00edna\" wine festival to celebrate the harvest in the surrounding wine-producing region. The Moravian Autumn festival, established as the Brno International Music Festival in 1966, is among the highest-profile cultural events in the Czech Republic, bringing leading international orchestras, chamber ensembles and soloists to Brno. The Jan\u00e1\u010dek Brno festival is an international opera and music festival that celebrates the works of Leo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek and other Czech composers, including Anton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k. Performances are often televised and broadcast on the radio.\nBrno also hosts historical reenactments and commemorative events. The reenactment of the Battle of Austerlitz draws over 1,000 attendees from more than a dozen countries each year. Another historic reenactment and parade is the Day of Brno, which commemorates the day when Brno successfully repelled the Swedish army during the Thirty Years' War. It features a re-enacted battle at the \u0160pilberk Castle and a parade in historical uniforms through the city centre. The Annual Pilgrimage of Reconciliation commemorates the expulsion of German residents and the so-called Brno Death March. The Reconciliation March is now part of the Meeting Brno festival. It was first held in 2015 and has grown significantly in size, with 13,000 attendees in 2023. In addition to the Brno International Folklore Festival, several Brno districts, such as Medl\u00e1nky and \u010cernovice, host their own \"hody\". This traditional Moravian village celebration combines local customs and festive activities. They are usually held in the summer and early fall, and feature folk costumes (), traditional music, dancing, and a maypole.\nTheatres.\nBrno features the oldest theatre building in Central Europe, the Reduta Theatre, located on Zeln\u00fd trh, which bears witness to the city's long tradition of the performing arts. The first theatre plays in Brno likely took place in the 1660s at what was the \"City Tavern\", an early precursor to the Reduta Theatre. However, the first theatre building with opera boxes was constructed later, in 1733. The first documented theatre performance in the Czech language took place here in 1767. The play was called \"Zamilovan\u00fd ponocn\u00fd\" () and was performed by the Baden Theatre Company. Mozart performed at the theatre with his sister Anna Maria (Nannerl) while his family spent Christmas in Brno that year. A Mozart statue stands in front of the theatre, commemorating their visit, and the theatre's \"Mozart Hall\" is named in his honor.\nThe National Theatre Brno (NdB) is the leading producer of opera, drama, and ballet in Brno. NdB's first permanent presence was established in 1884. Today, the National Theatre Brno also owns the Mahen Theatre, which was built in 1882, the Jan\u00e1\u010dek Theatre, built in 1965, and the Reduta Theatre. The composer Leo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek is also associated with the National Theatre Brno. The Mahen Theatre was the first theatre building in Europe illuminated by Thomas Edison's electric light bulbs, which were a novelty at the time. A small steam-driven electric power plant was constructed near the theatre before Edison's visit to Brno in 1911. The Brno City Theatre, founded in 1945, is the most commercially successful ensemble in Brno. The theatre's local performances are routinely sold out. It performs abroad as well. The theatre's repertoire consists primarily of musical and dramatic shows.\nThere is a variety of smaller theatre venues in Brno, including the Bolek Polivka theatre, the Husa na prov\u00e1zku Theatre, HaDivadlo, Divadlo Radost, and Divadlo Pol\u00e1rka. The Mahen Theatre was initially known as the City Theatre and, until 1918, hosted performances exclusively in German; it was not part of the National Theatre of Brno at that time. Between 1971 and 1978, some plays were hosted by the Brno Exhibition Centre while the Mahen Theatre underwent reconstruction.\nLocal legends.\nAlligators, crocodiles, and dragons are referenced heavily in Brno, due to a local legend dating back to the Middle Ages. According to one version of the legend, a frightening creature terrorized the residents of Brno. Unfamiliar with a crocodile, they referred to it as a dragon. They lived in fear until a young butcher devised a plan to kill the monster. He filled a cowhide with quicklime and sewed it up. After eating this, the crocodile attempted to wash down the bitter aftertaste with water until its stomach burst and it died. According to another version of the story, Margrave Matthias (later the Holy Roman Emperor) was fond of animals, and the Ottomans gifted him a live crocodile. As Matthias passed through the streets of Brno, the crocodile died, and the Margrave left it behind in the city, where it has been on display ever since at the Brno Old Town Hall.\nOver the years, the creature became one of the mascots of Brno. A stuffed baguette is called a crocodile (), as is the radio station, known as Radio Krokod\u00fdl. One of the local baseball teams is named Draci Brno (), the rugby club is RC Dragon Brno, and the American football team goes by Brno Alligators. An Intercity train connection between Brno and Prague is named \"Brn\u011bnsk\u00fd drak\" (). The 2024 Christmas season featured a dragon clothed in a neon jumper spewing flames. The particular specimen on display in the Old Town Hall passage is a female Nile crocodile of unknown age, about in length, and weighing . Its skin has been reinforced with metal and a plaster cast. \nNext to the crocodile is a wagon wheel, another symbol of the city. According to the legend, a man made a wager that he could fell a tree in Lednice, from the city, craft a wheel out of it, and roll with it to town all within a single day. Since the feat was deemed to be impossible, the man was believed to have made a pact with the devil, was ostracized, and died penniless as a result.\nAnother local legend dates back to the siege of the city by the Swedish army during the Thirty Years' War in 1645. The standoff was at a stalemate, and the Swedish marshal Lennart Torstensson declared that he would withdraw if the city did not surrender to him by noon. The bell ringer at the Cathedral of Saints Peter and Paul on Petrov Hill tricked the Swedes by sounding noon an hour early. In keeping his word, Field Marshal Torstensson and his army left. As a historic tribute to the Swedish siege, the bell at the Cathedral of Saints Peter and Paul still rings noon an hour early, at 11 o'clock. The Brno astronomical clock releases a glass ball at 11 a.m. every day to commemorate the heroic defense of the city. On special occasions, a glass ball rolls out every hour. As the hour approaches, the clock is typically surrounded by throngs of people hoping to catch one of the glass balls as a souvenir.\nMuseums, libraries and galleries.\nThe most significant museum in Brno is the Moravian Museum, the largest in Moravia and the second-largest in the Czech Republic. The museum was founded in 1817, and its collections comprise over 6 million pieces. The most extensive public library in Brno is the Moravian Library. With approximately 4 million volumes, it is the second-largest library in the Czech Republic. The most extensive gallery in Brno is the Moravian Gallery, which again ranks second in the Czech Republic and is the largest in Moravia. \nOne section of the Moravian Museum, the Anthropos Pavilion, is related to the earliest history of humanity and prehistoric Europe. Brno is also home to one of the largest technical museums in the Czech Republic, which hosts 17 permanent displays charting the advance of science and technology, accompanied by various models and restored machinery. The museum also hosts multiple short-term exhibitions that complement its emphasis on metallurgy, cutlery, mechanical music, steamships, clockwork, and water machines.\nEducation.\nBrno is home to 10 universities and more than 60 secondary schools. In 2024, over 65,000 students were enrolled in Brno's higher education institutions. The student population has increased by 6.4% over the past five years, reversing the downward trend that had persisted through the 2010s, and now one in six Brno residents is a student. The city is also home to several research and development institutions, including the Central European Institute of Technology (CEITEC) and the International Clinical Research Center (ICRC). While classes taught in English are subject to tuition fees, instruction in Czech is free to everyone, including international students. The three most prominent universities in the region, Masaryk University, Brno University of Technology, and Mendel University in Brno, all participate in the Erasmus programme. \nWith over 35,000 students, Masaryk University, also known as MUNI, is the largest university in Brno. Founded in 1919, it comprises ten faculties, 400 study programmes, over 190 departments, institutes, and clinics. MUNI consistently ranks among the top 500 universities globally and second, after Charles University, in the Czech Republic. The Brno University of Technology, VUT, was established in 1899 and is now one of the largest technical universities in the Czech Republic, with approximately 18,000 students. It ranks among the top 41% of universities globally and fifth in the nation. Viktor Kaplan, the inventor of the Kaplan turbine, spent nearly 30 years at the German Technical University in Brno, a precursor institution that closed after World War II in 1945.\nThe Mendel University, or MENDELU, was established in 1919 and is named after Gregor Mendel, the founder of genetics, who developed his revolutionary scientific theories in Brno. It focuses on life sciences and has over 10,000 students. It ranks 9th in the Czech Republic and 1267th globally (177th in Plant and Animal Science). \nThe Jan\u00e1\u010dek Academy of Music and Performing Arts, or JAMU, named after Leo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek, was founded in 1947 and is one of two academies of music and drama in the Czech Republic. It holds the annual Leo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek Competition. The University of Veterinary Sciences Brno is the only university in the Czech Republic for the study of veterinary sciences. Founded in 1918, the VETUNI has an estimated total enrollment of approximately 350 students, with 76 new students enrolled in the 2024/25 academic year. VETUNI ranks 699th in Plant and Animal Science globally.\nSport.\nThe city has a long association with motor racing; among other events, the Masaryk Circuit has hosted the Moto GP championship since 1965. The annual Czech Republic motorcycle Grand Prix, the most famous motor race in the Czech Republic, has been held in the city since 1950. Since 1968, Brno has been a permanent fixture on the European Touring Car Championship (ETCC) series.\nTrack and road cycling have a long history in Brno. The first track races took place here in 1889, and the velodrome in Brno ranks among the oldest velodromes in the world. In 1969, Brno hosted the UCI Track Cycling World Championships and the UCI Road World Championships for amateurs. In 1981, the UCI Track Cycling World Championships were held, and in 2001, the UEC European Track Championships were held for the U23 category. There are two traditional cycling teams: http:// and https://.\nThe 2010 FIBA World Championship for Women was played in Brno's Arena Vodova, with the Czech squad taking the silver medal.\nThere is a horse-race course at Brno-Dvorsk\u00e1 and an aeroclub airport in Medl\u00e1nky Airport. Several sports clubs represent the city in the various Czech leagues, including FC Zbrojovka Brno (football), HC Kometa Brno (ice hockey), KP Brno (basketball, women), BC Brno (basketball, men) and BK Brno (women), four baseball teams (Draci Brno, Hro\u0161i Brno, VSK Technika Brno, MZLU Express Brno), Brno Ravens LC (lacrosse club), Brno Alligators (American football), two rugby teams (RC Dragon Brno, RC Bystrc) and others. Tennis players Barbora Krej\u010d\u00edkov\u00e1, Lucie \u0160af\u00e1\u0159ov\u00e1, Luk\u00e1\u0161 Rosol, and Jana Novotn\u00e1 are from Brno, as well as Michal B\u0159ezina, one of the top Czech figure skaters.\nMotorcycle speedway events were held at the Winter Stadium, off Na Rybn\u00ed\u010dku in Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9 Pole. The venue hosted a final round of the Czechoslovak Individual Speedway Championship in 1949, 1950 and 1954.\nSights.\nBrno has over 400 protected cultural sites and objects, including one designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and 14 monuments on the List of national cultural monuments of the Czech Republic. Most of them are in the historical city centre, but some are located in the outer districts of the city.\nThe Old Town Hall (Czech: \"Star\u00e1 radnice\"), dating back to approximately 1240, is the oldest secular building in Brno and has been registered as a national cultural monument since 2024. Its observation deck is 63 metres above ground, and the central passageway houses the Brno dragon and a cartwheel, both symbols of the city. \u0160pilberk Castle, originally a royal seat founded in the 13th century, became a fortress and later a prison from the 17th century onwards (e.g., the Carbonari). Today, it is one of the city's major landmarks. The park and gardens around the castle, established in 1861, are notable for their landscaping, as well as an observation point also known as the \u0160pilberk Arbour. \nAnother key landmark is the Cathedral of St. Peter and Paul, built during the 14th and 15th centuries in place of an 11th-century chapel. It was completed in its present form with two neo-Gothic towers in 1909. \nVeve\u0159\u00ed Castle, about from the city centre, is the third-largest historic monument in Brno. Founded in the Middle Ages as a hunting lodge for the Moravian margraves, it is among the largest and oldest castles in the Czech Republic. Its last owner was Baron Maurice de Forest, an early motor racing driver, aviator, and close friend of Winston Churchill, who visited the castle several times.\nThe Abbey of Saint Thomas, the site of Gregor Mendel's genetics experiments, is also linked with Leo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek. The Church of Saint Tomas houses the graves of John Henry, its founder, and his son, Jobst of Moravia, both margraves of Moravia. The Basilica of the Assumption of Our Lady is the final resting place of Queen Elisabeth Richeza. The Church of Saint James is one of the best-preserved Gothic churches in Brno.\nThe Brno Ossuary is the second largest in Europe after the Catacombs of Paris. Another smaller ossuary is the Capuchin Crypt, which houses mummies of Capuchin monks and other notable figures of their era, including architect Mo\u0159ic Grimm and the mercenary leader Baron Trenk. The Labyrinth under Zeln\u00fd trh, a system of underground corridors and cellars dating back to the Middle Ages, have historically served as beer and wine cellars, food storage, and wartime shelters, and have more recently become a tourist attraction. They were previously not as interconnected as they are now, following an extensive reconstruction completed in 2009.\nBrno was home to a sizable Jewish community since at least the 13th century. The city is home to a functionalist synagogue built between 1934 and 1936, and the largest Jewish cemetery in Moravia. Tombstones and other cemetery artifacts date back to 1349. It is estimated that the Jewish community comprised about 12,000 individuals in 1938. Only about 1,000 of them survived the Holocaust and Nazi persecution during World War II. The cemetery and the synagogue are maintained by Brno's remaining Jewish community. The only mosque in the Czech Republic, founded in 1998, is also located in Brno.\nThe interwar period saw a significant construction boom, as evidenced by numerous modernist and functionalist buildings. The Villa Tugendhat, designed by architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe in the 1920s for the family of Fritz Tugendhat, was completed in 1930. It was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2001. Another notable architect who significantly contributed to Brno's cityscape was Arno\u0161t Wiesner. Other examples of functionalist buildings include the Hotel Avion and Palace Moravia. The Brno Exhibition Centre hosts more than 40 trade fairs and conferences annually, attracting over 1 million visitors.\nLu\u017e\u00e1nky is the oldest public park in the Czech Republic, established in the late 18th century by Emperor Joseph II. Denisovy sady, founded in the early 19th century, was the first public park in the Czech Republic to be established by public authorities. More recent additions include the Brno astronomical clock and the AZ Tower, commissioned in 2013, and at 111 metres (364 ft), the tallest building in the Czech Republic.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nBrno is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCooperation agreements.\nBrno also cooperates with:\nNearby cities.\nThis tool shows only cities with a population over 300,000 within a radius of .\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57576", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57576", "title": "Brno, Czech Republic", "text": ""}
{"id": "57577", "revid": "51014025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57577", "title": "Limassol", "text": "Largest city in Cyprus\nLimassol, also known as Lemesos, is a city along the southern coast of Cyprus, on the Mediterranean Sea. Limassol is the most populated municipality in Cyprus, with a population of 108,105 and is the second-largest urban area in Cyprus, after Nicosia, with an urban population of 195,139. It is the capital of the Limassol District with a population of 262,238.\nLimassol was built between two ancient Greek cities, Amathus and Kourion. Its historical centre is located around the medieval Limassol Castle and the Old Port. The city spreads along the Mediterranean coast and has extended much farther than the castle and port, with its suburbs stretching along the coast to Amathus. To the west of the city is Akrotiri, one of the two British Overseas Territories of Akrotiri and Dhekelia on the island.\nIn 2014, Limassol was ranked by TripAdvisor as the third most up-and-coming destination in the world, in its Top 10 Travelers' Choice Destinations on the Rise list. In Mercer's Quality of Living Ranking, the city was ranked 90th in 2023, and 89th in 2017. In the 2022 GaWC ranking, Limassol was classified as a \"High Sufficiency\" city, dropping one category from \"Gamma \u2212\" (lit.\u2009'global city') in 2020.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Limassol\" derives from the ancient Greek word \"Nemesos\" (), meaning \"one found in the middle\". This likely refers to the city's location between the ancient towns of Amathus and Kourion. Over time, the name evolved into \"Lemesos\", which is known in English as \"Limassol.\"\nHistory.\nAncient.\nLimassol is situated between the ancient city-kingdoms of Amathus, founded around 1100 BC by Greek settlers, and Kourion, founded around the same time. Settlements in the modern area of Limassol were most likely founded after the decline and destruction of Amathus, around the 7th century AD. The area around Limassol shows evidence of human activity dating back to the Neolithic period (around 7000 BC). Sites like Chirokitia, although not directly in Limassol, indicate the presence of early farming communities. During the Bronze Age, the region saw the development of more complex societies, with evidence of trade and cultural exchanges with neighbouring regions. Ancient writers and geographers mention nothing about the foundation of the town.\nAccording to the Council of Chalcedon which took place in 451, the local bishop as well as the bishops of Amathus and Arsinoe were involved in the foundation of the city, which would be known by the names of Theodosiana and Neapolis. Bishop Leontios of Neapolis was an important church writer in the 7th century. The records of the 7th Synod (757) refer to it as the bishop's see. The town was known as Lemesos by the 10th century.\nMedieval.\nThe history of Limassol is largely known by the events associated with the Third Crusade. The king of England, Richard the Lionheart, was travelling to the Holy Land in 1190. His fianc\u00e9e, Berengaria, and his sister, Joan, were also travelling there, but on a different ship. Due to a storm, the women's ship arrived in Limassol. Isaac Komnenos, the renegade Byzantine governor of Cyprus, invited the noblewomen ashore, with the intention of holding them for ransom, but they refused. So he refused them fresh water and they had to put out to sea again or yield to capture. When Richard arrived in Limassol and met Isaac Komnenos, he asked him to contribute to the crusade for the liberation of the Holy Land. At first Isaac agreed but later on refused. Richard took him captive; the entire island was taken over by the Anglo-Normans, bringing the long Byzantine dominion of Cyprus to an end. Richard celebrated his marriage with Berengaria who had received the crown as queen of England in Cyprus. Richard destroyed Amathus and the inhabitants were transferred to Limassol.\nA year later, in 1191 Cyprus was sold for the sum of 100,000 bezants to the Templars, rich monks and soldiers whose aim was the protection of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem.\nThe knights imposed high taxes, in order to get back the money they had paid for Cyprus. This led to the revolt of the Cypriots, who wished to get rid of the bond of promise. Richard accepted their request and a new purchaser was found: Guy of Lusignan, a Roman Catholic from Poitou, who handed Cyprus over to the French dynasty of the house of Lusignan, thus establishing the medieval Kingdom of Cyprus.\nFor a period of about three centuries (1192\u20131489), Limassol enjoyed remarkable prosperity. Cyprus had a great number of Latin bishops, which lasted until the occupation of Cyprus by the Ottomans in 1570. The Latin battalions established monasteries and settled down there. The settlement of merchants in Cyprus and particularly in Limassol in the 13th century enhanced the welfare of its inhabitants. Its harbour became a centre of transportation and commerce, contributing greatly to its financial and cultural development.\nVenetian rule.\nCyprus was sold in 1489 to Venice by the Cypriot Queen Catherine Cornaro. The Venetians were not interested in Cyprus. They only wanted to tax and exploit the island\u2019s resources. All the inhabitants were enslaved by the Venetians, and were obliged to give a third of their income, including products of the land. Travelers who visited Cyprus in the 16th century commented on the poor condition of the local population in the towns of the island.\nIn 1538 the Ottomans captured the city and the Limassol castle. The Venetian governor of Cyprus, after recapturing the castle, decided to demolish it in order to avoid its possible seizure. This destruction was completed in 1567-68. Two years later the Ottomans recaptured the city.\nOttoman rule.\nThe Ottoman Empire invaded Cyprus in 1570\u20131577 and occupied it. Limassol was conquered in July 1570 without any resistance. After the Ottoman acquisition of Cyprus in 1576, the remains or parts of the remains of the Limassol castle were incorporated in the new Ottoman fort, completed in 1590, which was considerably strengthened. The underground chamber and the first floor were transformed into prison cells and remained in use until 1950.\nSome neighbourhoods, primarily to the east of the city, were predominantly Greek, while those to the west were mainly Turkish, with a mixed area around the castle. Christians lived in small, low houses that required one to bend to enter, a deliberate design to prevent Turks from riding horses into the homes. During the period of Turkish rule, Cyprus experienced a general decline. The Turks did not contribute to any development, and Greeks and Turks lived in separate neighbourhoods. The intellectual standards of Cypriots declined due to the lack of interest from the conquerors, oppression, and high taxation, which hindered the intellectual development of children.\nThe church played an important role in the education of Greeks during the years 1754\u20131821. During those years, many new schools were established all over the island, most notable in Limassol being the Greek School (modern-day Laniteio Lyceum). Greek history, Turkish and French were taught at schools.\nBritish colony.\nIn 1878, the British had administrative control over Cyprus after the Cyprus convention. The first British governor of Limassol was Colonel Warren. He showed a particular interest in Limassol and even from the first days the condition of the town showed an improvement. The roads were cleaned, the animals were removed from the centre, roads were fixed, trees were planted and docks were constructed for the loading and unloading of those ships that were anchored off-shore. Lanterns for the lighting of the central areas were also installed in the 1880s. In 1912, electricity replaced the old lanterns.\nFrom the first years of the British occupation, a post office, a telegraph office and a hospital began to operate. In 1880, the first printing press started working. It was in this printing press that the newspapers \"Alithia\" and \"Anagennisis\" were published in 1897. The newspaper \"Salpinx\" was published at the same time.\nAt the end of the 19th century, the first hotels began to operate. Among these were Europe and Amathus. These changes that the British brought about contributed to the development of an intellectual and artistic life. Schools, theatres, clubs, art galleries, music halls, sport societies, football clubs etc. were all set up and meant a great deal to the cultural life of Limassol.\nModern day.\nDue to the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974 the Turkish Cypriot inhabitants of Limassol were transferred to the north of Cyprus. Accordingly, many Greek Cypriots refugees settled down in the city. When Famagusta was occupied by Turkish troops, Limassol experienced rapid growth fuelled by the large population increase and the need for housing. Many luxury hotels, restaurants and entertainment venues were built, making Limassol the new commerce centre of Cyprus, the role which had been filled by Famagusta.\nLimassol has become the second largest city in Cyprus and hosts the island\u2019s main port. It is renowned for its extravagant annual events, attracting numerous visitors from both the island and around the globe.\nGeography.\nMunicipalities and quarters.\nToday, the Limassol urban area includes the Limassol Municipality and the municipalities of Kato Polemidia, Mesa Geitonia, Agios Athanasios, Germasogeia, and Ypsonas. For administrative purposes, the municipalities of Limassol are divided into quarters, with the exception of Ypsonas.\nClimate.\nLimassol has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Csa\"), closely bordering a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"BSh\"), with hot and dry summers and mild and wet winters, which are separated by short springs and autumns which are generally warm and sunny. From December to March, the weather is unsettled and can be rainy and windy. Sunshine averages around 6 hours a day. During this season there are a few days when the daytime highs might not exceed and the night time lows might be as low as but usually the temperature ranges from to in the day and from to in the night. Rain tends to be heavy this time of the year and thunderstorms occur often though they usually do not last for a long time.\nSnow in Limassol is a very rare occurrence and usually falls mixed with rain every 7 to 13 years. Snow mixed with rain fell in February 2004, in January 2008 and in February 2012. In January 2022 Limassol registered a record low temperature of . In spring the weather is mild to warm and pleasant. It is sunny almost every day and the temperatures are around in the day and in the night. Rain showers and thunderstorms are common especially in late March and April. Sometimes during the spring dust comes from the Sahara desert which degrades air quality in the city. Summer for Limassol is the longest season of the year, and lasts about six months; it begins in May and ends in October. At this time of the year, the weather is sunny every day and rain is rare. The temperatures range between to in June and September and to in July and August. In June, sea mist can sometimes occur, usually resolving early in the morning. Autumn is warm and usually sunny. It begins in the end of November and in December. During this period of the year, temperatures range from as low as to as high as .\nThis season the weather differs from year to year and it can be very wet with violent thunderstorms sometimes (October 2009 rainfall was around ) or very dry (October 2007 rainfall of ). Limassol receives around of rain each year but this varies from year to year and sometimes droughts do occur (every 3\u20135 years). The rainy season 2009\u20132010 was a wet one with precipitation being as high as in some areas whilst the rainy season of 2007\u20132008 was dry with only of rain. Hail is rare and usually falls between October and April.\nDemographics.\nLimassol is the 2nd most populous district in Cyprus, with 262,238 residents as of the 2021 Cyprus census, while the city itself has 198,558 residents. The district population\u2019s citizenships in 2021 was 77.7% Cypriot, 8.6% EU citizen, 13.1% Foreign citizen, with 0.6% not stating their nationality. Between 2011 and 2021, the district gained 26,827 residents.\nSince the 1960s, internal migration and the influx of displaced persons after 1974 have significantly increased the population of Limassol and its suburbs.\nLimassol is home to a large community of Pontic Greeks, who settled in Cyprus after the collapse of the Soviet Union.\nThe city has also become increasingly popular with Russian and other post-Soviet nationals and expatriates, earning the nickname \u201cLimassolgrad\". Today, about 17% of Limassol\u2019s population is Russian-speaking, and 8% are Russian citizens.\nHistorical.\nHistorically, Limassol had a mixed population of Greek Cypriots, Turkish Cypriots, and Armenian Cypriots. Most Turkish Cypriots moved to the north in 1974-1975. Consequently, many Greek Cypriots from the north, who became refugees following the Turkish invasion, settled in the city. In the 1990s, several Cypriot Romani people (considered Turkish Cypriots according to the constitution) returned from the north to the Turkish quarter of Limassol. Armenians remained in Limassol, residing around the Sourp Kevork Armenian Apostolic Church and maintain the Nareg Armenian School (). There is also an Armenian village in the Limassol district called Armenochori ().\nThe population birth rate rose by 70% during the late 19th and 20th centuries (1878\u20131960). The number of inhabitants increased from 6,131 in 1881 to 43,593 in 1960. The Greek Cypriot population was estimated at 37,478, while the Turkish Cypriot population was at 6,115.\nEducation.\nLimassol has a comprehensive educational infrastructure, encompassing primary, secondary, and tertiary education. There are over a hundred public educational institutions in the city, with instruction primarily in Greek. Laniteio Lyceum, the oldest lyceum in the city and the largest on the island, was originally founded in 1819 as the \"Greek School\" and played a leading role in advancing education during periods of limited public provision.\nIn recent years, Limassol has emerged as a significant education hub, particularly for private and international secondary education. The city hosts sixteen private secondary schools, offering instruction in English, Greek, Russian, Ukrainian, French, and other languages. Notable institutions include The Grammar School, Foley\u2019s School, The Heritage Private School, American Academy, Pascal International Education, The Island Private School, IMS Private School, Silverline, and Trinity Private School. These schools offer a variety of curricula, including the British curriculum (IGCSE/A-Levels), International Baccalaureate (IB), Waldorf education, Montessori, and other international programs.\nSeveral new campuses have been announced or are under development. Pascal International Education is expanding with two new campuses in Limassol, one of which will offer the IB Diploma Programme starting in 2025. The Island Private School, an IB Continuum school, is expanding to include a boarding facility. In 2025, construction is expected to begin on a \u20ac50 million Jewish educational campus in the area of Polemidia, funded by the Yael Foundation and set to open in 2027 as a flagship international school for up to 1,500 students.\nIn addition to the various Greek and English speaking schools, the Nareg Armenian School also has a campus in the city, one of three on the island. Another notable example is Saint Mary's School, a Catholic institution founded in 1923 by the Franciscan Missionary Sisters of the Sacred Heart, offering primary and secondary education to students of all religions. Its curriculum places strong emphasis on modern languages\u2014including English, Greek, French, and Italian\u2014while gradually integrating science and commercial subjects.\nIn terms of higher education, Limassol is the base of Cyprus University of Technology (CUT), one of three state universities, established in 2004. The city is also home to Frederick University and the University of Limassol, which are both private universities. Many institutions of tertiary education can be found in the city.\nEconomy.\nTourism in Limassol began to flourish after 1974, following the occupation of Famagusta and Kyrenia, the principal tourist resorts of Cyprus, during the 1974 Turkish invasion of Cyprus. Limassol has many beaches, suitable for sunbathing and swimming. A bathing beach with all the necessary facilities, provided by the Cyprus Tourism Organisation, operates in the Dasoudi area.\nIn 1974, the Port of Limassol became the Republic of Cyprus\u2019s main seaport. Prior to that, the role had been filled by the port of Famagusta, now located in the \"de facto\" state of Northern Cyprus, which is not recognised as a legal port by any country except Turkey.\nLimassol is home to many of Cyprus\u2019s wine companies, which cater to the wine-growing regions on the southern slopes of the Troodos Mountains, including Commandaria. Notable companies such as KEO, LOEL, SODAP, and ETKO produce award-winning wines and brandies (cognacs) in international exhibitions. These products are highly consumed by both locals and tourists, with significant quantities exported to Europe.\nLimassol is the largest industrial centre in the district, hosting around 350 industrial units with 90 industry wares. These industries include dressmaking, furniture, footwear, beverages, food, printing, metalwork, electrical devices, plastics, and more.\nLimassol is a key trade centre in Cyprus, partially due to the presence of the UK sovereign base at Episkopi and Akrotiri, and the population displacement following the Turkish invasion in 1974. The main trade markets are located in the town centre and the coastal tourist area, stretching from the Old Port to the Amathus area. This area is home to most of the hotels, restaurants, confectioneries, discos, and entertainment venues. Major global retail shops can be found on Anexartisias Street and Makariou Avenue, the city\u2019s primary shopping streets, as well as at MYMALL, the largest mall in the district.\nLimassol has two ports, commonly known as the Old Port (Limassol Marina) and the New Port (Port of Limassol). The New Port handles the majority of commercial and passenger traffic and is one of the busiest ports in the Mediterranean transit trade and is the largest port in the Republic of Cyprus. With a depth of and breakwaters extending , can receive about ten ships, depending on their size. The Old Port, with a breakwater, can accommodate only three small ships at a time and is primarily used by fishing boats. These ports facilitate the export of grapes, wines, carobs, and citrus fruits, as well as the import of cereals, vehicles, machinery, textiles, agricultural medicines, fertilisers, and iron.The Limassol Marina, built in 2014, is located west of the Limassol Castle, on the Old Port. This new development allows berthing of ocean-going yachts, having hosted its first yachts in 2013. The marina has a capacity of 1,000 vessels.\nSince 2014, Limassol has experienced a construction boom driven by the tourism sector and increasing foreign investments. Public projects, such as the redesign of the Limassol Molos promenade, have enhanced the quality of life and the city\u2019s image as a cosmopolitan destination. Infrastructure improvements, partly funded by European programs, have addressed traffic issues with new highway flyovers and roundabouts.\nLimassol has become a major centre for tourism, trade, and services. The city offers numerous museums and archaeological sites for visitors. It attracts a diverse range of tourists, especially during the extended summer season, accommodated within a wide variety of hotels and apartments available.\nThe Limassol coastline, known as \u201cThe Limassol Riviera\u201d, is undergoing a significant construction boom that began in late 2013 with new legislation encouraging development; becoming Europe's newest riviera. Since then, hundreds of new housing units and mushrooming businesses are introduced to the community annually. Currently[ [update]], over 70 buildings taller than 50m are proposed or under construction, including 32 skyscrapers. Among these is \u201cONE\", Cyprus\u2019s tallest tower and Europe\u2019s tallest seafront residential building. Another notable project is the \u201cCity of Dreams Mediterranean (CoDM)\u201d, the first and largest integrated resort in Europe. In 2023, CoDM received the Seven Stars Luxury Hospitality and Lifestyle Award for \u201cBest New Luxury Casino Resort in the World\".\nLandmarks.\nArchaeological sites.\nAmathus.\nAmathus is an ancient city-kingdom, located about east of Limassol, dating back to 1100 BC, with a rich history with various influences by various civilisations. The most notable ruin is considered to be the Temple of Aphrodite, a major centre of worship and a sacred place for ceremonies and offerings, sitting atop the Acropolis of Amathus. Many tombs dating to the Iron Age can be found, as well as remnants of public baths and other buildings in the ancient Agora. One of the most remarkable finds from Amathus is a large limestone amphora, now housed in the Louvre Museum in Paris. This vase dates back to the 6th century BC and weighs .\nKourion.\nKourion is another ancient city-kingdom, situated &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt; west of Limassol, with a rich history dating back to the Neolithic period, with significant developments during the Hellenistic, Roman, and Early Christian periods. The centerpiece of Kourion is the Greco-Roman theatre, originally built in the 2nd century BC and expanded in the 2nd century AD. It has been restored and is still used for open-air performances, overlooking the Mediterranean Sea. The Sanctuary of Apollo Hylates was dedicated to Apollo Hylates, the god of the woodland. It includes the remains of a temple, a bath complex, and a palaestra (wrestling school).\nMuseums.\nThe medieval Limassol Castle is one of the ten castles of Cyprus, constructed by the Byzantines around 1000 AD. A chapel was also built on the site during the same period. It is believed that Richard the Lionheart married his fianc\u00e9e, Princess Berengaria of Navarre, at this location in 1191 after her ship was grounded nearby while she was accompanying him to the Third Crusade. The castle served as a prison from 1790 to 1940 and now functions as a medieval museum. The museum\u2019s collection spans from 400 to 1870 AD, showcasing a variety of exhibits including cannons, 17th and 18th-century wood carvings, paintings, tombstones, statues, suits of armor, coins, terracotta, metalware, pottery, glass, and marble artifacts.\nThe Kolossi Castle, located about west of Limassol, is a medieval fortress originally built in the 13th century by the Knights of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, also known as the Knights Hospitaller. The current structure, rebuilt in 1454, features a well-preserved three-story keep and an attached rectangular enclosure. The castle played a significant role in the production of sugar from local sugarcane and is also associated with the famous Commandaria wine.The Folk Art Museum is located in a preserved historic house and features a collection of Cypriot folk art from the past two centuries. The collection includes national costumes, tapestries, embroidery, wooden chests, waistcoats, men\u2019s jackets, necklaces, various light garments, town costumes, and rural tools. Established in 1985, the museum houses over 500 exhibits across six rooms. It was awarded the Europa Nostra prize in 1989. Visitors can explore Cypriot culture through these handmade exhibits.\nThe Archaeological Museum offers a fascinating collection of antiquities discovered in the district, spanning from the Neolithic Age to the Roman period. Among the notable artifacts are stone axes from the Neolithic and Chalcolithic periods, pottery and objects from the ancient cities of Kourion and Amathus, as well as Roman terracottas, gold jewelry, coins, sculptures, columns, vases, earrings, rings, necklaces, and marble statues. The museum was originally located within the Limassol Castle before being relocated to a site near the Public Gardens.\nSince 2024 the non-profit PSI Foundation established in an old carob warehouse located in the industrial area of Limassol hosts exhibitions of modern and contemporary art as well as history of Cyprus. First exhibition dedicated to 50th anniversary of the invasion, \u201cCasts of an Island 2024\u201d, was proclaimed \u201cCultural Event of the Year\u201d by Thoukis awards.\nParks.\nThe Limassol Public Gardens, located along the coastal road, boasts a diverse array of vegetation, including eucalyptus trees, pine trees, and cypresses. Within the garden, visitors can explore the Limassol Zoo that houses deer, moufflons, ostriches, pheasants, tigers, lions, monkeys, vultures, pelicans, flamingos and various other animals and birds. The Patticheio Municipal Museum and an open theatre, which has been renovated to host international performances, can also be found within the gardens.\nThe Limassol Molos, a multifunctional seaside park from reclaimed land that spans , is one of the city's largest hotspots, as well as one of the largest parks on the island. Fishing, kayaking and many other watersports can be done off the piers of the park. The Limassol Sculpture Park, commissioned by the Limassol Municipality, can be found at Molos. The sculptures were created by Costas Dikefalos, Thodoros Papayiannis, Vassilis Vassili and Kyriakos Rokos from Greece, Helene Black from Cyprus, and more.\nCulture.\nFestivals.\nLimassol is renowned in Cyprus for its vibrant festivals, most notably the Carnival and Wine Festival. The Limassol Carnival, a ten-day event filled with joyful and amusing masquerades, has ancient roots tracing back to pagan rituals. Over time, it has evolved into a purely entertaining spectacle with widespread popularity. The festivities kick off with the entrance parade of the King (or Queen) Carnival, followed by a children\u2019s fancy-dress competition. The Grand Carnival parade on Makariou Avenue attracts large crowds from across the island, who come to watch the floats, serenades, and various masqueraded groups. Each night, numerous hotels host fancy-dress balls and parties.\nIn early October, the grand Wine Festival of Cyprus takes place in the Limassol Public Gardens, running every evening from 08:00 to 23:00. During this festival, visitors can sample some of the finest Cypriot wines free of charge. The event also features folk dancing performances by groups from Cyprus and abroad, as well as choir performances and other entertainment.\nOther notable festivals in Limassol include the https:// and the https:// in May, the https:// and https:// in June, and the Festival of Ancient Greek Drama.\nAdditionally, Limassol introduced its first Beer Festival in July 2003. This three-day seaside dance festival in the city center offers a variety of Cypriot and imported beers. The festival is free to enter, with beers sold at low prices and a mix of international music providing the soundtrack.\nLimassol also hosted the sixth Junior Eurovision Song Contest at the Spyros Kyprianou Athletic Centre.\nSports.\nThe Alphamega Stadium, also known as the Limassol Stadium, is the second largest football only stadium on the island. With a capacity of 11.000, it is the home base of the city\u2019s three major football clubs in the city, AEL FC, Apollon FC and Aris FC. The two former ones are the largest sport clubs in Limassol, which have football, basketball, and volleyball teams, as well as other sports. In football, all three teams play in the First Division. AEL FC and Aris FC were two of the eight founding members of the Cyprus Football Association (CFA). There are also many other teams in athletics, bowling, cycling, and other sports.\nThe Tsirio Stadium with a capacity of 13.331, was the home base of the three aforementioned football teams of Limassol as well as the Cyprus national football team in the past. It is also used for athletics. Other than the two previously mentioned stadiums, many others also exist in the city.\nThe Apollon Limassol Basketball Stadium, hosted the 2003 FIBA Europe South Regional Challenge Cup Final Four. The Apollon BC and the AEL BC competed, with the latter becoming the first Cypriot sport team to win a European Trophy. In 2006, Limassol hosted the FIBA Europe All Star Game in Spyros Kiprianou Sports Centre, as it had the year before. The Cyprus Rally which was hosted for the World Rally Championship and the Intercontinental Rally Challenge were both hosted in the Limassol district. In 2025, Limassol will host the EuroBasket.\nThe Limassol Marathon is part of an annual race series which takes place in Limassol. It was first run in 2006 and is still organised to this day. 2024 was a key year for the marathon since the participation record was broken with over 17.000 runners from more than 70 countries around the world participating. There are various races including a marathon, a half marathon, a Energy Race, a Corporate Race and a Youth Race.\nLimassol also has an independent civilian rugby union team, the Limassol Crusaders, who play at the AEK Achileas Stadium and participate in the Joint Services Rugby League. There is a professional handball team, APEN Agiou Athanasiou.\nRowing and canoeing are rapidly becoming very popular in Limassol, due to the three nautical clubs in the city of Limassol. The Germasoyia dam is the place for both practising and competitions.\nTransport.\nLimassol is one of the island's main transportation hubs. The city is home to the largest port on the island, which handles almost exclusively all passenger traffic inbound and outbound the island.\nBus transport.\nEMEL (Limassol Passenger Transport Company) (), is the main operator of buses in Limassol. As of 2024[ [update]], its network consists of around 53 bus lines, spanning the Limassol district, making up a fleet of approximately 150 buses, 35 of which are electric. National and regional bus links are provided by InterCity Buses from the Limassol Port passenger building.\nFerry.\nThe Port of Limassol is the largest port in Cyprus. Commercial and passenger cruises make frequent stops at the port.\nMotorways.\nThe city is a highway hub, crossing the following motorways:\nAirports.\nWhile Limassol is not home to any airports, the city is close to two international airports; Larnaca International Airport (situated &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt; north-east from the city) and Paphos International Airport (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt; north-west). Bus links connect both airports with the city, served by Limassol Airport Express from Chavouzas station.\nGovernment and politics.\nPolitics.\nThe first Marxist groups in Cyprus formed in Limassol in the early 1920s; in 1926, the Communist party of Cyprus was formed in the city. Its successor, Progressive Party of Working People (AKEL), has dominated municipal elections since the first free elections in 1943, won by Ploutis Servas.\nThe European People's Party held an extraordinary party summit in Limassol in 2013. The list of participants in the summit included European Council members, government representatives, European Commission representatives, opposition members and leaders, and European Parliament representatives. The summit's agenda included topics such as the EU's multi-annual financial framework for the period 2014\u20132020 and the preparation for the 2014 European elections.\nNotably, Andreas Christou, an AKEL member, was re-elected mayor of Limassol in December 2011 to serve his second five-year term.\nLocal Government Reform.\nFollowing local government reform in 2024 there were a number of administrative changes.\nThe table below lists the new municipalities and the previous authorities from which they are composed, which now become municipal districts with deputy mayors. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nLimassol is twinned with:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nConsulates and consulates general.\nAs of October\u00a02024[ [update]], Limassol hosts 6 consulates general and 33 consulates.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57578", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57578", "title": "Limassol, Cyprus", "text": ""}
{"id": "57580", "revid": "37666339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57580", "title": "Basra", "text": "Port city in southern Iraq\nBasra () or Basrah is a port city in southern Iraq. It is the capital of the eponymous Basra Governorate, as well as the third largest city in Iraq overall, behind Baghdad and Mosul. Located near the Iran\u2013Iraq border, the city is situated along the banks of the Shatt al-Arab that empties into the Persian Gulf. It is consistently one of the hottest cities in Iraq, with summer temperatures regularly exceeding .\nBuilt in 636 as a military camp, Basra played an important role as a regional hub of knowledge, trade and commerce during the Islamic Golden Age and is home to the first mosque built outside the Arabian Peninsula. It was a center of the slave trade in Mesopotamia, until the Zanj rebellion in 871. Historically, Basra is one of the ports from which the fictional Sinbad the Sailor embarked on his journeys. It has experienced numerous ruling shifts. In 1258, the city was sacked by the Mongols. Basra came under Portuguese control in 1526 and later fell under the control of the Ottomans as part of the Basra Eyalet, one of the provinces comprising Ottoman Iraq. During World War I, British forces captured Basra in 1914. It was incorporated into Mandatory Iraq, under the framework Mandate for Mesopotamia after 1921, which later became the independent Kingdom of Iraq in 1932.\nSince Iraq's independence, the wars Iraq has fought have made Basra an active battlefield due to its strategic location. During the Iran\u2013Iraq War, the city was heavily shelled and besieged by Iranian forces. As a result of the war, half of the city's population fled. It suffered extensive damage again during the Gulf War due to coalition attacks. In 1991 and 1999, Basra was the site of two uprisings against Saddam Hussein. On April 6, 2003, the city was occupied by the United Kingdom and United States-led coalition, becoming the first city to be captured during the invasion of Iraq, enduring further devastation. During the war, it fell under the control of Shia factions such as Muqtada al-Sadr's Mahdi Army, who were later removed in 2008. Additionally, Basra was targeted by bombings in 2011 and 2012, and was impacted by the Islamist insurgency and the war with Islamic State from 2013 to 2017.\nWith its strategic location and abundant oil reserves, Basra has become one of the major industrial cities in the region. As the country\u2019s only coastal region, along with its adjoining governorate, Basra serves as a crucial transport hub. After the Iraq war ended, Basra experienced a period of prosperity and development, with numerous reconstruction projects funded by foreign investments, including the Grand Faw Port, which have gained global attention. Today, the majority of its population consists of Arab Shia Muslims, with a large Sunni minority.\nEtymology.\nThe city has had many names throughout history, Basrah being the most common. In Arabic, the word \"ba\u1e63rah\" means \"the overwatcher\", which may have been an allusion to the city's origin as an Arab military base against the Sassanids. Others have argued that the name is derived from the Aramaic word \"basratha\", meaning \"place of huts, settlement\".\nHistory.\nFoundation by the Rashidun Caliphate (636\u2013661).\nThe city was founded at the beginning of the Islamic era in 636 and began as a garrison encampment for Arab tribesmen constituting the armies of the Rashidun Caliph Umar. The original site, which was a military site, is still marked by the Imam Ali Mosque about 15 kilometers SW of modern Basra. While defeating the forces of the Sassanid Empire there, the Muslim commander Utbah ibn Ghazwan erected his camp on the site of an old Persian military settlement called \"Vahe\u0161t\u0101b\u0101d Arda\u0161\u012br\", which was destroyed by the Arabs. While the name Al-Basrah in Arabic can mean \"the overwatcher\".\nIn 639, Umar established this encampment as a city with five districts, and appointed Abu Musa al-Ash'ari as its first governor. The city was built in a circular plan according to the Partho-Sasanian architecture. Abu Musa led the conquest of Khuzestan from 639 to 642, and was ordered by Umar to aid Uthman ibn Abi al-As, then fighting Persia from a new, more easterly \"mi\u1e63r\" at Tawwaj. In 650, the Rashidun Caliph Uthman reorganised the Persian frontier, installed \u02bfAbdullah ibn Amir as Basra's governor, and put the military's southern wing under Basra's control. Ibn Amir led his forces to their final victory over Yazdegerd III, the Sassanid King of Kings. In 656, Uthman was murdered and Ali was appointed Caliph. Ali first installed Uthman ibn Hanif as Basra's governor, who was followed by \u02bfAbdullah ibn \u02bfAbbas. These men held the city for Ali until the latter's death in 661.\nBasra's infrastructure was planned. Why Basra was chosen as a site for the new city remains unclear. The original site lay 15\u00a0km from the Shatt al-Arab and thus lacked access to maritime trade and, more importantly, to fresh water. Additionally, neither historical texts nor archaeological finds indicate that there was much of an agricultural hinterland in the area before Basra was founded.\nIndeed, in an anecdote related by al-Baladhuri, al-Ahnaf ibn Qays pleaded to the caliph Umar that, whereas other Muslim settlers were established in well-watered areas with extensive farmland, the people of Basra had only \"reedy salt marsh which never dries up and where pasture never grows, bounded on the east by brackish water and on the west by waterless desert. We have no cultivation or stock farming to provide us with our livelihood or food, which comes to us as through the throat of an ostrich.\" Nevertheless, Basra overcame these natural disadvantages and rapidly grew into the second-largest city in Iraq, if not the entire Islamic world. Its role as a military encampment meant that the soldiers had to be fed, and since those soldiers were receiving government salaries, they had money to spend.\nThus, both the government and private entrepreneurs invested heavily in developing a vast agricultural infrastructure in the Basra region. These investments were made with the expectation of a profitable return, indicating the value of the Basra food market. Although African Zanj slaves from the Indian Ocean slave trade were put to work on these construction projects, most of the labor was done by free men working for wages. Governors sometimes directly supervised these projects, but usually they simply assigned the land while most of the financing was done by private investors. The result of these investments was a massive irrigation system covering some 57,000 hectares between the Shatt al-Arab and the now-dry western channel of the Tigris. This system was first reported in 962, when just 8,000 hectares of it remained in use, for the cultivation of date palms, while the rest had become desert. This system consists of a regular pattern of two-meter-high ridges in straight lines, separated by old canal beds. The ridges are extremely saline, with salt deposits up to 20 centimeters thick, and are completely barren. The former canal beds are less salty and can support a small population of salt-resistant plants.\nContemporary authors recorded how the Zanj slaves were put to work clearing the fields of salty topsoil and putting them into piles; the result was the ridges that remain today. This represents an enormous amount of work: H.S. Nelson calculated that 45 million tons of earth were moved in total, and with his extremely high estimate of one man moving two tons of soil per day, this would have taken a decade of strenuous work by 25,000 men. Ultimately, Basra's irrigation canals were unsustainable, because they were built at too little of a slope for the water flow to carry salt deposits away. This required the clearing of salty topsoil by the Zanj slaves in order to keep the fields from becoming too saline to grow crops. After Basra was sacked in by Zanj rebels in the late 800s and then by the Qarmatians in the early 900s, there was no financial incentive to invest in restoring the irrigation system, and the infrastructure was almost completely abandoned. Finally, in the late 900s, the city of Basra was entirely relocated, with the old site being abandoned and a new one developing on the banks of the Shatt al-Arab, where it has remained ever since.\nUmayyad Caliphate: 661\u2013750.\nThe Sufyanids held Basra until Yazid I's death in 683. The Sufyanids' first governor was Umayyad \u02bfAbdullah, a renowned military leader, commanding fealty and financial demands from Karballah, but poor governor. In 664, Mu'awiya I replaced him with Ziyad ibn Abi Sufyan, often called \"ibn Abihi\" (\"son of his own father\"), who became infamous for his draconian rules regarding public order. On Ziyad's death in 673, his son \u02bfUbayd Allah ibn Ziyad became governor. In 680, Yazid I ordered \u02bfUbayd Allah to keep order in Kufa as a reaction to Husayn ibn Ali's popularity as the grandson of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. 'Ubayd Allah took over the control of Kufa. Husayn sent his cousin as an ambassador to the people of Kufa, but \u02bfUbaydullah executed Husayn cousin Muslim ibn Aqil amid fears of an uprising. \u02bfUbayd Allah amassed an army of thousands of soldiers and fought Husayn's army of approximately 70 in a place called Karbala near Kufa. \u02bfUbayd Allah's army was victorious; Husayn and his followers were killed and their heads were sent to Yazid as proof.\nIbn al-Harith spent his year in office trying to put down Nafi' ibn al-Azraq's Kharijite uprising in Khuzestan. In 685, Ibn al-Zubayr, requiring a practical ruler, appointed Umar ibn Ubayd Allah ibn Ma'mar Finally, Ibn al-Zubayr appointed his own brother Mus'ab. In 686, the revolutionary al-Mukhtar led an insurrection at Kufa, and put an end to \u02bfUbaydullah ibn Ziyad near Mosul. In 687, Mus\u02bfab defeated al-Mukhtar with the help of Kufans who Mukhtar exiled.\nAbd al-Malik ibn Marwan reconquered Basra in 691, and Basra remained loyal to his governor al-Hajjaj during Ibn Ash\u02bfath's mutiny (699\u2013702). However, Basra did support the rebellion of Yazid ibn al-Muhallab against Yazid II during the 720s.\nAbbasid Caliphate and its Golden Age: 750\u20131258.\nIn the late 740s, Basra fell to as-Saffah of the Abbasid Caliphate. During the time of the Abbasids, Basra became an intellectual center and home to the elite Basra School of Grammar, the rival and sister school of the Kufa School of Grammar. Several outstanding intellectuals of the age were Basrans; Arab polymath Ibn al-Haytham, the Arab literary giant al-Jahiz, and the Sufi mystic Rabia Basri. The Zanj Rebellion by the agricultural slaves of the lowlands affected the area. In 871, the Zanj sacked Basra. In 923, the Qarmatians, an extremist Muslim sect, invaded and devastated Basra.\nFrom 945 to 1055, the Iranian Buyid dynasty ruled Baghdad and most of Iraq. Abu al Qasim al-Baridis, who still controlled Basra and Wasit, were defeated and their lands taken by the Buyids in 947. Adud al-Dawla and his sons Diya' al-Dawla and Samsam al-Dawla were the Buyid rulers of Basra during the 970s, 980s and 990s. Sanad al-Dawla al-Habashi (c.\u2009921\u2013977), the brother of the Emir of Iraq Izz al-Dawla, was governor of Basra and built a library of 15,000 books.\nThe Oghuz Turk Tughril Beg was the leader of the Seljuks, who expelled the Shiite Buyid dynasty. He was the first Seljuk ruler to style himself Sultan and Protector of the Abbasid Caliphate.\nThe Great Friday Mosque was constructed in Basra. In 1122, Imad ad-Din Zengi received Basra as a fief. In 1126, Zengi suppressed a revolt and in 1129, Dabis looted the Basra state treasury.\nA 1200 map \"on the eve of the Mongol invasions\" shows the Abbasid Caliphate as ruling lower Iraq and, presumably, Basra.\nThe Assassin Rashid-ad-Din-Sinan was born in Basra on or between 1131 and 1135.\nMongol rule and thereafter: 1258\u20131500s.\nIn 1258, the Mongols under Hulegu Khan sacked Baghdad and ended Abbasid rule. By some accounts, Basra capitulated to the Mongols to avoid a massacre. The Mamluk Bahri dynasty map (1250\u20131382) shows Basra as being under their area of control, and the Mongol Dominions map (1300\u20131405) shows Basra as being under Mongol control. In 1290 fighting erupted at the Persian Gulf port of Basra among the Genoese, between the Guelph and the Ghibelline factions.\nIbn Battuta visited Basra in the 14th century, noting it \"was renowned throughout the whole world, spacious in area and elegant in its courts, remarkable for its numerous fruit-gardens and its choice fruits, since it is the meeting place of the two seas, the salt and the fresh.\" Ibn Battuta also noted that Basra consisted of three-quarters: the Hudayl quarter, the Banu Haram quarter, and the Iranian quarter (\"mahallat al-Ajam\"). Fred Donner adds: \"If the first two reveal that Basra was still predominantly an Arab town, the existence of an Iranian quarter clearly reveals the legacy of long centuries of intimate contact between Basra and the Iranian plateau.\"\nThe Arab Al-Mughamis tribe established control over Basra in the early fifteenth century, however, they quickly fell under influence of the Kara Koyunlu and Ak Koyunlu, successively. The Al-Mughamis' control of Basra had become nominal by 1436; \"de facto\" control of Basra from 1436 to 1508 was in the hands of the Moshasha. In the latter year, during the reign of King (\"Shah\") Ismail I (r.1501\u20131524), the first Safavid ruler, Basra and the Moshasha became part of the Safavid Empire. This was the first time Basra had come under Safavid suzerainty. In 1524, following Ismail I's death, the local ruling dynasty of Basra, the Al-Mughamis, resumed effective control over the city. Twelve years later, in 1536, during the Ottoman\u2013Safavid War of 1532\u20131555, the Bedouin ruler of Basra, Rashid ibn Mughamis, acknowledged Suleiman the Magnificent as his suzerain who in turn confirmed him as governor of Basra. The Arab provinces of the Ottoman Empire exercised a great deal of independence, and they even often raised their own troops. Though Basra had submitted to the Ottomans, the Ottoman hold over Basra was tenuous at the time. This changed a decade later; in 1546, following a tribal struggle involving the Moshasha and the local ruler of Zakiya (near Basra), the Ottomans sent a force to Basra. This resulted in tighter (but still, nominal) Ottoman control over Basra.\nIn 1523, the Portuguese under the command of Ant\u00f3nio Tenreiro crossed from Aleppo to Basra. Nuno da Cunha took Basra in 1529. In 1550, the local Kingdom of Basra and tribal rulers trusted the Portuguese against the Ottomans, from then on the Portuguese threatened to invoke an invasion and conquest of Basra several times. From 1595 the Portuguese acted as military protectors of Basra, and in 1624 the Portuguese assisted the Ottoman Pasha of Basra in repelling a Persian invasion. The Portuguese were granted a share of the customs revenue and freedom from tolls. From about 1625 until 1668, Basra and the Delta marshlands were in the hands of local chieftains independent of the Ottoman administration at Baghdad.\nOttoman and British rule.\nBasra was, for a long time, a flourishing commercial and cultural center. It was captured by the Ottoman Empire in 1668. It was fought over by Turks and Persians and was the scene of repeated attempts at resistance. From 1697 to 1701, Basra was once again under Safavid control.\nThe Zand dynasty under Karim Khan Zand briefly occupied Basra after a long siege in 1775\u20139. The Zands attempted at introducing Usuli form of Shiism on a basically Akhbari Shia Basrans. The shortness of the Zand rule rendered this untenable.\nIn 1911, the \"Encyclopaedia Britannica\" reported \"about 4000 Jews and perhaps 6000 Christians\" living in Basra Vilayet, but no Turks other than Ottoman officials. In 1884 the Ottomans responded to local pressure from the Shi'as of the south by detaching the southern districts of the Baghdad vilayet and creating a new vilayet of Basra.\nDuring World War I, British forces captured Basra from the Ottomans, occupying the city on 22 November 1914. British officials and engineers (including Sir George Buchanan) subsequently modernized Basra's harbor, which due to the increased commercial activity in the area became one of the most important ports in the Persian Gulf, developing new mercantile links with India and East Asia.\nThe graves of around 5,000 men from WW1 both are at Basra War Cemetery and a further 40,000 with no known grave are commemorated at Basra Memorial. Both sites are suffering from neglect with the Commonwealth War Graves Commission having withdrawn from the country in 2007.\nModern era: 1921\u20132003.\nDuring World War II (1939\u20131945), Basra was an important port through which flowed much of the equipment and supplies sent to the Soviet Union by other Allies of World War II.\nThe population of Basra was 101,535 in 1947, and reached 219,167 in 1957. The University of Basrah was founded in 1964. By 1977, the population had risen to a peak population of some 1.5\u00a0million. The population declined during the Iran\u2013Iraq War, being under 900,000 in the late 1980s, possibly reaching a low point of just over 400,000 during the worst of the war. The city was repeatedly shelled by Iran and was the site of many fierce battles, such as Operation Ramadan (1982) and the Siege of Basra (1987).\nAfter the war, Saddam erected 99 memorial statues to Iraqi military officers killed during the war along the bank of the Shatt-al-Arab river, all pointing their fingers towards Iran. After the 1991 Gulf War a rebellion against Saddam erupted in Basra. The widespread revolt was against the Iraqi government, which violently put down the rebellion, with much death and destruction inflicted on Basra.\nAs part of the Iraqi no-fly zones conflict, United States Air Force fighter jets carried out two airstrikes against Basra on 25 January 1999. The airstrikes resulted in missiles landing in the al-Jumhuriya neighborhood of Basra, killed 11 Iraqi civilians and wounding 59. General Anthony Zinni, then commander of U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf, acknowledged that it was possible that \"a missile may have been errant.\" While such casualty numbers pale in comparison to later events, the bombing occurred one day after Arab foreign ministers, meeting in Egypt, refused to condemn four days of air strikes against Iraq in December 1998. This was described by Iraqi information minister Human Abdel-Khaliq as giving U.S.-led forces \"an Arab green card\" to continue their involvement in the conflict.\nA second revolt in 1999 led to mass executions by the Iraqi government in and around Basra. Subsequently, the Iraqi government deliberately neglected the city, and much commerce was diverted to Umm Qasr. These alleged abuses are to feature amongst the charges against the former regime to be considered by the Iraq Special Tribunal set up by the Iraq Interim Government following the 2003 invasion.\nPost-Saddam period: 2003\u2013present.\nIn March through to May 2003, the outskirts of Basra were the scene of some of the heaviest fighting in the beginning of the Iraq War in 2003. The British forces, led by the 7th Armoured Brigade, captured the city on 6 April 2003. This city was the first stop for the United States and the United Kingdom during the invasion of Iraq.\nOn 21 April 2004, a series of bomb blasts ripped through the city, killing 74 people. The Multi-National Division (South-East), under British command, was engaged in foreign internal defense missions in Basra Governorate and surrounding areas during this time. Political groups centered in Basra were reported to have close links with political parties already in power in the Iraqi government, despite opposition from Iraqi Sunnis and the Kurds. January 2005 elections saw several radical politicians gain office, supported by religious parties. American journalist Steven Vincent, who had been researching and reporting on corruption and militia activity in the city, was kidnapped and killed on 2 August 2005.\nOn 19 September 2005, two undercover British Special Air Service (SAS) soldiers were stopped by the Iraqi Police at a roadblock in Basra. The two soldiers were part of an SAS operation investigating allegations of insurgent infiltration into the Iraqi Police. When the police attempted to pull the soldiers out of their car, they opened fire on the officers, killing two. The SAS soldiers attempted to escape before being beaten and arrested by the police, who took them to the Al Jameat Police Station. British forces subsequently identified the location of the two soldiers and carried out a rescue mission, storming the police station and transporting them to a safe location. A civilian crowd gathered around the rescue force during the incident and attacked it; three British soldiers were injured and two members of the crowd were purportedly killed. The British Ministry of Defence initially denied carrying out the operation, which was criticised by Iraqi officials, before subsequently admitting it and claiming the two soldiers would have been executed if they were not rescued.\nThe British transferred control of Basra province to the Iraqi authorities in 2007, four-and-a-half years after the invasion. A BBC survey of local residents found that 86% thought the presence of British forces since 2003 had had an overall negative effect on the province. Major-General Abdul Jalil Khalaf was appointed Police Chief by the central government with the task of taking on the militias. He was outspoken against the targeting of women by the militias. Talking to the BBC, he said that his determination to tackle the militia had led to almost daily assassination attempts. This was taken as sign that he was serious in opposing the militias.\nIn March 2008, the Iraqi Army launched a major offensive, code-named Charge of the White Knights (\"Saulat al-Fursan\"), aimed at forcing the Mahdi Army out of Basra. The assault was planned by General Mohan Furaiji and approved by Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki. In April 2008, following the failure to disarm militant groups, both Major-General Abdul Jalil Khalaf and General Mohan Furaiji were removed from their positions in Basra.\nWorkers in Basra's oil industry have been involved in extensive organization and labour conflict. They held a two-day strike in August 2003, and formed the nucleus of the independent General Union of Oil Employees (GUOE) in June 2004. The union held a one-day strike in July 2005, and publicly opposes plans for privatizing the industry.\nBasra was scheduled to host the 22nd Arabian Gulf Cup tournament in Basra Sports City, a newly built multi-use sports complex. The tournament was shifted to Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, after concerns over preparations and security. Iraq was also due to host the 2013 tournament, but that was moved to Bahrain. At least 10 demonstrators died as they protested against the lack of clean drinking water and electrical power in the city during the height of summer in 2018. Some protesters stormed the Iranian consulate in the city. In 2023, the city hosted the long scheduled 25th Arabian Gulf Cup where the Iraqi team won.\nGeography.\nBasra is located on the Shatt-Al-Arab waterway, downstream of which is the Persian Gulf. The Shatt-Al-Arab and Basra waterways define the eastern and western borders of Basra, respectively. It is located near to the borders of Iran and Kuwait.\nThe city is penetrated by a complex network of canals and streams, vital for irrigation and other agricultural use. These canals were once used to transport goods and people throughout the city, but during the last two decades, pollution and a continuous drop in water levels have made river navigation impossible in the canals. Basra is roughly from the Persian Gulf. The city is located along the Shatt al-Arab waterway, from the Persian Gulf and from Baghdad, Iraq's capital and largest city.\nClimate.\nBasra has a hot desert climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BWh\"), like the rest of the surrounding region, though it receives slightly more precipitation than inland locations due to its location near the coast. During the summer months, from May to September, Basra is consistently one of the hottest cities on the planet, with temperatures regularly exceeding between July and August. In winter Basra experiences mild and somewhat moist conditions with average high temperatures around . On some winter nights, minimum temperatures are below . High humidity \u2013 sometimes exceeding 90% \u2013 is common due to the proximity to the marshy Persian Gulf.\nAn all-time high temperature was recorded on 22 July 2016, when daytime readings soared to , which is the highest temperature that has ever been recorded in Iraq. This is one of the hottest temperatures ever measured on the planet. The following night, the night time low temperature was , which was one of the highest minimum temperatures on any given day, only outshone by Khasab, Oman, Dehloran, Iran and Death Valley, United States. The lowest temperature ever recorded in Basra was on 22 January 1964.\nEffect of climate change.\nThe city of Basra was once well known for its agriculture, but that has since altered due to rising temperatures, increased water salinity, and desertification.\nDemographics.\nBasra Metropolitan Region comprises three towns\u2014Basra city proper, Al-\u02bfAshar, and Al-Ma\u02bfqil\u2014and several villages. In Basra the vast majority of the population are ethnic Arabs of the Adnanite or the Qahtanite tribes. The tribes located in Basra include Bani Malik, Al-shwelat, Suwa'id, Al-bo Mohammed, Al-Badr, Al-Ubadi, Ruba'ah Sayyid tribes and other Marsh Arabs tribes.\nThere are also Feyli Kurds living in the eastern side of the city, they are mainly merchants. In addition to the Arabs, there is also a community of Afro-Iraqi peoples, known as Zanj. The Zanj are an African Muslim ethnic group living in Iraq and are a mix of African peoples taken from the coast of the area of modern-day Kenya as slaves in the 900s. They number around 1,500,000\u20132,000,000 in Iraq.\nReligion.\nBasra is a major Shia city, with the old Akhbari Shiism progressively being overwhelmed by the Usuli Shiism. It is known as the \"Cradle of Islamic Culture\". The Sunni Muslim population is small and dropping in their percentage as more Iraqi Shias move into Basra for various job or welfare opportunities. The satellite town of Az Zubayr in the direction of Kuwait was a Sunni majority town, but the burgeoning population of Basra has spilled over into Zubair, turning it into an extension of Basra with a slight Shia majority as well.\nAssyrians were recorded in the Ottoman census as early as 1911, and a small number of them live in Basra. However, a significant number of the modern community are refugees fleeing persecution from ISIS in the Nineveh Plains, Mosul, and northern Iraq. But ever since the victory of Iraq against the ISIS in 2017, many Christians have returned to their homeland in the Nineveh plains. In 2018 there are about a few thousand Christians in Basra. The Armenian Church in Basra, dates from 1736 but has been rebuilt three times. The portrait of the Virgin Mary in the church was brought from India in 1882.\nOne of the largest communities of pre-Islamic Mandaeans live in the city, whose headquarters was in the area formerly called Suk esh-Sheikh. Basra is home to second highest concentration of the Mandaean community, after Baghdad. As of recent estimates 350 Mandaean families are found in the city. Dair al-Yahya is one of the most important Mandaean temples, located in Basra. The temple is dedicated to John the Baptist, the chief prophet in Mandaeism, who also reverred by the Jews, Christians and Muslims.\nThe city was also home to one of the oldest Jewish communities. During the 1930s, the Jews constituted 9.8% of the total population. However, most of them fled after a series of persecution, which began in 1941 and lasted till 1951. Between 1968 and 2003, fewer than 300 Jews remained in the city. After the 2003 invasion of Iraq, most of them emigrated to abroad. The Tweig Synagogue in Basra, is currently abandoned.\nGenetics.\nTwo genetic studies conducted by researchers at the University of Basrah have explored the paternal and maternal genetic diversity of the local population. A 2022 study analyzing Y-chromosome STR markers among 191 unrelated males found that the five most frequent Y-DNA haplogroups in Basra were R1b (20.5%), J2 (18.0%), E1b (15.5%), G2 (11.3%), and J1 (10.8%), lineages commonly found among the various ethnic groups of Iraq. A 2020 study of Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variation in 164 Basra women reported the most common haplogroups as H (17%), J (11%), U (9%), M (9%), and K (5%), with 19% classified as \u201cOther\u201d. These results reflect a complex population history, with paternal lineages showing strong affinities to ancient Mesopotamian ancestry, while maternal lineages also include a substantial proportion of native Mesopotamian haplogroups alongside broader genetic diversity linked to Basra\u2019s historical role as a regional trade hub.\nUrban Landscape.\nThe Old Mosque of Basra is the first mosque in Islam outside the Arabian peninsula. Sinbad Island is located in the centre of Shatt Al-Arab, near the Miinaalmakl, and extends above the Bridge Khaled and is a tourist landmark. The Muhhmad Baquir Al-Sadr Bridge, at the union of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers, was completed in 2017. Sayab's House Ruins is the site of the most famous home of the poet Badr Shakir al-Sayyab. There is also a statue of Sayab, one of the statues in Basra done by the artist and sculptor Nada' Kadhum, located on al-Basrah Corniche; it was unveiled in 1972.\nBasra Sports City is the largest sport city in the Middle East, located on the Shatt al-Basra. Palm tree forests are largely located on the shores of Shatt-al Arab waterway, especially in the nearby village of Abu Al-Khasib. Corniche al-Basra is a street which runs on the shore of the Shatt al-Arab; it goes from the Lion of Babylon Square to the Four Palaces. Basra International Hotel (formally known as Basra Sheraton Hotel) is located on the Corniche street. The first five star hotel in the city, it is notable for its Shanasheel style exterior design. The hotel was heavily looted during the Iraq War, and it has been renovated recently.\nSayyed Ali al-Musawi Mosque, also known as the Mosque of the Children of Amer, is located in the city centre, on Al-Gazear Street, and it was built for Shia Imami's leader Sayyed Ali al-Moussawi, whose followers lived in Iraq and neighbouring countries. The Fun City of Basra, which is now called Basra Land, is one of the oldest theme-park entertainment cities in the south of the country, and the largest involving a large number of games giants. It was damaged during the war, and has been rebuilt. Akhora Park is one of the city's older parks. It is located on al-Basra Street.\nThere are four formal presidential palaces in Basra, built by Saddam Hussein. One of them has been converted into the Basrah Museum. The Latin Church is located on 14 July Street. Indian Market (\"Amogaiz\") is one of the main bazaars in the city. It is called the Indian Market, since it had Indian vendors working there at the beginning of the last century. Hanna-Sheikh Bazaar is an old market; it was established by the powerful and famous Hanna-Sheikh family.\nEconomy.\nBasra is known as \"Iraq's economic and industrial capital\". Its strategic location has made the city an important hub of trade and commerce. Basra's economy is largely dependent on the oil and heavy industry. In the early 1970s, Basra was chosen as a nodal point for Iraq's development. A number of projects were launched during this period, such as oil refineries and chemical plants. In April 2017, the Iraqi Parliament recognized Basra as Iraq's economic capital.\nIraq has the world's 4th largest oil reserves, estimated to be more . Some of Iraq's largest oil fields are located in the province, and most of Iraq's oil exports leave from Al Basrah Oil Terminal. The Basra Oil Company, formerly the South Oil Company, has its headquarters in the city. Basra has emerged as an important commercial and industrial center for the country, as the city is home to a large number of manufacturing industries ranging from petrochemical to water treatment.\nSubstantial economic activity in Basra is centred around the petrochemical industry, which includes the Southern Fertilizer Company and The State Company for Petrochemical Industries (SCPI). The Southern Fertilizer Company produces ammonia solution, urea and nitrogen gas, while the SCPI focus on such products as ethylene, caustic/chlorine, vinyl chloride monomer (VCM), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), low-density polyethylene, and high-density polyethylene.\nBasra is in a fertile agricultural region, with major products including rice, maize corn, barley, pearl millet, wheat, dates, and livestock. For a long time, Basra was known for the superior quality of its dates. Basra was known in the 1960s for its sugar market, a fact that figured heavily in the English contract law remoteness of damages case The Heron II [1969] 1 AC 350. Fishing was an important business before the oil boom.\nTransport.\nShipping, logistics and transport are also major industries in Basra. Basra is home to all of Iraq's six ports; Umm Qasr is the main deep-water port with 22 platforms, some of which are dedicated to specific goods (such as sulphur, seeds, lubricant oil, etc.) The other five ports are smaller in scale and more narrowly specialized. The city also has an international airport, with service into Baghdad with Iraqi Airways\u2014the national airline, as well as international flights on several internationally top-ranked Middle Eastern airline companies.\nSeaport.\nBasra is Iraq's main port, although it does not have deep water access, which is handled at the port of Umm Qasr. However, construction of the Grand Faw Port on the southeastern coast of Basra Governorate, which is considered a national project for Iraq, is expected to strengthen Iraq's geopolitical position by giving the country the largest port in the Middle East and one of the largest in the world. Furthermore, Iraq is planning to establish a large naval base in the Faw peninsula.\nSports.\nThe city is home to the largest sports stadium in Iraq, the Basra International Stadium, which hosts several matches of the Iraq national football team. The city is also home to sports team Al-Minaa, that uses Al-Minaa Olympic Stadium as its home venue. Its basketball division is among the elite Arab teams that compete at the Arab Club Basketball Championship.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nBasra is twinned with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57581", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57581", "title": "Basra, Iraq", "text": ""}
{"id": "57582", "revid": "57173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57582", "title": "Al-Basrah", "text": ""}
{"id": "57584", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57584", "title": "Sapporo, Japan", "text": ""}
{"id": "57585", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57585", "title": "Casablanca (film)", "text": "1942 American romance film\nCasablanca is a 1942 American romantic drama film directed by Michael Curtiz and starring Humphrey Bogart, Ingrid Bergman, and Paul Henreid. Filmed and set during World War II, it focuses on an American expatriate (Bogart) who must choose between his love for a woman (Bergman) and helping her husband (Henreid), a Czechoslovak resistance leader, escape from the Vichy-controlled city of Casablanca to continue his fight against the Nazis. The screenplay is based on \"Everybody Comes to Rick's\", an unproduced stage play by Murray Burnett and Joan Alison. The supporting cast features Claude Rains, Conrad Veidt, Sydney Greenstreet, Peter Lorre, and Dooley Wilson.\nWarner Bros. story editor Irene Diamond convinced producer Hal B. Wallis to purchase the film rights to the play in January 1942. Brothers Julius and Philip G. Epstein were initially assigned to write the script. However, despite studio resistance, they left to work on Frank Capra's \"Why We Fight\" series early in 1942. Howard Koch was assigned to the screenplay until the Epsteins returned a month later. Principal photography began on May 25, 1942, ending on August 3; the film was shot entirely at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California, with the exception of one sequence at Van Nuys Airport in Los Angeles.\nAlthough \"Casablanca\" was an A-list film with established stars and first-rate writers, no one involved with its production expected it to stand out among the many pictures produced by Hollywood yearly. \"Casablanca\" was rushed into release to take advantage of the publicity from the Allied invasion of North Africa a few weeks earlier. It had its world premiere on November 26, 1942, in New York City and was released nationally in the United States on January 23, 1943. The film was a solid, if unspectacular, success in its initial run.\nExceeding expectations, \"Casablanca\" went on to win the Academy Award for Best Picture, while Curtiz was selected as Best Director and the Epsteins and Koch were honored for Best Adapted Screenplay. Its reputation has gradually grown, to the point that its lead characters, memorable lines, and pervasive theme song have all become iconic, and it consistently ranks near the top of lists of the greatest films in history. In the inaugural class of 1989, the United States Library of Congress selected the film as one of the first for preservation in the National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The film's copyright was renewed in 1970; it will enter the public domain in the US and countries with the rule of the shorter term on January 1, 2038.\nRoger Ebert wrote: \"If there is ever a time when they decide that some movies should be spelled with an upper-case M, \"Casablanca\" should be voted first on the list of Movies.\"\nPlot.\nIn December 1941, American expatriate Rick Blaine owns a nightclub and gambling den in Casablanca. \"Rick's Caf\u00e9 Am\u00e9ricain\" attracts a varied clientele, including Vichy French and German officials, refugees desperate to reach the still-neutral United States, and those who prey on them. Although Rick professes to be neutral in all matters, he ran guns to Ethiopia in 1935 and fought on the Republican side in the Spanish Civil War.\nPetty crook Ugarte boasts to Rick of letters of transit obtained by murdering two German couriers. The papers allow the bearers to travel freely around German-occupied Europe and to neutral Portugal. Ugarte plans to sell them at the club and persuades Rick to hold them for him. However, Ugarte is arrested by the local police under Captain Louis Renault, the unabashedly corrupt prefect of police. Ugarte is killed while in custody without revealing that Rick has the letters.\nThen, the reason for Rick's cynical nature\u2014former lover Ilsa Lund\u2014enters his establishment. Spotting Rick's friend and house pianist, Sam, Ilsa asks him to play \"As Time Goes By\". Rick storms over, furious that Sam disobeyed his order never to perform that song again, and is stunned to see Ilsa. She is accompanied by her husband, Victor Laszlo, a renowned fugitive Czechoslovak Resistance leader. A flashback reveals Ilsa left Rick without explanation when the couple were planning to flee as the German army neared Paris, embittering Rick. Laszlo and Ilsa need the letters to escape, while German Major Strasser arrives in Casablanca to prevent that.\nWhen Laszlo makes inquiries, Signor Ferrari, an underworld figure and Rick's friendly business rival, divulges his suspicion that Rick has the letters. Laszlo returns to Rick's caf\u00e9 that night and tries to buy them. Rick refuses to sell, telling Laszlo to ask his wife why. They are interrupted when Strasser leads a group of German officers in singing \"Die Wacht am Rhein\". Laszlo orders the house band to play \"La Marseillaise\", and Rick allows it. Patriotism grips the crowd and everyone joins in, drowning out the Germans. Afterwards, Strasser has Renault close the club on a flimsy pretext.\nLater, Ilsa confronts Rick in the deserted caf\u00e9; when he refuses to give her the letters, she threatens him with a gun but then confesses she still loves him. She explains that when they met and fell in love in Paris in 1940, she believed her husband had been killed while attempting to escape from a concentration camp. When she learned that Laszlo was alive and hiding near Paris, she left Rick without explanation to nurse her sick husband. Rick's bitterness dissolves. He agrees to help, letting Ilsa believe she will stay with him, while Laszlo leaves Casablanca. When Laszlo unexpectedly shows up, having narrowly escaped a police raid on a Resistance meeting, Rick has waiter Carl spirit Ilsa away. Laszlo, aware of Rick's love for Ilsa, tries to persuade him to use the letters to take her to safety.\nWhen the police arrest Laszlo on a trumped-up charge, Rick persuades Renault to release him by promising to set Laszlo up for a much more serious crime: possession of the letters. To allay Renault's suspicions, Rick explains that he and Ilsa will use the letters to leave for America. When Renault tries to arrest Laszlo as arranged, however, Rick forces him at gunpoint to assist in their escape. At the last moment, Rick makes Ilsa board the plane to Lisbon with Laszlo, telling her that she would regret it if she stayed, \"Maybe not today, maybe not tomorrow, but soon and for the rest of your life.\" Strasser, tipped off by Renault, drives up alone. Strasser attempts to stop the plane and then draws a gun on Rick; the latter shoots him dead. When policemen arrive, Renault pauses, then orders them to \"round up the usual suspects.\" He suggests to Rick that they join the Free French in Brazzaville. As they walk away into the fog, Rick says, \"Louis, I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship.\"\nCast.\nThe play's cast consisted of 16 speaking parts and several extras; the film script enlarged it to 22 speaking parts and hundreds of extras. The cast is notably international: only three of the credited actors were born in the United States (Bogart, Dooley Wilson, and Joy Page). The top-billed actors are:\nThe second-billed actors are:\nAlso credited are:\nNotable uncredited actors are:\nMuch of the emotional impact of the film, for the audience in 1942, has been attributed to the large proportion of European exiles and refugees who were extras or played minor roles (in addition to leading actors Paul Henreid, Conrad Veidt and Peter Lorre), such as Louis V. Arco, Trude Berliner, Ilka Gr\u00fcnig, Ludwig St\u00f6ssel, Hans Heinrich von Twardowski, and Wolfgang Zilzer. A witness to the filming of the \"duel of the anthems\" sequence said he saw many of the actors crying and \"realized that they were all real refugees\". Harmetz argues that they \"brought to a dozen small roles in \"Casablanca\" an understanding and a desperation that could never have come from Central Casting\". Even though many were Jewish or refugees from the Nazis (or both), they were frequently cast as Nazis in various war films, because of their accents.\nJack Benny may have appeared in an unbilled cameo, as was claimed by a contemporary newspaper advertisement and in the \"Casablanca\" press book. When asked in his column \"Movie Answer Man\", critic Roger Ebert first replied, \"It looks something like him. That's all I can say.\" In a later column, he responded to a follow-up commenter, \"I think you're right. The Jack Benny Fan Club can feel vindicated\".\nProduction.\nWriting.\nThe film was based on Murray Burnett and Joan Alison's unproduced play \"Everybody Comes to Rick's\". The Warner Bros. story analyst who read the play, Stephen Karnot, called it (approvingly) \"sophisticated hokum\" and story editor Irene Diamond, who had discovered the script on a trip to New York in 1941, convinced Hal Wallis to buy the rights in January 1942 for $20,000 (), the most anyone in Hollywood had ever paid for an unproduced play. The project was renamed \"Casablanca\", apparently in imitation of the 1938 hit \"Algiers\". \"Casablanca\" also shares many narrative and thematic similarities with \"Algiers\" \"(1938)\", which itself is a remake of the acclaimed 1937 French film \"P\u00e9p\u00e9 le Moko\", directed and co-written by Julien Duvivier.\nThe original play was inspired by a trip to Europe made by Murray Burnett and his wife in 1938, during which they visited Vienna shortly after the Anschluss and were affected by the antisemitism they saw. In the south of France, they went to a nightclub that had a multinational clientele, among them many exiles and refugees, and the prototype of Sam. In \"The Guardian\", Paul Fairclough wrote that Cinema Vox in Tangier \"was Africa's biggest when it opened in 1935, with 2,000 seats and a retractable roof. As Tangier was in Spanish territory, the theatre's wartime bar heaved with spies, refugees and underworld hoods, securing its place in cinematic history as the inspiration for Rick's Caf\u00e9 in \"Casablanca\".\" The scene of the singing of \"La Marseillaise\" in the bar is attributed by the film scholar Julian Jackson as an adaptation of a similar scene from Jean Renoir's film \"La Grande Illusion\" five years prior.\nThe first writers assigned to the script were twins Julius and Philip Epstein who, against the wishes of Warner Bros., left at Frank Capra's request early in 1942 to work on the \"Why We Fight\" series in Washington, D.C. While they were gone, the other credited writer, Howard Koch, was assigned; he produced thirty to forty pages. When the Epstein brothers returned after about a month, they were reassigned to \"Casablanca\" and\u2014contrary to what Koch claimed in two published books\u2014his work was not used. The Epstein brothers and Koch never worked in the same room at the same time during the writing of the script. In the final budget for the film, the Epsteins were paid $30,416, () and Koch earned $4,200 ().\nIn the play, the Ilsa character is an American named Lois Meredith; she does not meet Laszlo until after her relationship with Rick in Paris has ended. Rick is a lawyer. The play (set entirely in the caf\u00e9) ends with Rick sending Lois and Laszlo to the airport. To make Rick's motivation more believable, Wallis, Curtiz, and the screenwriters decided to set the film before the attack on Pearl Harbor.\nThe possibility was discussed of Laszlo being killed in Casablanca, allowing Rick and Ilsa to leave together, but as Casey Robinson wrote to Wallis before filming began, the ending of the film is\nset up for a swell twist when Rick sends her away on the plane with Laszlo. For now, in doing so, he is not just solving a love triangle. He is forcing the girl to live up to the idealism of her nature, forcing her to carry on with the work that in these days is far more important than the love of two little people.\nIt was certainly impossible for Ilsa to leave Laszlo for Rick, as the Motion Picture Production Code forbade showing a woman leaving her husband for another man. The concern was not whether Ilsa would leave with Laszlo, but how this outcome would be engineered. According to Julius Epstein, he and Philip were driving when they simultaneously came up with the idea for Renault to order the roundup of \"the usual suspects\", after which all the details needed for resolution of the story, including the farewell between Bergman and \"a suddenly noble Bogart\", were rapidly worked out.\nThe uncredited Casey Robinson assisted with three weeks of rewrites, including contributing the series of meetings between Rick and Ilsa in the caf\u00e9. Koch highlighted the political and melodramatic elements, and Curtiz seems to have favored the romantic parts, insisting on retaining the Paris flashbacks.\nIn a telegram to film editor Owen Marks on August 7, 1942, Wallis suggested two possible final lines of dialogue for Rick: \"Louis, I might have known you'd mix your patriotism with a little larceny\" or \"Louis, I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship\". Two weeks later, Wallis settled on the latter, which Bogart was recalled to dub a month after shooting had finished.\nBogart's line \"Here's looking at you, kid\", said four times, was not in the draft screenplays, but has been attributed to a comment he made to Bergman as she played poker with her English coach and hairdresser between takes.\nDespite the many writers, the film has what Ebert describes as a \"wonderfully unified and consistent\" script. Koch later claimed it was the tension between his own approach and Curtiz's that had accounted for this. \"Surprisingly, these disparate approaches somehow meshed, and perhaps it was partly this tug of war between Curtiz and me that gave the film a certain balance.\" Julius Epstein later noted the screenplay contained \"more corn than in the states of Kansas and Iowa combined. But when corn works, there's nothing better\".\nThe film ran into some trouble with Joseph Breen of the Production Code Administration (the Hollywood self-censorship body), who opposed the suggestions that Captain Renault extorted sexual favors from visa applicants, and that Rick and Ilsa had slept together. Extensive changes were made, with several lines of dialogue removed or altered. All direct references to sex were deleted; Renault's selling of visas for sex, and Rick and Ilsa's previous sexual relationship were implied elliptically rather than referenced explicitly. Also, in the original script, when Sam plays \"As Time Goes By\", Rick exclaims, \"What the \u2014\u2014 are you playing?\" This line was altered to \"Sam, I thought I told you never to play\u00a0...\" to conform to Breen's objection to an implied swear word.\nFilming.\nAlthough an initial filming date was selected for April 10, 1942, delays led to production starting on May 25. Filming was completed on August 3. It went $75,000 over budget for a total cost of $1,039,000 (), above average for the time. Unusually, the film was shot in sequence, mainly because only the first half of the script was ready when filming began.\nThe entire picture was shot in the studio except for the sequence showing Strasser's arrival and close-ups of the Lockheed Electra (filmed at Van Nuys Airport) and a few short clips of stock footage views of Paris. The street used for the exterior shots had recently been built for another film, \"The Desert Song\", and redressed for the Paris flashbacks.\nThe film critic Roger Ebert called Wallis the \"key creative force\" for his attention to the details of production (down to insisting on a real parrot in the Blue Parrot bar).\nThe difference between Bergman's and Bogart's height caused some problems. She was two\u00a0inches (5\u00a0cm) taller than Bogart, and claimed Curtiz had Bogart stand on blocks or sit on cushions in their scenes together.\nLater, there were plans for a further scene, showing Rick, Renault and a detachment of Free French soldiers on a ship, to incorporate the Allies' 1942 invasion of North Africa. It proved too difficult to get Claude Rains for the shoot, and the scene was finally abandoned after David O. Selznick judged \"it would be a terrible mistake to change the ending\".\nThe background of the final scene, which shows a Lockheed Model 12 Electra Junior airplane with personnel walking around it, was staged using little person extras and a proportionate cardboard plane. Fog was used to mask the model's unconvincing appearance.\nDirection.\nWallis's first choice for director was William Wyler, but he was unavailable, so Wallis turned to his close friend Michael Curtiz. Roger Ebert has commented that in \"Casablanca\" \"very few shots\u00a0...are memorable as shots\", as Curtiz wanted images to express the story rather than to stand alone. He contributed relatively little to development of the plot. Casey Robinson said Curtiz \"knew nothing whatever about story\u00a0...he saw it in pictures, and you supplied the stories\".\nCritic Andrew Sarris called the film \"the most decisive exception to the auteur theory\", of which Sarris was the most prominent proponent in the United States. Aljean Harmetz has responded, \"...nearly every Warner Bros. picture was an exception to the auteur theory\". Other critics give more credit to Curtiz. Sidney Rosenzweig, in his study of the director's work, sees the film as a typical example of Curtiz's highlighting of moral dilemmas.\nSome of the second unit montages, such as the opening sequence of the refugee trail and the invasion of France, were directed by Don Siegel.\nCinematography.\nThe cinematographer was Arthur Edeson, a veteran who had previously shot \"The Maltese Falcon\" and \"Frankenstein\". Particular attention was paid to photographing Bergman. She was shot mainly from her preferred left side, often with a softening gauze filter and with catch lights to make her eyes sparkle; the whole effect was designed to make her face seem \"ineffably sad and tender and nostalgic\". Bars of shadow across the characters and in the background variously imply imprisonment, the Cross of Lorraine\u2014the symbol of the Free French Forces\u2014and emotional turmoil. Dark film noir and expressionist lighting was used in several scenes, particularly towards the end of the picture. Rosenzweig argues these shadow and lighting effects are classic elements of the Curtiz style, along with the fluid camera work and the use of the environment as a framing device.\nMusic.\nThe music was written by Max Steiner. The song \"As Time Goes By\" by Herman Hupfeld had been part of the story from the original play; Steiner wanted to write his own composition to replace it, but Bergman had already cut her hair short for her next role (Mar\u00eda in \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\") and could not reshoot the scenes that incorporated the song, so Steiner based the entire score on it and \"La Marseillaise\", the French national anthem, transforming them as leitmotifs to reflect changing moods. Even though Steiner disliked \"As Time Goes By\", he admitted in a 1943 interview that it \"must have had something to attract so much attention\". (The song enjoyed a resurgence after the release of \"Casablanca\", spending 21 weeks on the hit parade.) \nParticularly memorable is the \"duel of the anthems\" between Strasser and Laszlo at Rick's caf\u00e9. In the soundtrack, \"La Marseillaise\" is played by a full orchestra. Originally, the opposing piece for this iconic sequence was to be the \"Horst-Wessel-Lied\", a Nazi anthem, but this was still under international copyright in non-Allied countries. Instead \"Die Wacht am Rhein\" was used. The \"Deutschlandlied\", the national anthem of Germany, is used several times in minor mode as a leitmotif for the German threat, e.g. in the scene in Paris as it is announced that the German army will reach Paris the next day. It is featured in the final scene, giving way to \"La Marseillaise\" after Strasser is shot.\nOther songs include:\nDooley Wilson, who played Sam, was a drummer, not a pianist, so his piano playing was performed by Jean Plummer. After shooting had been completed, producer Wallis considered dubbing over Wilson's voice for his singing.\nVery few films in the early 1940s had portions of the soundtrack released on 78 rpm records, and \"Casablanca\" was no exception. In 1997, almost 55 years after the film's premiere, Turner Entertainment in collaboration with Rhino Records issued the film's first original soundtrack album for release on compact disc, including original songs and music, spoken dialogue, and alternate takes.\nThe piano featured in the Paris flashback sequences was sold in New York City on December 14, 2012, at Sotheby's for more than $600,000 to an anonymous bidder. The piano Sam \"plays\" in Rick's Caf\u00e9 Am\u00e9ricain, put up for auction with other film memorabilia by Turner Classic Movies at Bonhams in New York on November 24, 2014, sold for $3.4 million.\nRelease.\nAlthough an initial release date was anticipated for early 1943, \"Casablanca\" premiered at the Hollywood Theater in New York City on November 26, 1942, to capitalize on Operation Torch (the Allied invasion of French North Africa) and the capture of Casablanca. It went into general release on January 23, 1943, to take advantage of the Casablanca Conference, a high-level meeting in the city between Prime Minister Winston Churchill and President Franklin D. Roosevelt. The Office of War Information prevented screening of the film to troops in North Africa, believing it would cause resentment among Vichy supporters in the region.\nIrish and German cuts.\nOn March 19, 1943, the film was banned in Ireland for infringing on the Emergency Powers Order preserving wartime neutrality, by portraying Vichy France and Nazi Germany in a \"sinister light\". It was passed with cuts on June 15, 1945, shortly after the EPO was lifted. The cuts were made to dialogue between Rick and Ilsa referring to their love affair. A version with only one scene cut was passed on July 16, 1974; Irish national broadcaster RT\u00c9 inquired about showing the film on TV, but found it still required a dialogue cut to Ilsa expressing her love for Rick.\nWarner Brothers released a heavily edited version of \"Casablanca\" in West Germany in 1952. All scenes with Nazis were removed, along with most references to World War II. Important plot points were altered when the dialogue was dubbed into German. Victor Laszlo was no longer a Resistance fighter who escaped from a Nazi concentration camp. Instead, he became a Norwegian atomic physicist who was being pursued by Interpol after he \"broke out of jail\". The West German version was 25 minutes shorter than the original cut. A German version of \"Casablanca\" with the original plot was not released until 1975.\nReception.\nInitial response.\n\"Casablanca\" received \"consistently good reviews\". Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"The Warners\u00a0... have a picture which makes the spine tingle and the heart take a leap.\" He applauded the combination of \"sentiment, humor and pathos with taut melodrama and bristling intrigue.\" Crowther noted its \"devious convolutions of the plot\" and praised the screenplay quality as \"of the best\" and the cast's performances as \"all of the first order\".\nThe trade paper \"Variety\" commended the film's \"combination of fine performances, engrossing story and neat direction\" and the \"variety of moods, action, suspense, comedy and drama that makes \"Casablanca\" an A-1 entry at the b.o.\" The review observed that the \"[f]ilm is splendid anti-Axis propaganda, particularly inasmuch as the propaganda is strictly a by-product of the principal action and contributes to it instead of getting in the way\". \"Variety\" also applauded the performances of Bergman and Henreid and noted, \"Bogart, as might be expected, is more at ease as the bitter and cynical operator of a joint than as a lover, but handles both assignments with superb finesse.\"\nSome reviews were less enthusiastic. \"The New Yorker\" rated \"Casablanca\" only \"pretty tolerable\" and said it was \"not quite up to \"Across the Pacific\", Bogart's last spyfest\".\nAt the 1,500-seat Hollywood Theater, the film grossed $255,000 over ten weeks (equivalent to $ in 2024). In its initial American release, \"Casablanca\" was a substantial, but not spectacular, box-office success, earning $3.7 million (equivalent to $ in 2024). A 50th-anniversary release grossed $ in 1992. According to Warner Bros. records, the film earned $3,398,000 domestically and $3,461,000 in foreign markets.\nPopularity.\nIn the decades since its release, the film has grown in reputation. Murray Burnett called it \"true yesterday, true today, true tomorrow\". By 1955, the film had brought in $6.8 million, making it the third-most-successful of Warners' wartime movies, behind \"Shine On, Harvest Moon\" and \"This Is the Army\". On April 21, 1957, the Brattle Theater of Cambridge, Massachusetts, showed the film as part of a season of old movies. It proved so popular that a tradition began in which \"Casablanca\" would be screened during the week of final exams at Harvard University. Todd Gitlin, a professor of sociology who had attended one of these screenings, has said that the experience was \"the acting out of my own personal rite of passage\". The tradition helped the film remain popular while other films that had been famous in the 1940s have faded from popular memory. By 1977, \"Casablanca\" had become the most frequently broadcast film on American television.\nIngrid Bergman's portrayal of Ilsa Lund in \"Casablanca\" became one of her best-known roles. In later years she said, \"I feel about \"Casablanca\" that it has a life of its own. There is something mystical about it. It seems to have filled a need, a need that was there before the film, a need that the film filled.\"\nOn the film's 50th anniversary, the \"Los Angeles Times\" called \"Casablanca\"'s great strength \"the purity of its Golden Age Hollywoodness [and] the enduring craftsmanship of its resonantly hokey dialogue\". Bob Strauss wrote in the newspaper that the film achieved a \"near-perfect entertainment balance\" of comedy, romance, and suspense.\nRoger Ebert wrote in 1992:\nThere are greater movies. More profound movies. Movies of greater artistic vision or artistic originality or political significance. ... But [it is] one of the movies we treasure the most ... This is a movie that has transcended the ordinary categories.\nIn his opinion, the film is popular because \"the people in it are all so good\" and it is \"a wonderful gem\". He said that he had never heard of a negative review of the film, even though individual elements can be criticized, citing unrealistic special effects and the stiff character of Laszlo as portrayed by Henreid. Ebert also wrote:\nSeeing the film over and over again, year after year, I find it never grows overfamiliar. It plays like a familiar musical album: the more I know it, the more I like it. The black-and-white cinematography has not aged as color would. The dialogue is so spare and cynical it has not grown old-fashioned. Much of the emotional effect of \"Casablanca\" is achieved by indirection. As we leave the theater, we are absolutely convinced that the only thing keeping the world from going crazy is the concerns of three little people who do, after all, amount to more than a hill of beans.\"\nCritic and film historian Leonard Maltin considers \"Casablanca\" \"the best Hollywood movie of all time\".\nAccording to Rudy Behlmer, the character of Rick is \"not a hero\u00a0... not a bad guy\" because he does what is necessary to appease the authorities and \"sticks his neck out for nobody\". Behlmer feels that the other characters are \"not cut and dried\" and come into their goodness over the course of the film. Renault begins as a collaborator with the Nazis who extorts sexual favors from refugees and has Ugarte killed. Even Ilsa, the least active of the main characters, is \"caught in the emotional struggle\" over which man she really loves. By the end, however, \"everybody is sacrificing\". Behlmer also emphasized the variety in the picture. \"It's a blend of drama, melodrama, comedy [and] intrigue.\"\nScott Tobias, writing for \"The Guardian\" on the film's 80th anniversary, calls it \"the jewel of Hollywood's Golden Age\", and the best example of the system of film-making working: due not to an artistic genius but a combination of talented writing, set design, music, casting, supporting characters, and production.\nA few reviewers have expressed reservations. To Pauline Kael, \"It's far from a great film, but it has a special appealingly schlocky romanticism\u00a0...\" Umberto Eco wrote that \"by any strict critical standards\u00a0... \"Casablanca\" is a very mediocre film\". He viewed the changes that the characters manifest as inconsistent rather than complex. \"It is a comic strip, a hotchpotch, low on psychological credibility, and with little continuity in its dramatic effects.\" However, he added that because of the presence of multiple archetypes that allow \"the power of Narrative in its natural state without Art intervening to discipline it\", it is a film reaching \"Homeric depths\" as a \"phenomenon worthy of awe\".\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 136 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 9.5/10. The website's consensus reads, \"An undisputed masterpiece and perhaps Hollywood's quintessential statement on love and romance, Casablanca has only improved with age, boasting career-defining performances from Humphrey Bogart and Ingrid Bergman.\"\nOn Metacritic, the film has a perfect score of 100 out of 100, based on 18 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\". It is one of the few films in the site's history to achieve a perfect aggregate score.\nIn the November/December 1982 issue of \"Film Comment\", Chuck Ross wrote that he retyped the \"Casablanca\" screenplay, reverting the title to \"Everybody Comes to Rick's\" and changing the name of Sam the piano player to Dooley (after Dooley Wilson, who played the character), and submitted it to 217 agencies. The majority of agencies returned the script unread (often because of policies regarding unsolicited screenplays) or did not respond. However, of those which did respond, only 33 specifically recognized it as \"Casablanca\". Eight others observed that it was similar to \"Casablanca\", and 41 agencies rejected the screenplay outright, offering comments such as \"Too much dialogue, not enough exposition, the story line was weak, and in general didn't hold my interest.\" Three agencies offered to represent the screenplay, and one suggested turning it into a novel.\nInfluence on later works.\nMany subsequent films have drawn on elements of \"Casablanca\". \"Passage to Marseille\" (1944) reunited actors Bogart, Rains, Greenstreet, and Lorre and director Curtiz in 1944, and there are similarities between \"Casablanca\" and a later Bogart film, \"To Have and Have Not\" (also 1944). Parodies have included the Marx Brothers' \"A Night in Casablanca\" (1946), Neil Simon's \"The Cheap Detective\" (1978), and \"Out Cold\" (2001). Indirectly, it provided the title for the 1995 neo-noir film \"The Usual Suspects\". Woody Allen's \"Play It Again, Sam\" (1972) appropriated Rick Blaine as the fantasy mentor for Allen's character.\nThe film was a plot device in the science-fiction television movie \"Overdrawn at the Memory Bank\" (1983), based on John Varley's story. The story's protagonist recreates settings from the film inside a virtual reality simulation, including a version of Rick who becomes an advisor and ally (both characters are played by lead actor Raul Julia).\nIt was referred to in Terry Gilliam's dystopian \"Brazil\" (1985). Warner Bros. produced its own parody: \"Carrotblanca\", a 1995 Bugs Bunny cartoon. The film critic Roger Ebert pointed out the plot of the film \"Barb Wire\" (1996) was identical to that of \"Casablanca\". In \"Casablanca\", a novella by Argentine writer Edgar Brau, the protagonist somehow wanders into Rick's Caf\u00e9 Am\u00e9ricain and listens to a strange tale related by Sam. The 2016 musical film \"La La Land\" contains allusions to \"Casablanca\" in the imagery, dialogue, and plot. Robert Zemeckis, director of \"Allied\" (2016), which is also set in 1942 Casablanca, studied the film to capture the city's elegance. The 2017 Moroccan drama film \"Razzia\", directed by Nabil Ayouch, is mostly set in the city of Casablanca, and its characters frequently discuss the 1942 film.\nAwards and honors.\nBecause of its November 1942 release, the New York Film Critics decided to include the film in its 1942 award season for best picture. \"Casablanca\" lost to \"In Which We Serve\". However, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences stated that since the film went into national release at the beginning of 1943, it would be included in that year's nominations. \"Casablanca\" was nominated for eight Academy Awards, and won three.\nAs Bogart stepped out of his car at the awards ceremony, \"the crowd surged forward, almost engulfing him and his wife, Mayo Methot. It took 12 police officers to rescue the two, and a red-faced, startled, yet smiling Bogart heard a chorus of cries of 'good luck' and 'here's looking at you, kid' as he was rushed into the theater\".\nWhen the award for Best Picture was announced, producer Hal B. Wallis got up to accept, but studio head Jack L. Warner rushed up to the stage \"with a broad, flashing smile and a look of great self-satisfaction\", Wallis later recalled.\nI couldn't believe it was happening. \"Casablanca\" had been my creation; Jack had absolutely nothing to do with it. As the audience gasped, I tried to get out of the row of seats and into the aisle, but the entire Warner family sat blocking me. I had no alternative but to sit down again, humiliated and furious\u00a0... Almost forty years later, I still haven't recovered from the shock.\nThis incident led Wallis to leave Warner Bros. in April.\nIn 1989, the film was one of the first 25 films selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". In 2005, it was named one of the 100 greatest films of the last 80 years by \"Time\" magazine (the selected films were not ranked). \"Bright Lights Film Journal\" stated in 2007, \"It is one of those rare films from Hollywood's Golden Age which has managed to transcend its era to entertain generations of moviegoers\u00a0... \"Casablanca\" provides twenty-first-century Americans with an oasis of hope in a desert of arbitrary cruelty and senseless violence.\"\nThe film also ranked at number 28 on \"Empire\"'s list of the 100 Greatest Movies of All Time, which said, \"Love, honour, thrills, wisecracks and a hit tune are among the attractions, which also include a perfect supporting cast of villains, sneaks, thieves, refugees and bar staff. But it's Bogart and Bergman's show, entering immortality as screen lovers reunited only to part. The irrefutible [\"sic\"] proof that great movies are accidents.\"\nScreenwriting teacher Robert McKee maintains that the script is \"the greatest screenplay of all time\". In 2006, the Writers Guild of America, West agreed, voting it the best ever in its list of the 101 greatest screenplays.\nThe film has been selected by the American Film Institute for many of their lists of important American films:\nInterpretation.\n\"Casablanca\" has been subjected to many readings; semioticians account for the film's popularity by claiming that its inclusion of stereotypes paradoxically strengthens the film. Umberto Eco wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thus \"Casablanca\" is not just one film. It is many films, an anthology. Made haphazardly, it probably made itself, if not actually against the will of its authors and actors, then at least beyond their control. And this is the reason it works, in spite of aesthetic theories and theories of film making. For in it there unfolds with almost telluric force the power of Narrative in its natural state, without Art intervening to discipline it\u00a0... When all the archetypes burst in shamelessly, we reach Homeric depths. Two clich\u00e9s make us laugh. A hundred clich\u00e9s move us. For we sense dimly that the clich\u00e9s are talking among themselves, and celebrating a reunion.\nEco also singled out sacrifice as a theme: \"the myth of sacrifice runs through the whole film\". It was this theme that resonated with a wartime audience who were reassured by the idea that painful sacrifice and going off to war could be romantic gestures done for the greater good.\nKoch also considered the film a political allegory. Rick is compared to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who gambled \"on the odds of going to war until circumstance and his own submerged nobility force him to close his casino (partisan politics) and commit himself\u2014first by financing the Side of Right and then by fighting for it\". The connection is reinforced by the film's title, which means \"white house\".\nHarvey Greenberg presents a Freudian reading in his \"The Movies on Your Mind\", in which the transgressions that prevent Rick from returning to the United States constitute an Oedipus complex, which is resolved only when Rick begins to identify with the father figure of Laszlo and the cause that he represents. Sidney Rosenzweig argues that such readings are reductive and that the most important aspect of the film is its ambiguity, above all in the central character of Rick; he cites the different names that each character gives Rick (Richard, Ricky, Mr. Rick, Herr Rick and boss) as evidence of the different meanings that he has for each person.\nHome media.\n\"Casablanca\" was initially released on Betamax and VHS by Magnetic Video and later by CBS/Fox Video (as United Artists owned the distribution rights at the time). In 1989, the Criterion Collection released a laserdisc release sourced from a nitrate print; this includes supplements such as an audio commentary by Ronald Haver, a treatment for an unreleased sequel and wartime footage of the city of Casablanca. Criterion issued a CLV version of this in 1991 with only the film and commentary. It was next released on laserdisc in 1991, and on VHS in 1992\u2014both from MGM/UA Home Entertainment (distributing for Turner Entertainment Co.), which at the time was distributed by Warner Home Video. It was first released on DVD in 1998 by MGM, containing the trailer and a making-of featurette (Warner Home Video reissued the DVD in 2000). A subsequent two-disc special edition, containing an audio commentary by Roger Ebert, documentaries, \"Carrotblanca\" and a newly remastered visual and audio presentation, was released in 2003.\nAn HD DVD was released on November 14, 2006, containing the same special features as the 2003 DVD. Reviewers were impressed with the new high-definition transfer of the film.\nA Blu-ray release with new special features came out on December 2, 2008; it is also available on DVD. The Blu-ray was initially only released as an expensive gift set with a booklet, a luggage tag and other assorted gift-type items. It was eventually released as a stand-alone Blu-ray in September 2009. On March 27, 2012, Warner released a new 70th Anniversary Ultimate Collector's Edition Blu-ray/DVD combo set. It includes a brand-new 4K restoration and new bonus material. This 4K restoration was completed at Warner Bros. Digital Imaging from a nitrate print, because the original negative no longer exists.\nThe film was also released on Ultra HD Blu-ray in November 8, 2022.\nRemakes and unrealized sequels.\nAlmost from the moment \"Casablanca\" became a hit, talk began of producing a sequel. One titled \"Brazzaville\" (in the final scene, Renault recommends fleeing to that Free French-held city) was planned, but never produced. A newspaper article at the time mentioned that Bogart and Greenstreet \"will continue their characterizations from the first film, and it's likely that Geraldine Fitzgerald will have an important role\". Since then, no studio has seriously considered filming a sequel or outright remake.\nFran\u00e7ois Truffaut refused an invitation to remake the film in 1974, citing its cult status among American students as his reason. Attempts to recapture the magic of \"Casablanca\" in other settings, such as \"Caboblanco\" (1980), \"a South American-set retooling of \"Casablanca\"\", and \"Havana\" (1990), have been poorly received.\nStories of a \"Casablanca\" remake or sequel nonetheless persist. In 2008, Madonna was reported to be pursuing a remake set in modern-day Iraq. In 2012, both \"The Daily Telegraph\" and \"Entertainment Weekly\" reported on efforts by Cass Warner, granddaughter of Harry Warner and friend of the late Howard Koch, to produce a sequel featuring the search by Rick Blaine and Ilsa Lund's illegitimate son for the whereabouts of his biological father.\nAdaptations.\nSeveral adaptations of the film were aired on radio. The two best-known are a thirty-minute adaptation on \"The Screen Guild Theater\" on April 26, 1943, starring Bogart, Bergman, and Henreid, and an hour-long version on the \"Lux Radio Theater\" on January 24, 1944, featuring Alan Ladd as Rick, Hedy Lamarr as Ilsa, and John Loder as Laszlo. Two other thirty-minute adaptations were aired, one on \"Philip Morris Playhouse\" on September 3, 1943, and the other on \"Theater of Romance\" on December 19, 1944, in which Dooley Wilson reprised his role as Sam.\nOn television, there have been two short-lived series based upon \"Casablanca\", both sharing the title. The first \"Casablanca\" aired on ABC as part of the wheel series \"Warner Bros. Presents\" in hour-long episodes from 1955 to 1956. It was a Cold War espionage program set contemporaneously with its production, and starred Charles McGraw as Rick and Marcel Dalio, who had played Emil the croupier in the movie, as the police chief. The second \"Casablanca\", broadcast on NBC in April 1983, starred David Soul as Rick and was canceled after three weeks.\nThe novel \"As Time Goes By\", written by Michael Walsh and published in 1998, was authorized by Warner. The novel picks up where the film leaves off, and also tells of Rick's mysterious past in America. The book met with little success. David Thomson provided an unofficial sequel in his 1985 novel \"Suspects\".\nJulius Epstein made two attempts to turn the film into a Broadway musical, in 1951 and 1967, but neither made it to the stage. The original play, \"Everybody Comes to Rick's\", was produced in Newport, Rhode Island, in August 1946, and again in London in April 1991, but met with no success. The film was adapted into a musical by the Takarazuka Revue, an all-female Japanese musical theater company, and ran from November 2009 through February 2010.\n\"CasablancaBox\", written by Sara Farrington and directed by Reid Farrington, premiered in New York in 2017 and was an imagined \"making of\" the film. It was nominated for two 2017 Drama Desk awards, Unique Theatrical Experience and Outstanding Projection Design. The \"New York Times\" described it as \"a brave, almost foolhardy undertaking, presenting the backstage drama during the making of \"Casablanca\"\".\nColorization.\n\"Casablanca\" was part of the film colorization controversy of the 1980s, when a colorized version aired on the television network WTBS. In 1984, MGM/UA hired Color Systems Technology to colorize the film for $180,000. When Ted Turner of Turner Broadcasting System purchased MGM/UA's film library two years later, he canceled the request, before contracting American Film Technologies (AFT) in 1988. AFT completed the colorization in two months at a cost of $450,000. Turner later reacted to criticism of the colorization, saying, \"[\"Casablanca\"] is one of a handful of films that really doesn't have to be colorized. I did it because I wanted to. All I'm trying to do is protect my investment.\"\nThe Library of Congress deemed that the color change differed so much from the original film that it gave a new copyright to Turner Entertainment. When the colorized film debuted on WTBS, it was watched by three million viewers, failing to make the top-ten viewed cable shows for the week. Although Jack Matthews of the \"Los Angeles Times\" called the finished product \"state of the art\", it was mostly met with negative critical reception. It was briefly available on home video. Gary Edgerton, writing for the \"Journal of Popular Film &amp; Television\" criticized the colorization, stating that \"\"Casablanca\" in color ended up being much blander in appearance and, overall, much less visually interesting than its 1942 predecessor.\" Bogart's son, Stephen, said, \"if you're going to colorize \"Casablanca\", why not put arms on the Venus de Milo?\"\nInaccuracies and a misquote.\nSeveral unfounded rumors and misconceptions have grown around the film, one being that Ronald Reagan was originally chosen to play Rick. This originated in a press release issued by the studio early on in the film's development. By that time the studio already knew that he was going into the Army, and he was never seriously considered. George Raft claimed that he had turned down the lead role but studio records make it clear that Wallis was committed to Bogart from the start.\nAnother story is that the actors did not know until the last day of shooting how the film was to end. Koch later acknowledged:\nWhen we began, we didn't have a finished script\u00a0... Ingrid Bergman came to me and said, \"Which man should I love more\u00a0...?\" I said to her, \"I don't know\u00a0... play them both evenly.\" You see we didn't have an ending, so we didn't know what was going to happen!\nWhile rewrites did occur during filming, Aljean Harmetz's examination of the scripts has shown that many of the key scenes were shot after Bergman knew how the film would end; any confusion was, according to critic Roger Ebert, \"emotional\", not \"factual\".\nThe film has several logical flaws, one being the \"letters of transit\" that enable their bearers to leave Vichy French territory. Ugarte says the letters had been signed by (depending on the listener) either Vichy General Weygand or Free French General de Gaulle. The French subtitles on the official DVD read Weygand, the English ones de Gaulle. Weygand had been the Vichy delegate-general for the North African colonies until November 1941, a month before the film is set. De Gaulle was the head of the Free French government in exile, so a letter signed by him would have provided no benefit. The letters were invented as a MacGuffin by Joan Alison for the original play and never questioned.\nIn the same vein, though Laszlo asserts that the Nazis cannot arrest him, saying, \"This is still unoccupied France; any violation of neutrality would reflect on Captain Renault\", Ebert points out, \"It makes no sense that he could walk around freely.\u00a0... He would be arrested on sight.\" No uniformed German troops were stationed in Casablanca during World War II, and neither American nor French troops occupied Berlin in 1918, despite Renault's retort to Strasser, who calls Rick a \"blundering American\".\nA line closely associated with \"Casablanca\"\u2014\"Play it again, Sam\"\u2014is not spoken in the film. When Ilsa first enters the Caf\u00e9 Am\u00e9ricain, she spots Sam and asks him, \"Play it once, Sam, for old times' sake.\" After he feigns ignorance, she responds, \"Play it, Sam. Play 'As Time Goes By'.\" Later that night, alone with Sam, Rick says, \"You played it for her, you can play it for me\", and \"If she can stand it, I can! Play it!\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nStreaming audio"}
{"id": "57587", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57587", "title": "Casablanca, Morocco", "text": ""}
{"id": "57588", "revid": "48535834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57588", "title": "Cigarette card", "text": "Trading cards included in cigarette packaging\nCigarette cards are trading cards issued by tobacco manufacturers to stiffen cigarette packaging and advertise cigarette brands.\nBetween 1875 and the 1940s, cigarette companies often included collectible cards with their packages of cigarettes. Cigarette card sets document popular culture from the turn of the century, often depicting the period's actresses, costumes, and sports, as well as offering insights into mainstream humour and cultural norms.\nHistory.\nBeginning in 1879, cards depicting actresses, baseball players, Native American chiefs, boxers, national flags, or wild animals were issued by the U.S.-based Allen &amp; Ginter tobacco company. These are considered to be some of the first cigarette cards. Other tobacco companies such as Goodwin &amp; Co. soon followed suit. They first emerged in the U.S., then the UK, then, eventually, in many other countries.\nIn the UK, W.D. &amp; H.O. Wills in 1887 were one of the first companies to include advertising cards with their cigarettes, but it was John Player &amp; Sons in 1893 that produced one of the first general interest sets 'Castles and Abbeys'.\nThomas Ogden of Liverpool soon followed in 1894 and in 1895, Wills produced their first set 'Ships and Sailors'. In 1896 Wills produced the first set in the United Kingdom with a sporting theme called 'Cricketers'. In 1906, Ogden's produced a set of association football cards depicting footballers in their club colours, in one of the first full-colour sets.\nEach set of cards typically consisted of 25 or 50 related subjects, but series of over 100 cards per issue are known. Popular themes were 'beauties' (famous actresses, film stars and models), sporters (in the U.S. mainly baseball, in the rest of the world mainly football and cricket), nature, military heroes and uniforms, heraldry, locomotives, and city views.\nImperial Tobacco Canada manufactured the first ice hockey cards ever for the inaugural NHL season. There were a total of 36 cards in the set, each one featured an illustration of a player. After World War I, only one more cigarette set was issued, during 1924\u201325.\nToday, for example, sports and military historians study these cards for details on uniform design.\nSome very early cigarette cards were printed on silk which was then attached to a paper backing. They were discontinued in order to save paper during World War II, and never fully reintroduced thereafter.\nDoral, an R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company brand, started printing cigarette cards in the year 2000. These were the first cigarette cards from a major manufacturer since the 1940s, although the small company Carreras in the UK issued cigarette cards with Turf brand cigarettes for a short period in the 1950s and 1960s, Black Cat brand in 1976. Furthermore, card-like coupons with special offers have often been included in cigarette packets over the years.\nThe first set of \"Doral Celebrate America\" cards featured the 50 states in two releases, 2000 and 2001. Later themes include American festivals, cars, national parks, and 20th century events.\nNatural American Spirit, another R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company brand, also includes cigarette cards on their packs, with information on such things as windpower, diversity, and their farmers.\nPhilip Morris USA started including \"Information For Smokers\" cigarette cards in certain packs. One provides information on quitting smoking and the other states that \"Light, \"Ultra Light\", \"Mild\", \"Medium\", and \"Low Tar\" cigarettes are just as harmful as \"Full Flavor\" ones.\nClassification and cataloguing.\nThe system devised to codify 19th Century American tobacco issues has its origin in the 'American Card Catalog' (ACC), written by Jefferson Burdick. Burdick listed the American Tobacco cards in one section, broken down by companies that issued the card series and by the types of cards. The 19th Century issues were prefixed with 'N' (N1-N694) and the 20th with 'T'. (T1-T235).\nThe World Tobacco Index (WTI).\nThe World Tobacco Index (WTI), published by the Cartophilic Society of Great Britain (CSGB), lists all known tobacco issues from around the world and is still being updated today on reports of new finds. Using a similar alphanumeric system, it assigns a code based on the name of manufacturer, rather than the century in which the cards were issued. For example, Burdick's N2 'Celebrated American Indian Chiefs' by Allen &amp; Ginter is listed as A400-030 (a), with the larger N42 series listed as A400-030 (b).\nSports cigarette cards.\nThe following list focuses on the sports-only cards manufactured by tobacco companies:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAssociation football.\nOgden's Limited of Liverpool produced cigarette cards featuring football from 1894 which were included with their Guinea Gold brand until 1901. They were later included with their Tabs brand from 1901 to 1903.\nIn 1896 Marcus &amp; Company of Manchester produced the first football set called Footballers &amp; Club Colours. In 1902 W.D. &amp; H.O. Wills produced a set of football-related cards called the Football Series with 66 cards featuring advertising for their Wild Woodbine and Cinderella brands. William Clarke &amp; Sons of Liverpool later issued the same set but with a short biography for the player on each one.\nIn 1906, Ogden's produced a set depicting footballers in their club colours, in one of the first full-colour sets.\nWills issued a 50-card set for the Indian market in 1907 with their Scissors brand, called Football Team Colours. Further sets were issued overseas by Wills in 1910 and 1914.\nWills produced further sets in 1935 and 1939.\nCricket.\nWills produced a set called 'Cricketers' in 1896 and released others sets in 1901, 1908, 1909, 1910 and 1928.\nOther cigarette cards.\nAnother notable and sought-after set of cards is the untitled series issued by Taddy and known by collectors as \"Clowns and Circus Artistes\". While not the rarest cards in existence (there are a number of series in which only one known example remains), they are still very rare and command high prices whenever they come up for auction. The T206 Ty Cobb is another example of a notably rare cigarette card.\nThe Mecca cigarette trading card for George Sutton is also notable for it depicts him with hands. Sutton was known as \"the handless billiard player\" for mastering the game with such a handicap.\nApart from these examples, there are also cigarette cards that do not focus on people, but on cities or flags.\nLegacy.\nThe largest cigarette card collection on record is that of Edward Wharton-Tigar. His collection, bequeathed to the British Museum following his death in 1995, is recognised by the \"Guinness Book of Records\" as the largest collection of its kind. His autobiography, \"Burning Bright\", details both his obsession with collecting cigarette cards, as well as his business life, which included becoming President of Selection Trust \u2013 at the time, one of the largest mining companies in the world \u2013 as well as his lifelong passion for cricket, which culminated in his presidency of Kent Cricket Club. When asked what others thought of his collecting he said: \"If to collect cigarette cards is a sign of eccentricity, how then will posterity judge one who amassed the biggest collection in the world? Frankly, I care not.\"\nHe was the president of the Cartophilic Society of Great Britain until his death in 1995.\nWorld record price.\nThe most valuable cigarette card in the world features Honus Wagner, one of the great names in U.S. baseball at the turn of the 20th century. The T206 Honus Wagner has repeatedly set records at auction, most recently in 2016 when it sold for $3,120,000. Wagner was a dedicated non-smoker and objected when America's biggest tobacco corporation planned to picture him on a cigarette card without his permission. Threats of legal action prevented its release, but a few slipped out, and it was one of these that stunned the collecting world when it was auctioned.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57589", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57589", "title": "Individual Movies", "text": ""}
{"id": "57591", "revid": "24043204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57591", "title": "Brachydanio rerio", "text": ""}
{"id": "57592", "revid": "263608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57592", "title": "E. coli 0157 H7", "text": ""}
{"id": "57595", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57595", "title": "Cigarette Cards", "text": ""}
{"id": "57596", "revid": "5230605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57596", "title": "Football War", "text": "Brief war between El Salvador and Honduras in 1969\nThe Football War (), also known as the Soccer War or the 100 Hour War, was a brief military conflict fought between El Salvador and Honduras in 1969. Existing tensions between the two countries coincided with rioting during a 1970 FIFA World Cup qualifier. The war began on 14 July 1969 when the Salvadoran military launched an attack against Honduras. The Organization of American States (OAS) negotiated a cease-fire on the night of 18 July, hence its nickname. Salvadoran troops were withdrawn in early August. \nThe war, while brief, had major consequences for both countries and was a major factor in starting the Salvadoran Civil War a decade later.\nBackground.\nAlthough the nickname \"Football War\" implies that the conflict was due to a football match, the causes of the war went much deeper. The roots were issues over land reform in Honduras and immigration and demographic problems in El Salvador. Honduras has more than five times the area of neighboring El Salvador, but in 1969 the population of El Salvador (3.7 million) was 40% larger than that of Honduras (2.6 million). At the beginning of the 20th century, Salvadorans had begun migrating to Honduras in large numbers. By 1969, more than 300,000 Salvadorans were living in Honduras, making up more than 10% of Honduras's population.\nIn Honduras, as in much of Central America, a large majority of the land was owned by big corporations or large landowners. The United Fruit Company owned 10% of the land, making it hard for the average landowner to compete. Just 8.8% of landowners held over 63% of the land, and the top 1% held over 38%. In 1966, these landowners united to create the National Federation of Honduran Farmers and Ranchers (, FENAGH). This group put pressure on the President of Honduras, General Oswaldo L\u00f3pez Arellano, to protect the property of wealthy landowners from \"campesinos\", many of whom were Salvadoran.\nIn 1962, Honduras successfully enacted a new land reform law. Fully enforced by 1967, this law gave the central government and municipalities much of the land occupied illegally by Salvadoran immigrants and redistributed it to native-born Hondurans. The land was taken from both immigrant farmers and squatters regardless of their claims to ownership or immigration status. This created problems for Salvadorans and Hondurans who were married. Thousands of Salvadoran laborers were expelled from Honduras, including both migrant workers and longer-term settlers. This general rise in tensions ultimately led to a military conflict.\nBuildup.\nIn June 1969, both countries met in a two-leg 1970 FIFA World Cup qualifier. The first game was held in Tegucigalpa, Honduras' capital, on 8 June 1969. The Salvadoran team was harassed by Honduran fans at their hotel the night before the match. Honduras won 1\u20130, causing Salvadoran fans to reportedly set fire to the stadium.\nThe second game was held in San Salvador, El Salvador's capital, on 15 June 1969. Salvadoran fans, seeking vengeance, rioted outside the Honduran team's hotel, leading to several deaths. At the match's start, a dirty rag was flown instead of the Honduran flag. It was won 3\u20130 by El Salvador. Anti-Salvadoran riots occurred across Honduras following the loss.\nOn 26 June 1969, the night before the play-off match in Mexico City, which El Salvador would win 3\u20132 after extra time, El Salvador dissolved all diplomatic ties with Honduras, stating that around 12,000 Salvadorans had been forced to flee Honduras in the days following the second match. It further claimed that \"the Government of Honduras has not taken any effective measures to punish these crimes which constitute genocide, nor has it given assurances of indemnification or reparations for the damages caused to Salvadorans\".\nBorder skirmishes.\nOn 3 July, Salvadoran anti-aircraft fired on a civilian Douglas DC-3 in Honduran airspace, causing the Honduran Air Force (\",\" FAH) to scramble two North American T-28 Trojans and forces stationed near the border town of El Poy to briefly clash. The same day, a Piper PA-28 Cherokee, used by the Salvadoran Air Force (, FAS) as a reconnaissance plane, was intercepted, but managed to escape capture. \nAt the request of the Honduran foreign minister, the OAS held an emergency meeting the following day, where it was decided that the organization would \"postpone any action of its own\" and have the neighboring nations of Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and Guatemala mediate the situation. Honduras and El Salvador were also both urged to \"avoid any action that might further endanger the situation\". However, the OAS resolution did little to reduce tensions as skirmishes continued. \nOn 5 July, El Salvador claimed that two Honduran platoons had crossed the border. On 12 July, Honduras claimed that four Salvadoran soldiers had been killed in an incursion, something which El Salvador dismissed as part of a \"continuing campaign of distortion of the truth\". On 13 July, six Honduran civilians were injured during another skirmish at El Poy, in which both sides exchanged mortar fire.\nWar.\nThe war began on 14 July 1969 at around 6 PM, when the FAS attacked Honduran airfields using P-51 Mustangs, as well as C-47 Skytrains and civilian aircraft hastily converted into bombers. They mainly targeted Toncont\u00edn International Airport, where the FAH kept half of its aircraft. The Salvadoran Army then launched a two-front invasion of Honduras; one contingent headed to secure the prosperous Sula Valley, while the other marched along the Pan-American Highway toward Tegucigalpa.66220 Troops were supported by M3A1 Stuarts, as well as bulldozers and trucks using improvised vehicle armor. Initial progress was swift, with \"La Prensa Gr\u00e1fica\" claiming they advanced in a single day. \nOn 15 July, the FAH commenced bombings using their own fleet of World War II-era aircraft, mainly consisting of F4U Corsairs.21 Sortie targets included the Ilopango International Airport and oil facilities in Acajutla and Port Cutuco. El Salvador lost 20% of its fuel reserves in the raids. However, despite the operation's success, the FAH went on the defensive for the rest of the war following a second FAS attack on Toncont\u00edn.\nOn 16 July, in the only major battle of the war, Salvadoran troops led by Colonel Mario (\u201cEl Diablo\u201d) Vel\u00e1zquez Jandres, reached and surrounded Nueva Ocotepeque, pressing defenses in what TIME described as a \"narrow defile\". Following artillery barrages, Honduran forces retreated alongside civilians, leading to the town's capture. Both fronts stalled later that day due to an ammunition shortage and increasing Honduran resistance.\nOne of the last engagements of the war took place on the afternoon of 17 July, a dogfight which involved 4 Corsairs and 2 Mustangs. Captain Guillermo Reynaldo Cortez, a Salvadoran, was killed; he was the highest-ranking casualty of the war. The Football War was the last conflict in which piston-engined fighters fought each other.\nCeasefire.\nSoon after the start of the war, the OAS held a special session, organizing a seven nation committee to oversee negotiations and calling for a cease-fire. While Honduran officials were reportedly willing, El Salvador resisted OAS pressure for several days, with one of the biggest sticking points, according to the CIA, being the time window given for troops to be withdrawn. \nA cease-fire was arranged on the night of 18 July, which required Salvadoran troops to withdraw within 96 hours and an end to \"inflammatory press, radio, and T.V. campaigns\", among other things. It took effect at midnight.\nDelayed withdrawal.\nSoon before the initial 96 hour deadline, the Salvadoran government sent a document to the OAS, stating, while it would continue to hold the cease-fire, it would not withdraw troops until a guarantee of safety for Salvadorans still living in Honduras was given, reparations were paid, and anti-Salvadoran rioters were punished. Honduras only fulfilled the first demand, but El Salvador relented after the OAS threatened sanctions, resulting in troops withdrawing on 2 August 1969.\nConsequences.\nEl Salvador suffered up to 700 casualties throughout the course of the war, including 107 deaths. Three aircraft were also destroyed in Honduran air raids. Official records state Honduras suffered 165 casualties, including 99 deaths, but such numbers have been disputed; Nueva Ocotepeque's parish priest reportedly saw 400 dead, while internal CIA documents report up to 1,500. Most historians agree that civilians accounted for the majority of the losses.\nSome 300,000 Salvadorans had been displaced; many had been forcibly exiled or had fled from war-torn Honduras, only to enter an El Salvador in which the government was not welcoming. Most of these refugees were forced to provide for themselves with very little assistance. Over the next few years, more Salvadorans returned to their native land, where they encountered overpopulation and extreme poverty. The resulting social unrest was one of the causes of the Salvadoran Civil War, which followed approximately a decade later in which 70,000 to 80,000 died and a further 8,000 more disappeared.\nTrade between Honduras and El Salvador, which had been heavily disrupted pre-war, was outright stopped following it.22 Honduras would go on to leave and thereby further weaken the already ailing Central American Common Market, a regional integration project that had been set up by the United States largely as a means of counteracting the effects of the Cuban Revolution.38\nAftermath.\nAlthough it had initiated the war, El Salvador played in the World Cup; it was eliminated after losing its first three matches against the USSR, Mexico, and Belgium.\nEleven years after the conflict the two nations signed a peace treaty in Lima, Peru on 30 October 1980 and agreed to resolve the border dispute over the Gulf of Fonseca and five sections of land boundary through the International Court of Justice (ICJ). In 1992, the Court awarded most of the disputed territory to Honduras, and in 1998, Honduras and El Salvador signed a border demarcation treaty to implement the terms of the ICJ decree. The total disputed land area given to Honduras after the court's ruling was around . In the Gulf of Fonseca the court found that Honduras held sovereignty over the island of El Tigre, and El Salvador over the islands of Meanguera and Meanguerita.\nThe dispute continued despite the ICJ ruling. At a meeting in March 2012 President Porfirio Lobo of Honduras, President Otto P\u00e9rez of Guatemala, and President Daniel Ortega of Nicaragua all agreed that the Gulf of Fonseca would be designated as a peace zone. El Salvador was not at the meeting. However, in December 2012, El Salvador agreed to a tripartite commission of government representatives from El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua that was to take care of territorial disputes through peaceful means and come up with a solution by 1 March 2013. The commission did not meet after December, and in March 2013 stiff letters threatening military action were exchanged between Honduras and El Salvador.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57597", "revid": "235191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57597", "title": "Soccer War", "text": ""}
{"id": "57598", "revid": "4156945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57598", "title": "Telecommunications in Algeria", "text": " \nTypes of communications in Algeria, including telephones, mass media and the Internet.\nIn October 2013, the Algeria Regulatory Authority for Post and Telecommunication awarded 3G licences to the three mobile operators in Algeria: Mobilis, Ooredoo Algeria and Djezzy. The mobile operator companies promised their clients better mobile internet service.\nTelephony.\nTelephones - main lines in use: 3.068 million (2007) \n\"country comparison to the world:\" 48\nTelephones - mobile cellular: 43.227 million (2015) \n\"country comparison to the world:\" 31\nTelephone system: \"domestic:\" good service in north but sparse in south; domestic satellite system with 12 earth stations (20 additional domestic earth stations are planned)\n\"international:\" 5 submarine cables; microwave radio relay to Italy, France, Spain, Morocco, and Tunisia; coaxial cable to Morocco and Tunisia; participant in Medarabtel; satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean), 1 Intersputnik, and 1 Arabsat\nInternet.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs): 03 (2005)\nInternet Hosts: 477 (2008)\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 161\nInternet Users: 20 million (2007)\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 51\nCountry codes: .dz\nControversy.\nIn October 2013, the Algeria Regulatory Authority for Post and Telecommunication awarded 3G licences to the three mobile operators in Algeria: Mobilis, Ooredoo, and Djezzy. The mobile operator companies promised their clients better mobile internet service.\nThe authority imposed on mobile operators a 3G double numbering license. This double numbering system requires any citizen that wishes to use the 3G service, must hold two separate 2G and 3G mobile numbers. Having two numbers with two different mobile internet access is more expensive and inconvenient.\n\"Anonymous involvement\".\n\" In August 2012 a group in the Anonymous irc channel #OpAlgeria started an operation against the Algeria Regulatory Authority for Post and Telecommunication. This operation was started because the authority made a decision to require authorization of its users before allowing them to use any kind of encryption (for example; IpSec). They also will require authorization for any type of virtual private network (VPN) technology (for example; PPTP, L2TP, GRE tunneling, OpenVPN, and most other protocols that allow protection of information).\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57599", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57599", "title": "Transport in Algeria", "text": "As the tenth-largest country in the world, and the largest in Africa and in the Mediterranean region, Algeria has a vast transportation system that includes a large and diverse transportation infrastructure.\nRailways.\nThere are a total of of railways: with of that being electrified and of that being double tracked.\nSNTF operates the railways, whilst a new, separate organisation, Anesrif, has been created to manage infrastructure investment.\nThe High Plateau line is a major new project to build an east\u2013west line across the country, parallel to the Rocade Nord.\nMetro.\nThe Algiers Metro is a rapid transit system that first opened in 2011, making Algiers the first city in the Maghreb to possess this type of infrastructure. The system is mostly underground and extends over , serving 19 stations, and has an annual ridership of over 40 million passengers in 2018.\nSeveral expansion projects are underway to ensure more extensive coverage of the capital city, with the network projected to reach a length of and serve 58 stations in the future.\nTramways.\nAlgeria possesses one of the highest number of tram systems among developing countries, and by far the highest number in Africa, with 7 operating systems across different major cities. Currently the cities of Algiers, Oran, Constantine, S\u00e9tif, Sidi bel Abbes, Mostaganem and Ouargla have a tram line in operation. The government, wanting to diversify the country's future in rail transport, has assigned the Entreprise M\u00e9tro d'Alger to the projects.\nHighways.\nDue to extensive investment the motorway network in Algeria is expanding, along with other kinds of infrastructure. The country plans to link all of its major ports and cities with its highway network, as well as linking the country to all of its neighbors, with the aim of boosting economic activity and trade.\nCurrently Algeria has over of paved roads including of expressways (six-lane highways), as well as of unpaved roads, for a total road system of about .\nRegional highways.\nAlgeria has two major roads in the Trans-African Highway network, including the Trans-Sahara Highway, which traverses the country from north to south, and eventually continues into Niger and Nigeria, linking Algiers to Lagos, Nigeria. The country has also constructed the East\u2013west highway, which crosses the entirety of the country's north along the east\u2013west axis, and runs from its border with Tunisia to that with Morocco, connecting most major Algerian cities in the process.\nCable transport.\nDue to its mountainous geography, Algeria has taken a particular interest in cable-based transportation, namely gondola lifts and aerial tramways, which serve as both an ecological and touristic means of transport. Currently there are eight such systems in operation across the country, in Algiers, Oran, Tlemcen, Tizi Ouzou, Chr\u00e9a, Constantine, Annaba and Skikda.\nOver the coming years, Algeria will launch a program of new projects for the modernization and maintenance of all the country's cable cars. These works aim to reinforce the country's public cable transport.\nPipelines.\nAs of 2013 Algeria had an extensive network of pipelines, with 7,036 kilometers of oil pipelines, 16,415 kilometers of natural gas pipelines, 3,447 kilometers of liquid petroleum gas pipelines, 2,600 kilometers of condensate pipelines and 144 kilometers of refined products pipelines.\nThe country has 3 export pipelines, two running to Spain (Maghreb-Europe Gas Pipeline and Medgaz), and one running to Italy (Trans-Mediterranean Pipeline), with an additional pipeline (GALSI) planned between Annaba and Sardinia. The pipeline networks will be extended to France and Germany.\nMerchant marine.\nTotal: 110 (2017, CIA World Factbook)\nby type: bulk carrier 3, general cargo 13, oil tanker 9, other 85 (2017)"}
{"id": "57600", "revid": "25994772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57600", "title": "Algerian People's National Army", "text": "Combined military forces of Algeria\nThe People's National Army (PNA) () is the military of the Algerian republic. It is the direct successor of the National Liberation Army (ALN), the armed wing of the nationalist National Liberation Front, which fought French colonial rule during the Algerian War of Independence (1954\u20131962).\nThe People's National Army include the Algerian Land Forces, the Algerian Air Force, the Navy, and the Algerian Air Defence Force. The antecedents of the army were the conventional military units formed in neighbouring Morocco and Tunisia during the war of independence from France.\nHistory.\nRole in politics.\nThe Algerian military \u00e9lite has played a dominating role in Algerian politics ever since independence in 1962, when the army emerged as the only effective powerbroker in a shattered political landscape dominated by weak and competing political factions. At the end of the war of independence, a split developed between the National Liberation Army and the Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic (GPRA). The GPRA was set up in 1958 to represent the National Liberation Front abroad, mobilise the funds needed to organise the underground movement and support the refugees who had fled to Morocco and Tunisia. But it was the general staff of the ALN that was actually in charge of the revolution. When the war ended, it \"dismissed\" the GPRA and took over the running of the new state.\nAfter independence in 1962, the Army, led by Houari Boumedi\u00e8ne, backed Ahmed Ben Bella to become president. Recognizing the role that the military played in bringing him to power, Ben Bella appointed senior officers as ministers and other important positions within the new state, including naming Boumedi\u00e8ne as the defence minister.\nJust three years later, Boumedi\u00e8ne deposed Ben Bella in a coup, which also saw the former take power and the National Assembly replaced by the Revolutionary Council to oversee the development of state structures. The Council was set up by 26 military officers, including Chadli Bendjedid and Abdelaziz Bouteflika, and it gradually entrenched the military establishment as the founders and the backbone of the Algerian regime. Despite the influence of the army that time was limited due to state and army leadership were joined under Boumedi\u00e8ne's highly authoritarian presidency, after his death in 1978, the role of the military in politics started to grow from the late 1970s. The Ministry of Defence took over administrative control of the government after Boumedi\u00e8ne fell ill. After Boumedi\u00e8ne's death in 1978,\nthe military ensured the continuation of its influence in politics by choosing Colonel Chadli Benjedid to succeed as the President, as he increasingly relied on the a small number of military advisers for advice. Despite this, factionalization and rivalries within the military and political \u00e9lites remains a major factor in Algerian politics.\nAfter being structured as a politicized \"people's army\" in the Boum\u00e9di\u00e8ne era, and retaining its allegiance to the FLN during the one-party state years of Algerian history, the military forces were formally depoliticized in 1988, as a multi-party system was introduced. This, however, did not end military influence over Algerian politics. It was extremely suspicious of Islamist parties, such as the Islamic Salvation Front \"(Front Islamique du Salut, FIS)\", and opposed the FIS's legal recognition in 1989. Since most of the officers were trained overseas in states practicing secular laws, such as France and the Soviet Union, they believe Islamism was a threat to state foundations and a threat to the military's interests. This was reflected in decisions by army chiefs to ban the hijab and its reluctance to support Iraq during its invasion of Kuwait.\nIn 1991, fearing the installation of Sharia Law, which would result in Algeria becoming an Islamic state, the Algerian Army cancelled free elections that were likely to bring an Islamist party, the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) (\"Front Islamique du Salut\") to power. They also launched a coup d'etat in January 1991 and forced Bendjedid to resign the presidency. For many officers, the election of an Islamist Algerian government would be a disaster as they believed it would be catastrophic for the economy through capital flight and foreign petrol companies cancelling their agreements to extract oil and gas in Algeria. Politically, the military believed the election of the FIS could bring instability to the country, as there were indications that the FIS's opponents are preparing to start armed conflicts against any future Islamist governments. Despite Benjedid assured the officers that he could keep the FIS in check with his constitutional and institutional powers, the military were still suspicious, as they doubted Benjedid's ability to exercise such powers and feared he might compromise with the FIS to maintain his position, including sacking senior personnel.\nThe coup and the cancellation of elections triggered the Algerian Civil War in December 1991, a conflict which is believed to have claimed 100-350,000 lives during the 1990s. During the war, both the armed forces and Islamist insurgents have been severely criticized by outside observers for their conduct of the war on humanitarian and human rights grounds. The state and army suppressed Islamist resistance in the late 1990s, but local and sporadic fighting persists in 2009, along with occasional bomb attacks against government targets in major cities. The most active insurgent group is al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, formerly known as GSPC. Since major fighting subsided in about 1997, the army has been engaged in refitting itself for the tasks of a conventional army, after more than a decade of anti-guerrilla action.\nOver Boutiflika's 20-year-presidency, the military's influence over politics decreased, as commanders who once held strong political power started to retire, and Boutiflika himself secured more mandate from the people, as his foreign policies rejuvenated Algeria's international status and domestic policies were successful in achieving reconciliation between different sides of the civil war and achieving peace.\nHowever, the military still has a role in Algerian politics. This was displayed during the Algerian protests that forced Bouteflika to resign from office in 2019, after losing support of the military, which Chief of Staff of the military, General Ahmed Gaid Salah, demanded that he be declared unfit for office and be removed immediately.\nBorder disputes.\nThe major part of Algeria's armed forces are directed towards the country's western border with Morocco and Western Sahara. Algeria supported the guerrilla Western Sahara War (1975\u20131991) against Moroccan control of Western Sahara by the Polisario Front, a national liberation movement of Sahrawi Bedouin exiled in Algeria's Tindouf Province. Algeria has had longstanding border disagreements with Morocco, due to the non-recognition of the colonial borders by the Moroccan regime. Although now basically resolved, these continue to linger as a factor in the consistently troubled but generally non-violent relations between the two neighboring states. The Algeria-Morocco border has been closed since 1994. Both countries' armed forces have engaged in costly equipment upgrades in recent years, clearly viewing each other as the principal threat to their sovereignty, and equally reluctant to let the other nation gain the upper hand militarily.\nBy contrast, Algeria's post-independence border disagreements with Tunisia and Libya, which were at times a cause for poor relations, both appear to have been peacefully resolved (to its advantage). The Algerian army has also, especially in later years, been very active along the Algeria-Mali border, where various insurgent movements are based. Algeria has fought only two brief wars and battles after independence (the Sand War, a border conflict with Morocco in 1963 and the First battle of Amgala in 1976), but the country is also, like most Arab nations, formally at war with Israel since 1948.\nIn 1984, after promoting eight colonels to become the first generals in independent Algeria, Chadli Benjedid announced the establishment of an ANP general staff. Previously, the armed forces had relied on the secretary general of the Ministry of National Defence to coordinate staff activities. The previous secretary general of the ministry, Major General Moustafa Benloucif, was named the first chief of staff. Benloucif had risen quickly in the ANP and was also an alternate member of the FLN Political Bureau. However, he was dismissed in 1986 without explanation; in 1992 the regime announced that Benloucif would be tried for corruption and the embezzlement of US$11 million, which had been transferred to European accounts.\nBouteflika sought to reassert the power of the presidency over the largely autonomous armed forces. As Minister of Defence, he nominated new commanders for military regions in August 2004. He also issued a presidential decree creating the position of General Secretary within the Ministry of Defence. Nevertheless, current and retired officers\u2014\"le pouvoir\"\u2014remain important decision-makers. In order to encourage Algerian military reforms, the U.S. decided to allow Algeria to receive International Military Education and Training (IMET) funds.\nAlgeria has the largest defence budget in Africa. Historically, Algeria bought weapons and military equipment from the Soviet Union. United Press International reported in March 2013 that Algeria was undergoing a process of military modernization, which includes the introduction of new, more modern warships, aircraft, and tanks.\nOn 19 January 2013, Algerian troops killed 32 militant hostage-takers and freed more than 650 hostages held at the Tigantourine gas facility, situated near in Amenas in the Illizi Province. Nearly 48 hostages are confirmed to be dead. The kidnappers said the assault on the gas plant was launched in retaliation for French intervention against Islamist groups in neighboring Mali.\nComposition.\nThe army is under the control of the president, who also is the minister of National Defence. The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency estimated that military expenditures accounted for some 6% of GDP in 2019.\nBefore 1984, the armed forces had relied on the secretary general of the Ministry of National Defence to coordinate staff activities. That year, Chadli Bendjedid announced the establishment of an ANP general staff. The general staff had responsibility for operational planning for the integrated armed forces, budgeting, information and communications, logistics and administrative support, mobilization, and recruiting. It was not, however, part of the regular chain of command. In practice, the armed forces chief of staff dealt directly with the chiefs of the service branches and with the commanders of the six military regions. Along with the minister of defence (Nezzar in 1993), Helen Chapin Metz wrote in 1993 that the senior hierarchy of the armed forces included the Chief of Staff of the People's National Army, Abdelmalek Gu\u00e9naizia; the commander of the National Gendarmerie, Abbas Ghezaiel; the chief of the DRS, Mohamed M\u00e9di\u00e8ne; and the inspector general of the land forces, Tayeb Derradji.\nIn October 2013 \"Jeune Afrique\" predicted the recreation of an inspectorate of the armed forces, possibly to be headed by General Ben Ali Ben Ali.\nThe armed forces comprise:\nThe army was in the process of being reorganized into four divisions in 1993, and also has numerous independent brigades and battalions. There are seven military regions, the seventh being added in 2013. The 6th Military Region was created in 1975 to cover the south, and the 7th Military Region in 2013. Regular military forces are composed of conscripts; all Algerian men are required to do a year of military service.\nMilitary intelligence, recognized to have played a major political role, was long called \"S\u00e9curit\u00e9 militaire\" (Military Security, SM) but reorganized in the late 1980s and early 1990s into \"D\u00e9partement du Renseignement et de la S\u00e9curit\u00e9\" (Department of Intelligence and Security, DRS). The DRS and its counter-espionage branch, DCE, was a leading role in the fight against the Islamist insurgency of the 1990s through a number of its own , as well as by establishing joint task force commands which assumed control over specialized military and police units.\nSince 2016 the DRS has been dissolved and the new Algerian intelligence service is the \"Direction des services de s\u00e9curit\u00e9s\" (DSS).\nMilitary forces are supplemented by a 150,000-member National Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie Nationale), a paramilitary body, which is used mainly as a police force in rural areas. The 200,000-member \"S\u00fbret\u00e9 nationale\" or metropolitan police force is under the Ministry of the Interior.\nAlgeria is one of four Saharan states which will create a Joint Military Staff Committee, to be based at Tamanrasset in southern Algeria. Algeria, Mauritania, Niger, and Mali will take part. Mortimer wrote that '..In March 2010, the Centre d'Etat-Major commun Op\u00e9rationel Conjoint (CEMOC) was established'. A later report said the committee had a secretariat with four staff sections: operations, intelligence, logistics, and communications.\nEquipment.\nAlgeria's primary military suppliers have been the former Soviet Union, which sold various types of sophisticated equipment under military trade agreements, and the People's Republic of China. Since independence in the 1960s, no foreign bases are known to have been allowed in Algeria, although in the 1970s and 1980s, large numbers of Soviet military advisers were stationed in the country. Since 2001, security cooperation with the United States has increased, and US forces have taken part in training missions in the country's Saharan south.\nAnother weapons supplier of Algeria is France. France and Algeria have had a significant connection since the French Algeria colonial era, as France supplies weapons and armor to Algerian forces. As of October 2009, it was reported that Algeria canceled a weapons deal with France over the presence of Israeli parts.\nFour or eight battalions of Russian S-300PMU2 long-range anti-aircraft missiles were ordered in 2006. In 2006, multibillion-dollar purchases of Russian military equipment were made in order to upgrade the country's conventional arsenal. This included a deal by the Algerian Air Force to buy 28 Su-30MKA and 36 MiG-29SMT for up to $3.5 billion. However, those MiG-29s were returned to Russia in February 2008 because of poor airframe quality, after technical evaluations in Algeria. In May 2008 the two governments agreed on a new deal to replace those 36 MiG-29SMT by a new batch of 16 Su-30MKA which meet all requirements of Algerian Air Force.\nAlgeria also has a small domestic military industry of its own. The army produces AK-47 and AKM-47 assault rifles, licensed by Russia and China, as well as rocket-type RPGs in the Construction Company Mechanical Khenchela (ECMK).\nMoreover, the ECMK also builds under license the UAE Caracal pistol. The logistics base station produces various types of AICV (Armoured Infantry Fighting Vehicle) for the transport of troops and light armored vehicles. The air force produces two types of light aircraft for the basic training and has produced its own reconnaissance drone since December 2010. The Russian company, Rosoboronexport, has expressed a request for financial assistance to several countries including Algeria, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE to participate in the project for the production of the T-50 (PAK-FA) 5th generation fighter aircraft.\nMilitary industry.\nStarting in 2021 the Algerian T-62 fleet underwent a unique homemade upgrade, turning the vehicle from an MBT into a fire-support vehicle by replacing the old turret with a Berezhok combat turret containing a PKT, a 30 mm autocannon, four Kornet ATGMs and a teleoperated AGS-30 grenade launcher. This new format has been likened to a \"Mini-Terminator\" or a \"BMPT-62\".\nAlgeria also has a military industrial company called the Military Industry of Central Direction, which produces military arms, vehicles, weapons, ships, jets, helicopters, tanks, and other equipment. It was founded in 1998.\nThe military industry of Algeria dates back to 1980, when Algeria needed to diversify and sought to have its own national equipment so as to be less reliant on weapons imported from the Soviet Union and France. The development of the military industry in Algeria in the 1980s played a crucial role when the Algerian Civil War occurred a decade later. The indigenously manufactured weapons helped the Algerian military in combating the Islamists around the country, contributing to the government's victory in 2002.\nAlgeria exports its indigenously manufactured weapons to Tunisia, Mali, Niger, Libya, Mauritania and several other African as well as Arab states in the Middle East.\nSince 2017 the \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Alg\u00e9rienne de Fabrication de V\u00e9hicules de Marque Mercedes Benz\" (SAFAV-MB) supplied the Algerian armed and security forces with several types of Mercedes-Benz vehicles like the Mercedes-Benz Unimog, Zetros, Sprinter, Actros, G-class...\nAdditionally, all of these vehicles are made in Algeria with the vehicles of the \"Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Nationale des V\u00e9hicules Industrielles\" (SNVI).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57601", "revid": "4177882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57601", "title": "Transnational issues of Algeria", "text": ""}
{"id": "57602", "revid": "50732370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57602", "title": "El Alamein", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEl Alamein (, ) is an Egyptian city in the northern Matrouh Governorate. Located on the Mediterranean Sea, it lies west of Alexandria and northwest of Cairo. The town is located on the site of the ancient city Antiphrai (). The city is divided into three main areas: El Alamein, Sidi Abdel Rahman, and Tel El Eis village.\nThe city's economy is mainly based on its natural resources of petroleum, which is explored by several Egyptian companies, and the tourist areas where a number of luxury hotels and tourist resorts are located, such as the tourist town of Marina.\nTourism.\nMilitary cemeteries.\nGermany.\nThere are Italian and German military cemeteries on Tel el-Eisa Hill outside the town. The German cemetery is an ossuary, built in the style of a medieval fortress.\nItaly.\nThe cemetery of the Italian War Memorial at El Alamein contains 5,200 graves.\nGreek.\nThere is a Greek cemetery at El Alamein.\nCommonwealth of Nations.\nThe Commonwealth Alamein Memorial and attached war cemetery, built and maintained by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, has graves of soldiers from various countries who fought on the Allied side. Buried here are 6,425 identified Commonwealth service personnel, 815 unidentified ones, and 102 of other nationalities. These include four Victoria Cross recipients:\nOthers buried here include:\nThis has monuments commemorating Greek, New Zealand, Australian, South African, Indian and Canadian forces. The cemetery entrance is through the Alamein Memorial and there is also a separate Alamein Cremation Memorial to 603 Commonwealth service personnel who died in Egypt and Libya and were cremated in line with their religion.\nThe names of 213 Canadian airmen appear on the Alamein Memorial in Egypt.\nThe cemetery was designed by Hubert Worthington.\nBeaches.\nMany Egyptians, particularly the upper and middle class travel to El Alamein during summer to flee the summer heat in other cities and towns.\nClimate.\nEl Alamein has a hot desert climate, K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BWh\", common with most of the Middle East and North Africa. However, like the rest of the northern coast of Egypt, its climate is slightly less hot, compared to the rest of Egypt, because of the prevailing Mediterranean Sea winds.\nWorld War II.\nTwo important World War II battles were fought in the area:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "57604", "revid": "50632554", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57604", "title": "Max Reinhardt", "text": "Austrian-born theatre and film director (1873\u20131943)\nMax Reinhardt (; born Maximilian Goldmann; 9 September 1873 \u2013 30 October 1943) was an Austrian-born theatre and film director, intendant, and theatrical producer. With his radically innovative and avant-garde stage productions, Reinhardt is regarded as one of the most prominent stage directors of the early 20th century.\nFor example, Reinhardt's 1917 stage premiere of Reinhard Sorge's Kleist Prize-winning stage play \"Der Bettler\" almost single-handedly gave birth to Expressionism in the theatre and ultimately in motion pictures as well. In 1920, Reinhardt established the Salzburg Festival by directing an open air production of Hugo von Hofmannsthal's acclaimed adaptation of the \"Everyman\" Medieval mystery play in the square before the Cathedral with the Alps as a background. This remains an annual custom at the Salzburg Festival to this day.\nToby Cole and Helen Krich Chinoy have dubbed Reinhardt, \"one of the most picturesque actor-directors of modern times\", and write that his eventual arrival in the United States as a refugee from the imminent Nazi takeover of Austria followed a long and distinguished career, \"inspired by the example of social participation in the ancient Greek and Medieval theatres\", of seeking, \"to bridge the separation between actors and audiences\".\nIn 1935, Reinhardt directed his first and only motion picture in the United States through Warner Brothers, the Expressionist film adaptation of William Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", starring Mickey Rooney, Olivia De Havilland, and James Cagney. The film was banned by the Ministry of Propaganda in an infamous example of censorship in Nazi Germany. This was due not only to Joseph Goebbels' belief that Expressionism was degenerate art, but even more so due to the Jewish ancestry of director Max Reinhardt, Classical music composer Felix Mendelssohn, and soundtrack arranger Erich Wolfgang Korngold; whose work was already banned by Goebbels as allegedly degenerate music.&lt;ref name=\"forbiddenmusic/reinhardt-circus\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nReinhardt also founded the highly influential drama schools Hochschule f\u00fcr Schauspielkunst \"Ernst Busch\" in Berlin, Max Reinhardt Seminar, the Max Reinhardt Workshop (Sunset Boulevard), and the Max Reinhardt Junior Workshop. Even though Reinhardt did not live long enough to witness the end of Nazism in 1945, his formerly expropriated estate at Schloss Leopoldskron near Salzburg was restored to his widow and his legacy continues to be celebrated and honoured in the modern Germanosphere for his many radically innovative contributions to the performing arts.\nEarly life.\nReinhardt was born Maximilian Goldmann in the spa town of Baden bei Wien, to Jewish parents Rachel Lea Rosi \"Rosa\" Goldmann and her husband Wilhelm Goldmann, a merchant from Stupava, Slovakia. Having finished school, he began an apprenticeship at a bank, but already took acting lessons.\nCareer.\nIn 1890, he gave his debut on a private stage in Vienna with the stage name \"Max Reinhardt\" (possibly after the protagonist Reinhard Werner in Theodor Storm's novella \"Immensee\"). In 1893 he performed at the re-opened Salzburg City Theatre. One year later, Reinhardt relocated to Germany, joining the Deutsches Theater ensemble under director Otto Brahm in Berlin.\nReinhardt was one of the contributors to the Swedish avant-garde theatre magazine \"Thalia\" between 1910 and 1913. In 1918 Reinhardt purchased Schloss Leopoldskron castle in Salzburg.\nIn October 1922 Reinhardt was in the audience when \"The Dybbuk\" was staged by the Vilna Troupe at the Roland Theater in Vienna. Reinhardt rushed backstage and congratulated the actors. At the time he was already recognized in Austria as distinguished theater director. A couple of months before his endorsement for \"The Dybbuk\", Reinhardt had again successfully staged \"Jedermann (Everyman)\" for the Salzburg Festival.\nExile.\nReinhardt fled due to the Nazis' increasing anti-Semitic aggressions. The castle was seized following Germany's Anschluss annexation of Austria in 1938. After the war, the castle was restored to Reinhardt's heirs, and subsequently the home and grounds became famous as the filming site for the early scenes of the Von Trapp family gardens in the movie \"The Sound of Music\".\nReinhardt theatres.\nIn 1901, Reinhardt together with Friedrich Kay\u00dfler and several other theatre colleagues founded the \"Schall und Rauch\" (Sound and Smoke) Kabarett stage in Berlin. Re-opened as \"Kleines Theater\" (Little Theatre) it was the first of numerous stages where Reinhardt worked as a director until the beginning of Nazi rule in 1933. From 1903 to 1905, he managed the Neues Theater (present-day Theater am Schiffbauerdamm) and in 1906 acquired the Deutsches&lt;ref name=\"jewishvirtuallibrary/reinhardt-max\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Theater in Berlin. In 1911, he premiered with Karl Vollm\u00f6ller's \"The Miracle\" in Olympia, London, gaining an international reputation.\nIn 1910, Siegfried Jacobsohn wrote his book entitled \"Max Reinhardt\". In 1914, he was persuaded to sign the Manifesto of the Ninety-Three, defending the German invasion of Belgium. He was signatory 66; he later expressed regret at signing.\nFrom 1915 to 1918, Reinhardt also worked as director of the Volksb\u00fchne theatre.\nOn 23 December 1917, Reinhardt presided over the world premiere of Reinhard Sorge's Kleist Prize-winning stage play \"Der Bettler\", which had long been, \"a \"succ\u00e8s de scandale\", an innovation, changing the course of theatrical history with its revolutionary staging techniques\".\nAccording to Michael Paterson, \"The genius of the 20-year old Sorge already showed the possibilities of abstract staging, and Reinhardt in 1917, simply by following Sorge's stage directions, was to become the first director to present a play in wholly Expressionist style.\"\nAccording to Michael Paterson, \"The play opens with an ingenious inversion: the Poet and Friend converse in front of a closed curtain, behind which voices can be heard. It appears that we, the audience, are backstage and the voices are those of the imagined audience out front. It is a simple, but disorienting trick of stagecraft, whose imaginative spatial reversal is self-consciously theatrical. So the audience is alerted to the fact that they are about to see a play and not a 'slice of life'.\"\nAccording to Walter H. Sokel, \"The lighting apparatus behaves like the mind. It drowns in darkness what it wishes to forget and bathes in light what it wishes to recall. Thus the entire stage becomes a universe of [the] mind, and the individual scenes are not replicas of three-dimensional physical reality, but visualizes stages of thought.\"\nReinhardt's production of the play, which he had meticulously planned ever since he had purchased the rights from Sorge in 1913, proved enormously popular and productions immediately began to be staged in other German cities, such as Cologne. After the 1918 Armistice, newspapers in the German language in the United States also published articles highly praising Reinhardt's production of the play, which singlehandedly gave birth to Expressionism in the theatre.\nAfter the November Revolution of 1918, Reinhardt re-opened the Gro\u00dfes Schauspielhaus (after World War II renamed into Friedrichstadtpalast) in 1919, following its expressionist conversion by Hans Poelzig. By 1930, he ran eleven stages in Berlin and, in addition, managed the Theater in der Josefstadt in Vienna from 1924 to 1933.\nIn 1920, Reinhardt established the Salzburg Festival with Richard Strauss and Hugo von Hofmannsthal, always directing the annual production of Hoffmansthal's acclaimed adaptation of the Medieval Dutch morality play \"Everyman\", in which the Christian God sends Death to summon an archetype of the Human Race to Judgment Day. In the United States, he successfully directed \"The Miracle\" in 1924, and a popular stage version of Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" in 1927.\nFrom the 1910s to the early 1930s, one of Reinhardt's most frequent collaborators was the Swedish-born American composer and conductor Einar Nilson, whom he employed as the music department head of his theaters; during international trips, Nilson would also serve as an advance man for Reinhardt, traveling ahead to the next performance location to audition singers and actors. Reinhardt, moreover, often would utilize existing music by famous composers (for example, Mozart and Mendelssohn) for his productions, which Nilson would arrange to meet Reinhardt's needs. Nilson also composed original music, such as the incidental music for Hofmannsthal's \"Jedermann\".\nReinhardt followed that success by directing a film version of \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" in 1935 using a mostly different cast, that included James Cagney, Mickey Rooney, Joe E. Brown and Olivia de Havilland, amongst others. Rooney and de Havilland had also appeared in Reinhardt's 1934 stage production, which was staged at the Hollywood Bowl.&lt;ref name=\"latimes/midsummer-hollywood-bowl\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The Nazis banned the film because of the Jewish ancestry of both Reinhardt and Felix Mendelssohn, whose music (arranged by Erich Wolfgang Korngold) was used throughout the film.\nAfter the Anschluss of Austria to Nazi-governed Germany in 1938, he emigrated first to Britain, then to the United States. In 1940, he became a naturalized citizen of the United States.&lt;ref name=\"kuenste-im-exil/reinhardt-max\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; At that time, he was married to his second wife, actress Helene Thimig, daughter of actor Hugo Thimig and sister of actors Hans and Hermann Thimig.\nBy employing powerful staging techniques, and integrating stage design, language, music and choreography, Reinhardt introduced new dimensions into German theatre. The Max Reinhardt Seminar in Vienna, which is arguably the most important German-language acting school, was installed implementing his ideas.\nMax Reinhardt and film.\nReinhardt took a greater interest in film than most of his contemporaries in the theater world. He made films as a director and from time to time also as a producer. His first staging was the film \"Sumur\u00fbn\" in 1910. After that, Reinhardt founded his own film company. He sold the film rights for the film adaptation of the play \"Das Mirakel\" (\"The Miracle\") to Joseph Menchen, whose full-colour 1912 film of \"The Miracle\" gained world-wide success. Controversies around the staging of \"Das Mirakel\", which was shown in the Vienna Rotunde in 1912, led to Reinhardt's retreat from the project. The author of the play, Reinhardt's friend and confidant Karl Gustav Vollmoeller, had French director Michel Carr\u00e9 finish the shooting. \nReinhardt made two films, \"Die Insel der Seligen\" (\"Isle of the Blessed\") and \"Eine venezianische Nacht\" (\"Venetian Nights\"), under a four-picture contract for the German film producer Paul Davidson. Released in 1913 and 1914, respectively, both films received negative reviews from the press and public. The other two films called for in the contract were never made.\nBoth films demanded much of cameraman Karl Freund because of Reinhardt's special shooting needs, such as filming a lagoon in moonlight. \"Isle of the Blessed\" attracted attention due to its erotic nature. Its ancient mythical setting included sea gods, nymphs, and fauns, and the actors appeared naked. However, the film also fit in with the strict customs of the late German and Austrian empires. The actors had to live up to the demands of double roles. Wilhelm Diegelmann and Willy Prager played the bourgeois fathers as well as the sea gods, Ernst Matray a bachelor and a faun, Leopoldine Konstantin the Circe. The shooting for \"Eine venezianische Nacht\" by Karl Gustav Vollmoeller took place in Venice. Maria Carmi played the bride, Alfred Abel the young stranger, and Ernst Matray Anselmus and Pipistrello. The shooting was disturbed by a fanatic who incited the attendant Venetians against the German-speaking staff.\nIn 1935, Reinhardt directed his first film in the US, \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\". He founded the drama schools Hochschule f\u00fcr Schauspielkunst \"Ernst Busch\" in Berlin, Max Reinhardt Seminar, the Max Reinhardt Workshop (Sunset Boulevard), and the Max Reinhardt Junior Workshop.\nMax Reinhardt Seminar.\nMax Reinhardt Seminar trained Kurt Kasznar.\nMax Reinhardt Workshop.\nMax Reinhardt's Workshop&lt;ref name=\"stadtmuseum/max-reinhardt\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"scihi/max-reinhardt\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; of Stage, Screen, and Radio (Sunset Boulevard) (\"Reinhardt School of the Theatre\") trained Ann Savage. Joan Barry, and Nanette Fabray (\"Reinhardt School of the Theatre in Hollywood\").&lt;ref name=\"mahlerfoundation/max-reinhardt\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nReinhardt won the school, \"Ben Bard Drama\" (a playhouse on Wilshire Boulevard), from Ben Bard in a poker game. Reinhardt opened the Reinhardt School of the Theatre in Hollywood, on Sunset Boulevard. Several notable stars of the day received classical theater training, among them actress Nanette Fabray. Many alumni of these schools made their careers in film. Edward G. Kuster, for two years, was the personal assistant to Reinhardt, taught classes and directed plays. In 1938, Walden Philip Boyle, later, a founding faculty of the Department of Theater Arts at UCLA, worked with the \"Max Reinhardt Theatre Academy in Hollywood\".&lt;ref name=\"universityofcalifornia/philipwaldenboyle\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Students include Alan Ladd, Jack Carson, Robert Ryan, Gower Champion, Shirley Temple, Angie Dickinson, Frank Bonner, Anthony James, Greg Mullavey, Charlene Tilton, and Cliff Robertson In 1943, Reinhardt departed.&lt;ref name=\"toa.edu/history\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; It later was known as \"Geller Theatre Workshop\", \"Hollywood School of Acting\", and \"Theatre of Arts Hollywood Acting School\".\nIn 2000, the school, \"Theatre of Arts\", was associated with Campus Hollywood, which included, Musicians Institute, and Los Angeles College of Music. In 2009, James Warwick was appointed president.\nMax Reinhardt Junior Workshop trained Mala Powers.&lt;ref name=\"walkoffame/mala-powers\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"mansfieldnewsjournal.newspapers/294003377/\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"glamourgirlsofthesilverscreen/Mala+Powers\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nDeath and legacy.\nReinhardt died of a stroke in New York City in 1943 and is interred at Westchester Hills Cemetery in Hastings-on-Hudson, Westchester County, New York. He was 70 years old. His papers and literary estate are housed at Binghamton University (SUNY), in the Max Reinhardt Archives and Library. His sons by first wife Else Heims (m. 1910\u20131935), Wolfgang and Gottfried Reinhardt, were well-regarded film producers. One of his grandsons (by adoption), Stephen Reinhardt, was a labor lawyer who served notably on the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit from his appointment by Jimmy Carter in 1980 until his death in 2018. Another grandson, Michael Reinhardt, is a successful fashion photographer. In 2015 his great-granddaughter Jelena Ulrike Reinhardt was appointed as researcher at the University of Perugia in German literature.\nTribute.\nOn 18 November 2015, the Friedrichstadt-Palast in Berlin inaugurated a memorial at Friedrichstra\u00dfe 107 dedicated to the theatre's founders, Max Reinhardt, Hans Poelzig and Erik Charell.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57605", "revid": "32798152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57605", "title": "MCS", "text": "MCS may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "57607", "revid": "56299", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57607", "title": "Pachinko", "text": "Japanese arcade gambling game\n is a mechanical game originating in Japan that is used as an arcade game and, muchmore frequently, for gambling. Pachinko fills a niche in Japanese gambling comparable to that of the slot machine in the Western world as a form of low-stakes, low-strategy gambling.\nPachinko parlors are widespread in Japan, and usually also feature a number of slot machines (called or ); these venues look and operate similarly to casinos. Modern pachinko machines have both mechanical and electrical components.\nGambling for cash is illegal \"de jure\" inJapan, but the widespread popularity of low-stakes pachinko in Japanese society has enabled a specific legal loophole allowing it to exist. Pachinko balls won from games cannot be exchanged directly for money in the parlor, nor can they be removed from the premises or exchanged with other parlors. However, they can be legally traded to the parlor for so-called \"special prize\" tokens (()), which can in turn be \"sold\" forcash to a separate vendor off-premises. These vendors (ostensibly independent from, but often owned by, the parlor owner) then sell the tokens back to the parlor at the same price paid for them\u2014plus a small commission, creating a cash profit\u2014without technically violating the law.\u200d\nBy 1994, the pachinko market in Japan was valued at \u00a5trillion\u200d (nearly US$billion; equivalentto $ in2024\u200d). In1999, salesand revenue from pachinko parlors contributed 5.6% of Japan's , and they employed over 330,000 people, 0.52% of all those employed inJapan.\u200d However, the sales amount of these pachinko parlors is calculated based on the total amount that customers rented pachinko balls from pachinko parlors. It is said that on average, about85% of the money spent by customers in pachinko parlors is returned to the customers, so the sales of pachinko parlors are said to be about15% of the statistical amount.\u200d As of 2015[ [update]], Japan's pachinko market generated more gambling revenue than that of Macau, Las Vegas, and Singapore combined.\u200d Pachinko gambling's grey-market nature and tremendous profit historically resulted in considerable infiltration by yakuza, who used it as a vehicle for money laundering and racketeering. \nSince the 1990s, however, this has been less of an issue due to police crackdowns.\u200d There were over 7million pachinkos around the world in2018 with morethan half of them being inJapan.\u200d In recent years, the pachinko market (the total amount of pachinko balls rented by customers from pachinko parlors) and the number of pachinko parlors inJapan have both continued to decline. The marketsize in2022 was \u00a5trillion, lessthan half of the \u00a5trillion in2005 when the market was at itspeak, and the numberof pachinko parlors in2022 was 7,665, lessthan half of the 18,244 in1997, when the numberof parlors was at its peak.\u200d \nFollowing a number of years of decline of parlours and machines, the number of pachinko machines inJapan dropped to around 2.5million by the end of 2019.\u200d\nDescription.\nA pachinko machine resembles a vertical pinball machine, but is different from Western pinball in severalways. It uses small ( diameter) steelballs, which the owner (usually a \"pachinko parlor\", featuring many individual games in rows) rents to the player, while pinball games use a larger, captive ball. \nThe player loads one or more balls into the machine, then presses and releases a spring-loaded handle, which is attached to a padded hammer inside the machine, launching the ball(s) into a metal track. The track guides the ball over the top of the playingfield; then when it loses momentum, it falls into the playingfield.\nThe playing field is populated by numerous brasspins, several smallcups into which the player hopes the ball will fall (each catcher is barely the width of the ball), and a hole at the bottom into which the ball falls if it does not enter a catcher. The ball bounces from pin to pin, both slowing its descent and deflecting it laterally across the field. A ball that enters a catcher triggers a payout, in which a number of balls are dropped into a tray at the front of the machine.\u200d\nMany games made since the 1960s feature \"tulip\" catchers, which have small flippers that open to expand the width of the catcher. They are controlled by the machine, and may open and close randomly or in a pattern; expert players try to launch a ball so it reaches the catcher when its flippers are open.\u200d \nThe game's object is to win as many balls as possible, which can be exchanged for prizes. Pachinko machines were originally strictly mechanical, but have since incorporated extensive electronics, becoming similar to videoslot machines. Another type of machine often found in pachinko parlors, called a \"pachislot\", does not involve steelballs, but are loadedwith tokens or coins and trigger reels comparable to those of a traditional slot machine. Online casinos also offer \"pachislot\" games to tailor their product to the Japanesemarket.\nHistory.\nPachinko machines were first built during the 1920s as a children'stoy called the , based on and named after the American \"Corinthian bagatelle\".\u200d It emerged as an adult pastime in around1930, and spread from there.\u200d\nAll of Japan's pachinko parlors were closed down during World WarII but re-emerged in the late1940s. Pachinko has remained popular since; the first commercial parlor was opened in in1948.\u200d Due to Japanese influence during its 50-year occupation, Taiwan has many pachinko establishments.\u200d \nGuam also hosts a pachinko parlor.\u200d\nAn estimated 80 percent of pachinko parlors in Japan are owned by ethnic Koreans.\u200d In2001, British company BS Group bought a stake in , which was running almost 20parlors in Japan, and had also looked into opening parlors in the UnitedKingdom.\u200d\nUntil the 1980s, pachinko machines were mechanical devices,\u200d using bells to indicate different states of the machine. Electricity was used only to flash lights and to indicate problems, such as a machine emptied of its balls.\u200d Balls were launched using a flipper; their speed was controlled by pulling the flipper down to different levels. Manufacturers in this period included and ; most of these machines available on online auction sites today date to the1970s.\u200d After that time, pachinko machines incorporated more electronic features, thus requiring electricity for operation.\nMechanisms.\nTo play pachinko, players get a number of metal balls by inserting cash or cards directly into the machine they want to use. They then shoot the balls into the machine. Older pachinko machines use a spring-loaded lever for shooting balls individually; while later ones use a round knob, controlling the strength of a mechanically-fired plunger that shoots the balls. The balls fall vertically through an array of pins, levers, cups, trapsand obstacles until they enter a payoff target or reach the bottom of the playfield.\nThe player has a chance to get more balls if a launched ball lands in one of certain places as it falls. More balls allow the player to remain in the game longer, creating a larger chance to win.\u200d \nNewer \"pachislot\" machines have a digital slot machine display on a large screen, where the objective is to get three numbers or symbols in a row for a jackpot.\u200d\nEvery ball that goes into the center gate results in one spin, but there is a limit on the number of spins at onetime because of the possibility of balls passing through the centergate while a spin is still in progress. Each spin pays out a small number of balls, but the objective is to hit the jackpot.\nDesign.\nPachinko machines vary in several aspects\u2014including decorative mechanics, sound, gimmicks, modes, and gates. The playing field is usually a wooden board with a transparent acrylic overlay containing artwork. Most modern machines have an LCDscreen over the main start pocket. The game is played by keeping the stream of balls to the left of the screen, but many models have their optimized ballstream. Vintage machines vary in pocket location and strategy, with most having a specific center area containing winpockets.\nPayout mode.\nIf the first two numbers, letters, or symbols of the spin match up, the digital program will display many animations before the third reel stops spinning, to give the player an added excitement. This is called a \"reach\" (or ) and sometimes longer animations are played, called \"superreaches\". Pachinko machines offer different odds in hitting a jackpot; if the player manages to obtain a jackpot, the machine will enter into \"payoutmode\".\nThe payout mode lasts for a number of rounds. During each round, amidst more animations and movies playing on the center screen, a large payoutgate opens up at the bottom of the machine layout and the player must try to shoot balls into it. Each ball that successfully enters into this gate results in many balls being dropped into a separate tray at the bottom of the machine, which can then be placed into a ballbucket.\nHidden modes, hints, and instant wins.\nTo enhance gameplay, modern machines have integrated several aspects not possible in vintage machines. A common one is the ability to switch between different playmodes, including rare and hidden modes that can differ significantly from normalplay. Twoexamples can be seen in the \"NeonGenesis Evangelion\" series of pachinko machines, which include \"MissionMode\" and \"BerserkerMode\", ranging from having little effect on winning to being an almost-guaranteed win.\u200d\u200d\nGraphics in videos and light patterns can also give players a general idea of what these winningodds are. For example, a \"superreach\" may cause a change in animation, or show an introductory animation or picture. This adds excitement, with some changes having much more significance than others in terms of odds of winning on a given spin. Some machines feature instant wins. There are also second-chancewins, where a spin that appears to have lost, or to have a verylow winning chance, gives the player three matching numbers and starts \"fevermode\".\u200d\nPost-payout systems.\nAfter the payout mode has ended, the pachinko machine may do oneof two things. Most pachinko machines employ the system (short for ), where some percentage of the possible jackpots on the digital slotmachine result in the odds of hitting the next jackpot multiplying by a large amount, followed by another spin regardless of the outcome. The probability of a occurring is determined by a random number generator. \nHence, under this system, it is possible for a player to get a string of consecutive jackpots after the first \"hard-earned\" one, commonly referred to as \"fevermode\". Another type of system is a \"specialtime\" or \"ST\"'. With these machines, every jackpot earned results in a ', but in order to earn a payout beyond the first jackpot, the player must hit a certain set of odds within a given number of spins.\nWhen a jackpot does not result in a combination, the pachinko machine will enter into (short for ) mode, with a much larger number of spins than '. Under the original payoutodds, the centergate widens to make it considerably easier for balls to fall into it; this system is also present in '. \nTo compensate for the increase in the number of spins, the digital slotmachine reveals the final outcome of each spin sooner. STpachinko machines do not offer this mode; after it ends, the machine spins as in \"\". Once no more jackpots have been made, the pachinko machine reverts to its original setting.\nKoatari.\nStarting in 2007, the majority of Japanese pachinko machines started to include into their payout systems. is shorter than the normal jackpot and during payoutmode the payoutgate opens for a shorttime only, even if no balls go into it. The timing of the opening of the gates is unpredictable, effectively making it a jackpot where the player receives no payout. jackpots can result in a as per normal operation, depending on the payout scheme of the machine in question. The main purpose of is so that pachinko manufacturers can offer payout schemes that \"appear\" to be largely favorable to customers, without losing any long-term profit.\nIn addition to being able to offer higher percentages, this made it possible for manufacturers to design \"battle-type\" machines. Unlike old-fashioned pachinko machines that offer a fullpayout or a for any type of jackpot earned, these machines require players to hit a jackpot with a certain probability in order to get a fullpayout. This is orchestrated by the player entering into \"battle\", where the player, in accordance with the item that the machine is based on, must \"defeat\" a certain enemy or foe in order to earn another \"\". If the player loses, it means that a normal has been hit and the machine enters into mode.\nAnother reason for incorporating every is that they have made it possible for a machine to go into mode without the player's knowledge. This is referred to as because it does not occur in any of the jackpot modes. A player sitting at a used pachinko machine offering the 1 in \"x\" chance of hitting a jackpot in normalmode can hit it within \"x\"spins easily because the previous player did not realize that the machine was in '. This induces players to keep playing their machines, even though they may still be in normalmode. Japanese pachinko players have not shown significant signs of protest in response to the incorporation of '; on the contrary, battle-type pachinko machines have become a major part of most parlors.\nPrizes.\nWinnings take the form of additional balls, which players may either use to keep playing or exchange for prizes (). When players wish to exchange their winnings, they must call a parlor staff member by using a callbutton located at the top of their station. The staff member will then carry the player's balls to an automated counter to see how many balls they have.\u200d\nAfter recording the number of balls the player won and the number of the machine they used, the staff member will then give the player a voucher or card with the number of balls stored in it. Some modern machines can count the balls automatically, without the need for staff. The player then hands it in at the parlor's exchange center to get their prizes. Among the array of prizes available, there will invariably be an item known as the \"special prize\" (, typically a small silver or gold novelty item encased in plastic) that can be sold for cash at an outside establishment in the vicinity of the parlor.\u200d\nSpecial prizes are awarded to the player in amounts corresponding to the number of ballswon. For example, one special prize worth \u00a51500 outside the parlor might be offered to a customer per 400balls won, assuming each ball originally cost 4yen. The vast majority of players opt for the maximum number of special prizes offered for their balltotal, selecting other prizes only when they have a remaining total too small to receive a special prize.\u200d\nBesides the special prizes, prizes may be as simple as chocolate bars, pens or cigarette lighters, or as complicated as electronics, bicycles and other items. Under Japaneselaw, cash cannot be paid out directly for pachinko balls, but there is usually a small establishment located nearby, separate from the gameparlor but sometimes in a separate unit as part of the same building, where players may sell special prizes for cash. This is tolerated by the police because the pachinko parlors that pay out goods and special prizes are nominally independent from the shops that buy back the special prizes.\u200d \nSome pachinko parlors may even give out vouchers for groceries at a nearby supermarket. The \"yakuza\" (organized crime) were formerly often involved in prize exchange, but a greatdeal of police effort beginning in the1960s and ramping up in the1990s has largely done away with their influence.\u200d In, the special prize exchange is handled exclusively by the Union Circulation company (known asTUC), which sells pachinko and slotparlors goldslivers in standardized plastic cases, which it buys back from winning customers at its \"TUCShop\" windows.\u200d\nThe \"three-shop system\"\u200d is a system employed by pachinko parlors to exchange for (prizes), usually with items such as cigarette lighters or ball-point pens. These items are carried to a nearby shop and exchanged for cash as a way of circumventing gambling laws.\nRecreational pachinko.\nMany arcades in Japan feature pachinko models from different times. They offer more playing time for the same amount of money, and have balls that can be exchanged only for gametokens to play other games in the establishment. As many of these arcades are smoke-free and gambling is removed, they are popular venues for casual players, newcomers, children, and those wanting to play in a more relaxed atmosphere. \nIn such arcades, thrifty gamblers may spend a small amount on a newly-released pachinko model to get a feel for the machine before going to a realparlor. These machines can also be found in many stores, where they payout capsules containing a prize coupon or store credit.\nRegulations.\nSmoking.\nSmoking is allowed in pachinko parlors, although there are discussions in Japan to extend public smoking bans to them.\u200d\nCrime.\nGambling is illegal in Japan, but pachinko is regarded as an exception and treated as an amusement activity.\u200d Although awarding direct money prizes for it is illegal, parlors may reward players with tokens which can then be sold for cash at nearby exchange centers. With growing public and political pressure in recent years, since passage of Japan's blanket anti-gambling law in the1990s, police are more active in regulating parlors.\u200d \nRetired police officers often work in the pachinko industry; critics have pointed out that while this has had a deterrent effect against organized crime, it also means these operators are in a strong position to influence police officers in their favor.\u200d\nPolice tolerate the level of gambling in pachinko parlors. For example, in May2005, a parlor in Prefecture reported to the local police that someone had counterfeited their tokens and made off with the equivalent of US$60,000 incash by trading them in at their nearby exchange center. Even with such information proving that this parlor was illegally operating an exchange center, which by law must be independent of the parlor, the police did not shut them down, but tracked down the thief.\u200d\nBall designs.\nIt is forbidden for pachinko balls to be removed from a parlor to be used elsewhere. To help prevent this, many parlors have a design or name engraved on each of their balls, inspiring some people to collect pachinkoballs with various designs.\nAddiction.\nA 2014 study showed that pathological gambling among Japanese adults was 9.04% inmen and 1.6% inwomen, higher than the NorthAmerican prevalence of 1.6%, particularly for men.\u200d In1999, 29% ofplayers thought of themselves as addicted and needing treatment. Another30% said they exceeded their budgets and borrowed money to play.\u200d\nFranchising.\nA number of media franchises, mainly the media mix\u2014including Japanesefilm, anime, manga, television and video game franchises\u2014have generated significant revenue from sales of licensed pachinko and pachislot machines to pachinko parlors and amusement arcades.\u200d SegaSammy Holdings and Konami are two major license holders for most mediamix pachinko machines.\u200d\nSome original pachinko games were adapted into anime: examples include , , , and .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57608", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57608", "title": "Brisbane River", "text": "River in Queensland, Australia\nThe Brisbane River (Turrbal: ) is the longest river in South East Queensland, Australia. It flows through the city of Brisbane, before emptying into Moreton Bay on the Coral Sea. John Oxley, the first European to explore the river, named it after the Governor of New South Wales, Sir Thomas Brisbane in 1823. The penal colony of Moreton Bay later adopted the same name, eventually becoming the present city of Brisbane. The river is a tidal estuary and the water is brackish from its mouth through the majority of the Brisbane metropolitan area westward to the Mount Crosby Weir. The river is wide and navigable throughout the Brisbane metropolitan area. It is affectionately known by locals as the \"Brown Snake\", on account of its silty waters and long, winding course.\nThe river travels from Mount Stanley. The river is dammed by the Wivenhoe Dam, forming Lake Wivenhoe, the main water supply for Brisbane. The waterway is a habitat for the rare Queensland lungfish, Brisbane River cod (extinct), and bull sharks.\nEarly travellers along the waterway admired the natural beauty, abundant fish and rich vegetation along its banks. From 1862 the Brisbane River has been dredged for navigation purposes. The river served as an important carriageway between Brisbane and Ipswich before a railway linking the towns was built in 1875. By the late 1920s, water quality in the river had significantly deteriorated.\nMultiple major floods occurred in 1893. In 1974, the most damaging flood on record occurred, causing the 66,000-tonne vessel \"Robert Miller\" (largest ship ever built on the river) to break free from its mooring. Other major floods occurred in January 2011 and February 2022.\nExtensive port facilities have been constructed on the Fisherman Islands, now known as the Port of Brisbane, located at the mouth of the river on Moreton Bay. There are 16 major bridges that cross the river. The Clem Jones Tunnel, opened in 2010, is the river's first underground crossing for road transport. The CityCat and KittyCat ferry services deliver passengers along the inner-city reaches of the river.\nName.\nIn 1823 John Oxley named the river after the Governor Thomas Brisbane while surveying the area to locate a new penal settlement. The name is of Scottish origin, dating from at least 1643, from their family lands at Rothiebrisbane, Aberdeenshire. This is the name now used by the Queensland Government.\nMaiwar is the name of the river in the Turrbal language (the language of an Aboriginal group native to the Brisbane area). The name is also used for the inner-western state electorate of Maiwar.\nAccording to Archibald Meston and Tom Petrie in 1901, the Aboriginal people of the Brisbane area did not have a single name for the river, but rather they named individual reaches and bends.\nCourse.\nThe Brisbane River East and West branches traditionally have their headwaters in the ranges east of Kingaroy. The two branches merge into a single watercourse south of Mount Stanley. Using an alternative modern definition, the source is located at the top of Fig Tree Gully in the Bunya Mountains, which are the headwaters of the river's longest tributary Cooyar Creek. Water from the highest point in the catchment has fallen on the Bunya Mountains, 992m above sea level.\nThe junction of Cooyar Creek and Brisbane River is south of Avoca Vale, and the river then makes its way south past townships including Linville, Moore and Toogoolawah before being joined by the Stanley River, just south of Somerset Dam.\nThe river runs from there into Lake Wivenhoe, created by the Wivenhoe Dam. Beyond the dam, the river meanders eastward, meeting the Bremer River near Ipswich, then making its way through Brisbane's western suburbs, including Jindalee, Indooroopilly and Toowong.\nThe Brisbane River then flows past wharves including Pinkenba Wharf and Portside Wharf, past Bulwer Island and Luggage Point through the Port of Brisbane and into southern Bramble Bay an embayment of Moreton Bay.\nKangaroo Point Cliffs.\nOn the southern side of the river, opposite Gardens Point, are the Kangaroo Point Cliffs; made from Triassic aged volcanic rock of rhyolite composition called Brisbane tuff. The Kangaroo Point Cliffs were created by a quarrying operation that, according to Allan Cunninghams' Field Book, was underway prior to 1829 when he observed a \"\"stone wharf presumably used for landing the blocks of stone ferried across the river for the construction of buildings in the settlement\".\" This was in the vicinity of Edward Street ferry terminal. Quarrying this volcanic rock formed part of the hard labour undertaken by the convicts of the Moreton Bay Penal Settlement, which not only provided the convicts with the punishment of hard labour but also provided the settlement with a useful building material. Many of the early buildings including the Commissariat Store, Brisbane were built by convicts using tuff from this quarry. After the penal settlement was closed, the Petrie family leased the cliffs and quarried the tuff for use in their construction projects, but ultimately quarrying this material became uneconomic without the free labour of the convicts.\nThe volcanic rock Ignimbrite which formed the cliffs was deposited in the Triassic period about 220 million years ago. They currently form the banks of the Brisbane River.\nReaches.\nA number of the reaches of the Brisbane River are named, including the following listed below (from upstream to downstream), together with their location relative to tributaries of the river and river crossings:\nTributaries.\nThe following major tributaries flow into the Brisbane River from the north; Breakfast Creek, Moggill Creek and the Stanley River. On the southside Bulimba Creek, Norman Creek, Oxley Creek, Bremer River and Lockyer Creek waterways enter the Brisbane River. The following smaller creeks also flow into the river; Cressbrook Creek, Cooyar Creek, Cubberla Creek, Black Snake Creek, Wolston Creek, Woogaroo Creek, Goodna Creek, Six Mile Creek, Pullen Pullen Creek and Kholo Creek.\nHistory.\nBefore European settlement, the Brisbane River was spiritually important and a vital food source for the Aboriginal people of the Turrbal people, primarily through fishing in the tidal sections downstream. Additionally, fishing and fire-stick farming took place in the upper reaches of the river where there was freshwater, in some seasons.\nFour European navigators, namely James Cook, Matthew Flinders, John Bingle and William Edwardson, all visited Moreton Bay but failed to discover the river. The exploration by Flinders took place during his expedition from Port Jackson north to Hervey Bay in 1799. He spent a total of 15 days in the area, touching down at Woody Point and several other spots, but failed to discover the mouth of the river although there were suspicions of its existence. This is consistent with accounts of many other rivers along the east coast of Australia, which could not be found by seaward exploration but were discovered by inland travellers.\nOn 21 March 1823, four ticket-of-leave convicts sailing south from Sydney on a timber getting mission to Illawarra, Thomas Pamphlett, John Finnegan, Richard Parsons and John Thompson were blown north by a storm. They went 21 days without water, continuing north in the belief they had been blown south, during which time Thompson died. They landed on Moreton Island on 16 April and made it to the mainland on the south of the Brisbane River. They immediately began trekking north in order to return to Sydney, still believing themselves to be somewhere south of Jervis Bay. Subsequently, they became the first known Europeans to discover the river, stumbling across it somewhere near the entrance. They walked upstream along its banks for nearly a month before making their first crossing at Canoe Reach, the junction of Oxley Creek. It was here they stole a small canoe left by the Turrbal people of the region.\nJohn Oxley was Surveyor General of New South Wales when, in the same year and under orders from Governor Brisbane, he sailed into Moreton Bay looking for a suitable new site for a convict settlement to be established. An entry in Oxley's diary on 19 November 1823 describes his surprise meeting with one of the shipwrecked men:\n\"We rounded the Point Skirmish about 5 o'clock and observed a number of natives running along the beach towards the vessel, the foremost much lighter in colour than the rest. We were to the last degree astonished when he came abreast the vessel to hear him hail us in good English.\"\nBy that time Pamphlett and Finnegan were living with natives near Bribie Island. Parsons, who had continued to travel north in search of Sydney, was picked up by Oxley on 11 September 1824.\nOn 2 December 1823, Oxley and Stirling, with Finnegan as a somewhat reluctant guide, entered the river and sailed upstream as far as present-day Goodna. Oxley noted the abundant fish and tall pine trees. Early European explorers marvelled at the sheer natural beauty they witnessed while travelling up the lower reaches.\nReports by early European explorers such as Allan Cunningham and Oxley indicate rainforest once fringed the Brisbane River and its major tributaries, especially on the broader floodplains such as St Lucia and Seventeen Mile Rocks. The coastal lowlands were extensively vegetated with Melaleuca woodlands in low lying, poorly drained coastal areas. When first described by Europeans, the lower reaches of the Brisbane River were fringed by a mosaic of open forest, closed forest and rainforest.\nIn the same year of 1823, the river was named after Sir Thomas Brisbane, the then Governor of New South Wales. Upon the establishment of a local settlement in 1824, other explorers such as Allan Cunningham, Patrick Logan and Major Edmund Lockyer made expeditions and surveys further upstream, and, in May 1825, the Moreton Bay penal colony at Redcliffe under the command of Heny Miller relocated to North Quay.\nThe entrance to the Brisbane River was surveyed and marked with buoys in May 1825 by Pilot John M Gray sent from Sydney for the purpose by Governor Sir Thomas Brisbane. Gray also transferred the soldiers and convicts from the First Settlement at Redcliffe at this time. The first small private wharves were built on the river in about 1848. and the once popular, shark-proof river baths were first built in 1857 at Kangaroo Point. By 1850, nearly all the prime alluvial lands in the Brisbane River valley had been taken up by settlers.\nFrom 1862 the Brisbane River has been dredged for navigation purposes. Throughout much of the 20th century large quantities of sand and gravel were extracted from the estuary of the river. Since the rate of materials being deposited is not as high as that which was removed, the river has acted as a subaqueous mine.\nIn 1865, water police were stationed on board \"Proserpine\", a hulk moored at the mouth of the Brisbane River.\nIn 1866, there was a breakwater built at the junction of the Bremer and Brisbane rivers that was designed to stop shingle from blocking the access to the Bremer's boat channel. The first pile light using kerosene was built in 1882. The steel framed light also served as an early port signal station.\nIn February 1896, one of the river's worst disasters occurred with the capsize of the ferry \"Pearl\" (which struck the anchor chain of the government yacht \"Lucinda\") with the loss of around 40 lives.\n20th century.\nBy 1928, due to the early settlement of Brisbane, the water quality had deteriorated to the point where several public baths had to cease sourcing water from the river. Yet even up to the 1930s, the water was said to be very clear, with reports of people seeing the river bed below the surface. Swimming was once popular at Oxley Point under the Walter Taylor Bridge. In the middle tidal reaches in more recent times, visibility has been about . As Brisbane grew, the condition of the river worsened until at its worst it was no more than an open sewer and waste dump. The banks were cleared of timber and introduced animals and plants rapidly changed the river's ecology to its detriment.\nOn 25 March 1941, a USA goodwill flotilla arrived in the city docking at wharves along the River and built Naval Base Brisbane. The largest ship built on the river was the \"Robert Miller\". Construction was near complete when the 66,000\u00a0tonne vessel became un-moored in the 1974 Brisbane flood. In 1977, Queen Elizabeth II switched on the Jubilee Fountain positioned in front of the proposed Queensland Cultural Centre. The jets pushed the floodlit river water up to in the air. The floating fountain sank late on the 31 December 1984. 1987 was proclaimed the \"Year of the River\" by the Lord Mayor of Brisbane at the time, Sallyanne Atkinson.\nOver the 20th century, enough obstacles, sand and gravel had been removed from the river that its channel depth increased the tidal flow and tidal range upstream.\n21st century.\nOn 9 August 2020, it was discovered that Google Maps accidentally changed the Brisbane River name to Ithaca Creek after a complaint that Ithaca Creek was incorrectly named Brisbane River.\nFloods.\nThe Brisbane River floods frequently, although the occurrence and magnitude of flooding has diminished following the construction of the Wivenhoe Dam on the upper reaches of the River.\nPast floods have resulted in both deepening and reduction in river depth, creation of new sand banks and shoals as well as increased transport of suspended sediment from upstream. Before the invention of modern dredging techniques the sediment deposited by flooding created hazards to ships navigating the river. Even medium-sized vessels no longer travel up the Brisbane River beyond the city reach, and dredging of the upper reaches has ceased, allowing the river to recover substantially from the fine silt dislodged by gravel and sand extraction.\nSignificant floods have occurred several times since the European settlement of Brisbane. There have been 12 Major flood peaks (over 3.5m) recorded at the Brisbane gauge since records began in 1841, including:\nPost construction of Wivenhoe Dam\nFlooding along the Brisbane River has the potential to be devastating, as documented in 1974, 2011 and 2022. For much of the river's length its banks are relatively high, but topped by a broad plain. The river's meandering course means that flood waters from upstream cannot be quickly discharged into Moreton Bay. Thus higher than normal flows cause river levels to rise rapidly and once the top of the banks are breached the floodwaters can spread over wide areas of the city.\nNavigation.\nThere has been much dredging and widening work done over the years to allow ships to transport cargo to and from Brisbane. The river is no longer dredged. The river served as an important carriageway between Brisbane and Ipswich before a railway linking the towns was built in 1875. By early 1825 buoys were being laid along the South Passage and shortly after that the first pilots were commissioned to guide ships entering from Moreton Bay and another service for those travelling upstream. Flying boats used the waters of the river in Pinkenba, to take-off for domestic and international destinations in the 1930s.\nThe river depth was progressively increased and narrow points widened to allow larger vessels into the river and further upstream. For navigation and safety reasons the Seventeen Mile Rocks were completely removed in 1965 after numerous partially successful attempts in the past. The northern river bank at the mouth of the river has undergone reclamation projects over the years, especially in the suburbs of Hamilton and Pinkenba. More recently, extensive facilities for the Port of Brisbane have been constructed on Fisherman's Island which has also seen significant land reclamation into the bay.\nEarly rivers crossings were made using small oared boat ferries, beginning in 1843, followed by steam ferries. In 1865 the first Victoria Bridge, later destroyed in a flood, was built across the river. Professor Hawken of the University of Queensland undertook a study in 1914 to identify the future crossing points for the river.\nHistorically, the Brisbane River contained upstream bars and shallows and had a natural tidal limit of only . The current tidal limit now extends upstream due to continual channel dredging.\nCrossings.\nThe first bridge built across the Brisbane River was the original timber Victoria Bridge, opened in 1865 between Brisbane and South Brisbane. The current concrete Victoria Bridge is the 4th to be built on the site, the original bridge collapsed after marine borers weakened its timber piles, and the second was destroyed in the 1893 flood.\nAs of 2012[ [update]] the Brisbane River is crossed by 16 major bridges (counting the new second Gateway, now Sir Leo Hielscher Bridge), including the historic 1940 Story Bridge and the tolled Sir Leo Hielscher Bridges. There are two other major bridges upstream (west) of Brisbane, on the D'Aguilar Highway and the Brisbane Valley Highway. The Clem Jones Tunnel, opened in 2010, is the river's first underground crossing for road transport.\nThe Moggill Ferry continues to provide a crossing for vehicles northeast of Ipswich.\nThe Albert Bridge was the first railway crossing of the Brisbane River, opened in 1876. It was destroyed in the 1893 flood and replaced by a 2 span design that is flood tolerant. A second bridge was built adjacent to it, opened in 1957 in conjunction with the quadruplication of the railway between Roma Street and Corinda. The Merivale Bridge, opened in 1978, connects the South Brisbane railway system to the City.\nFour bridges have been built that cater for pedestrians and bicycles, being the Goodwill Bridge and Kurilpa Bridge in the City area, the Eleanor Schonell Bridge between Dutton Park and St Lucia (which also caters for public buses to the University of Queensland St Lucia campus), and the Jack Pesch Bridge between Indooroopilly and Chelmer. The Brisbane City Council has announced plans for a pedestrian and cycle only bridge between Kangaroo Point and the city.\nBrisbane Riverwalk.\nThe Brisbane City Council has developed a network of riverwalk pavements along the banks of the Brisbane River. The Riverwalk runs along much of the Brisbane River foreshore throughout the inner-city area, with the longest span running between Newstead and Toowong. Another popular stretch runs beneath the Kangaroo Point Cliffs between South Brisbane and Kangaroo Point. Several spans of the Riverwalk are built out over the Brisbane River.\nAn interesting section is the floating walkway between the Story Bridge and Merthyr Road New Farm. Brisbane City planners require many developers of formerly private riverfront blocks to create new sections of the Brisbane Riverwalk that are accessible to the public.\nDuring the 2011 floods, the Lord Mayor of Brisbane, Campbell Newman authorised the destruction of the Brisbane Riverwalk to prevent it floating away and becoming a hazard downstream. The proposed demolition of the Riverwalk was later cancelled.\nEarly in the morning of 13 January 2011 a several hundred metre long section of the Riverwalk broke away from the main structure and floated downstream. Queensland Police temporarily closed the Sir Leo Hielscher Bridges (commonly known as the Gateway Bridge) several times as there were fears that sections of Riverwalk could collide with and damage the bridge. The largest part of the floating boardwalk was safely guided under the bridge by a tugboat and past other infrastructure before being safely secured. Other tugs and Water Police guided other Riverwalk sections under the bridge. The damaged Riverwalk was rebuilt as a fixed structure by the Brisbane City Council. The 18-month construction commenced in early 2013 and was completed in September 2014.\nCross river tunnel.\nThe Clem Jones Tunnel is currently the only cross river tunnel built in Brisbane. It opened on 16 March 2010. The Cross River Rail tunnel is currently under construction and is expected to be complete in 2029.\nEnvironmental concerns.\nDuring the 19th century and early 20th century, the river's surface was periodically choked by large swathes of the noxious weed known as water hyacinth. The plant was originally imported from South America.\nEnvironmentally, the river is in a poor condition and has been so for many years. In 2000, the Brisbane River estuary did not meet the national guidelines for environmental standards. The lower reaches received a very poor rating in the 2008 Healthy Waterways report, an annual assessment of river water quality. The major causes of pollution are excess nutrients, hydrocarbons, pesticides and bacteria which become concentrated in the river and its sediment after flowing off surrounding lands. The river is also considered too murky and it is not recommended to swim in its waters.\nBeginning in the 1950s, the river was dredged for the purpose of extracting sand and gravel. The considerable impacts of that activity include increased turbidity and bank erosion. The effect of the artificial sediment load in Moreton Bay grew to concern environmentalists worried that sediment was choking sea grass paddocks which were grazing territory for dugong. Public outcry led to all commercial dredging being stopped by 1998.\n Non-extractive dredging continues in the Brisbane River in order to maintain its navigability.\nIn 2018, the water quality in the Brisbane River failed to meet many Queensland Government standards. Nitrogen and phosphorus exceeded the maximum levels in all tests conducted in the mid-Brisbane River catchment. Results in the lower- and upper- catchments found maximum levels exceeded for the majority of tests for nitrogen and nearly all tests for phosphorus. Nitrogen and phosphorus primarily enter the river as they are washed in from agriculture areas on the banks upstream.\nIn 2019, research at the University of Queensland indicated that the river's turbidity cycle (and murky brown colour) is principally driven by exchanges of mud between the channel and mudbanks. However, by planting Crinum pedunculatum in a line parallel to the channel and below the mean water level, the turbidity would reduce to such a degree that the river would appear clear and blue. To date, this has not been attempted\nby Brisbane City Council.\nFlora.\nThe river has several important ecological areas where remnant populations of mangroves exist; these include areas around drainage culverts, in Breakfast Creek, New Farm, a small preserve at the city bend, near the Queensland University of Technology and around the shipping terminals at the river's terminus into Moreton Bay. These mangroves have recently become classified as protected nature reserves. The noxious water hyacinth weed is still growing in stretches between Fernvale and the Mount Crosby Weir but only poses a minimal risk to drinking water supplies.\nFauna.\nQueensland lungfish.\nIn 1895\u20131896, the Queensland lungfish was only found in the Mary and Burnett river systems. Concerned about the species survival, it was introduced into other Queensland waterways with varying success. Self-sustaining populations of lungfish were successfully established in the Brisbane River, the Enoggera Reservoir and the North Pine River.\nBrisbane River cod.\nThe freshwater reaches of the Brisbane River once supported a unique species of cod, the Brisbane River cod, which was similar to Murray cod and closely related to eastern freshwater cod and Mary River cod. This unique native fish became extinct somewhere between the 1930s and 1950s due to habitat degradation and overfishing. The river has been restocked with cod from the Mary River.\nBull sharks.\nThe Brisbane River is home to a very large population of bull sharks, thus swimming is not advised due to the dangers imposed by this predatory fish. Ipswich City Council warns against swimming as far up as Colleges Crossing. There have been four recorded shark attack deaths in the river (1862, 1880, 1901 and 1921), and numerous other fatal attacks in surrounding rivers and estuaries. There have also been numerous attacks on family pets, such as dogs. Bull sharks can grow up to between 7\u201311.5 feet (2.1\u20133.5 m) in length and be very aggressively territorial, which are unusual for a shark species because they can inhabit brackish water (containing less than 50% seawater) and are known to tolerate freshwater.\nWater Transport.\nThe river is traversed by CityCats and other ferries in Brisbane, as it winds its way through the city centre.\nEvents.\nThe Brisbane River hosts numerous events including the Brisbane Festival, Riverfire, and the Brisbane River Classic fishing competition. Many schools and clubs use the river to conduct rowing regattas on Milton Reach. Sailing regattas are also held on this reach as well as the Hamilton reach.\nRiverfire.\nRiverfire, which began in 1998, was a festival held in September each year at South Bank Parklands and surrounding areas (including the Victoria Bridge), to celebrate the Brisbane River. In 2009, the festival merged with Brisbane Festival. Riverfire was previously held at the end of the Brisbane Festival until 2022 when it was changed to be held as the festival opener. The event involves an afternoon RAAF aerial display utilising aircraft such as the F/A-18 Super Hornet preceding the main event, a fireworks display extending the length of the Brisbane River from South Bank Parklands to the Story Bridge.\nThe RAAF also perform a practice session in the days preceding the event, serving as an opportunity to both practice beforehand and also promote Riverfire. One of the most popular RAAF aircraft to perform at Riverfire was the F-111 which was known for performing a 'dump-and-burn' above the city. The final F-111 dump-and-burn of Riverfire occurred in 2010 was able to be seen as far as the Gold Coast and Toowoomba as the F-111 climbed from to a higher altitude of about . The 20th Riverfire attracted nearly 500,000 people to the river.\nIn 2009 as part of the Q150 celebrations, Riverfire was announced as one of the Q150 Icons of Queensland for its role as an \"Events and festivals\".\nNamed in its honour.\nThe electoral district of Maiwar created in the 2017 Queensland state electoral redistribution was named after the river's indigenous name.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57609", "revid": "1063872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57609", "title": "Egyptian hieroglyphic writing", "text": ""}
{"id": "57610", "revid": "42134605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57610", "title": "Nursultan Nazarbayev", "text": "President of Kazakhstan from 1991 to 2019\nNursultan Abishuly Nazarbayev (born 6 July 1940) is a Kazakh politician who served as the first president of Kazakhstan from 1991 to 2019. He also held the special title of Elbasy from 2010 to 2022 and chairman of the Security Council from 1991 to 2022.\nNazarbayev's political career began in the Soviet era, where he joined the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1962 while working as a steel factory worker. Rising through the party ranks, he became Prime Minister of the Kazakh SSR in 1984 and First Secretary of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan in 1989. In 1990, the Supreme Soviet elected him as the president of Kazakhstan. Nazarbayev played a key role in navigating Kazakhstan through the dissolution of the Soviet Union, leading to the country's independence in 1991. In the country\u2019s first direct 1991 presidential election, Nazarbayev appeared on the ballot without opposition and secured an overwhelming victory. In 1995, ruling by decree, Nazarbayev extended his presidency through a referendum and adopted a new constitution that expanded his powers. He was re-elected in 1999, deemed eligible to run again in 2005 by a Supreme Court ruling, and benefited from a 2007 constitutional amendment solely exempting term limits for him, allowing re-elections in 2011 and 2015.\nUnder Nazarbayev's rule, Kazakhstan experienced substantial economic growth, driven by high oil prices and market-oriented reforms. His policies focused on modernizing infrastructure, attracting foreign investment, and positioning Kazakhstan as an economic hub in Central Asia. On the international stage, he prioritized strong ties with global powers and Kazakhstan's integration into regional and global organizations, including the Eurasian Economic Union and the World Trade Organization. Nazarbayev also gained recognition for his efforts in nuclear disarmament, renouncing Kazakhstan\u2019s inherited nuclear arsenal, and closing the Semipalatinsk Test Site. However, his presidency was also marked by widespread corruption, nepotism, kleptocracy, and economic challenges, such as the Great Recession, the 2010s oil glut, and economic repercussions from the Russo-Ukrainian War. These issues contributed to inflation and the devaluation of the national currency, the tenge, while undermining transparency and governance.\nIn March 2019, following a wave of protests and increasing discontent, Nazarbayev announced his resignation, handing over power to Kassym-Jomart Tokayev. Tokayev was elected president in a snap election in June 2019. While Nazarbayev stepped down from the presidency, he remained a powerful figure in Kazakh politics, retaining influence through his leadership of the Assembly of People of Kazakhstan and the Nur Otan party. He also chaired the Security Council until his dismissal in 2022. Nazarbayev's power was diminished following the 2022 unrest, which led to a constitutional referendum that stripped him of many privileges and titles, including his membership in the Senate and the Constitutional Council. By 2023, he had lost most of his official titles, signaling the end of his political dominance.\nNazarbayev was one of the longest-ruling non-royal leaders in the world, having led Kazakhstan for nearly three decades, excluding chairmanship in the Security Council after the end of his presidency. He has often been referred to as a dictator due to his consolidation of power and autocratic rule. While he is credited with fostering economic growth and political stability in Kazakhstan, his tenure was marred by widespread authoritarianism, significant human rights abuses, and systemic corruption. His leadership was further characterized by a pervasive cult of personality, with his image and influence deeply entrenched in the nation\u2019s political and social landscape.\nEarly life and career.\nNursultan Nazarbayev () was born in Chemolgan, a village near Almaty, when Kazakhstan was one of the republics of the Soviet Union, to parents \u00c4bi\u015f Nazarbayev (1903\u20131970) and \u00c4ljan Nazarbayeva (1910\u20131978). His father \u00c4bish was a poor labourer who worked for a wealthy local family until Soviet rule confiscated the family's farmland in the 1930s during Joseph Stalin's collectivization policy. Following this, his father took the family to the mountains to live out a nomadic existence. His family's religious tradition was Sunni Islam.\n\u00c4bi\u015f avoided compulsory military service due to a withered arm he had sustained when putting out a fire. At the end of World War II, the family returned to the village of Chemolgan where in 1948, Nazarbayev began attending school and being taught the Russian language; while living with his paternal uncle, as his parents had not owned dwelling in the place for a brief period. Nazarbayev later himself chose to settle in the upper part of Chemolgan where mainly ethnic Russians lived, in order to master Russian while communicating with them. Despite performing well at school, by the time Nazarbayev was in 10th grade, all the classes in the same grade were called off due to a student shortage and as a result in 1957, he was sent to a boarding school named after Abai Qunanbaiuly in Kaskelen. During that time, Nazarbayev's father, \u00c4bi\u015f, wished to create favourable conditions towards his son for studying and living as well as to potentially avoid bad influence from peers by renting himself an apartment for Nazarbayev in the village.\nAfter leaving school, Nazarbayev took up a one-year, government-funded scholarship at the Karaganda Steel Mill in Temirtau. He also spent time training at a steel plant in Dniprodzerzhynsk, and therefore was away from Temirtau when riots broke out there over working conditions. By the age of 20, he was earning a relatively good wage doing \"incredibly heavy and dangerous work\" in the blast furnace. From there, Nazarbayev married Sara Nazarbayeva on 25 August 1962, who was a dispatcher at the same steel mill that he worked in. Together, both parties would eventually have three daughters: Dariga, Dinara and Aliya, born in 1963, 1968 and 1980, respectively.\nOn 15 November 1962, Nazarbayev joined the Communist Party, becoming a prominent member of the Young Communist League (Komsomol) and full-time worker for the party, while attending the Karagandy Polytechnic Institute. He was appointed secretary of the Communist Party Committee of the Karaganda Metallurgical Kombinat in 1972, and four years later became Second Secretary of the Karaganda Regional Party Committee.\nIn his role as a bureaucrat, Nazarbayev dealt with legal papers, logistical problems, and industrial disputes, as well as meeting workers to solve individual issues. He later wrote that \"the central allocation of capital investment and the distribution of funds\" meant that infrastructure was poor, workers were demoralised and overworked, and centrally set targets were unrealistic; he saw the steel plant's problems as a microcosm for the problems for the Soviet Union as a whole.\nRise to power.\nIn 1984, at the age 43, Nazarbayev became the Prime Minister of Kazakhstan (Chairman of the Council of Ministers), the youngest-ever officeholder in the Soviet Union to serve the post, under Dinmukhamed Kunaev, the First Secretary of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan. During that period, the Perestroika policies slowly began to take place under Mikhail Gorbachev while Nazarbayev himself was viewed to be more of experienced policy maker as his views and stances had already been formed during the Khrushchev Thaw and 1965 Soviet economic reform. Kazakhstan at that time was seen as a backwater republic within the Soviet Union with its industry being heavily reliant upon rich raw materials, specifically in mining sectors and was forced upon to import its consumer goods from other Soviet republics. It faced problems especially in countryside with a need for state farm repairs, as well as housing for farmers, lack of available preschools for rural children which Nazarbayev during his tenure raised issues in regard to these problems that was reportedly met with disagreements amongst the republic's leadership.\nGrowing frustrated over the problems within the Kazakh SSR, at the 16th Session of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan held in January 1986, Nazarbayev criticized Askar Kunayev, head of the Academy of Sciences, for not reforming his department. Dinmukhamed, Nazarbayev's boss and Askar's brother, felt deeply angered and betrayed. Kunayev went to Moscow and demanded Nazarbayev's dismissal while Nazarbayev's supporters campaigned for Kunayev's dismissal and Nazarbayev's promotion.\nKunayev was ousted in 1986 and replaced by Gennady Kolbin, an ethnic Russian, who despite his office, had little authority in Kazakhstan. Nazarbayev was named party leader and the top position (First Secretary of the Communist Party) on 22 June 1989, only the second Kazakh (after Kunayev) to hold the post. He was the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet (head of state) from 22 February to 24 April 1990.\nOn 24 April 1990, Nazarbayev was elected as the first President of Kazakhstan by the Supreme Soviet. He supported Russian President Boris Yeltsin against the attempted coup in August 1991 by Soviet hardliners. Nazarbayev was close enough to Soviet general secretary Mikhail Gorbachev for Gorbachev to consider him for the post of Vice President of the Soviet Union; however, Nazarbayev turned the offer down. However, on 29 July, Gorbachev, Yeltsin, and Nazarbayev discussed and decided that once the New Union Treaty was signed, Nazarbayev would replace Valentin Pavlov as Premier of the Soviet Union.\nThe Soviet Union began disintegrating following the failed coup, though Nazarbayev was highly concerned with maintaining the close economic ties between Kazakhstan and Russia. In the country's first presidential election, held on 1 December, he appeared alone on the ballot and won 95% of the vote. On 16 December, Nazarbayev signed the Constitutional Law \"On the State Independence of the Republic of Kazakhstan\", which had been adopted earlier that day by the Supreme Soviet, formally establishing Kazakhstan as a sovereign state and making it the last Soviet republic to declare independence. Five days later, he joined other leaders in signing the Alma-Ata Protocol on 21 December, bringing Kazakhstan into the Commonwealth of Independent States.\nPresidency (1990\u20132019).\n1991\u20131999: First term.\nNazarbayev renamed the former State Defense Committees as the Ministry of Defense and appointed Sagadat Nurmagambetov as Defense Minister on 7 May 1992.\nThe Supreme Soviet, under the leadership of Chairman Serikbolsyn Abdilin, began debating over a draft constitution in June 1992. Opposition political parties Azat, Jeltoqsan and the Republican Party, held demonstrations in Alma-Ata from 10 to 17 June 1992 calling for the formation of a coalition government, resignation of Sergey Tereshchenko's government and the Supreme Soviet which, at that time, was composed of former Communist Party legislators who had yet to stand in an election. The first constitution of Kazakhstan, adopted on 28 January 1993, created a strong executive branch with limited checks on executive power.\nOn 10 December 1993, the Supreme Soviet voted to dissolve itself and that same day, a presidential decree was signed which set changes in local representative and executive bodies with elections of the m\u00e4slihats (local legislatures) taking place every five years and \u00e4kims (local heads) being appointed by the president. In March 1994, Kazakhstan for the first time since independence, held a legislative election which was boycotted by the Azat and Jeltoqsan parties. From there, the pro-presidential People's Union of Kazakhstan Unity party won a majority of 30 seats with independent candidates who were on presidential-list won 42 seats. The OSCE observers called the elections unfair, reporting an inflated voter turnout. Nevertheless, the new composition of the Parliament was considered to be \"professional\" with different various political factions that functioned. In May 1994, the Supreme Council passed a vote of no confidence against Prime Minister Sergey Tereshchenko amidst political scandals evolving Tereshchenko and government ministers. Nazarbayev objected to the change, arguing that the Constitution gave the president the right to appoint the PM with already existing parliamentary confirmation regardless of the motion of confidence. However, he eventually backed down, dismissing Tereshchenko's government in October 1994 and appointing ethnic-Kazakh Akezhan Kazhegeldin as the new PM.\nIn 1994, Nazarbayev suggested relocating the capital city from Almaty to Astana, and the official changeover of the capital happened on 10 December 1997.\nIn March 1995, the Constitutional Court ruled that 1994 legislative elections were held unconstitutionally and as a result, Nazarbayev dissolved the Supreme Council. From that period, all bills were adopted on the basis of presidential decrees such as outlawing any civic participation in an unregistered and/or illegal public association who would be punished with 15-day jail sentence or fines from 5 to 10 times the minimum monthly wage in an effort \"to fight organized crime.\" An April 1995 referendum extended Nazarbayev's term, originally set to end in 1996, to until 2000. In August 1995, a referendum was held which allowed for greater presidential powers and established a bicameral Parliament as well. Both the elections for Mazhilis (lower house) and the Senate (upper house) were held in December 1995 which convened in January 1996. Nazarbayev dismissed the accusations from critics of him personally dissolving the legislature by claiming that it was under Constitutional Court's orders, saying \"the law is the law, and the President is obliged to abide by the constitution, otherwise, how will we build a rule-of-law state?\" and that the cancellation of the 1996 presidential elections was made by the decision of the Assembly of People of Kazakhstan arguing that \"Western schemes do not work in our Eurasian expanses.\"\nIn October 1997, Nazarbayev dismissed Prime Minister Akezhan Kazhegeldin from his post, which according to political experts was seen as a \"power grab\". In his address, he criticized Kazhegeldin over his record reforms and in his place, Nazarbayev appointed Nurlan Balgimbayev, an oil engineer who prior served as an Oil and Gas Minister.\n1999\u20132006: Second term.\nOn 7 October 1998, a number of amendments were made to the Constitution of Kazakhstan in which the term of office of the president was increased from 5 to 7 years as well as term limits. The changes also removed restriction on the maximum required age of a presidential candidate. The following day on 8 October, Nazarbayev signed decree setting the election date for January 1999. He was reelected for second term by winning 81% of the vote in the first round, defeating his main challenger and former Supreme Council chairman Serikbolsyn Abdildin. Abdildin himself in response refused to acknowledge the official results, insisting that they were falsified.\nIn February 1999, several pro-presidential parties formed into one party named Otan. At the Founding Congress of the party which was held on 1 March 1999, Nazarbayev was elected as the chairman. From there, he suggested that former PM Sergey Tereshchenko should take over the leading role, noting the constitutional limits on president's affiliation with political parties while Nazarbayev himself remained as \"de facto\" party leader. In July 1999, Nazarbayev signed decree setting the date for the legislative elections. The Otan, for the first time, participated in the elections, winning 23 seats. In the aftermath on 1 October 1999, Nazarbayev appointed Kassym-Jomart Tokayev as the PM after his predecessor Nurlan Balgimbayev had faced an increasing unpopularity amidst worsening economy and scandal revolving around an arms deal with North Korea.\nNazarbayev appointed Altynbek Sarsenbayev, who at the time served as the Minister of Culture, Information and Concord, the Secretary of the Security Council, replacing Marat Tazhin, on 4 May 2001. Tazhin became the Chairman of the National Security Committee, replacing Alnur Mussayev. Mussayev became the head of the Presidential Security Service.\nIn January 2002, Prime Minister Kassym-Jomart Tokayev resigned from his post and was subsequently appointed as the Minister of Foreign Affairs and State Secretary. Imangali Tasmagambetov took over Tokayev's role as the new PM which viewed as a response towards a political crisis which occurred following the formation of the Democratic Choice of Kazakhstan in November 2001 by several prominent Kazakh officials who called for political and democratic reforms. Tasmagambetov's government was short-lived, facing opposition by the Parliament over his proposed policies on land privatisation which led to a motion of no confidence against him. Tasmagambetov resigned in June 2003 and Nazarbayev appointed Daniyal Akhmetov to lead the government citing the reason \"to intensify the pace of social and economic development.\"\n2006\u20132011: Third term.\nIn June 2000, the Constitutional Council announced its resolution which declared that Nazarbayev's second term was, in fact, his first due to the adaptation of the new Kazakh Constitution which took place in 1995 during Nazarbayev's first term. This allowed him the opportunity to run for another election as his term was set to end in 2007. \nOn 4 December 2005, new presidential elections were held where Nazarbayev won by an overwhelming majority of 91.15% (from a total of 6,871,571 eligible participating voters) in the first round. Nazarbayev was sworn in for another seven-year term on 11 January 2006.\nIn 2006, the Otan increased its ranks as all pro-presidential parties began merging into one. Nazarbayev supported the move, stating the need for there to be fewer, but stronger parties that \"efficiently defend the interests of the population.\" In December 2006, the Otan renamed itself into Nur Otan and on 4 July 2007, Nazarbayev was re-elected as the party's chairman.\nAmidst the political shakeup, Nazarbayev dismissed Prime Minister Daniyal Akhmetov in January 2007 and appointed Deputy PM Karim Massimov to the post. He stated that Massimov had the \"sufficient knowledge and experience\" to \"develop Kazakhstan's successes.\" On 18 May 2007, the Parliament of Kazakhstan approved a constitutional amendment which allowed the incumbent president\u2014himself\u2014to run for an unlimited number of five-year terms. This amendment applied specifically and only to Nazarbayev: the original constitution's prescribed maximum of two five-year terms will still apply to all future presidents of Kazakhstan. That same year in August, legislative elections were held from which the Nur Otan won all the contested seats in the Mazhilis, eliminating any form of opposition which sparked controversy and criticism from international organizations and groups within the country. In response, Kazakhstan introduced an amendment by allowing for a two-party system since any party that wins second place in race\u2014regardless or not if it passes the 7% electoral threshold\u2014would be guaranteed to have representation in the Parliament.\nNazarbayev has always emphasized the role of education in the nation's social development. In order to make education affordable, on 13 January 2009, he introduced educational grant \"Orken\" for the talented youth of Kazakhstan. This decree was amended on 23 September 2016.\nIn 2009, former UK Cabinet Minister Jonathan Aitken released a biography of the Kazakh leader entitled \"Nazarbayev and the Making of Kazakhstan\". The book took a generally pro-Nazarbayev stance, asserting in the introduction that he is mostly responsible for the success of modern Kazakhstan.\n2011\u20132015: Fourth term.\nIn April 2011, Nazarbayev ran for a fourth term, winning 95.5% of the vote during the first round with virtually no opposition candidates. Following his victory, he announced the need in finding an \"optimal way of empowering parliament, increasing the government's responsibility and improving the electoral process.\"\nOn 11 June 2011, Daniel Witt, Vice Chairman of the Eurasia Foundation, acknowledged the role of Nazarbayev and his political reforms:\"[President] Nazarbayev has led Kazakhstan through difficult times and into an era of prosperity and growth. He has demonstrated that he values his U.S. and Western alliances and is committed to achieving democratic governance.\"In December 2011, opponents of Nazarbayev rioted in Mangystau, described by the BBC as the biggest opposition movement of his time in power. On 16 December 2011, demonstrations in the oil town of Zhanaozen clashed with police on the country's Independence Day. Fifteen people were shot dead by security forces and almost 100 people were injured. Protests quickly spread to other cities but then died down. The subsequent trial of demonstrators uncovered mass abuse and torture of detainees. \nOn 24 September 2012, Nazarbayev appointed Serik Akhmetov as the PM, a close-ally of Nazarbayev who served as First Deputy PM under Massimov's cabinet and the \u00c4kim of Karaganda Region. Massimov in turn, became the new head of the Presidential Administration.\nIn December 2012, Nazarbayev outlined a forward-looking national strategy called the Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy.\nIn 2014, Nazarbayev proposed that Kazakhstan should change its name to \"Kazakh Eli\" (\"Country of the Kazakhs\"), for the country to attract better and more foreign investment, since \"Kazakhstan\" by its name is associated with other \"-stan\" countries. Nazarbayev suggested Mongolia receives more investment than Kazakhstan because it is not a \"-stan\" country, even though it is in the same neighborhood, and not as stable as Kazakhstan. However, he noted that decision should be decided by the people on whether the country should change its name.\nAfter Kazakhstan faced an economic downturn of which was caused by low oil prices and devaluation of the tenge, Nazarbayev on 2 April 2014 dismissed PM Serik Akhmetov and reappointed Karim Massimov to the post. Akhmetov subsequently was appointed as a Defence Minister while Massimov's government was aimed at dealing with the economic crisis.\n2015\u20132019: Fifth and final term.\nNazarbayev for the last time ran again in the 2015 presidential election for the fifth term. From there, he gathered 97.7% of the vote share in the first round, making it one of the biggest in Kazakhstan's history. In his victory speech, he emphasized the top priority in Nurly Zhol stimulus package that was designed in softening the social blow caused by economic troubles. At a later news conference, Nazarbayev speaking about the electoral results remarked, \"I apologize that for superdemocratic states such figures are unacceptable. But I could do nothing. If I had interfered, I would have looked undemocratic, right?\" The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe criticized the election as falling short of international democratic standards.\nIn early 2016, it was announced that 1.7 million hectares of agricultural land would be sold at an auction. This sparked rare protests around the country which called for Nazarbayev to stop the momentum on land sales and solve the nation's problems as well. In response to the fears of the lands being sold to foreigners, especially Chinese, Nazarbayev fired back at claims, calling them \"groundless\" and warned that any provocateur would be punished. On 1 May 2016, at the Kazakhstan People's Unity Day, Nazarbayev warned that without unity and stability, a crisis similarly in Ukraine would happen. In June 2016, armed attacks in Aktobe took place resulting in deaths of 25 people. Nazarbayev called the incident as terrorist attacks which were orchestrated from abroad to destabilize the country similarly in a colour revolution to which he accused of being infiltrated by the ISIS militants.On 8 September 2016, Nazarbayev appointed Karim Massimov as the National Security Committee Chairman and Bakhytzhan Sagintayev to the post of the PM. Days later on 13 September, Nazarbayev's daughter Dariga was appointed as the member of the Senate. This suggested that Nazarbayev was preparing for his succession to be taken over by Dariga as the cabinet reshuffling had occurred after Uzbek President Islam Karimov's death which created political uncertainty in the neighboring country. Nazarbayev dismissed the claims of hereditary succession in an interview to the Bloomberg News in November 2016, saying that the \"transfer of power is spelled out by the Constitution.\"\nIn January 2017, Nazarbayev proposed constitutional reforms, which would allow for the Parliament to have greater role in decision making, calling it \"a consistent and logical step in the development of the state\". The Parliament approved several amendments to the Constitution on 5 March 2017, making the president no longer able to override parliamentary votes of no-confidence, while giving the legislative branch to form a government cabinet, implementing state programs and policies. The move was seen as way by Nazarbayev to ensure the potential of a peaceful transfer of power.\nNazarbayev, along with seventeen heads of state and government from around the world, which included Felipe VI of Spain and leaders of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization member countries, consisting of Russia, China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Pakistan and India, attended the opening ceremony of Expo 2017 which was held in Astana. An estimated 3.86 million people visited the site with Nazarbayev at the closing ceremony on 10 September 2017 calling it as \"Kazakhstan's most brilliant achievements since its independence.\"\nSenate Chairman Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, in an interview to BBC News in June 2018, suggested that Nazarbayev's term presidential from 2015 was in fact, the last one as he hinted the possibility that Nazarbayev would not run for re-election which was scheduled for 2020. Minister of Information and Communications Dauren Abaev responded to Tokayev's statements claiming that \"there's still a lot of time\" for Nazarbayev to decide on whether to run for re-election pointing out that the decision will be primarily based on his. He also added that the country would only benefit if Nazarbayev chooses to run for sixth term.\nResignation.\nOn 19 March 2019, following unusually persistent protests in cities across the country, Nazarbayev announced his resignation as President of Kazakhstan, citing the need for \"a new generation of leaders\". The announcement was broadcast in a televised address in Astana after which he signed a decree ending his powers from 20 March 2019. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, speaker of the upper house of parliament, was appointed as president of the country until the end of the presidential term.\nNotwithstanding his resignation as president, he continued to head the ruling Nur Otan party and remains a member of the Constitutional Council. In his televised address Nazarbayev pointed out that he had been granted the honorary status of \"elbasy\" (leader of the nation, leader of the people), the title bestowed upon him by parliament in 2010. The title was later removed due to the cancellation of the Law on the First President.\nVarious colleagues of Nazarbayev reacted within hours of the announcement, with Uzbek President Shavkat Mirziyoyev holding a telephone conversation with Nazarbayev, calling him a \"great politician\". In a cabinet meeting, Russian President Vladimir Putin praised Nazarbayev's leadership, even going as far as to say that the Eurasian Economic Union was Nazarbayev's \"brainchild\". Other world leaders who sent messages to Nazarbayev included Ilham Aliyev, President of Azerbaijan, Alexander Lukashenko, President of Belarus, and Emomali Rahmon, President of Tajikistan.\nAccording to Nazarbayev himself, he described his intention for stepping down was due to \"peak of trust\" by the people and that it was \"necessary to leave\", recalling his memories in attending funerals of Soviet leaders Leonid Brezhnev, Yuri Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko, embarking that \"there is still a limit of human capabilities.\"\nAllegations of corruption.\nOver the course of Nazarbayev's presidency, an increasing number of accusations of corruption and favoritism were directed against Nazarbayev and his circle. Critics said that the country's government came to resemble a clan system.\nAccording to \"The New Yorker\", in 1999 Swiss banking officials discovered $85 million in an account apparently belonging to Nazarbayev; the money, intended for the Kazakh treasury, had in part been transferred through accounts linked to James Giffen. Subsequently, Nazarbayev successfully pushed for a parliamentary bill granting him legal immunity, as well as another designed to legalise money laundering, angering critics further. When Kazakh opposition newspaper \"Respublika\" reported in 2002 that Nazarbayev had in the mid-1990s secretly stashed away $1 billion of state oil revenue in Swiss bank accounts, the decapitated carcass of a dog was left outside the newspaper's offices, with a warning reading \"There won't be a next time\"; the dog's head later turned up outside editor Irina Petrushova's apartment, with a warning reading \"There will be no last time.\" The newspaper was firebombed as well.\nIn May 2007, the Parliament of Kazakhstan approved a constitutional amendment which would allow Nazarbayev to seek re-election as many times as he wishes. This amendment applies specifically and only to Nazarbayev, since it states that the first president will have no limits on how many times he can run for office, but subsequent presidents will be restricted to a five-year term.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], Kazakhstan has never held an election meeting international standards.\nIn May 2018, the Parliament of Kazakhstan passed a constitutional amendment allowing Nazarbayev to serve as Chairman of the Security Council for life. These reforms, which were approved by the Constitutional Council on 28 June, also expanded the powers of the Security Council, granting it the status of a constitutional body. The amendment states that, \"The decisions of the security council and the chairman of the security council are mandatory and are subject to strict execution by state bodies, organisations and officials of the Republic of Kazakhstan.\"\nIn December 2020, according to an investigative report by Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, it identified at least $785 million in European and U.S. real estate purchases made by Nazarbaev's family members and their in-laws in six countries over a 20-year span. This figure includes a handful of properties that have since been sold, including multimillion-dollar apartments in the United States bought by Nazarbaev's brother, Bolat. It does not include a sprawling Spanish estate owned by Kulibaev, for which a purchase price could not be found.\nDomestic policy.\nEconomic issues.\nAfter the breakup of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan faced mass unemployment and emigration. Nazarbayev was viewed to have followed Russia's economic reforms starting with price liberalisations. On 3 January 1992, he signed a decree \"On measures to liberalise prices\", an attempt to stabilise the country's socio-economic situation and form a market economy within Kazakhstan. This resulted in a rapid inflation of goods, causing discontent amongst citizens, thus forcing Nazarbayev on 12 January to sign a \"On additional measures for social protection of the population in the context of price liberalisation\" which established partial state-regulated prices on bread, bakery products and flour.\nThroughout the 1990s, privatisation and banking reforms took place in Kazakhstan. In June 1994, Nazarbayev amended the Parliament's Economic Memorandum for the next three years, which has been defined as an economic strategy. It included strict measures to reform the economy and establish macroeconomic stability and set the task of carrying out rapid and vigorous privatization. During the introduction of the National Bank of Kazakhstan in December 1993, significant changes were made in which all specialized banks were transformed into a joint stock company, and the National Bank was granted a number of powers. In March 1995, Nazarbayev signed decree setting the National Bank as an independent entity that is accountable only for the head of state.\nKazakhstan managed to avoid full impact from the 1997 Asian financial crisis and 1998 Russian financial crisis, due to lack of high liquid investments. Nazarbayev pledged for to continue in advancing for an \"independent, open and free market economy.\" Starting from early 2000's, the Kazakh economy faced huge growth thanks to its development in energy sector and high oil prices. Nazarbayev published his manifesto: \"Prosperity, Security and the Ever-Growing Welfare of all Kazakhstanis\" in 2000, where he wrote that \"today we are building a new state, a new market economy and a new democracy, and this\u2014at the very time when many other independent states have already trodden that path similar enough.\"\nIn October 2008, during the 2008 financial crisis, Nazarbayev assured the nation that it would deal with the crisis by introducing a rescue package amounted to 10% of the country's GDP, of which was funded thanks in part to the national sovereign wealth fund. In his state of address on 6 March 2009, he announced 350,000 jobs for workers in the spheres of infrastructure projects as well as the creation of the Eurasian Land Bridge.\nSince 2014, Nazarbayev has set strategic priority in Kazakhstan for economic diversification which would maintain the country's stability by avoiding the effects from its oil export reliance that would affect the economy through its constant price downfalls.\nEurasian Economic Union.\nIn 1994, Nazarbayev suggested the idea of creating a \"Eurasian Union\" during a speech at Moscow State University. On 29 May 2014, alongside Russian President Vladimir Putin and Belarusian President Aleksandr Lukashenko, Nazarbayev signed the founding treaty of the Eurasian Union (EEU) in Astana, paving the way for the transition from their current customs union to the full-fledged EEU on 1 January 2015. Nazarbayev named Honorary Chairman of Supreme Eurasian Economic Council in May 2019.\nKazakhstan 2050 Strategy.\nNazarbayev unveiled in his 2012 State of the Nation the Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy, a long-term strategy to ensure future growth prospects of Kazakhstan, and position Kazakhstan as one of the top 30 most developed nations in the world.\nNurly Zhol.\nPresident Nazarbayev unveiled in 2014 a multibillion-dollar domestic modernization and reformation plan called \"Nurly Zhol \u2013 The Path to the Future\". It was officially approved by the Decree of the President on 6 April 2015. The goal of the plan was for development and improvement of tourist, industrial and housing infrastructure, create 395,500 new jobs, and increase the GDP growth rate 15.7 by 2019.\nIn March 2019, it was announced that the program would be extended to 2025 with its new agenda being focused on developing road infrastructure. According to Minister of Infrastructure and Development Beibut Atamkulov, it is planned that 27,000 kilometres of local roads will be repaired, with 21,000 kilometres of national roads being reconstructed and repaired.\nDigital Kazakhstan.\nPresident Nazarbayev unveiled this technological modernization initiative to increase Kazakhstan's economic competitiveness through the digital ecosystem development.\nEnvironmental issues.\nIn his 1998 autobiography, Nazarbayev wrote that \"The shrinking of the Aral Sea, because of its scope, is one of the most serious ecological disasters being faced by our planet today. It is not an exaggeration to put it on the same level as the destruction of the Amazon rainforest.\" He called on Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, and the wider world to do more to reverse the environmental damage done during the Soviet era.\nNuclear disarmament.\nKazakhstan inherited from the Soviet Union the world's fourth-largest stockpile of nuclear weapons. Within four years of independence, Kazakhstan possessed zero nuclear weapons. In one of the new government's first major decisions, Nazarbayev closed the Soviet nuclear test site at Semipalatinsk (Semei), where 456 nuclear tests had been conducted by the Soviet military.\nDuring the Soviet era, over 500 military experiments with nuclear weapons were conducted by scientists in the Kazakhstan region, mostly at the Semipalatinsk Test Site, causing radiation sickness and birth defects. As the influence of the Soviet Union waned, Nazarbayev closed the site. He later claimed that he had encouraged Olzhas Suleimenov's anti-nuclear movement in Kazakhstan, and was always fully committed to the group's goals. In what was dubbed \"Project Sapphire\", the Kazakhstan and United States governments worked closely together to dismantle former Soviet weapons stored in the country, with the Americans agreeing to fund over $800 million in transportation and \"compensation\" costs.\nNazarbayev encouraged the United Nations General Assembly to establish 29 August as the International Day Against Nuclear Tests. In his article he has proposed a new Non-Proliferation Treaty \"that would guarantee clear obligations on the part of signatory governments and define real sanctions for those who fail to observe the terms of the agreement.\" His foreign minister signed a treaty authorizing the Central Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone on 8 September 2006.\nIn an oped in \"The Washington Times\", Nazarbayev called for the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty to be modernized and better balanced.\nIn March 2016, Nazarbayev released his \"Manifesto: The World. The 21st century.\" In this manifest he called for expanding and replicating existing nuclear weapon-free zones and stressed the need to modernise existing international disarmament treaties.\nReligion.\nNazarbayev put forward the initiative of holding a forum of world and traditional religions in Astana. Earlier the organisers of similar events were only representatives of leading religions and denominations. Among other similar events aimed at establishing interdenominational dialogue were the meetings of representatives of world religions and denominations held in Assisi, Italy, in October 1986 and January 2002. The first Congress of World and Traditional Religions which gathered in 2003 allowed the leaders of all major religions to develop prospects for mutual cooperation.\nNazarbayev initially espoused anti-religious views during the Soviet era; he later made attempts to support Muslim heritage by performing the Hajj pilgrimage, and supporting mosque renovations.\nUnder the leadership of Nazarbayev, Kazakhstan enacted some degrees of multiculturalism in order to retain and attract talents from diverse ethnic groups among its citizenry, and even from nations that are developing ties of cooperation with the country, in order to coordinate human resources onto the state-guided path of global market economic participation. This principle of the Kazakh leadership has earned it the name \"Singapore of the Steppes\".\nHowever, in 2012, Nazarbayev proposed reforms, which were later enacted by the parliament, imposing stringent restrictions on religious practices. Religious groups were required to re-register, or face closure. The initiative was explained as an attempt to combat extremism. However, under the new law, many minority religious groups are deemed illegal. In order to exist on a local level, a group must have more than 50 members: more than 500 on a regional level, and more than 5,000 on the national level.\nNationalism.\nIn 2014, Vladimir Putin's remarks regarding the historicity of Kazakhstan, in which he stated that Nazarbayev \"created a state on a territory that never had a state ... Kazakhs never had any statehood, he has created it\" led to a severe response from Nazarbayev. Four years later, in February 2018, Reuters reported that \"Kazakhstan further loosened cultural ties with its former political masters in Moscow ... when a ban on speaking Russian in cabinet meetings took effect ... [Nazarbayev] has also ordered all parliamentary hearings to be held in Kazakh, saying those who are not fluent must be provided with simultaneous translations.\"\nHuman rights record.\nKazakhstan's human rights situation under Nazarbayev is uniformly described as poor by independent observers. Human Rights Watch says that \"Kazakhstan heavily restricts freedom of assembly, speech, and religion. In 2014, authorities closed newspapers, jailed or fined dozens of people after peaceful but unsanctioned protests, and fined or detained worshippers for practicing religion outside state controls. Government critics, including opposition leader Vladimir Kozlov, remained in detention after unfair trials. In mid-2014, Kazakhstan adopted new criminal, criminal executive, criminal procedural, and administrative codes, and a new law on trade unions, which contain articles restricting fundamental freedoms and are incompatible with international standards. Torture remains common in places of detention.\"\nKazakhstan is ranked 161 out of 180 countries on the World Press Freedom Index, compiled by Reporters Without Borders.\nRule of law.\nAccording to a US government report released in 2014, in Kazakhstan:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKazakhstan's global rank in the World Justice Project's 2015 Rule of Law Index was 65 out of 102; the country scored well on \"Order and Security\" (global rank 32/102), and poorly on \"Constraints on Government Powers\" (global rank 93/102), \"Open Government\" (85/102) and \"Fundamental Rights\" (84/102, with a downward trend marking a deterioration in conditions). https:// in the World Justice Project's 2020 Rule of Law Index rose and was 62 out 128. Its global rank on \"Order and Security\" remained high (39/128) and low on \"Constraints on Government Powers\" (102/128), \"Open Government\" (81/128) and \"Fundamental Rights\" (100/128).\nThe 100 Concrete Steps national plan introduced by President Nazarbayev included measures to reform the court system of Kazakhstan, including the introduction of mandatory jury trials for certain categories of crimes (Step 21) and the creation of local police service (Step 30). The implementation of the national plan resulted in Kazakhstan's transition from a five-tier judicial system to a three-tier one in early 2016 yet it severely restricted access to the cassation review of cases by the Supreme Court. However, the expansion of jury trials has not been implemented. Furthermore, Nazarbayev abolished the local police service in 2018 following the public outrage over the murder of Denis Ten in downtown Almaty.\nForeign policy.\nDuring Nazarbayev's presidency the main principle of Kazakhstan's international relations was multi-vector foreign policy, which was based on initiatives to establish friendly relations with foreign partners. His government's policies were considered moderate by maintaining a balance between the world powers of United States and Russia.\nFrom 1990 to 1994, Nazarbayev paid official visits to the United States, United Kingdom, China, Germany, Russia, Turkey, Japan and other nations. By 1996, 120 nations had recognized Kazakhstan, and it had established diplomatic relations with 92 countries. The first major diplomatic initiatives by Nazarbayev were dealing with strategic issues, such as obtaining international security guarantees in the aftermath of nuclear disarmament as a result of pressure from Western nations. Nazarbayev called on Russia, the United States, and China to conclude a non-aggression pact with Kazakhstan that would also guarantee the country's sovereignty. On 5 December 1994, Russia, U.S., and U.K. signed the Budapest Memorandum on Security Assurances to Kazakhstan based on the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). Later, the governments of China and France added their signatures to the Memorandum.\nKazakhstan under Nazarbayev became co-founders of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation in 2001.\nIn January 2019, Zimbabwean President Emmerson Mnangagwa conducted a state visit to Astana to meet with Nazarbayev, in the first visit by an African leader to the country in years. This would be the last foreign head of state that Nazarbayev would receive while in office. Nazarbayev's last state visit to a foreign country took place five days prior to his resignation, visiting the United Arab Emirates to meet Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed.\nChina.\nNazarbayev prioritized strengthening relations with China through a pragmatic approach focused on economic cooperation, regional security, and border stability. Kazakhstan resolved longstanding border disputes with China through agreements in 1994, 1997, and 2002, finalizing their 1,700-kilometer boundary.\nHe played a central role in founding the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) in 2001, deepening regional cooperation with China on security and trade. Economic ties grew substantially during his presidency, with China becoming a major trading partner and investor.\nEnergy and infrastructure cooperation were key pillars of the bilateral relationship. In 2006, Kazakhstan and China completed the first stage of the Kazakhstan\u2013China oil pipeline, the first direct pipeline between China and a foreign country. This was followed by the Central Asia\u2013China gas pipeline, launched in 2009, linking gas fields in Turkmenistan through Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan into western China. Nazarbayev also supported Chinese President Xi Jinping's Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) proposal in 2013, which he aligned with Kazakhstan's domestic Nurly Zhol infrastructure program beginning in 2014. This coordination facilitated large-scale Chinese investments in transport corridors, logistics centers, and industrial zones across Kazakhstan, further embedding the country in transcontinental trade routes.\nDespite close ties with China, Nazarbayev's government remained discreet about the Xinjiang internment camps and persecution of Uyghurs in China. As international concern grew in the late 2010s, Kazakhstan faced domestic pressure and consular issues but opted not to publicly criticize Beijing.\nIran.\nIn a speech given in December 2006 marking the fifteenth anniversary of Kazakhstan's independence, Nazarbayev stated he wished to join with Iran in support of a single currency for all Central Asian states and intended to push the idea forward with the President of Iran, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, on an upcoming visit. In one of his speeches however, Nazarbayev criticised Iran as one of the countries that provides support for terrorism. The Kazakh Foreign Ministry however, released a statement on 19 December, saying his remarks were not \"what he really meant,\" and his comments were \"mistakes.\"\nDuring an announcement of a railway link in 2007, Nazarbayev expressed a religious solidarity with Iran, as he was quoted as saying, \"Today I will pay a visit to Turkmenistan where we will agree on the construction of a railway through Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan to Iran with access to the Persian Gulf. This will bring us closer to our Muslim brothers.\"\nIsrael.\nNotwithstanding Kazakhstan's membership in the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation), under Nazarbayev, Kazakhstan had good relations with Israel. Diplomatic relations were established in 1992 and Nazarbayev paid official visits to Israel in 1995 and 2000. Bilateral trade between the two countries amounted to $724 million in 2005.\nIsraeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu conducted his first ever visit to Kazakhstan in mid-December 2016, when he met with Nazarbayev. The two countries signed agreements on research and development, aviation, civil service commissions and agricultural cooperation, as well as a declaration on establishing an agricultural consortium.\nRussia.\nKazakhstan maintained close and multifaceted relations with Russia, grounded in shared history, culture, and economic ties as neighboring former Soviet republics. Both countries were founding members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) in 1991, which aimed to facilitate political, economic, and security cooperation among post-Soviet states. This partnership further deepened with Kazakhstan's participation in the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) from 2015, promoting economic integration and free movement within the region. Security collaboration was conducted through frameworks like the Russian-led Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), addressing regional stability and counterterrorism.\nNazarbayev pursued a multi-vector foreign policy, balancing Kazakhstan's relations with Russia through high-level meetings with Russian leaders\u2014including Boris Yeltsin, Vladimir Putin, and Dmitry Medvedev. Cooperation with Russia focused on trade, energy, security, and border management.\nEnergy cooperation was a key aspect of the relationship. Kazakhstan's oil and natural gas exports relied heavily on routes passing through Russia, such as those of the Caspian Pipeline Consortium. While the energy partnership was generally stable, disputes occasionally arose over tariffs and transit terms, prompting Kazakhstan to explore alternative export routes and support the Baku\u2013Tbilisi\u2013Ceyhan pipeline.\nAmid Russia's growing geopolitical assertiveness, including the Russo-Georgian War, the 2014 annexation of Crimea and conflict in eastern Ukraine, and military involvement in the Syrian civil war, Nazarbayev consistently emphasized adherence to international law, sovereignty, and territorial integrity, seeking to preserve Kazakhstan's strategic partnership with Moscow while avoiding entanglement in regional conflicts.\nUnited States.\nThe United States was among the first countries to recognize Kazakhstan's independence in December 1991, providing important diplomatic support during the nation's early years. In May 1992, Nazarbayev made his first state visit to the United States, meeting with President George H. W. Bush. During this visit, the leaders expressed a commitment to developing friendly and cooperative relations. Nazarbayev also signed a landmark agreement with Chevron to develop the Tengiz oil field, signaling the start of major American investment in Kazakhstan's energy sector.\nA central aspect of U.S.\u2013Kazakhstan relations during Nazarbayev\u2019s presidency was Kazakhstan's decision to voluntarily renounce the nuclear weapons it inherited from the Soviet Union. Nazarbayev's government closed the Semipalatinsk Test Site and worked closely with the United States under the Cooperative Threat Reduction program to dismantle weapons of mass destruction and related infrastructure. Kazakhstan's role in global nuclear nonproliferation was further highlighted by its hosting of the International Atomic Energy Agency's Low-Enriched Uranium Bank, designed to promote peaceful nuclear energy.\nThroughout his tenure, Nazarbayev met with several US diplomats and presidents, including Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, Barack Obama, and Donald Trump. These meetings served to strengthen cooperation on energy development, regional security, counterterrorism, and nuclear nonproliferation. Under Nazarbayev's leadership, Kazakhstan and the United States established a strategic partnership that contributed to regional stability and addressed shared security concerns.\nTurkey.\nKazakhstan established early and enduring diplomatic ties with Turkey. In March 1991, Turkish President Turgut \u00d6zal became the first foreign head of state to visit Kazakhstan, signing foundational cooperation agreements. Turkey promptly recognized Kazakhstan's independence that year, and diplomatic relations were formally established on 2 March\u202f1992. Later that year, Nazarbayev made his inaugural state visit to Ankara, commemorating the opening of Kazakh embassy and deepening bilateral engagement.\nDuring his presidency, Nazarbayev prioritized Turkey as a key partner, driven by shared Turkic heritage and strategic interests. One of the earliest symbols of this partnership was the transformation of Turkistan State University into the Khoja Akhmet Yassawi International Kazakh\u2013Turkish University in 1991, formally established by bilateral agreement in October 1992. Educational ties expanded further through the opening of dozens of Kazakh\u2013Turkish lyceums across Kazakhstan, supported by the Kazakh\u2013Turkish Education Foundation, and through scholarship programs that enabled thousands of Kazakh students to study in Turkey.\nDuring his presidency, Nazarbayev prioritized Turkey as a key partner, driven by shared Turkic heritage and strategic interests. Significant milestones included a Strategic Partnership Agreement in 2009, which expanded collaboration in energy, infrastructure, education, and defense. Economically, the \"New Synergy\" initiative aimed to raise bilateral trade from around US\u202f$3.3\u202fbillion in 2011 toward US\u202f$10\u202fbillion by 2015, and Turkish investors played a growing role in Kazakh infrastructure and energy projects. Nazarbayev also incorporated Turkey into his Nurly Zhol economic corridor strategy to strengthen transport links between Europe and Central Asia.\nPost-presidency.\nAccording to \"The Economist\", despite his resignation, he is still behind the leadership of the country. His resignation is considered by \"The Moscow Times\" to be an attempt to turn him into a Lee Kuan Yew type of public figure. In the month since his resignation, he had met with South Korean President Moon Jae-in and Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orb\u00e1n during their visit to Kazakhstan. Notably, their meetings with Nazarbayev took place separately from their meetings with President Tokayev, who is the \"de jure\" head of state. Two days after leaving office, he attended the Nauryz celebrations where he was greeted by the civilian population. In regard to accommodations as the first president, it is known that his personal office (now known as \"K\u00f6korda\") has been moved to a different location in the capital from the presidential palace. It was also reported in late April 2019 that Nazarbayev also maintains a private jet for official and private visits.\nHe has embarked on two foreign visits since leaving office, to Beijing and Moscow. The former visit took place during the second Belt and Road Forum while the latter took place during the 2019 Moscow Victory Day Parade. In late-May, Turkish Foreign Minister Mevl\u00fct \u00c7avu\u015fo\u011flu announced the naming of Nazarbayev as the Honorary President of the Turkic Council. On 7 September, he visited Moscow once again to attend the Moscow City Day celebrations on the VDNKh and to open his pavilion at the trade show. During a visit to the Azerbaijani capital of Baku, he told the hosting President Ilham Aliyev that his father, former President Heydar Aliyev, would be \"very delighted\" with the development of the capital. In late October, he attended the Enthronement of Japanese emperor Naruhito as the representative of Kazakhstan. During this visit, he met with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky, during which he congratulated him on his election victory and was invited by Zelensky to visit Kyiv. Nazarbayev met with Spanish tennis player Rafael Nadal during his visit to Kazakhstan for a charity tennis match. During his meeting with Nadal, he personally called former Spanish King Juan Carlos I. In October 2019, it was announced that all potential ministerial candidates needed the approval of Nazarbayev before being appointed by Tokayev, with the exception of Minister of Defence, Interior Minister and Foreign Minister.\nOn 29 November 2019, Nazarbayev was named the Honorary Chair of Central Asian Consultative Meeting. It was announced at the second Consultative Meeting of the Heads of State of Central Asia in Tashkent.\nAt the 29th Session of the Assembly of People of Kazakhstan (QHA) held on 28 April 2021, Nazarbayev announced his intention to step down as the QHA chairman and have President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev to succeed his role, describing it as an emotional \"serious step\". However from there, Tokayev suggested for Nazarbayev to be named as an \"Honorary Chairman\" by the QHA to which his statements received applause. Nazarbayev accepted the offer, promising to continue to work with the Assembly.\nIn October 2021, during a visit to the United Arab Emirates, Nazarbayev awarded Crown Prince Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan the Nuclear Weapon-Free World and Global Security award for ensuring peace, regional stability and sustainable economic development.\nOn 23 November 2021, at the Nur Otan political council meeting, it was revealed that Nazarbayev would resign from the party's leadership and suggested President Tokayev to take over the position, stressing that the Nur Otan should be led by an incumbent president. The move was met with various reactions from political analysts and activists, affirming that it would increase Tokayev's governing powers and influence over the Kazakh politics while some going as far as proclaiming it as an end to the \"era of Nazarbayev\". According to Nazarbayev's press secretary Aidos \u00dck\u0131bai, the decision was a \"logical continuation of the transit of power\" with the party needing to be main support for Tokayev due to \"the global crisis caused by the pandemic.\"\nCapital renaming.\nOn 20 March 2019, after Nazarbayev's resignation, President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev proposed renaming the capital Astana to Nur-Sultan in honor of Nazarbayev. The Parliament of Kazakhstan officially voted in favour of the renaming.\nHowever, Kazakhstan changed the name of the capital from Nur-Sultan back to Astana in September 2022.\nCOVID-19.\nNazarbayev created the Biz Birgemiz (lit. \"We are Together\") Fund in March 2020 \"to fight the pandemic COVID-19 effectively while supporting the economy\". As of June 2020, the fund gathered over 28 billion tenge ($69.3 million) to provide financial aid to more than 470,000 families in 23 cities as part of the fund's three waves of assistance. Upon his diagnosis with COVID-19 in mid-June of that year, he received calls and telegrams of support from world leaders, including Vladimir Putin and King Abdullah II of Jordan as well as former president of Croatia Stjepan Mesi\u0107.\nIn June 2021, Nazarbayev received a Russian-made Sputnik V vaccine against the virus. From there, he urged everyone to get vaccinated due to emergence of the new COVID-19 strains for their health, acknowledging the challenging times happening in amidst of the pandemic and wishing health and wellbeing for the public.\n80th birthday.\nHe recovered from the virus on 3 July 2020, in time for the celebration of his 80th birthday which was held on 6 July and also coincided with the Day of the Capital City. Nazarbayev received congratulations from leader such as the Armenian President Armen Sarkissian, Russian President Vladimir Putin, former Tatar President Mintimer Shaimiev and former Turkish President Abdullah G\u00fcl. Former Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of Russia Grigory Karasin described Nazarbayev in an interview honoring his birthday as \"one of the few world politicians who has a vision of political processes\". The celebratory events were held virtually due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the country. A statue of Nazarbayev in military uniform was unveiled at the National Defense University (an institution that itself bears his name).\n2021 legislative campaign.\nWhile continuing to lead the Nur Otan after resigning from presidency, Nazarbayev signed a decree in the preparation of the 2021 legislative elections on 4 June 2020 setting the date of closed primaries would be held within the party \"for open and political competition, promote civic engagement in the political process, and empower women and the youth of the country\" to which he instructed for the party to include 30% of women and 20% of people under the age of 35 in its list. The primaries were held from 17 August to 3 October 2020 where Nazarbayev himself voted online.\nAt the 20th Nur Otan Extraordinary Congress held on 25 November 2020, the Nur Otan revealed its list of party candidates as well as electoral platforms which were approved by the delegates. Nazarbayev at the congress spoke saying:\"The party's program announced by our President [Kassym-Jomart Tokayev] today is ambitious and at the same time calculated, supported by financial and human resources. It is a logical extension of our reforms. Throughout the years of independence, I have always set clear goals, and I have said that it is necessary to work hard and hard to achieve them. And now it's the same. I support this program proposed by the President and our common task is to rally around it and work together. You have to believe in yourself, love your homeland and do everything possible for progress.\"Nazarbayev, at the congress, accused the United States of \"double standards\" over its conduct of the 2020 presidential elections, telling \"what is there to talk about now in the United States of America, the OSCE was not allowed in the elections at all. The Democrats did not allow Republican observers and so on. It is not in order to criticize a big state, but if we are criticized, then why are there such disorders?\". In his response to the Belarusian protests against President Alexander Lukashenko's re-election, Nazarbayev criticized the protestors, saying \"they've been fucking Belarus for a whole month,\" and noted the Bulgarian protests in which Nazarbayev claimed that it received a lack of international attention in contrast with Belarus. To conclude the Nur Otan congress, Nazarbayev proposed Bauyrjan Baibek to be the head of the party's campaign headquarters, a decision that was unanimously supported by the Nur Otan delegates.\nIn the following aftermath of the elections to the Mazhilis which were held on 10 January 2021, the ruling Nur Otan swept a comfortable majority of 76 seats despite a loss eight seats in contrary to the 2016 election. Nazarbayev congratulated the party's victory in the election saying, \"Kazakhstanis associate the further development of our country, improvement of welfare with our party.\"\n2022 unrest and resignation from Security Council.\nFollowing the outbreak of protests after a sudden sharp increase in gas prices, President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev declared a state of emergency in Mangystau Region and Almaty, effective from 5 January 2022. The Mamin Cabinet resigned the same day. On the evening of 5 January, Tokayev announced Nazarbayev's resignation from the Security Council. Questions regarding Nazarbayev's whereabouts arose as he was viewed to be the main target in the unrest with anti-Nazarbayev slogans being chanted throughout protests along with monuments and street names dedicated to him being vandalized and torn down.\nRumours about Nazarbayev fleeing Kazakhstan was brought up by Echo of Moscow chief editor Alexei Venediktov, claiming that he was preparing to leave the country for unspecified treatment citing inner diplomatic circle. The Kyrgyz media reported that a private jet belonging to Nazarbayev's family had allegedly arrived in the capital of Bishkek from the United Arab Emirates without official confirmation. While the Kazakh embassy in the UAE denied reports of his presence in the country. Spokesperson Aidos \u00dck\u0131bai in his Twitter dismissed claims, affirming that Nazarbayev was in the capital of Nur-Sultan and that he had stayed in the country the whole time. From there, \u00dck\u0131bai stated that Nazarbayev \"holds a number of consultative meetings\" and is in direct contact with President Tokayev, whom he urged everyone to rally around with \"to overcome current challenges and ensure the integrity\" of Kazakhstan. \nOn 18 January 2022, Nazarbayev made his first public appearance in a video address since the unrest, calling the events a \"tragedy\" which \"became a lesson for all of us.\" From there, he urged the public \"to protect independence like the apple of one's eye\" by finding out unknown people responsible for \"demonstrations and murders\" while expressing condolences to the families of the victims in the protests. During the address, Nazarbayev dismissed any rumours in regard to supposed inner conflict between the country's elite by calling them \"absolutely groundless\", insisting that he'd been a pensioner ever since handing over presidency to Tokayev whom he remarked \"possesses full power\" as he was set to be elected as the new chairman of the ruling Nur Otan party. Nazarbayev remarked about his achievements as president in which his goal was to form \"stability and tranquility for the country\" by calling for everyone to protect these \"enduring values\" and for unity around the Tokayev by supporting his reform agenda.\nPersonal life.\nNursultan Nazarbayev identifies as a Muslim. Nazarbayev has described his spirituality as being based on the words from Abai Qunanbaiuly, a Kazakh poet whose philosophy is based on an enlightened Islam. According to Nazarbayev, Abai's \"Words of Wisdom\" aided him in attempting to build a modern Kazakhstan after the collapse of the Soviet Union.\nNazarbayev is married to Sara Alpysqyzy Nazarbayeva. They have three daughters: Dariga, Dinara and Aliya. Aliya's first marriage was notably to Aidar Akayev, the eldest son of former president of Kyrgyzstan Askar Akayev, which for a short period made the two Central Asian leaders related. Having grown up in the Soviet Union, Nazarbayev is fluent in Kazakh as well as Russian and understands English. He has two brothers, Satybaldy (1947\u20131980) and Bolat (1953\u20132023), as well as one sister named Anip. On 16 August 2020, Nazarbayev's grandson, Aisultan, reportedly died from cardiac arrest in London. Prior to that, Aisultan made several public statements on social media that Nazarbayev was his biological father and that his life was constantly threatened. He also accused his grandfather's associates of plotting and scheming. In response, Nazarbayev described Aisultan as being very similar to himself, expressing his regrets by telling that \"one could not have sent him anywhere, but it was impossible to keep him. He was already a slave to this work and could not stop. We treated him in Moscow, and we treated him in London. It seems that I went out and came back to it again.\"\nOn 18 June 2020, it was reported that Nazarbayev had tested positive for COVID-19; a spokesman stated that Nazarbayev would go into isolation and work remotely. On 3 July 2020, Nazarbayev had recovered and was \"back on his feet\" three weeks after contracting the virus. Nazarbayev later during a meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin recalled his sickness, telling that \"group of Russian doctors stood by me for ten days. It was decisive in my recovery, so it will not be forgotten.\"\nIn an October 2021 interview, Nazarbayev revealed that he had suffered a disease in his spine back in 2011, to which it became noticed while attending a concert, resulting him being carefully escorted out of the hall and eventually undergo a vertebra surgery to which Nazarbayev stated was amongst things that have influenced him in eventually resigning from presidency.\nIn January 2023, Nursultan Nazarbayev was hospitalized at the National Scientific Cardiac Surgery Center in Astana. On 20 January 2023, a heart operation was performed, which was successful.\nHe gave his last name to his grandchildren: Aisultan Nazarbayev (1990\u20132020) and Nabi Nazarbayev (born 2008).\nIn popular culture.\nNazarbayev is portrayed by Romanian actor Dani Popescu in the 2020 satirical film \"Borat Subsequent Moviefilm\".\nIn 2021, Nazarbayev was interviewed by Oliver Stone in an eight-part hagiographic documentary titled \"Qazaq: History of the Golden Man\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "57612", "revid": "15181583", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57612", "title": "Geography of Norway", "text": "Norway is a country located in Northern Europe in the northern and western parts of the Scandinavian Peninsula. The majority of the country borders water, including the Skagerrak inlet to the south, the North Sea to the southwest, the North Atlantic Ocean (Norwegian Sea) to the west, and the Barents Sea to the north. It has a land border with Sweden to the east; to the northeast it has a shorter border with Finland and an even shorter border with Russia.\nNorway has an elongated shape, one of the longest and most rugged coastlines in the world, and there are a total of 320,249 islands and islets (239,057 islands and 81,192 islets) along its much-indented coastline, according to Kartverket (the official Norwegian mapping agency). It is one of the world's northernmost countries, and it is one of Europe's most mountainous countries, with large areas dominated by the Scandinavian Mountains. The country's average elevation is , and 32 percent of the mainland is located above the tree line. Its country-length chain of peaks is geologically continuous with the mountains of Scotland, Ireland, and, after crossing under the Atlantic Ocean, the Appalachian Mountains of North America. Geologists hold that all these formed a single range before the breakup of the ancient supercontinent Pangaea.\nDuring the Last Glacial Period, as well as in many earlier ice ages, virtually the entire country was covered with a thick ice sheet. The movement of the ice carved out deep valleys. As a result of the ice carving, Sognefjorden is the world's second deepest fjord and Hornindalsvatnet is the deepest lake in Europe. When the ice melted, the sea filled many of these valleys, creating Norway's famous fjords. The glaciers in the higher mountain areas today are not remnants of the large ice sheet of the ice age\u2014their origins are more recent. The regional climate was up to warmer in 7000 BC to 3000 BC in the Holocene climatic optimum, (relative to the 1961-90 period), melting the remaining glaciers in the mountains almost completely during that period.\nEven though it has long since been released from the enormous weight of the ice, the land is still rebounding several millimetres a year. This rebound is greatest in the eastern part of the country and in the inner parts of the long fjords, where the ice cover was thickest. This is a slow process, and for thousands of years following the end of the ice age, the sea covered substantial areas of what is today dry land. This old seabed is now among the most productive agricultural lands in the country. \nArea and borders.\nThe total area of Norway is , with being water. With Svalbard and Jan Mayen included, the total area is .\nOf its land boundary, it shares with Sweden, with Finland, and with Russia.\nThe continental coastline of Norway is ; with islands included, it is \nNorway's exclusive economic zone (EEZ) totals . It is one of the largest in Europe and the 17th-largest in the world. The EEZ along the mainland makes up , the Jan Mayen EEZ makes up , and since 1977 Norway has claimed an economic zone around Svalbard of . Norway also has maritime claims of for the contiguous zone, for the continental shelf, and for the territorial sea.\nPhysical geography.\nOverview.\nMainland Norway comprises an extensive range of natural variation, given its moderate size, including both terrestrial, marine, limnic and snow and ice ecosystems. Norway has a high mineral and bedrock diversity, and high diversity of landforms. Major landscape types include inland hills and mountains, inland valleys, inland plains, coastal plains, coastal fjords and coastal hills and mountains. Glaciated; mostly high plateaus and rugged mountains broken by fertile valleys; small, scattered plains; coastline deeply indented by fjords; arctic tundra only in the extreme northeast (largely found on the Varanger Peninsula). Frozen ground all year can also be found in the higher mountain areas and in the interior of Finnmark county. Numerous glaciers are also found in Norway.\nThe highest point is Galdh\u00f8piggen at , and the lowest point is the Norwegian Sea at 0m.\nMainland.\nScandinavian Mountains.\nThe Scandinavian Mountains are the most defining feature of the country. Starting with Setesdalsheiene north of the Skagerrak coast, the mountains are found in large parts of the country and intersect the many fjords of Vestlandet. This region includes Hardangervidda, Jotunheimen (with Galdh\u00f8piggen at a.s.l.), Sognefjell, and Trollheimen in the north, with large glaciers, such as Jostedalsbreen, Folgefonna, and Hardangerj\u00f8kulen. The mountain chain swings eastwards south of Trondheim, with ranges such as Dovrefjell and Rondane, and reaches the border with Sweden, where they have become mostly gently sloping plateaus. The mountains then follow the border in a northeasterly direction and are known as \"Kj\u00f8len\" (the \"keel\"). The mountains intersect many fjords in Nordland and Troms, where they become more alpine and create many islands after they meet the sea. The Scandinavian mountains form the Lyngen Alps, which reach into northwestern Finnmark, gradually becoming lower from Altafjord towards the North Cape, where they finally end at the Barents Sea.\nThe Scandinavian Mountains naturally divide the country into physical regions; valleys surround the mountains in all directions.\nSouthern coast.\nIn southern Norway, the southern Skagerrak and North Sea coast is the lowland south of the mountain range, from Stavanger in the west to the western reaches of the outer part of the Oslofjord in the east. In this part of the country, valleys tend to follow a north\u2013south direction. This area is mostly hilly, but with some very flat areas such as Lista and J\u00e6ren.\nSoutheast.\nThe land east of the mountains (corresponding to \u00d8stlandet, most of Telemark, and R\u00f8ros Municipality) is dominated by valleys running in a north\u2013south direction in the eastern part, and in a more northwest\u2013southeast direction further west, the valleys terminating at the Oslofjord. The longest valleys in the country are here\u2014\u00d8sterdal and Gudbrandsdal. This region also contains large areas of lowland surrounding the Oslofjord, as well as the Glomma River and Lake Mj\u00f8sa.\nWestern fjords.\nThe land west of the mountains (corresponding to Vestlandet north of Stavanger) is dominated by the mountain chain, as the mountains extend, gradually becoming lower, all the way to the coast. This region is dominated by large fjords, the largest being Sognefjord and Hardangerfjord. Geirangerfjord is often regarded as having the ultimate in fjord scenery. The coast is protected by a chain of skerries (small, uninhabited islands\u2014the Skj\u00e6rg\u00e5rd) that are parallel to the coast and provide the beginning of a protected passage for almost the entire route from Stavanger to Nordkapp. In the south, fjords and most valleys generally run in a west\u2013east direction, and, in the north, in a northwest\u2013southeast direction.\nTrondheim region.\nThe land north of Dovre Municipality (corresponding to Tr\u00f8ndelag county, except R\u00f8ros Municipality) comprises a more gentle landscape with more rounded shapes and mountains, and with valleys terminating at the Trondheimsfjord, where they open up onto a large lowland area. Further north is the valley of Namdalen, opening up in the Namsos area. However, the Fosen peninsula and the most northern coast (Leka Municipality) is dominated by higher mountains and narrower valleys.\nNorthern fjords.\nThe land further north in Northern Norway (corresponding to Nordland, Troms, and northwestern Finnmark) is again dominated by steep mountains going all the way to the coast and by numerous fjords. The fjords and valleys generally lie in a west\u2013east direction in the southern part of this area, and a more northwest\u2013southeast direction further north. The Saltfjellet mountain range is an exception, as the valley runs in a more north\u2013south direction from these mountains. This long, narrow area includes many large islands, such as Lofoten, Vester\u00e5len, and Senja.\nFar northeast.\nThe interior and the coast east of Nordkapp (corresponding to Finnmarksvidda and eastern Finnmark) is less dominated by mountains, and is mostly below . The interior is dominated by the large Finnmarksvidda plateau. There are large, wide fjords running in a north\u2013south direction. This coast lacks the small islands, or skerries, typical of the Norwegian coast. Furthest to the east, the Varangerfjord runs in an east\u2013west direction and is the only large fjord in the country whose mouth is to the east.\nArctic islands.\nSvalbard.\nFurther north, in the Arctic Ocean, lies the Svalbard archipelago, which is also dominated by mountains that are mostly covered by large glaciers, especially in the eastern part of the archipelago, where glaciers cover more than 90%, with one glacier, Austfonna, being the largest in Europe. Unlike on the mainland, these glaciers calve directly into the open ocean.\nJan Mayen.\nTo the far northwest, halfway towards Greenland, is Jan Mayen island, where the only active volcano in Norway, Beerenberg, is found.\nAntarctic islands and claim to Antarctica.\nNorway has several territorial claims in Antarctica and on its islands. Bouvet Island is located in the South Atlantic Ocean at 54\u00b0S and mostly covered by glaciers, this island is one of the most remote in the world, inhabited only by seals and birds. Peter I Island is located in the South Pacific Ocean at 69\u00b0S and 90\u00b0W, this island is dominated by glaciers and a volcano. As with Bouvet Island, this island is regarded as an external dependency, and not part of the kingdom. Queen Maud Land is Norway's continental claim in Antarctica. The large, sectorial area stretches to the South Pole and is completely dominated by the world's largest ice sheet and with some nunataks (bare rock) penetrating above the ice. The Troll Research Station is operated by the Norwegian Polar Institute and is located on a snow-free mountain slope, the only station in Antarctica not to be located on the ice.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Norway is relatively temperate. This is mainly due to the North Atlantic Current with its extension, the Norwegian Current, raising the air temperature; the prevailing southwesterlies bringing mild air onshore; and the general southwest\u2013northeast orientation of the coast, which allows the westerlies to penetrate into the Arctic. \nPrecipitation.\nNorway is among Europe's wettest countries, but with large variation in precipitation amount due to the terrain with mountain chains resulting in orographic precipitation but also creating rain shadows. In some regions, locations with vastly different precipitation amounts can be fairly close. Precipitation is heaviest in late autumn and winter along the coast, while April to June is the driest. The innermost parts of the long fjords are somewhat drier. The regions east of the mountain chain (including Oslo) have a more continental climate with generally less precipitation, and precipitation peaks in summer and early autumn, while winter and spring tend to be driest. A large area in the interior of Finnmark receive less than of precipitation annually. Some valleys surrounded by mountains get very scarce precipitation, and often need irrigation in summer.\nTemperature.\nThe coast experiences milder winters than other areas at the same latitudes. The average temperature difference between the coldest month and the warmest is only in coastal areas. The differences of inland areas are larger, with a maximum difference of in Karasjok.\nB\u00f8 Municipality is the most northerly location in the world where all winter months have mean temperatures above . Temperature differences between the north and south are greatest in the spring; this is also the time of year when daytime and nighttime temperatures differ the most. Inland valleys and the innermost fjord areas have less wind and see the warmest summer days. Inland areas reach their peak warmth around mid-July and coastal areas by the first half of August. Humidity is usually low in summer.\nThe North Atlantic Current splits in two over the northern part of the Norwegian Sea, one branch going east into the Barents Sea and the other going north along the west coast of Spitsbergen. This modifies the Arctic polar climate somewhat and results in open water throughout the year at higher latitudes than any other place in the Arctic. On the eastern coast of the Svalbard archipelago, the sea used to be frozen during most of the year, but warming has led to open waters lasting noticeably longer. Atlantic lows bringing mild winds in winter further warmed by foehn can give warm temperatures in narrow fjords in winter, Compared to coastal areas, inland valleys and the innermost fjord areas have larger diurnal temperature variations, especially in spring and summer.\nAll populated areas of the Norwegian mainland have temperate or subarctic climates (K\u00f6ppen groups \"C\" and \"D\"). Svalbard and Jan Mayen have a polar climate (K\u00f6ppen group \"E\"). As a consequence of warming since 1990, summers are warmer and longer and winters are getting shorter and milder. With the new official 1991-2020 climate normal, many areas have seen their climate change to a new climate zone compared to 1961-90 normal. Snow cover has also decreased in most populated areas due to winter warming. The strongest warming has been observed on Svalbard. In addition to warming, precipitation has increased in most areas, especially in winter, increasing erosion and the risk of landslides.\nHazards and natural disasters.\nEuropean windstorms with hurricane-strength winds along the coast and in the mountains are not uncommon. Avalanches on steep slopes, especially in the northern part of the country and in mountain areas. Landslides have been fatal, mostly in areas with soil rich in marine clay, as in lowland areas near Trondheimsfjord. Tsunamis have killed people; usually caused by parts of mountains (rockslide) falling into fjords or lakes. This happened 1905 in Loen in Stryn Municipality when parts of Ramnefjell fell into Loenvatnet lake, causing a tsunami which killed 61 people. It happened again in the same place in 1936, this time with 73 victims. 40 people were killed in Tafjord in Norddal Municipality in 1934.\nFauna.\nDue to the large latitudinal range of the country and its varied topography and climate, Norway has a higher number of habitats than almost any other European country. There are approximately 60,000 species of plant and animal life in Norway and adjacent waters. The Norwegian Shelf large marine ecosystem is considered highly productive. The total number of species include 16,000 species of insects (probably 4,000 more species yet to be described), 20,000 species of algae, 1,800 species of lichen, 1,050 species of mosses, 2,800 species of vascular plants, up to 7,000 species of fungi, 450 species of birds (250 species nesting in Norway), 90 species of mammals, 45 species of freshwater fish, 150 species of saltwater fish, 1,000 species of freshwater invertebrates and 3,500 species of saltwater invertebrates. About 40,000 of these species have been scientifically described. In the summer of 2010, scientific exploration in Finnmark discovered 126 species of insects new to Norway, of which 54 species were new to science.\nThe 2006 IUCN Red List names 3,886 Norwegian species as endangered, 17 of which, such as the European beaver, are listed because they are endangered globally, even if the population in Norway is not seen as endangered. There are 430 species of fungi on the red list, many of these are closely associated with the small remaining areas of old-growth forests. There are also 90 species of birds on the list and 25 species of mammals. As of 2006, 1,988 current species are listed as endangered or vulnerable, of which 939 are listed as vulnerable, 734 as endangered, and 285 as critically endangered in Norway, among them the gray wolf, the Arctic fox (healthy population on Svalbard), and the pool frog.\nThe largest predator in Norwegian waters is the sperm whale, and the largest fish is the basking shark. The largest predator on land is the polar bear, while the brown bear is the largest predator on the Norwegian mainland, where the common moose is the largest animal.\nFlora.\nNatural vegetation in Norway varies considerably, as can be expected in a country with such variation in latitude. There are generally fewer species of trees in Norway than in areas in western North America with a similar climate. This is because European north\u2013south migration routes after the ice age are more difficult, with bodies of water (such as the Baltic Sea and the North Sea) and mountains creating barriers, while in America land is contiguous and the mountains follow a north\u2013south direction. Recent research using DNA-studies of spruce and pine and lake sediments have proven that Norwegian conifers survived the ice age in ice-free refuges to the north as far as And\u00f8ya. \nMany imported plants have been able to bear seed and spread. Less than half of the 2,630 plant species in modern Norway are native species. About 210 species of plants growing in Norway are listed as endangered, 13 of which are endemic. The national parks in Norway are mostly located in mountain areas; about 2% of the productive forests in the country are protected.\nSome plants, such as holly and bell heather, are classified as western due to their need for high humidity or low tolerance of winter frost; these will stay close to the southwestern coast, with their northern limit near \u00c5lesund. Plants classified as eastern need comparatively more summer sunshine, with less humidity, but can tolerate cold winters. These will often occur in the southeast and inland areas: examples being \"Daphne mezereum\", \"Fragaria viridis\", and spiked speedwell. Some eastern species common to Siberia grow in the river valleys of eastern Finnmark. There are species which seem to thrive in between these extremes, such as the southern plants, where both winter and summer climate is important (such as pedunculate oak, European ash, and dog's mercury). Other plants depend on the type of bedrock.\nMild temperatures along the coast allow for some hardy species of palm grow as far north as Sunnm\u00f8re. One of the largest remaining Linden forests in Europe grows at Flostranda, in Stryn Municipality. Planted deciduous trees, such as horse chestnut and beech, thrive north of the Arctic Circle (as at Steigen Municipality).\nThere is a considerable number of alpine species in the mountains of Norway. These species cannot tolerate summers that are comparatively long and warm, nor are they able to compete with plants adapted to a longer and warmer growing season. Many alpine plants are common in the North Boreal zone and some in the Middle Boreal zone, but their main area of distribution is on the alpine tundra in the Scandinavian Mountains and on the Arctic tundra. Many of the hardiest species have adapted by ripening seeds over more than one summer. Examples of alpine species are glacier buttercup, \"Draba lactea\", and \"Salix herbacea\". A well-known anomaly is the 30 American alpine species, which in Europe only grow in two mountainous parts of Norway: the Dovre\u2013Trollheimen and Jotunheim mountains in the south; and the Saltdal Municipality, to western Finnmark, in the north. Other than in Norway, these species\u2014such as \"Braya linearis\" and \"Carex scirpoidea\"\u2014grow only in Canada and Greenland. It is unknown whether these survived the ice age on some mountain peak penetrating the ice, or spread from further south in Europe, or why did they not spread to other mountainous regions of Europe. Some alpine species have a wider distribution and grow in Siberia, such as \"Rhododendron lapponicum\" (Lapland rosebay). Other alpine species are common to the whole Arctic and some grow only in Europe, such as globe-flower.\nNemoral.\nA small area along the southern coast\u2014from Soknedal Municipality in southern Rogaland and east to Fevik in Agder county (including Kristiansand)\u2014belongs to the Nemoral vegetation zone. This zone is located below above sea level and at most inland along the valleys. This is the predominant vegetation zone in Europe north of southern France, the Alps, the Carpathians, and the Caucasus. The hallmark of this zone in Norway is the predominance of oak and the virtually complete lack of typical boreal species such as Norway spruce and grey alder, although a lowland variant of pine occurs. Nemoral covers a total of 0.5% of the land area (excluding Svalbard and Jan Mayen).\nHemiboreal (Boreonemoral).\nThe hemiboreal zone covers a total of 7% of the land area in Norway, including 80% of \u00d8stfold and Vestfold. This vegetation represents a mix of nemoral and boreal plant species, and belongs to the Palearctic, Sarmatic mixed forests terrestrial ecoregion (PA0436). The nemoral species tend to predominate on slopes facing southwest and with good soil, while the boreal species predominate on slopes facing north and with waterlogged soil. In some areas, other factors overrule this, such as where the bedrock gives little nutrient, where oak and the boreal pine often share predominance. The boreonemoral zone follows the coast from Oslofjord north to \u00c5lesund, becoming discontinuous north of Sunnm\u00f8re. In Oslo, this zone reaches to an elevation of above sea level. It also reaches into some of the lower valleys and just reaches the lowland around Mj\u00f8sa, but not as far north as Lillehammer. In the valleys of the south, this vegetation might exist up to above sea level. The zone follows the lowland of the west coast and into the largest fjords, reaching an elevation of there, even to in some sheltered fjords and valleys in Nordm\u00f8re, with nutrient-rich soil. The northernmost locations in the world are several areas along the Trondheimsfjord, such as Frosta Municipality, with the northernmost location being Byahalla, in Steinkjer Municipality. Some nemoral species in this zone are English oak, sessile oak, European ash, elm, Norway maple, hazel, black alder, lime, yew, holly (southwest coast), wild cherry, ramsons, beech (a late arrival only common in Vestfold), and primrose. Typical boreal species are Norway spruce, pine, downy birch, grey alder, aspen, rowan, wood anemone, and \"Viola riviniana\".\nBoreal.\nBoreal species are adapted to a long and cold winter, and most of these species can tolerate colder winter temperatures than winters in most of Norway. Thus they are distinguished by their need for growing season length and summer warmth. Bogs are common in the boreal zone, with the largest areas in the North and Middle Boreal Zones, as well as in the area just above the tree line. The large boreal zone is usually divided into three subzones: South Boreal, Middle Boreal, and North Boreal.\nThe boreal zones in Norway belong to three ecoregions. The area dominated by spruce forests (some birch, pine, willow, aspen) mostly belong to the Scandinavian and Russian taiga ecoregion (PA0608). The Scandinavian coastal conifer forests ecoregion (PA0520) in coastal areas with mild winters and frequent rainfall follows the coast from south of Stavanger north to southern Troms and includes both hemiboreal and boreal areas. Bordering the latter region is the Scandinavian Montane Birch forest and grasslands ecoregion (PA1110). This region seems to include both mountain areas with alpine tundra and lowland forests, essentially all the area outside the natural range of Norway spruce forests. This ecoregion thus shows a very large range of climatic and environmental conditions, from the temperate forest along the fjords of Western Norway to the summit of Galdh\u00f8piggen, and northeast to the Varanger Peninsula. The area above the conifer treeline is made up of mountain birch \"Betula pubescens-czerepanovii\" (\"fjellbj\u00f8rkeskog\"). The Scots pine reaches its altitudinal limit about lower than the mountain birch.\nSouth Boreal.\nThe South Boreal zone (SB) is dominated by boreal species, especially Norway spruce, and covers a total of 12% of the total land area. The SB is the only boreal zone with a few scattered\u2014but well-developed\u2014warmth-demanding broadleaf deciduous trees, such as European ash and oak. Several species in this zone need fairly warm summers (SB has 3\u20134 months with a mean 24-hr temperature of at least ), and thus are very rare in the middle boreal zone. Some of the species not found further north are black alder, hop, oregano, and guelder rose. This zone is found above the hemiboreal zone, up to amsl in \u00d8stlandet and in the most southern valleys. In the eastern valleys it reaches several hundred kilometers into Gudbrandsdal and \u00d8sterdal, and up to Lom Municipality and Skj\u00e5k Municipality, in Ottadalen. Along the southwestern coast, the zone reaches an elevation of at the head of large fjords (such as in L\u00e6rdal), and about nearer to the coast. Norway spruce is lacking in Vestlandet (Voss Municipality is an exception). North of \u00c5lesund, SB vegetation predominates in the lowland down to sea level, including islands such as Hitra. Most of the lowland in Tr\u00f8ndelag below elevation is SB, up to above sea level in inland valleys such as Gauldalen and Verdalen, and up to in Namdalen. The coastal areas and some fjord areas further north\u2014such as N\u00e6r\u00f8ysund Municipality and Br\u00f8nn\u00f8y Municipality, and the best locations along the Helgeland coast\u2014is SB north to the mouth of Ranfjord, while inland areas north of Grong Municipality are dominated by Middle Boreal zone vegetation in the lowland. There are small isolated areas with SB vegetation further north, as in Bod\u00f8 Municipality and Fauske Municipality, the most northern location being a narrow strip along the northern shore of Ofotfjord; and the endemic Nordland-whitebeam only grows in Bindal Municipality. Agriculture in Norway, including grain cultivation, takes place mostly in the hemiboreal and SB zones.\nMiddle Boreal.\nThe typical closed-canopy forest of the Middle Boreal (MB) zone is dominated by boreal plant species. The MB vegetation covers a total of 20% of the total land area. Norway spruce is the dominant tree in large areas in the interior of \u00d8stlandet, S\u00f8rlandet, Tr\u00f8ndelag, and Helgeland and the MB and SB spruce forests are the commercially most important in Norway. Spruce does not grow naturally north of Saltfjell in mid-Nordland (the Siberian spruce variant occurs in the Pasvik valley), due to mountain ranges blocking their advance, but is often planted in MB areas further north for economic reasons, contributing to a different landscape. Birch is usually dominant in these northern areas; but pine, aspen, rowan, bird cherry and grey alder are also common. This MB birch is often a cross between silver birch and downy birch and is taller () than the birch growing near the tree line. Conifers will grow taller. Some alpine plants grow in the MB zone; nemoral species are rare. The understory (undergrowth) is usually well developed if the forest is not too dense. Many plants do not grow further north: grey alder, silver birch, yellow bedstraw, raspberry, mugwort, and \"Myrica gale\" are examples of species in this zone that do not grow further north or higher up. MB is located at an altitude of in \u00d8stlandet, up to in the southern valleys, ( at the head of the long fjords) on the southwest coast, and in Tr\u00f8ndelag ( in the interior, as at R\u00f8ros and Oppdal Municipality). Further north, MB is common in the lowland: up to above sea level in Lofoten and Vester\u00e5len, at Narvik, at Troms\u00f8, in inland valleys in Troms, and the lowland at the head of Altafjord is the most northerly area of any size\u2014small pockets exist at Porsanger Municipality and S\u00f8r-Varanger Municipality. This is usually the most northerly area with some farming activity, and barley was traditionally grown even as far north as Alta Municipality.\nNorth Boreal.\nThe North Boreal (NB) zone, (also known as open or sparse taiga) is the zone closest to the tree line, bordering the alpine or polar area, and dominated by a harsh subarctic climate. There are at least 30 summer days with a mean temperature of or more, up to about two months. The trees grow very slowly and generally do not get very large. The forest is not as dense as further south or at lower altitudes and is known as the mountain forest (\"Fjellskog\"). The NB zone covers a total of 28% of the total land area of Norway, including almost half of Finnmark, where the mountain birch grows down to sea level. The lower part of this zone also has conifers, but the tree line in Norway is mostly formed by mountain birch, a subspecies of downy birch (subspecies \"czerepanovii\"), which is not to be confused with dwarf birch). Spruce and pine make up the tree line in some mountain areas with a more continental climate. Alpine plants are common in this zone. The birch forest above sea level at Sikilsdalshorn is the highest tree line in Norway, while a birch at 1,404 m ASL in Veodal, Jotunheimen, is the highest growing single tree. The tree line is lower closer to the coast and in areas with lower mountains, due to cooler summers, more wind near mountain summits, and more snow in the winter (coastal mountains) leading to later snowmelt. The NB zone covers large areas at altitude in the interior of \u00d8stlandet; is in the central mountain areas; but at the western coast the tree line is down to about above sea level, increasing significantly in the long fjords ( at the head of Sognefjord). Further north, large areas in the interior highlands or uplands of Tr\u00f8ndelag and North Norway are dominated by the NB zone, with the tree line at about amsl in the interior of Tr\u00f8ndelag, in Rana Municipality, at Narvik, at Troms\u00f8, at Kirkenes and at Hammerfest (only pockets in sheltered areas). The large Finnmarksvidda plateau is at an altitude placing it almost exactly at the tree line. The last patch of NB zone gives way to tundra at sea level about south of the North Cape plateau (near Skarsv\u00e5g). Areas south of this line are tundra-like with scattered patches of mountain birch woodland (forest-tundra) and become alpine tundra even at minor elevations. The trees near the tree line are often bent by snow, wind, and growing-season frost; and their height is only . Outside Norway (and adjacent areas in Sweden), the only other areas in the world with the tree line mostly made up by a small-leaved deciduous tree such as birch\u2014in contrast to conifers\u2014are Iceland and the Kamtschatka peninsula.\nThe presence of a conifer tree line is sometimes used (\"Barskoggrense\") to divide this zone into two subzones, as the conifers will usually not grow as high up as the mountain birch. Spruce and pine grow at nearly above sea level in some areas of Jotunheimen, down to in Bergen ( at the head of Sognefjord), at Lillehammer (mountains near Oslo are too low to have a tree line), at Trondheim ( at Oppdal), at Narvik, at Harstad, at Alta; and the most northerly pine forest in the world is in Stabbursdalen National Park in Porsanger Municipality. There are some forests in this part of the NB zone; and some conifers can grow quite large even if growth is slow.\nTundra.\nAlpine tundra is common in Norway, covering a total of 32% of the land area (excluding Svalbard and Jan Mayen) and belonging to the Scandinavian Montane Birch forest and grasslands ecoregion (PA1110). The area closest to the tree line (low alpine) has continuous plant cover, with willow species such as \"Salix glauca\", \"S. lanata\", and \"S. lapponum\" ( tall); blueberry, common juniper, and twinflower are also common. The low alpine area was traditionally used as summer pasture, and in part still is. This zone reaches an elevation of in Jotunheimen, including most of Hardangervidda; in eastern Trollheimen; and about at Narvik and the Lyngen Alps. Higher up (mid-alpine tundra) the plants become smaller; mosses and lichens are more predominant; and plants still cover most of the ground, even if snowfields lasting into mid-summer and permafrost are common. At the highest elevations (high-alpine tundra) the ground is dominated by bare rock, snow, and glaciers, with few plants.\nThe highest weather station in Norway\u2014Fanar\u00e5ken in Luster Municipality, at \u2014has barely three months of above freezing temperatures and a July average of . Still, glacier buttercup has been found only below the summit of Galdh\u00f8piggen, and mosses and lichens have been found at the summit.\nIn northeastern Finnmark (northern half of the Varanger Peninsula and the Nordkinn Peninsula) is a small lowland tundra area which is often considered part of the Kola Peninsula tundra ecoregion (PA1106). Svalbard and Jan Mayen have tundra vegetation except for areas covered by glaciers; and some areas, such as the cliffs at southern Bear Island, are fertilized by seabird colonies. This tundra is often considered part of the Arctic Desert ecoregion (PA1101). The lushest areas on these Arctic islands are sheltered fjord areas at Spitsbergen; they have the highest summer temperatures and the very dry climate makes for little snow and thus comparatively early snowmelt. The short growing season and the permafrost underneath the active layer provide enough moisture. Plants include dwarf birch, cloudberry, Svalbard poppy, and harebell.\nA warmer climate would push the vegetation zones significantly northwards and to higher elevations.\nNatural resources.\nIn addition to oil and natural gas, hydroelectric power, and fish and forest resources, Norway has reserves of ferric and nonferric metal ores. Many of these have been exploited in the past but whose mines are now idle because of low-grade purity and high operating costs. Europe's largest titanium deposits are near the southwest coast. Coal is mined in the Svalbard islands.\nNorway's resources include petroleum, copper, natural gas, pyrites, nickel, iron ore, zinc, lead, fish, lumber, and hydropower.\nLand use.\nOnly 3.5% of Norway's land is considered arable land. 0% of it used for permanent crops and permanent pastures. A 1993 estimate assessed Norway's irrigated land at about . 38% of land area is covered by forests; 21% by conifer forest, and 17% by deciduous forest. The remaining land is made of mountains and heaths (46%), bogs and wetlands (6.3%), lakes and rivers (5.3%), and urban areas (1.1%). Over time, wilderness areas have decreased due to human intervention. In 2008, Environment Norway () referred changing land use as one of the most important factors for endangered species and declining biodiversity.\nEnvironmental concerns.\nEnvironmental concerns in Norway include how to cut greenhouse gas emissions, pollution of the air and water, loss of habitat, damage to cold-water coral reefs from trawlers, and salmon fish farming threatening the wild salmon by spawning in the rivers, thereby diluting the fish DNA. Acid rain has damaged lakes, rivers and forests, especially in the southernmost part of the country, and most wild salmon populations in S\u00f8rlandet have died. Due to lower emissions in Europe, acid rain in Norway has decreased by 40% from 1980 to 2003. Another concern is a possible increase in extreme weather. In the future, climate models predict increased precipitation, especially in the areas with currently high precipitation, and also predict more episodes with heavy precipitation within a short period, which can cause landslides and local floods. Winters will probably be significant milder, and the sea-ice cover in the Arctic Ocean might melt altogether in summer, threatening the survival of the polar bear on Svalbard. Both terrestrial and aquatic species are expected to shift northwards, and this is already observed for some species; the growing red deer population is spreading northwards and eastwards, with 2008 being the first hunting season which saw more red deer (35,700) than moose shot. Migratory birds are arriving earlier; trees are coming into leaf earlier; mackerel are becoming common in summer off the coast of Troms. The total number of species in Norway are expected to rise due to new species arriving. Norwegians are statistically among the most worried when it comes to global warming and its effects, even if Norway is among the countries expected to be least negatively affected by global warming, with some possible gains.\nInternational agreements.\nNorway is a party to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57613", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57613", "title": "Demographics of Norway", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographic features of the population of Norway, including Jan Mayen, and Svalbard, where the hospital is not equipped for births, and no burials are allowed because of permafrost, include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects.\nThe population of Norway rose to over 5.6 million during 2025.\nHistorical populations.\nFrom 1349 to 1500 the population was approximately halved by several rounds of the black plague, down to approximately 250,000.\nThe first official census for the then Denmark-Norway kingdom union was held in 1769 and found the Norwegian population to be 723 000.\nExcept for Ireland, no other country contributed a larger percentage of its population to the American immigration between 1825 - 1925 when more than 800,000 left Norway.\nBy 1905, when Norway reached full independence, the population was 2,303,595.\nPopulation.\nThe total population of Norway at the end of 2024 was 5,594,340. Statistics Norway estimated that the 5,000,000 milestone was reached on 19 March 2012.\nThe following demographic statistics are from the World Population Review.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nFertility.\nThe total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World In Data and Gapminder Foundation.\n1.85 children born/woman (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 143rd\n28.9 years\n12.2 births/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 160th\nLife expectancy.\nSources: Our World In Data and the United Nations.\n1843\u20131950\n1950\u20132015\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\ntotal population: 82 years. Country comparison to the world: 22nd\nmale: 79.9 years\nfemale: 84.1 years (2018 est.)\n8 deaths/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 90th\n\"0\u201314 years:\" 18.1% (male 495,403 /female 471,014) (2018 est.)\n\"15\u201324 years:\" 12.3% (male 340,672 /female 324,088)\n\"25\u201354 years:\" 41.0% (male 1,136,373 /female 1,065,138)\n\"55\u201364 years:\" 11.7% (male 318,898 /female 310,668)\n\"65 years and over:\" 16.9% (male 420,178 /female 489,759)\ntotal: 39.3 years. Country comparison to the world: 55th\nmale: 38.6 years\nfemale: 40 years (2018 est.)\nurban population: 82.2% of total population (2018)\nrate of urbanization: 1.4% annual rate of change (2015\u201320 est.)\nPopulation density.\nNote: data include Svalbard and Jan Mayen Islands\nVital statistics.\nData according to Statistics Norway, which collects the official statistics for Norway.\nNotable events in Norwegian demographics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 19.XI.2011) (Including residents temporarily outside the country. Population statistics are compiled from registers.): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.I.2021) (Data refer to usual resident population.): \nEthnicity.\nStatistics Norway does not attempt to quantify or track data on ethnicity. The national population registry records only country of birth.\nAs of 2012, an official government study shows that 81.0% of the total population were ethnic Norwegians (born in Norway with two parents also born in Norway).\nEthnically, the residents of Norway are predominantly Norwegians, a North Germanic ethnic group. In Northern Norway there is a population of S\u00e1mi people, who descend from people who probably settled the area a couple thousand years ago. The people who spoke the proto-S\u00e1mi language probably migrated from the Volga region in modern-day Russia in Eastern Europe through Finland, finally arriving in the northern portion of the Scandinavian peninsula where they would assimilate local Paleo-European hunter-gatherers who were already living in the region. The indigenous peoples and minorities of Norway include: S\u00e1mi, Scandinavian Romani, Roma, Jews, and Kvener, as well as a small Finnish community.\nImmigration.\nNet migration of Norway, 1999-present.\nIn the last decades, Norway has become home to increasing numbers of immigrants, foreign workers, and asylum-seekers from various parts of the world. Norway had a steady influx of immigrants from South Asia (mostly Pakistanis and Sri Lankans), East Asia (mainly Chinese), Pacific Islands and Southeast Asia (e.g. Filipinos), Eastern Europe (e.g. Russians) and Central Europe (e.g. Poles), Southern Europe (Greeks, Albanians and people from former Yugoslavia, Bosniaks, Serbs etc.), and Middle East countries (especially Kurdish Iraqis and Kurdish Iranians), as well as Somalis, Turks, Moroccans, and some Latin Americans. After ten Eastern European and Baltic countries joined the EU in 2004, there has also been a substantial influx of people from Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.\nAt the start of 2022, there were 819,356 immigrants and 205,819 Norwegian-born to immigrant parents in Norway, together constituting 18.9% of the total population. The same year, immigrants (and Norwegian born to immigrant parents) originating in the European Economic Area constituted 7.1% of the total number of Norwegian residents, while 6.3% were from Asia including Turkey and 2.7% were from Africa.\nAmong people of African descent in Oslo, almost 60% are younger than 30, compared to 20% of those of North American background.\nAs of 2022, there are around 207,575 third generation immigrants in Norway. This means that at least one of their grandparents were born in a foreign country. The majority of these persons are of Western European and Northern European background with Sweden and Denmark accounting for 36,126 (17.4%) and 33,695 (16.2%) respectively. Other countries with significant third generation communities are the United States with 29,395 (14.1%), the United Kingdom with 17,882 (8.6%), Germany with 14,090 (6.8%), Finland with 6,213 (3%) and South Korea with 5,199 (2,5%).\nOf these 1,025,175 immigrants and their descendants (born in Norway with two foreign born parents):\nIn 2012, of the total 660 000 with immigrant background, 407,262 had Norwegian citizenship (62.2 percent).\nImmigrants were represented in all Norwegian municipalities.\nThe cities or municipalities with the highest share of immigrants in 2012 was Oslo (26 percent) and Drammen (18 percent). The share in Stavanger was 16%. According to Reuters, Oslo is the \"fastest growing city in Europe because of increased immigration\". In recent years, immigration has accounted for most of Norway's population growth.\ntotal: 10.4%. Country comparison to the world: 125th\nmale: 11.7%\nfemale: 9% (2017 est.)\nReligion.\nThe Lutheran Church of Norway is the former state church and the vast majority remain at least nominal members. Other religions do, however, enjoy religious freedom and have prospered with immigration in recent years, particularly Islam and Roman Catholicism. Saint Olaf is the patron saint of Norway. He is regarded by some as the eternal king and has a reputation and place in history unchallenged by any other Norwegian King for the last 1000 years.\nLanguages.\nNorwegian (the written standards Bokm\u00e5l and Nynorsk). &lt;br&gt;Uralic languages \u2013 South S\u00e1mi, Lule S\u00e1mi, North S\u00e1mi and Kven \u2013 are additional official languages of some municipalities.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57614", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57614", "title": "Politics of Norway", "text": "The politics of Norway take place in the framework of a parliamentary, representative democratic constitutional monarchy. Executive power is exercised by the Council of State, the cabinet, led by the Prime Minister of Norway. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the legislature, the Storting, elected within a multi-party system. The judiciary is independent of the executive branch and the legislature.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Norway a \"full democracy\" in . According to the V-Dem Democracy indices Norway was 2023 the second most electoral democratic country in the world. Reporters Without Borders ranked Norway 1st in the world in the 2024 Press Freedom Index. Freedom House's 2020 Freedom in the World report classified Norway as \"free\", scoring maximum points in the categories of \"political rights\" and \"civil liberties\".\nConstitutional development.\nThe Norwegian constitution, signed by the Eidsvoll assembly on 17 May 1814, transformed Norway from being an absolute monarchy into a constitutional monarchy. The 1814 constitution granted rights such as freedom of speech (\u00a7100) and rule of law (\u00a7\u00a7\u00a096, 97, 99). Important amendments include:\nExecutive branch.\nNorway is a constitutional monarchy, where the king has a mainly symbolic power. The royal house is a branch of the princely family of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Gl\u00fccksburg, and the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha in Germany. The functions of the king, Harald V, are mainly ceremonial, but he has influence as the symbol of national unity. Although the constitution of 1814 grants important executive powers to the king, these are always exercised by the Council of State in the name of the king (King's Council, or cabinet). The king is also High Protector of the Church of Norway (the state church), Grand Master of the Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav, and symbolically Supreme Commander of the Norwegian armed forces.\nThe Council of State is formally convened by the reigning monarch. The Council of State consists of the prime minister and his or her council, formally appointed by the king. Parliamentarism has evolved since 1884 and entails that the cabinet must not have the parliament against it, and that the appointment by the king is a formality. The council must have the confidence of the Norwegian legislative body, known as the Storting. In practice, the monarch will ask the leader of a parliamentary block that has a majority in the Storting to form a government. After elections resulting in no clear majority to any party or coalition, the leader of the party most likely to be able to form a government is appointed prime minister. Since World War II, most non-socialist governments have been coalitions, and Labour Party governments have often relied on the support of other parties to retain the necessary parliamentary votes.\nThe executive branch is divided into the following ministries:\nGovernments 1935\u20131981.\nThe Labour Party has been the largest party in Parliament ever since the election of 1927 up to the recent 2017 election. Labour formed their first brief minority government in 1928 which lasted for 18 days only. After the 1936 election the Labour Party formed a new minority government, which had to go into exile 1940\u20131945 because of the German occupation of Norway. After a brief trans-party government following the German capitulation in 1945, Labour gained a majority of the seats in parliament in the first post-war election of 1945.\nNorway was ruled by Labour governments from 1945 to 1981, except for three periods (1963, 1965\u20131971, and 1972\u20131973). The Labour Party had a single party majority in the Storting from 1945 to 1961. Since then no party has single-handedly formed a majority government, hence minority and coalition governments have been the rule. After the centre-right Willoch government lost its parliamentary majority in the election of 1985, there were no majority governments in Norway until the second Stoltenberg government was formed after the 2005 election.\nGovernments 1981\u20132005.\nFrom 1981 to 1997, governments alternated between minority Labour governments and Conservative-led centre-right governments. The centre-right governments gained power in three out of four elections during this period (1981, 1985, 1989), whereas Labour toppled those governments twice between elections (1986, 1990) and stayed in power after one election (1993). Elections take place in September and governments change in October of election years.\nConservative leader K\u00e5re Willoch formed a minority government after the election of 1981. In 1983, midway between elections, this government was expanded to a majority three-party coalition of the Conservatives, the Centre Party and the Christian Democrats. In the election of 1985 the coalition lost its majority but stayed in office until 1986, when it stepped down after losing a parliamentary vote on petrol taxes.\nLabour leader Gro Harlem Brundtland served three periods as Prime Minister. First briefly from February 1981 until the election the same year, then from May 1986 to the election of 1989, and last from November 1990 until October 1996 when she decided to step out of domestic politics. Brundtland strongly influenced Norwegian politics and society during this period and was nicknamed the \"national mother\".\nAfter the election of 1989 a centre-right coalition was formed with the same three parties as in 1983\u20131986, this time headed by Conservative leader Jan P. Syse. This coalition governed from 1989 to November 1990 when it collapsed from inside over the issue of Norwegian membership in the European Economic Area.\nWhen Brundtland resigned in 1996, Labour leader Thorbj\u00f8rn Jagland formed a new Labour government that stayed in office until October 1997 when he, after the September 1997 election, declared that his government would step down because the Labour Party failed to win at least 36.9% of the national vote \u2013 the percentage Labour had won in the 1993 election.\nA three-party minority coalition of the Centre, Christian Democratic, and Liberal parties, headed by Christian Democrat Prime Minister Kjell Magne Bondevik, moved into office in October 1997. That government fell in March 2000 over the issue of proposed natural gas plants, opposed by Bondevik due to their impact on climate change.\nThe Labour Party's Jens Stoltenberg, a Brundtland prot\u00e9g\u00e9, took over in a minority Labour government but lost power in the September 2001 election when Labour posted its worst performance since World War I.\nBondevik once again became Prime Minister in 2001, this time as head of a minority coalition of the Conservatives, Christian Democrats and Liberals, a coalition dependent on support from the Progress Party. This coalition government was the first to stay in office for a complete four-year election period since Per Borten's coalition government of 1965\u20131969.\nCabinet 2005\u20132013.\nA coalition between the Labour Party, Socialist Left Party, and Centre Party, took over from 17 October 2005[ [update]] after the 2005 general election, where this coalition obtained a majority of 87 out of 169 seats in the Storting. Jens Stoltenberg became Prime Minister and formed a cabinet known as Stoltenberg's Second Cabinet.\nThis was a historical coalition in several aspects. It was the first time the Socialist Left sat in cabinet, the first time the Labour Party sat in a coalition government since the 1945 four-month post-war trans-party government (otherwise in government alone), and the first time the Centre Party sat in government along with socialist parties (otherwise in coalition with conservative and other centre parties).\nIn the 2009 general election the coalition parties kept the majority in the Storting by winning 86 out of 169 seats. Stoltenberg's second cabinet thus continued. There have been several reshuffles in the cabinet during its existence.\nCabinet 2013\u20132021.\nIn the 2013 election, the incumbent red\u2013green coalition government obtained 72 seats and lost its majority. The election ended with a victory for the four opposition non-socialist parties, winning a total of 96 seats out of 169 (85 needed for a majority). Following convention, Stoltenberg's government resigned and handed over power in October 2013. The Labour Party, however, remained the largest party in parliament with 30.8% of the popular vote. The Progress Party also lost ground, but nevertheless participates in the new cabinet led by Conservative Prime Minister Erna Solberg. Among the smaller parties, the centrist Liberal Party and Christian Peoples Party hold the balance of power. Both campaigned on a change in government. On 30 September the two smaller parties announced that they would support a minority coalition of the Conservative and Progress parties, but they would not take seats in the cabinet themselves. The new Erna Solberg government was re-elected in 2017. In January 2020, right-wing Progress Party left the government. Prime Minister Erna Solberg continued with a minority government consisting of three coalition partners \u2014 her own Conservatives, the centrist Liberal Party and the Christian Democrats.\nCurrent cabinet.\nIn the 2021 election, the incumbent Solberg cabinet lost its majority. Jonas Gahr St\u00f8re of the Labour Party formed a minority coalition government with the Centre Party. The government relies on the support of the Socialist Left Party in order to secure a majority.\nOn 14 October 2021, Jonas Gahr St\u00f8re, the leader of Norway's center-left Labor Party, was sworn in as new Prime Minister of Norway. His center-left minority government included ten women and nine men.\n\"See also the category and list of Norwegian governments.\"\nLegislative branch.\nNorway has a unicameral parliament, the Storting (\"Great Council\"), with members elected by popular vote for a four-year term (during which it may not be dissolved) by proportional representation in multi-member constituencies. Voting rights are granted in the year a person turns 18.\nThe Storting currently has 169 members (increased from 165, effective from the elections of 12 September 2005). The members are elected from the 19 counties for four-year terms according to a system of proportional representation. Until 2009, the Storting divided itself into two chambers, the \"Odelsting\" and the \"Lagting\" for the sole purpose of voting on legislation. Laws were proposed by the government through a member of the Council of State or by a member of the Odelsting and decided on by the Odelsting and Lagting, in case of repeated disagreement by the joint Storting. In practice, the Lagting rarely disagreed and mainly just rubber-stamped the Odelsting's decision. In February 2007, the Storting passed a constitutional amendment to repeal the division, which abolished the Lagting for the 2009 general election, thereby establishing a fully unicameral system.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nElections are to be held every four years on the second Monday of September.\nJudicial branch.\nThe Norwegian legal system is a mixture of customary law, civil law system, and common law traditions; the Supreme Court renders advisory opinions to legislature when asked; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations.\nThe regular courts include the Supreme Court () with 18 permanent judges and a president, courts of appeal (court of second instance in most cases), city and county courts (court of first instance in most cases), and conciliation councils (court of first instance in most civil-code cases). Judges attached to the regular courts are appointed by the King in council after nomination by the Ministry of Justice.\nThe special High Court of the Realm () hears impeachment cases against members of the government, parliament, or Supreme Court. Following an amendment to the Norwegian constitution in February 2007, impeachment cases are heard by the five highest ranking Supreme Court justices and six lay members in one of the Supreme Court courtrooms The High Court of the Realm had generally lost most of its significance after 1884, and this institution has been passive ever since 1927. The new system is meant to restore the to its earlier significance.\nImpeachment.\nImpeachment may be brought against Members of the Council of State, or of the Supreme Court or of the Storting, for criminal offenses which they may have committed in their official capacity. Indictments are raised by the Storting and judged by five Supreme Court justices and six lay judges.\nAdministrative divisions.\nCivil Servant Recruitment Procedure\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0Public Advertisement of Positions: All civil service positions are required to be advertised publicly, as mandated by the Civil Service Act, Section 4. Exceptions to this requirement are limited and must be legally justified, such as temporary positions lasting up to six months or specific cases outlined in collective agreements.\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0Qualification Principle: Central to the hiring process is the qualification principle, stipulated in Section 3 of the Civil Service Act. This principle mandates that the candidate with the best overall qualifications\u2014considering education, experience, and personal suitability\u2014be selected for the position. The criteria specified in the job posting serve as the basis for evaluating applicants.\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0Transparency and Appeals: The process emphasizes transparency, allowing applicants to access information about other candidates, such as names, ages, and qualifications. While direct appeals against hiring decisions are generally not permitted, applicants who believe procedural errors occurred can bring their concerns to the employer or relevant authorities. Additionally, cases involving potential discrimination can be addressed by the Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombud.\nPublic Workforce Composition\nAccording to the OECD's Government at a Glance report, in 2021, the size of general government employment accounted for 30.92% of Norway's total workforce, the highest proportion among OECD countries. Sweden followed with 29.27%, while Denmark and Finland reported similarly high shares at 28.04% and 25.41%, respectively. In contrast, South Korea and Japan had the lowest levels of general government employment among OECD countries, with government employment comprising only 8.83% and 4.55% of total employment, respectively.\nRegarding gender representation, in 2020, Norway had the third-highest share of women in public sector employment among OECD countries in 2020, with women accounting for 69.99% of the public sector workforce. Sweden ranked the highest at 77.51%, followed by Finland at 72.19%.\nIn Norway, most public sector employees worked within local government as of 2023, with a total of 574,498 employees, while the central government employed 328,959 individuals.\nIn terms of salaries, the central government sector in Norway offered the highest average monthly pay in 2022, with men earning 61,370 Norwegian kroner and women earning approximately 54,620 kroner. In the local government sector, men earned an average of 49,420 kroner, while women earned 46,640 kroner.\nEmployment Benefits\nHoliday Leave: In Norway, the Holiday Act (Ferieloven) ensures that all employees are entitled to holiday leave and holiday pay. Employees can take 25 working days of leave each year, which equals four weeks and one day, as all days except Sundays. To qualify for the full leave, employees must start work by September 30; those starting after October 1 get six days of leave for that year. Holiday pay is based on earnings from the previous year. The standard rate is 10.2% of annual earnings, but it increases to 12% for employees with five weeks of leave (often through agreements) and 12.5% for employees over 60 who get an extra week of leave.\nParental leave: The Norwegian Working Environment Act provides parents with extensive leave rights to support family life. Pregnant employees are entitled to up to twelve weeks of leave during pregnancy, and mothers are required to take six weeks of leave after childbirth unless medically cleared to return to work earlier. Fathers are entitled to two weeks of leave to assist the mother, which may be transferred to another individual helping if the father is unavailable. Parents are jointly entitled to twelve months of leave, with an additional twelve months available to each parent immediately afterward. Single parents may take up to two years of leave. Adoptive and foster parents are granted the same rights, except in cases of stepchild adoption or if the child is over 15 years old.\nThe parental benefit period offers 49 weeks at full compensation (100% of income) or 59 weeks at a reduced rate (80% of income). For adoptive parents, the benefit period is shorter, providing 46 weeks at full compensation or 56 weeks at the reduced rate. To be eligible for parental benefits, individuals must be members of the Norwegian National Insurance Scheme.\nPublic Organizational Structure\nThe Constitution of Norway, established in 1814, defines the country as a monarchy with power divided among three branches: a legislative branch which is also responsible for appropriations, the Storting; an executive branch, the Government; and a judicial branch, the courts of law.\nThe King serves as the head of state, with his role primarily ceremonial and representative. Although the Constitution states that \u201cthe executive power is vested in the King,\u201d this authority is exercised by the Government. The King performs important formal duties, such as officially opening the Storting (Norwegian parliament) each year and presiding over the Council of State at the Royal Palace. He also plays a significant role during government transitions and formally receives the credentials of newly appointed ambassadors during official audiences at the Royal Palace.\nExecutive authority operates within a three-tier administrative framework, comprising the central or national level, the regional or county level, and the local or municipal level.\nCentral government\nThe Central Government of Norway encompasses the Office of the Prime Minister and 16 ministries. It is responsible for national policymaking, drafting legislation (approved by the Storting), and overseeing the implementation of laws and policies through various ministries and agencies.\nResponsibilities of the central government \n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0The National Insurance Scheme.\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0Specialised health services (hospitals).\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0Higher education/universities, labour market, refugees and immigrants.\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0National road network, railways, agricultural issues, environmental issues.\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0Police, courts, prisons, armed forces, foreign policy.\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0Specialised social services.\nLocal government\nLocal democracy is strong in Norway, and local government is well-established. The Alderman Act of 1837 first set out the rights and duties of local authorities. Both municipalities and counties hold elections where representatives are chosen by the people and are responsible to them. Oslo, the capital, is officially a municipality but also performs the responsibilities of a county authority. While municipalities and county authorities share the same administrative status, the central government has overall authority and oversees their administration.\nNorway operates a two-tier local government system, consisting of municipalities and county authorities. As of January 1, 2024, Norway has 15 counties, an increase from 11 in 2023. This change is due to the division of Viken into the counties of Akershus, Buskerud, and \u00d8stfold. Similarly, Vestfold and Telemark have been separated into individual counties, as have Troms and Finnmark. These adjustments reverse the county mergers introduced in 2020. Norway also comprises 357 municipalities.\nThe mainland of Norway is divided into 11 counties (, singular ): Agder, Innlandet, M\u00f8re og Romsdal, Nordland, Oslo, Rogaland, Vestfold og Telemark, Troms og Finnmark, Tr\u00f8ndelag, Vestland, and Viken. This was reduced in 2020 from 18. In addition are the island group Svalbard and the island Jan Mayen.\nCounties and municipalities have local autonomy, but this autonomy is circumscribed by national controls. Counties and municipalities are subject to the oversight of a governor () appointed by the King in the Council of State. One governor exercises authority in both Oslo and the adjacent county of Viken. Each county has a directly elected county assembly, led by a mayor, which decides upon matters falling within purview of the counties (upper secondary and vocational education, some culture, transport and social services). There is also a governor () on Svalbard, who is under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and not the Ministry of Local Government and Regional Development as the other counties.\nResponsibilities of County Authorities \n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 Upper secondary school \u2022 Regional development\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 County roads and public transport\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 Regional planning Business development\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 Culture (museums, libraries, sports)\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 Cultural heritage\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 Environmental issues.\nResponsibilities of Municipalities \n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 Primary and lower secondary school.\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0Nurseries/kindergartens.\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 Primary healthcare.\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 Care for the elderly and disabled, social services.\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 Local planning, agricultural issues, environmental issues, local roads, harbours.\n- \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 Water supply, sanitation and sewer. \n- Culture and business development.\nDependent areas.\nNorway has three dependent areas, all in or near Antarctica: Bouvet Island in the South Atlantic Ocean, Queen Maud Land in Antarctica, and Peter I Island off West Antarctica. The Norwegian Act of 27 February 1930 declares these areas are subject to Norwegian sovereignty as dependencies.\nAn attempt to annex East Greenland ended in defeat at the Hague Tribunal in 1933.\nPublic Participation Mechanisms.\nNorway\u2019s governance system is internationally recognized for its emphasis on public participation, transparency, and inclusivity. These principles are rooted in the country\u2019s democratic tradition, originating with the https://, one of the oldest democratic constitutions in the world. The Constitution not only laid the foundation for participatory democracy but also empowered the Storting (Norwegian parliament) and strengthened electoral systems, ensuring that citizens play a direct role in governance.\nPublic participation in Norway is facilitated through a combination of legal frameworks and structured mechanisms. These ensure that citizens' voices are heard at every level of government, from local municipalities to national policymaking bodies.\nHistorical Context of Public Participation.\nNorway\u2019s transition to a constitutional monarchy in 1814 marked the beginning of its participatory governance system. The 1814 Norwegian Constitution established foundational democratic principles such as the separation of powers, free elections, and civil liberties. Over time, Norway has continuously refined its governance mechanisms to ensure that citizens remain active participants in the democratic process. \nIn 1837, the enactment of the \"\" (Municipalities Act) established local self-governance, granting municipalities significant autonomy and encouraging grassroots public participation. This system allowed municipal councils to address local issues independently, fostering robust local governance. Over time, the role of municipal councils has remained central to public participation, enabling citizens to engage directly with local governance and decision-making processes.\nLegal Frameworks Supporting Public Participation.\nPublic participation in Norway is supported by several key pieces of legislation:\nThe Local Government Act (2018): This act establishes the responsibilities of municipalities and counties to foster citizen engagement. It mandates that local governments provide platforms for public input during planning and decision-making processes. For instance, municipal councils are required to hold public hearings and consult citizens before approving major development projects.\nThe Freedom of Information Act (2009): Transparency is a cornerstone of public trust in Norway\u2019s governance. This act ensures that citizens have access to government documents, promoting transparency and accountability. Allowing citizens to request information, enhances informed participation and supports trust in governmental processes.\nThe Environmental Information Act (2003): This law grants citizens the right to access environmental data from both public and private entities. It has been instrumental in empowering environmental advocacy groups and enabling citizens to participate in discussions on sustainability and climate change.\nThese laws collectively create an environment where citizens can engage with their government in a meaningful way, ensuring that governance is responsive to public needs and concerns. \nMechanisms for Citizen Engagement.\nNorway employs various mechanisms to facilitate public participation. These mechanisms are designed to ensure active citizen engagement in governance, ranging from traditional consultations to innovative digital approaches.\nMunicipal Planning and Local Engagement.\nMunicipalities play a critical role in facilitating public participation in Norway. Citizens are often invited to contribute to local planning processes, particularly in areas such as urban development, education, and transportation. \nFor example, urban renewal projects in cities like Trondheim incorporate extensive public input. Residents are encouraged to provide feedback on proposed designs, ensuring that development plans reflect community priorities.\nCitizen Surveys and Panels.\nThe Norwegian Citizen Panel, managed by the University of Bergen, is a prime example of how technology can enhance public participation. This web-based platform conducts regular surveys to collect data on public opinion regarding societal issues. The results are used by policymakers to gauge public sentiment and identify areas of concern.\nCitizen panels are also employed at the local level. These panels bring together a diverse group of residents to deliberate on complex policy issues. Their recommendations often influence municipal decision-making, demonstrating the value of inclusive governance.\nPublic Consultations.\nPublic consultations are a cornerstone of Norway\u2019s participatory governance model. These consultations allow citizens to provide feedback on proposed legislation and policies, ensuring that their perspectives are considered before decisions are finalized.\nA notable example of the effectiveness of public consultations is Norway's response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The government conducted extensive consultations with health experts, civil society organizations, and the general public, which enhanced the response's effectiveness and strengthened public trust in government actions. This trust played a key role in successful crisis management, reflected in 80% of citizens expressing satisfaction with healthcare, 12 points above the OECD average (2022).\nCivil Society Organizations.\nCivil society organizations (CSOs) in Norway act as intermediaries between citizens and the government. These organizations represent diverse interests, from environmental advocacy to gender equality. CSOs also play a critical role in public debates often organizing workshops, seminars, and public forums to create spaces where citizens can engage in meaningful dialogue on policy issues.\nFor example, the Norwegian Association for Women\u2019s Rights has been instrumental in promoting gender equality through lobbying and public awareness campaigns. By addressing societal issues, CSOs help ensure that public concerns are included in the policymaking process. Their activities foster a collaborative relationship between the public and the government, contributing to more inclusive governance.\nNon-Governmental Organizations.\nNon-governmental organizations (NGOs) in Norway significantly influence policymaking by advocating for a variety of interests and ensuring diverse perspectives are considered. These organizations often work closely with government bodies, providing expertise and contributing to the development of policies addressing societal needs.\nOrganizations like the Norwegian Red Cross, play a vital role in policy discussions on disaster preparedness and public health. By participating in the formulation and implementation of policies, NGOs help shape initiatives that address pressing societal challenges. Their involvement ensures that policies are informed by a broad range of voices and experiences, fostering solutions that are both inclusive and effective.\nDigital Platforms.\nDigital technology has transformed how citizens engage with the government in Norway, with platforms like https:// and https:// specifically designed to engage younger demographics. Ung.no, for instance, serves as a central hub for government services and information targeting individuals aged 13 to 20. It offers quality-assured resources, guidance, and a question-and-answer service that allows users to seek personalized support.\nThe platform exemplifies cross-sector collaboration and the use of digital tools to effectively target specific groups. In 2023, Ung.no recorded over 21.9 million visits and approximately 110,000 inquiries, demonstrating its significant reach and impact. By centralizing services and fostering youth participation, platforms like Ung.no enhance civic engagement and ensure public administration remains accessible and relevant to the next generation. \nSocial Media Engagement.\nSocial media has become a powerful tool for public engagement in Norway, enabling direct interaction between citizens and local governments. For instance, the Nesodden municipality uses platforms like https:// to maintain communication with residents, providing a forward-thinking example of how local governments can foster real-time dialogue and transparency.\nBy leveraging social media, municipalities create a more inclusive and collaborative environment for decision-making. These platforms make governance more accessible, particularly for younger, tech-savvy audiences. The use of social media enhances public trust by fostering transparency and ensuring that diverse perspectives are heard and considered.\nManaging Performance and Accountability in Norway.\nNorway\u2019s public sector reforms have been shaped by globalization, economic shifts, and administrative challenges. The adoption of New Public Management (NPM) in the 1980s and 1990s aligned governance with global trends, emphasizing performance, efficiency, and accountability. Inspired by international models, particularly from the United Kingdom and New Zealand, Norway introduced performance-based management and decentralization \nAdministrative inefficiencies and rising public expectations also drove reforms. Traditional bureaucratic structures were seen as rigid, costly, and ineffective, prompting demands for greater transparency and improved services. Norway responded with institutional restructuring, digital governance, and service delivery improvements to enhance responsiveness \nEconomic shifts, including fluctuating oil revenues, influenced governance strategies. To ensure fiscal sustainability and efficiency, the government adopted budgetary optimization and performance-based management. Broader economic pressures in the 1980s and 1990s, including global recessions and rising welfare costs, accelerated the use of cost-control measures, performance budgeting, and accountability mechanisms \nNorway\u2019s performance measurements follow NPM principles, emphasizing goal setting, monitoring, and evaluation through measurable indicators like service efficiency and operational outcomes \nPerformance Measurement Systems.\nNorway's Management by Objective Results (MBOR) framework, aligned with New Public Management (NPM) principles, emphasizes goal setting, monitoring, and structured evaluation to enhance government efficiency and accountability \nCore Components of MBOR.\n\u2022 Annual Activity Plans: Each agency outlines strategic priorities and performance targets. For example, the Norwegian Health Directorate sets annual goals for reducing hospital wait times and improving patient satisfaction \n\u2022 Performance Indicators: \n1. Cost-efficiency ratios in public services, 2. Operational: Patient treatment rates in hospitals, 3. Service-Oriented: Citizen satisfaction surveys and service delivery metrics \n\u2022 Steering Dialogues: Ministries and subordinate agencies engage in continuous performance reviews to align goals with policy priorities \nMBOR has evolved through key policy reforms.\n1. 1986 \u2013 Budget Reforms: Introduced productivity-oriented budgeting, giving agencies greater autonomy in resource allocation, 2. 1990 - MBOR Mandate: Required all public-sector units to adopt annual activity plans, strengthening political control and goal-setting clarity, 3. 1991 - Salary Reforms: Linked administrative leaders\u2019 pay to performance, with compensation tied to individual contracts and annual assessments, 4. 1996 - New Government Financial Regulations: Formalized \u201cLetters of Allocation\u201d, contract-like agreements defining budget resources, objectives, and performance indicators \nAccountability Mechanisms.\nNational Audit Office of Norway (NAO).\nThe National Audit of Norway (NAO Norway) is the independent audit agency of the Storting (Norwegian Parliament), ensuring financial accountability and transparency. It conducts government audits, and performance reviews, and monitors state-owned enterprises to ensure compliance with financial regulations and parliamentary decisions. \nAudit by the NAO revealed significant issues in Norway\u2019s performance-based financing (PBF) system. Key findings included:\n\u2022 Misclassified Cases: 41% of pneumonia cases were misclassified, requiring one in four admissions to be reassigned to a new Diagnosis-Related Group (DRG). This led to funding discrepancies and inefficiencies in resource allocation.\n\u2022 Coding Inconsistencies: Post-audit, pneumonia cases decreased from 2.7 to 2.3 conditions per admission, and hip replacements dropped from 1.5 to 1.0, highlighting systemic coding errors (see Table 4).\n\u2022 Recommendations: The NAO called for improved coding accuracy, stricter oversight, and enhanced financial controls to ensure accurate reporting and fiscal accountability in Norway\u2019s healthcare sector.\nThe Norwegian Parliamentary Ombudsman.\nSivilombudsmannen established in 1962, and appointed by the Storting, ensures fair administrations, protects individual rights, and uploads human rights standards in public governance. Unlike non-parliamentary ombudsmen in other countries, the Norwegian model operates independently from executive influence and reports directly to Parliament \nPerformance\nIn 2021, the Ombud\u2019s handled 4,032 complaints, resolving 50% through administrative corrections. It conducted 26 own-initiative investigations on prison monitoring, police access, and case processing delays, recommending procedural improvements \nPublic Consultation Platforms.\nH\u00f8yringar allows citizens, organizations, and businesses to provide input on laws, regulations, and policies, ensuring transparency and public transportation.\nKey stages of the process\n1. Proposal Submission: Ministries publish draft laws and policies, 2. Public Notification: Proposals are available on the consultation portal (H\u00f8ringsportalen), 3. Feedback Collection: Stakeholders and the public submit opinions and recommendations digitally, 4. Revies: The government evaluates feedback and adjusts proposals, 5. Final Decision: Revised proposals proceed to Parliament or administrative adoption.\nResult-Oriented Reforms.\nBetween 2000 and 2020, Norway has adopted several different performance-driven reforms to enhance public sector efficiency, service delivery, and governance. \nHealthcare Sector Reforms (2002 and 2012).\nThe 2002 hospital reform centralized public hospital ownership under the Ministry of Health while granting management autonomy to regional and local health enterprises. The reform aimed to improve efficiency and implement performance-based governance. \nThe 2012 Collaboration Reform sought to improve coordination between municipal primary care and government-controlled secondary care through performance-based incentives, contracts, and agreements.\nThe Results:\nThe Faster Return to Work (FRW) scheme introduced in 2007 reduced waiting times by 12\u201315 days and shortened sick leave by approximately 8 days on average. Surgical patients in the FRW scheme had 15\u201323 days shorter sick leave periods compared to those on regular waiting lists.\nWelfare Administration Reform (2005-2007).\nThe 2005 Welfare Administration Reform in Norway merged central government pensions and labor agencies into a single national entity, streamlining social welfare administration. A local partnership agreement was introduced integrating municipal social welfare bodies to enhance service coordination. By 2007, regional pension offices and administrative units were established, shifting certain responsibilities from local to regional levels of employment. \nPolice Sector Reforms (2001 and 2015).\nThe 2001 reform centralized police governance under a central Police Agency, reducing police districts from 54 to 27. The 2015 \u201cCommunity Police Reform\u201d further consolidated police districts to 12 and local units from 350 to 210, aiming to strengthen emergency response.\nRegional and Municipal Reforms (2015 and 2020).\nThe 2015 Norwegian Municipal Reform aimed to consolidate municipalities from 428 to 356 due to local resistance. The 2020 Regional Reform reduced counties from 19 to 11, though few new responsibilities were transferred.\nDigitalization and Trust Reforms (2020).\nThe establishment of the Digitalization Agency in 2020 aimed to accelerate public sector digital transformation and enhance coordination, efficiency, and citizen services.\nIn 2021, the Trust Reform was introduced, inspired by similar reforms in Denmark and Sweden. It aimed to reduce market-driven governance, enhance collaboration with labor organizations, and increase public sector employee involvement in decision-making.\nEducation Reforms (2020).\nThe National Testing and Evaluation System was introduced by the Norwegian Directorate for Education and Training in 2020 to measure school and student performance.\nCompletion Reform Impact: Dropout rates in upper secondary education (VGO) have declined due to improved evaluation measures and targeted policies. The reform enhances early intervention and personalized learning to support student success.\nThe Results\n\u2022 Mathematics Performance: Norway ranks 3rd out of 38 OECD countries with a 97.1% variation, among the highest compared to the OECD average.\n\u2022 Reading Performance: Norway ranks 11th out of 38 OECD countries, with an 88% variation, also among the largest in OECD assessments.\nInternational organization participation.\nAfDB, AsDB, Australia Group, BIS, CBSS, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, ESA, FAO, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, International IDEA, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, International Maritime Organization, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, NAM (guest), NATO, NC, NEA, NIB, NSG, OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNMOP, UNTSO, UPU, WCO, WEU (associate), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, Zangger Committee.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "57615", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57615", "title": "Economy of Norway", "text": "The economy of Norway is a highly developed mixed economy with state-ownership in strategic areas. Although sensitive to global business cycles, the economy of Norway has shown robust growth since the start of the industrial era. The country has a very high standard of living compared with other European countries. Norway's modern manufacturing and welfare system rely on a financial reserve produced by exploitation of natural resources, particularly North Sea oil. Among OECD nations, Norway has a relatively efficient and strong social security system; social expenditure in 2022 was below the OECD average and stood at roughly 20.7% of GDP.\nHistory.\nPre\u2013industrial revolution.\nNorway was the poorest of the three Scandinavian kingdoms (the others being Denmark and Sweden) during the Viking Age.\nPrior to the industrial revolution, Norway's economy was largely based on agriculture, timber, and fishing. Norwegians typically lived under conditions of considerable scarcity, though famine was rare. Except for certain fertile areas in Hedemarken and \u00d8stfold, crops were limited to hardy grains, such as oats, rye, and barley; and livestock to sheep, goats, cattle, pigs, and some poultry; in places this was complemented with hunting. In areas of Central and Northern Norway, the Sami subsisted on the nomadic herding of reindeer. Fishing all around the coast was dangerous work, though fish such as herring, cod, halibut, and other cold-water species were found in abundance. The introduction of the potato to Norway, promoted by practical priests and the king in Copenhagen in the 18th century, provided considerable relief and became common food for Norwegians.\nAll around the coast, the harvesting of fish (including cod, herring, halibut, and other cold water species) was an important supplement to farming and was in many areas in the north and west the primary household subsistence. Fishing was typically supplemented with crop-growing and the raising of livestock on small farms.\nThe economic conditions in Norway did not lend themselves to the formation of feudal system, though several kings did reward land to loyal subjects who became knights. Self-owning farmers were\u2014and continue to be\u2014the main unit of work in Norwegian agriculture, but leading up to the 19th century farmers ran out of land available for farming. Many agricultural families were reduced to poverty as tenant farmers, and served as the impetus for emigration to North America. Norway, after Ireland, became the country losing the most people to this emigration in percentage relative to its population.\nIndustrial revolution.\nAside from mining in Kongsberg, R\u00f8ros, and L\u00f8kken, industrialization came with the first textile mills that were built in Norway in the middle of the 19th century. But the first large industrial enterprises came into formation when entrepreneurs' politics led to the founding of banks to serve those needs.\nIndustries also offered employment for a large number of individuals who were displaced from the agricultural sector. As wages from industry exceeded those from agriculture, the shift started a long-term trend of reduction in cultivated land and rural population patterns. The working class became a distinct phenomenon in Norway, with its own neighborhoods, culture, and politics.\nSocial democratic reforms.\nAfter World War II, the Norwegian Labour Party, with Einar Gerhardsen as prime minister, embarked on a number of social democratic reforms aimed at flattening the income distribution, eliminating poverty, ensuring social services such as retirement, medical care, and disability benefits to all, and putting more of the nation's capital into public trust.\nHighly progressive income taxes, the introduction of value-added tax, and a wide variety of special surcharges and taxes made Norway one of the most heavily taxed economies in the world. Authorities particularly taxed discretionary spending, levying special taxes on automobiles, tobacco, alcohol, cosmetics, etc.\nNorway's long-term social democratic policies, extensive governmental tracking of information, and the homogeneity of its population lent themselves particularly well for economic study, and academic research from Norway proved to make significant contributions to the field of macroeconomics during this era. When Norway became a petroleum-exporting country, the economic effects came under further study.\nPetroleum and post-industrialism.\nOil-exporting country.\nIn May 1963, Norway asserted sovereign rights over natural resources in its sector of the North Sea. Exploration started on 19 July 1966, when Ocean Traveler drilled its first well. Oil was first encountered at the Balder oil field at flank of the Utsira High, about 190\u00a0km west of Stavanger, in 1967. Initial exploration was fruitless, until Ocean Viking found oil on 21 August 1969. By the end of 1969, it was clear that there were large oil and gas reserves in the North Sea. The first oil field was Ekofisk, produced of crude in 1980. Since then, large natural gas reserves have also been discovered.\nAgainst the backdrop of the Norwegian referendum to not join the European Union, the Norwegian Ministry of Industry, headed by Ola Skj\u00e5k Br\u00e6k moved quickly to establish a national energy policy. Norway decided to stay out of OPEC, keep its own energy prices in line with world markets, and spend the revenue \u2013 known as the \"currency gift\" \u2013 wisely. The Norwegian government established its own oil company, Statoil (now known as Equinor), and awarded drilling and production rights to Norsk Hydro and the newly formed Saga Petroleum. Petroleum exports are taxed at a marginal rate of 78% (standard corporate tax of 24%, and a special petroleum tax of 54%).\nThe North Sea turned out to present many technological challenges for production and exploration, and Norwegian companies invested in building capabilities to meet these challenges. A number of engineering and construction companies emerged from the remnants of the largely lost shipbuilding industry, creating centers of competence in Stavanger and the western suburbs of Oslo. Stavanger also became the land-based staging area for the offshore drilling industry. Presently North Sea is past its peak oil production. New oil and gas fields have been found and developed in the large Norwegian areas of the Norwegian Sea and the Barents Sea, including Sn\u00f8hvit.\nReservations about European Union.\nIn September 1972, the Norwegian parliament put to a referendum the question whether Norway should join the European Economic Community. The proposal was turned down with a slim margin. The Norwegian government proceeded to negotiate a trade agreement with the EU that would give Norwegian companies access to European markets. Over time, Norway renegotiated and refined this agreement, ultimately joining the European Free Trade Association and the European Economic Area.\nAlthough Norway's trade policies have long aimed at harmonizing its industrial and trade policy with the EU's, a new referendum in 1994 gave the same result as in 1972, and Norway remains one of only two Nordic countries outside the EU, the other being Iceland.\nAlthough much of the highly divisive public debate about EU membership turned on political rather than economic issues, it formed economic policy in several important ways:\nNorwegians have sought accommodations on a range of specific issues, such as products from fish farms, agricultural products, emission standards, etc., but these do not appear to differ substantially from those sought by bona fide EU members. It is expected that the issue of membership will be brought to a referendum again at some point.\nPost-industrial economic developments.\nSeveral issues have dominated the debate on Norway's economy since the 1970s:\nState ownership role.\nThe Norwegian state maintains large ownership positions in key industrial sectors concentrated in natural resources and strategic industries such as the strategic petroleum sector (Equinor), hydroelectric energy production (Statkraft), aluminum production (Norsk Hydro), the largest Norwegian bank (DNB) and telecommunication provider (Telenor). The government controls around 35% of the total value of publicly listed companies on the Oslo stock exchange, with five of its largest seven listed firms partially owned by the state. When non-listed companies are included the state has an even higher share in ownership (mainly from direct oil license ownership). Norway's state-owned enterprises comprise 9.6% of all non-agricultural employment, a number that rises to almost 13% when companies with minority state ownership stakes are included, the highest among OECD countries. Both listed and non-listed firms with state ownership stakes are market-driven and operate in a highly liberalized market economy.\nThe oil and gas industries play a dominant role in the Norwegian economy, providing a source of finance for the Norwegian welfare state through direct ownership of oil fields, dividends from its shares in Equinor, and licensure fees and taxes. The oil and gas industry is Norway's largest in terms of government revenue and value-added. The organization of this sector is designed to ensure the exploration, development and extraction of petroleum resources result in public value creation for the entire society through a mixture of taxation, licensing and direct state ownership through a system called the State's Direct Financial Interest (SDFI). The SDFI was established in 1985 and represents state-owned holdings in a number of oil and gas fields, pipelines and onshore facilities as well as 67% of the shares in Equinor. Government revenues from the petroleum industry are transferred to the Government Pension Fund of Norway Global in a structure that forbids the government from accessing the fund for public spending; only income generated by the funds' capital can be used for government spending.\nThe high levels of state ownership have been motivated for a variety of reasons, but most importantly by a desire for national control of the utilization of natural resources. Direct state involvement began prior to the 20th century with the provision of public infrastructure, and expanded greatly into industry and commercial enterprises after the Second World War through the acquisition of German assets in several manufacturing companies. The largest expansion of state ownership occurred with the establishment of Statoil in 1972. Industries and commercial enterprises where the state owns stakes are and market-driven, with marketization extending to public service providers as well as industry.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022\u20132027). Inflation under 5% is in green.\nCompanies.\nIn 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Norway is Services with 296,849 companies followed by Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate with 118,411 companies respectively.\nEconomic structure and sustained growth.\nThe emergence of Norway as an oil-exporting country has raised a number of issues for Norwegian economic policy. There has been concern that much of Norway's human capital investment has been concentrated in petroleum-related industries. Critics have pointed out that Norway's economic structure is highly dependent on natural resources that do not require skilled labor, making economic growth highly vulnerable to fluctuations in the demand and pricing for these natural resources. The Government Pension Fund of Norway is part of several efforts to hedge against dependence on petroleum revenue.\nBecause of the oil boom since the 1970s, there has been little government incentive to help develop and encourage new industries in the private sector, in contrast to other Nordic countries like Sweden and particularly Finland. However the last decades have started to see some incentive on national and local government levels to encourage formation of new \"mainland\" industries that are competitive internationally. In addition to aspirations for a high-tech industry, there is growing interest in encouraging small business growth as a source of employment for the future. In 2006, the Norwegian government formed nine \"centers of expertise\" to facilitate this business growth. Later in June 2007, the government contributed to the formation of the Oslo Cancer Cluster (OCC) as a center of expertise, capitalizing on the fact that 80% of cancer research in Norway takes place in proximity to Oslo and that most Norwegian biotechnology companies are focused on cancer.\nAgriculture of Norway.\nPest control.\nPesticide usage information for the entire country is available from Statistics Norway.\nAntimicrobial resistance.\nOverall the risk of antimicrobial resistance in the food supply chains is \"negligible\". Specifically cattle, milk/dairy products, fish, seafood, drinking water, and pork are considered to be negligible risks. On the other hand, there is a more-than-negligible risk from contact with live pigs (farming and processing them), live poultry, and poultry meat.\nRegional variation.\nSource: Eurostat\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
