{"id": "73157", "revid": "3965251", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73157", "title": "Bruno Bauer", "text": "German philosopher and theologian (1809\u20131882)\nBruno Bauer (; ; 6 September 1809\u00a0\u2013 13 April 1882) was a German philosopher, theologian, historian, and biblical critic. A prominent member of the Young Hegelians, he was a radical rationalist critic of the Bible and Christianity. Initially a student of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Bauer became a central figure in the intellectual circles of the \"Vorm\u00e4rz\", the period preceding the Revolutions of 1848. His philosophical work was a major influence on, and target of critique for, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, with whom he had a close but tumultuous relationship.\nStarting as a right-wing Hegelian, Bauer shifted to the left in 1839, developing a radical critique of religion and the state. He argued that the Christian gospels were not historical records but literary works of the human self-consciousness. His most significant work of this period, \"The Trumpet of the Last Judgement over Hegel the Atheist and Antichrist\" (1841), presented Hegel's philosophy as a revolutionary atheism that called for the overthrow of all existing religious and political institutions. Bauer's political thought was a form of republicanism based on the concept of \"infinite self-consciousness,\" an ethical idealism that advocated for the constant transformation of society in pursuit of rational freedom.\nDuring the 1840s, Bauer engaged with the emerging social question, developing a critique of both liberalism, for its basis in private interest, and the nascent socialist movements. His controversial writings on Jewish emancipation, in which he argued that both Jews and Christians must renounce their particular religious identities to achieve universal freedom, led to his isolation from many of his former allies. Though he participated in the 1848 Revolutions, their failure led him to abandon his revolutionary republicanism and turn to conservative causes.\nIn his later life, Bauer developed a virulent anti-Semitism. His post-1848 work focused on historical studies, particularly the origins of Christianity, and on the political development of Russia and the rise of global imperialism. Despite the profound change in his political orientation, his work continued to influence thinkers on both the left and the right, including Karl Kautsky and Friedrich Nietzsche.\nLife and career.\nEarly life and Hegelian studies.\nBruno Bauer was born on 6 September 1809 in Eisenberg, Thuringia. His father was a porcelain painter, and the family moved to Berlin in 1815. In 1828, Bauer enrolled as a theology student at the University of Berlin, where he studied under Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel himself for three years, as well as Hegel's associates Philipp Marheineke and Henrik Steffens. Bauer was particularly disappointed with the teachings of Friedrich Schleiermacher, whose attempts to find a compromise between various conflicting schools of thought seemed to Bauer to engender only ambiguity and uncertainty.\nIn 1829, while still a student, Bauer won the annual Royal Prize in Philosophy on Hegel's recommendation for an essay on Immanuel Kant's aesthetics. Hegel lavished praise on the work, stating: \"The lecture [...] develops most convincingly [...] there is consistent development of the thought and the author has also succeeded in exploiting the contradictions of the Kantian principles, which are incompatible.\" After graduating in 1832, Bauer began an academic career in theology. He became a close associate of the Hegelian school, and was entrusted with editing the second edition of Hegel's \"Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion\" (1840). He taught at Berlin from 1834 to 1839, delivering lectures on theology, the Bible, and church history, and serving as the main editor for the \"Zeitschrift f\u00fcr spekulative Theologie\" (Journal for Speculative Theology). During this period, his work was imbued with a spirit of conservative orthodoxy. This led him to be chosen to write the official critique of David Strauss's sensational 1835 book \"The Life of Jesus\", in which he initially defended the historicity of the Gospels.\nLeft Hegelianism and biblical criticism.\nBy 1839, Bauer had made a decisive shift to a Left Hegelian position, marked by a public break with conservative orthodoxy in his polemical work \"Herr Dr. Hengstenberg\". In this work and others, he defended the progressive character of Hegel's system and separated the \"spirit of Christianity\" from its dogmatic form, undermining the religious ideology of the Prussian Restoration. This turn was influenced by his involvement with the Berlin \"Doktorklub\" (Doctors' Club), an intellectual circle of Young Hegelians that included Karl Marx, Friedrich K\u00f6ppen, and others. Bauer was considered the moving spirit of this group. His increasingly radical views led the Prussian Minister of Culture, Karl vom Stein zum Altenstein, to move him to the University of Bonn in an effort to shield him from attacks in Berlin.\nBauer's radicalization intensified with his critiques of the Gospels, which he developed over a series of works from 1840 to 1842. The project began with his \"Critique of the Gospel of John\" (1840), followed by the three-volume \"Critique of the Synoptic Gospels\" (1841\u201342). In these works, Bauer argued that the Gospel narratives were not historical reports of the life of Jesus, but literary products of the religious consciousness of the early Christian community. He saw the evangelists not as historians but as artists who had transformed earlier religious traditions into a new, dogmatic form. He concluded that the figure of Jesus was a literary invention, a transplantation of the community's own struggles and experiences onto a single representative figure. This critique was aimed directly at the ideological foundations of the Prussian state, which used dogmatic Christianity for its legitimation.\nBauer's publications caused a major controversy. In March 1842, he was dismissed from his teaching position at the University of Bonn on the initiative of the conservative minister of education, Johann Albrecht Friedrich von Eichhorn.\nRepublicanism and \"The Trumpet of the Last Judgement\".\nIn October 1841, Bauer anonymously published his most significant philosophical work of the \"Vorm\u00e4rz\", \"Die Posaune des j\u00fcngsten Gerichts \u00fcber Hegel, den Atheisten und Antichristen\" (\"The Trumpet of the Last Judgement over Hegel the Atheist and Antichrist\"). Described as the \"\"locus classicus\" for the Young Hegelian view of Hegel,\" the book adopted the ironic guise of a pious pietist to denounce Hegel as a revolutionary atheist whose philosophy would inevitably lead to the destruction of religion, the state, and all social order. The book's true purpose was to reclaim Hegel for the revolutionary cause by distinguishing between an \"exoteric\" Hegel who accommodated existing powers and an \"esoteric,\" atheistic Hegel whose true meaning was accessible only to his radical disciples. The book was praised by fellow Young Hegelian Arnold Ruge as a work of \"world-historical importance.\"\nIn the \"Posaune\", Bauer interpreted Hegel's philosophy as a theory of \"infinite self-consciousness,\" a power that creates and transforms the historical world. This self-consciousness, he argued, was engaged in a constant revolutionary struggle against all \"positivity\"\u2014that is, against all fixed, given, or reified institutions, whether religious or political. The book outlined a political program based on the ruthless critique of all existing relations and a refusal to compromise, culminating in the revolutionary overthrow of the old order. It advocated for a form of ethical perfectionism, a commitment to constantly transform political and social institutions in the name of freedom.\nSocial question and polemics.\nAfter his dismissal from academia, Bauer became a leading figure among the Berlin \"Freien\" (The Free), a circle of Young Hegelians, and founded the journal \"Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung\" to promote his ideas of \"pure critique.\" In this period, he increasingly turned his attention to the social question and the political currents of the day. He developed a critique of both liberalism and the emerging socialist and communist movements. He saw liberalism as a defense of egoistic private interest that was incapable of genuine opposition to the authoritarian state. He critiqued socialism for what he viewed as its own form of heteronomy, arguing that communism was a dogmatic ideology that elevated the masses and their material needs over the critical spirit of the intellectual elite.\nBauer's most controversial interventions came in his 1843 writings on Jewish emancipation, \"Die Judenfrage\" (\"The Jewish Question\") and \"The Capacity of Present-Day Jews and Christians to Become Free\". Arguing from his principle of universal self-consciousness, Bauer asserted that genuine freedom required the renunciation of all particularistic religious ties. He concluded that Jews, like Christians, could not be emancipated as a religious group but only as human beings, which required them to give up their religion. This position was widely seen as an attack on one of the central demands of the progressive movement. It led to his break with many former allies, including Marx, who responded with his own famous essay, \"On the Jewish Question\". According to Douglas Moggach, Bauer's stance on this issue was a \"costly error in judgement\" that stemmed from a sectarian \"republican rigorism\" and a \"conflation of right and morality\".\n1848 Revolutions and later life.\nBauer was an active participant in the Revolutions of 1848. He ran for election to the Prussian National Assembly as a candidate for Charlottenburg, defending the principle of popular sovereignty and calling for the creation of a \"league of equal right\" that would carry the revolution into all spheres of social life. He defended the March barricade fighters in Berlin and attacked the liberal bourgeoisie for its willingness to compromise with the monarchy.\nThe failure of the revolutions led to a \"profound change\" in Bauer's thought. He abandoned his revolutionary republicanism and his ethics of perfectionism, becoming what was known as the \"hermit of Rixdorf\". His abiding anti-liberalism now led him to support conservative and, later, anti-Semitic causes, and he collaborated for many years with the reactionary editor Hermann Wagener, one of Otto von Bismarck's closest advisers. He developed a new political vision centered on the rise of global imperialism and the clash between Russia and the West. He saw Russia, with its all-encompassing unity of church and state, as a force that would shatter the particularism of Europe and create the conditions for a new, post-metaphysical era. In his later years, he developed a virulent anti-Semitism, describing the \"Jewish question\" as the new form of the social question and contributing to the rhetoric of racial anti-Semitism in Germany. Bauer died in Rixdorf (now part of Neuk\u00f6lln) on 13 April 1882.\nPhilosophy.\nSelf-consciousness and critique.\nThe central concept in Bauer's philosophy during his \"Vorm\u00e4rz\" period was \"infinite self-consciousness\" (\"unendliches Selbstbewu\u00dftsein\"). For Bauer, this was not an abstract subjective state but the motive force of history itself\u2014the dynamic, creative, and critical activity of human subjects. It is \"infinite\" because it constantly negates and transcends any given, finite reality or \"positivity\". This self-consciousness achieves its ends through critique, which for Bauer is the theoretical and practical activity of exposing the contradictions in existing institutions and ideologies. Drawing inspiration from the \"Aufkl\u00e4rung\" and the French Revolution, Bauer argued that critique was a form of \"praxis\"; it is the \"terrorism of true criticism\" that prepares the ground for the actualization of philosophy in the world. For Bauer, \"theory is the strongest form of practice.\" His version of the dialectic differed from Hegel's in that it was a purely negative process of destruction, lacking Hegel's concept of \"aufheben\" (sublation), which involves preservation as well as negation.\nBauer's theory is a form of ethical and historical idealism. It is historical because the content of self-consciousness is derived from the rational comprehension of the historical process as the struggle for freedom. It is ethical because it demands a commitment to \"perfectionism\"\u2014an uncompromising will to transform the world in accordance with the universal principles of reason and freedom. Bauer distinguished between the \"individual self-consciousness\" of particular persons and the \"universal self-consciousness,\" which he identified with liberty and humanity. The egoistic, religious person is trapped in the former, while the goal of history is the realization of the latter.\nCritique of religion.\nBauer's critique of religion was a cornerstone of his philosophical and political project. He originated the term \"self-alienation\" (\"Selbstentfremdung\") to describe religion as the primary form of alienated self-consciousness. In religion, he argued, humanity projects its own essential powers onto an external, transcendent being, and then worships this alienated essence as God. This process is a \"division in consciousness\" that stems from objective deficiencies in social and political life; religion is a \"distorted consciousness of a distorted reality\". The God that humanity creates is a \"subhuman God,\" a distorted reflection of humanity's own alienated condition.\nHe argued that Christianity, particularly in its Protestant form, represented the \"perfection of the religious consciousness\" because it had universalized this alienation to encompass all aspects of life. In a famous passage, he described the alienated self of the Christian world as a \"vampire of spiritual abstraction\" that, having been drained of its own content, projects its powers onto a Messiah. For Bauer, this total alienation was a necessary step, a \"Vorbereitungsgeschichte\" (preparatory history), for total liberation. The critique of religion was therefore the necessary first step toward political revolution, as it aimed to dissolve the ideological foundations of the old order and restore to humanity its own creative powers.\nRepublicanism and the social question.\nBauer's political thought was a form of republicanism that stood in opposition to both Restoration absolutism and possessive individualist liberalism. He envisioned a \"republic of self-consciousness,\" a self-determining community founded on a genuine common interest rather than the aggregation of private, egoistic interests that characterized modern civil society. This republicanism required a radical transformation of individuals themselves, who must overcome their own particularity and elevate themselves to universality through ethical and political action. He held a Hegelian view of the state as the \"manifestation of freedom\" but critiqued the existing \"Christian state\" for being tied to the atomized, egoistic world of civil society. He drew inspiration from the French Revolution and the federal model of the United States.\nHe distinguished between the \"Volk\" (the people), a revolutionary subject capable of acting on universal principles, and the \"Masse\" (the masses), an atomized, inert aggregate of private individuals characteristic of modern market society. For Bauer, liberalism was the ideology of the \"Masse\", as it defined freedom as the pursuit of private property and thereby dissolved the bonds of ethical life. After 1843, disappointed by the passivity of the masses in the face of political reaction, he turned to a theory of \"pure critique,\" arguing that the intellectual elite must stand apart from the masses and their dogmatic ideologies. The task of the revolution was to create a true \"Volk\" by overcoming the egoism of mass society. This involved not only political change but also social emancipation, including the humanization of labor and the elimination of pauperism.\nRelationship with Karl Marx.\nBauer's relationship with Karl Marx was central to the development of both thinkers. Marx was Bauer's student at the University of Berlin, attending his lectures assiduously in 1839, and became a junior member of the \"Doktorklub\" which Bauer led. They developed a close friendship and intellectual collaboration; Bauer encouraged Marx to write his doctoral dissertation and planned to secure him a teaching position at Bonn. They planned several joint publishing ventures, including a journal of atheistic critique to be called the \"Archiv des Atheismus\" (\"Archive of Atheism\"). During this period, Marx was widely seen as Bauer's most dedicated disciple.\nThe intellectual affinity was deep. Marx's doctoral dissertation is saturated with Bauerian themes: the conception of the post-Aristotelian schools of philosophy as a struggle for the freedom of self-consciousness, the idea of critique as a form of world-changing praxis, and the apocalyptic view of history as a series of catastrophic transformations. The dissertation's preface declares, in a thoroughly Bauerian spirit, that philosophy opposes \"all gods in heaven and earth that do not recognise human self-consciousness as the highest godhead.\" Marx's early views on religion, alienation, and ideology were profoundly shaped by Bauer. Marx's celebrated critique of religion in his 1843 \"Introduction\" borrows heavily from Bauer's language and imagery, including the ideas of religion as an \"opium-like influence,\" the \"imaginary flowers\" on the chains of oppression, and the \"illusory sun\" around which man revolves before revolving around himself. More fundamentally, Marx adopted Bauer's critical method, applying the critique of religion as a model for the critique of politics and economics.\nThe friendship broke down in late 1842 over political and tactical differences, particularly concerning the radicalism of the Berlin \"Freien\" and the direction of the \"Rheinische Zeitung\", which Marx was editing. Even then, Marx continued to praise Bauer's work, and the final break came later. The split culminated in a series of polemical works. In \"The Holy Family\" (1845) and \"The German Ideology\" (1846), Marx and Friedrich Engels launched a comprehensive critique of Bauer and his philosophy. They accused Bauer of being an abstract idealist who had turned \"Critique\" itself into a transcendent power, separate from the real struggles of the masses and material interests. Bauer responded by accusing Marx of dogmatism and a shallow understanding of his work. Despite the bitterness of the polemic, the two men re-established personal contact in London in the mid-1850s and discussed politics and philosophy.\nLegacy.\nBruno Bauer was a pivotal, if controversial, figure in 19th-century German thought. His scholarly reputation was largely destroyed by Marx's polemics, which depicted him as a speculative idealist completely detached from reality. This caricature influenced generations of scholars, including Georg Luk\u00e1cs and Ernst Bloch, who tended to dismiss Bauer as a minor figure who \"lived off the crumbs of Hegelian philosophy\". As a leading Young Hegelian, he played a crucial role in the development of radical biblical criticism. His argument that Jesus was a literary myth rather than a historical figure was famously praised by Albert Schweitzer as \"the ablest and most complete collection of the difficulties of the life of Jesus which is anywhere to be found.\" Fellow Hegelian Karl Rosenkranz described him as \"undoubtedly the most important\" of the Berlin \"Freien\" \"in character as in culture and talent.\"\nAfter 1848, Bauer's influence waned in progressive circles, but his later work anticipated themes that would be taken up by others. His prediction of an age of global imperialism and his critique of modern mass society as a form of cultural decay were influential on Friedrich Nietzsche. His late, virulent anti-Semitism, in which he recast the \"Jewish question\" as the central social problem of a declining Europe, contributed to the intellectual arsenal of modern anti-Semitism. Despite this, his earlier work on the Roman origins of Christianity was later praised and developed by socialists like Karl Kautsky and Engels, who, in his later years, acknowledged Bauer's great contribution to solving the \"Evangelical mystery\" and paved the way for a selective use of his atheistic ideas in anti-religious propaganda, notably in the Soviet Union.\nMajor works.\nTranslations.\nThe great bulk of Bauer's writings have still not been translated into English. Only a few works by Bauer have been formally translated:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73158", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73158", "title": "The Night of the Living Dead", "text": ""}
{"id": "73159", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73159", "title": "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf", "text": ""}
{"id": "73161", "revid": "461895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73161", "title": "Seigniorage", "text": "Profit from minting money\nSeigniorage , also spelled seignorage or seigneurage (from fro\u00a0'right of the lord (\"seigneur\") to mint money'), is the profit a government makes from issuing currency, which is the difference between the face value of money and the cost of producing it. \nThe term historically referred to a lord's right to mint coins, but today includes revenue from creating coins and banknotes, and interest earned by the central bank from its conduct of monetary policy. Seigniorage earned is equivalent to the increase in the money supply due to money creation minus the cost of producing the additional money. \nSeignorage can also refer to:\nSeigniorage is the positive return, or carry, on issued notes and coins (money in circulation). Demurrage, the opposite, is the cost of holding currency.\nAn example of an exchange of gold for \"paper\" where no seigniorage occurs is when a person has one ounce of gold, trades it for a government-issued gold certificate (providing for redemption in one ounce of gold), keeps that certificate for a year, and redeems it in gold. That person began with and ends up with exactly one ounce of gold.\nIn another scenario, instead of issuing gold certificates a government converts gold into non-gold standard based currency at the market rate by printing paper notes. A person exchanges one ounce of gold for its value in that currency, keeps the currency for one year, and exchanges it for an amount of gold at the new market value. If the value of the currency relative to gold has changed in the interim, the second exchange will yield less (or more) than one ounce of gold (assuming that the value, or purchasing power, of one ounce of gold remains constant through the year). If the value of the currency relative to gold has decreased, the person receives less than one ounce of gold and seigniorage occurred. If the value of the currency relative to gold has increased, the person receives more than one ounce of gold and demurrage occurred; seigniorage did not occur.\nContemporary use.\nThe 50 State Quarters series of quarters (25-cent coins) began in 1999. The U.S. government thought that many people, collecting each new quarter as it rolled out of the United States Mint, would remove the coins from circulation. Each complete set of quarters (the 50 states, the five inhabited U.S.\u00a0territories, and the District of Columbia) is worth $14.00. Since it costs the mint about five cents to produce one quarter, the government made a profit when someone collected a coin. The Treasury Department estimates that it earned about $6.3 billion in seigniorage from the quarters during the program.\nSome countries' national mints report the amount of seigniorage provided to their governments; the Royal Canadian Mint reported that in 2006 it generated $93 million in seigniorage for the government of Canada. The U.S. government, the largest beneficiary of seigniorage, earned about $25 billion in 2000. For coins only, the U.S. Treasury received 45 cents per dollar issued in seigniorage for the 2011 fiscal year.\nOccasionally, central banks have issued limited quantities of higher-value banknotes in unusual denominations for collecting; the denomination will usually coincide with an anniversary of national significance. The potential seigniorage from such printings has been limited, since the unusual denomination makes the notes more difficult to circulate and only a relatively-small number of people collect higher-value notes.\nOver half of Zimbabwe's government revenue in 2008 was reportedly seigniorage. The country has experienced hyperinflation ever since, with an annualized rate of about 24,000 percent in July 2008 (prices doubling every 46 days).\nOrdinary seigniorage.\nOrdinarily, seigniorage is an interest-free loan (of gold, for example) to the issuer of the coin or banknote. When the currency is worn out the issuer buys it back at face value, balancing the revenue received when it was put into circulation without any additional amount for the interest value of what the issuer received.\nHistorically, seigniorage was the profit resulting from producing coins. Silver and gold were mixed with base metals to make durable coins. The British pound sterling was 92.5 percent silver; the base metal added (and the pure silver retained by the government mint) was, less costs, the profit \u2013 the seigniorage. Before 1933, United States gold coins were 90 percent gold and 10 percent copper. To make up for the lack of gold, the coins were over-weighted. A one-ounce Gold American Eagle will have as much of the alloy as needed to contain a total of one ounce of gold (which will be over one ounce). Seigniorage is earned by selling the coins above the melt value in exchange for guaranteeing the weight of the coin.\nUnder the rules governing the monetary operations of major central banks (including the United States Federal Reserve), seigniorage on banknotes is the interest payments received by central banks on the total amount of currency issued. This usually takes the form of interest payments on treasury bonds purchased by central banks, putting more money into circulation. If the currency is collected, or is otherwise taken permanently out of circulation, the currency is never returned to the central bank; the issuer of the currency keeps the seigniorage profit by not having to buy back worn-out currency at face value.\nSolvency constraints of central banks.\nThe solvency constraint of a standard central bank requires that the present discounted value of its net non-monetary liabilities (separate from monetary liabilities accrued through seigniorage attempts) be zero or negative in the long run. Its monetary liabilities are liabilities in name only, since they are irredeemable. The holder of base money cannot insist on the redemption of a given amount into anything other than the same amount of itself, unless the holder of the base money is another central bank reclaiming the value of its original interest-free loan.\nInternational circulation.\nThe international circulation of banknotes is a profitable form of seigniorage. Although the cost of printing banknotes is minimal, the foreign entity must provide goods and services at the note's face value. The banknote is retained as a store of value, since the entity values it more than the local currency. Foreign circulation generally involves large-value banknotes, and can be used for private transactions (some of which are illegal).\nAmerican currency has been circulating globally for most of the 20th century, and the amount of currency in circulation increased several-fold during World War II. Large-scale printing of the United States one-hundred-dollar bill began when the Soviet Union dissolved in 1991; production quadrupled, with the first trillion-dollar printing of the bill. At the end of 2008, U.S. currency in public circulation amounted to $824 billion and 76 percent of the currency supply was in the form of $100 bills (twenty $100 bills per U.S. citizen). The amount of U.S. currency circulating abroad is controversial. According to Porter and Judson, 53 to 67 percent was overseas during the mid-1990s. Feige estimates that about 40 percent is abroad. In a New York Federal Reserve publication, Goldberg writes that \"about 65 percent ($580 billion) of all banknotes are in circulation outside of the country\". These figures are largely contradicted by Federal Reserve Board of Governors Flow of Funds statistics, which indicate that $313 billion (36.7 percent) of U.S. currency was held abroad at the end of March 2009. Feige calculates that since 1964, \"the cumulative seigniorage earnings accruing to the U.S. by virtue of the currency held by foreigners amounted to $167\u2013$185 billion and over the past two decades seigniorage revenues from foreigners have averaged $6\u2013$7 billion dollars per year\".\nThe American $100 bill has competition from the \u20ac500 note, which facilitates the transport of larger amounts of money. One million dollars in $100 bills weighs 22 pounds (10\u00a0kg), and it is difficult to carry this much money without a briefcase and physical security. The same amount in \u20ac500 notes would weigh less than three pounds (1.4\u00a0kg), which could be dispersed in clothing and luggage without attracting attention or alerting security devices. In illegal operations, transporting currency is logistically more difficult than transporting cocaine because of its size and weight, and the ease of transporting its banknotes makes the euro attractive to Latin American drug cartels.\nThe Swiss 1,000-franc note, worth slightly more than $1,000, is probably the only other banknote in circulation outside its home country. However, it does not have a significant advantage over the \u20ac500 note to the non-Swiss; there are 20 times as many \u20ac500 notes in circulation, and they are more widely recognized. As a reserve currency, it makes up about 0.1% of the currency composition of official foreign-exchange reserves.\nGovernments vary in their issuance of large banknotes; in August 2009, the number of Fr. 1,000 notes in circulation was over three times the population of Switzerland. For comparison, the number of circulating \u00a350 banknotes is slightly less than three times the population of the United Kingdom; the Fr. 1,000 franc note is worth about \u00a3600. The British government has been wary of large banknotes since the counterfeiting Operation Bernhard during World War II, which caused the Bank of England to withdraw all notes larger than \u00a35 from circulation. The bank did not reintroduce other denominations until the early 1960s (\u00a310), 1970 (\u00a320) and March 20, 1981 (\u00a350).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73162", "revid": "36623386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73162", "title": "Western Hemisphere", "text": "Half of Earth west of the Prime Meridian\nThe Western Hemisphere is the half of the planet Earth that lies west of the Prime Meridian and east of the 180th meridian. The other half is called the Eastern Hemisphere. Geopolitically, the term Western Hemisphere is often used as a metonym for the Americas or the \"New World\", even though geographically the hemisphere also includes parts of other continents.\nGeography.\nThe Western Hemisphere comprises the Americas, except some of the Aleutian Islands to the southwest of the Alaskan mainland; the westernmost parts of Europe and Africa, both mainland and islands; the extreme eastern tip of the Russian mainland and islands (North Asia); many territories in Oceania; and a large part of Antarctica.\nThe center of the Western Hemisphere on the surface of the Earth is in the Pacific Ocean, at the intersection of the 90th meridian west and the Equator, among the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands. The nearest land is Genovesa Island at .\nThe highest mountain in the Western Hemisphere is Aconcagua, in the Andes of Argentina, at .\nThe tallest freestanding structure in the Western Hemisphere is the CN Tower, in Toronto, at . The tallest building in the Western Hemisphere is One World Trade Center, in New York City at .\nOther definitions.\nIn an attempt to match the Western Hemisphere more closely with the Americas, some sources use the 20th meridian west and the diametrically opposed 160th meridian east to define the hemisphere. This definition excludes all of the European and African mainlands, but still includes some islands associated with these continents, more of eastern Russia and Oceania, and part of Antarctica. It includes all islands of Alaska, but excludes a small portion of northeast Greenland. There is no hemisphere that includes all of the Americas that also excludes all land outside the Americas, regardless of the meridians or points chosen to define it.\nSovereign states in both hemispheres.\nBelow is a list of the sovereign states in both the Western and Eastern hemispheres on the IERS Reference Meridian, in order from north to south:\nBelow is a list of additional sovereign states which are in both the Western and Eastern hemispheres along the 180th meridian, in order from north to south. (France is not listed below due to its inclusion above, though the meridian does pass Wallis and Futuna.) With the exception of the United States (due to \"Wake Island\", \"Guam\" and the \"Northern Mariana Islands\"), all of them are located on just one side of the International Date Line, which curves around them.\nCountries, dependencies and other territories in the Western Hemisphere but not in the Americas.\nThe following countries and territories lie outside the Americas yet are entirely, mostly, or partially within the Western Hemisphere:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73164", "revid": "1506993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73164", "title": "Chepang people", "text": "The Chepang (), also known as Chewang, are a Tibeto-Burman ethnic group from the rugged ridges of the Mahabharat mountain range of central Nepal.\nWith increasing populations, lack of arable land and few irrigation options, malnutrition has been a historic problem for the Chepang despite forest supplements. The Chepang have often been characterized as the poorest of Nepal's poor. Forced teenage pregnancies are common. Chepang men and women are basically egalitarian and no social ranking exists as it does in caste Nepalese society. Many Chepang cannot read and write due to a lack of education beyond elementary school, and this illiteracy stands in contrast to the great gains Nepal has been making in reducing illiteracy. They are mostly located in Bagmati Province (Dhading District, Chitwan District, and Makwanpur District) and Gandaki Province (Gorkha District and Tanahun District).\nGeographical distribution.\nThe 2011 Nepal census classifies the Chepang within the broader social group of Mountain/Hill Janajati. At the time of the 2011 Nepal census, 68,399 people (0.3% of the population of Nepal) were Chepang. The frequency of Chepang people by province was as follows:\nThe frequency of Chepang people was higher than national average (0.3%) in the following districts:\nLivelihood.\nOver the past two or three generations, the Chepang have begun to slowly shift from a semi-nomadic (slash-and-burn) lifestyle to a more settled way of life, relying increasingly upon the production of permanent fields of maize, millet and bananas. The severe topography, however, has made permanent farming difficult (and usually insufficient), and the forest has remained an important (although decreasingly so) source of food for the Chepang. Historically, the collection of wild yams and tubers, fish caught from nearby rivers, bats and wild birds, and periodically wild deer hunted from nearby forests, have supplemented their need for carbohydrates and protein.\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2011 Nepal Census, there are almost 70,000 Chepang in the country, of which 65% were Hindu and 25% were Christian and 10% were animist. The Chepangs themselves follow Animism, although they are strongly influenced by both Hinduism and Buddhism, which came from the Tamangs just north of them. They observe all the Hindu festivals of Dashain, Tihar and Sakranti besides their own tribal festival \"Nwagi\" or \"Chhonam\", which is performed on a Tuesday during third week of Bhadra (some day in August and September). Chhonam is the auspicious day for eating a new crop. Before the celebration of this festival, eating certain agricultural products is prohibited.\nIn the 5th National Gathering of Chepang, 2004, it was stated they practiced Prakriti (Nature), with ancestor worship as most important. They worship many deities including Bhumi, Aita Bare, Gaidu, Namrung (earth deity) etc. They also observe other different festivals like, Maghe Sakranti, Saune Sakranti, Dashain, Tihar.\nIn recent years, many of the Chepang have converted to Christianity.\nLanguage.\nThe language is also known as Chepang but is called by the people themselves. These people are also called \"Praja\" meaning \"political subjects\". The people speak 3 different dialects of this Tibeto-Burman language that is closely related to Raute and Raji, two undocumented languages spoken in western Nepal. Chepang is one of the few languages which uses a duodecimal (base 12) counting system rather than the decimal (base 10).\n2015 earthquake and political crisis.\nChepang are among the most vulnerable due to the combination of April 2015 Nepal earthquake and 2015 Nepal blockade. More than 50 per cent of the people killed were from marginalised communities ranked low in the Human Development Index (HDI). Chepang communities were already suffering from severe malnutrition before the blockade, along with the Tamang. Due to historic discrimination and neglect and remote communities, Chepang have suffered discrimination even at the hands of the Nepali Food Corporation in charge of emergency food distribution. It is said that Chepangs compulsorily eat rice during Dashain, where meat is often eaten by more wealthy groups, but they are unlikely to afford even rice this year (2015). Hence they are among the most vulnerable ethnic groups facing potential population bottleneck in the winter of 2015/16 despite their already small numbers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73165", "revid": "44361418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73165", "title": "Infant", "text": "Very young offspring of humans\nIn common terminology, a baby is the very young offspring of adult human beings, while infant (from la\u00a0'baby, child') is a formal or specialised synonym. The terms may also be used to refer to juveniles of other organisms. A newborn is, in colloquial use, a baby who is only hours, days, or weeks old; while in medical contexts, a newborn or neonate (from la\u00a0'newborn') is an infant in the first 28 days after birth (the term applies to premature, full term, and postmature infants).\nInfants born prior to 37 weeks of gestation are called \"premature\", those born between 39 and 40 weeks are \"full term\", those born through 41 weeks are \"late term\", and anything beyond 42 weeks is considered \"post term\".\nBefore birth, the offspring is called a fetus. The term \"infant\" is typically applied to very young children under one year of age; however, definitions may vary and may include children up to two years of age. When a human child learns to walk, they are appropriately called a toddler instead.\nOther uses.\nIn British English, an \"infant school\" is for children aged between four and seven.\nAs a legal term, \"infancy\" is more like minority, and continues until a person reaches 18 years of age.\nPhysical characteristics.\nA newborn's shoulders and hips are wide, the abdomen protrudes slightly, and the arms and legs are relatively long with respect to the rest of their body.\nHead.\nA newborn's head is very large in proportion to the body, and the cranium is enormous relative to their face. While the adult human skull is about one seventh of the total body length, the newborn's is about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444. Normal head circumference for a full-term infant is 33\u201336\u00a0cm at birth. At birth, many regions of the newborn's skull have not yet been converted to bone, leaving \"soft spots\" known as fontanels. The two largest are the diamond-shaped anterior fontanel, located at the top front portion of the head, and the smaller triangular-shaped posterior fontanel, which lies at the back of the head. Later in the child's life, these bones will fuse together in a natural process. A protein called noggin is responsible for the delay in an infant's skull fusion.\nDuring labour and birth, the infant's skull changes shape to fit through the birth canal, sometimes causing the child to be born with a misshapen or elongated head. It will usually return to normal on its own within a few days or weeks. Special exercises sometimes advised by physicians may assist the process.\nHair.\nSome newborns have a fine, downy body hair called lanugo. It may be particularly noticeable on the back, shoulders, forehead, ears and face of premature infants. Lanugo disappears within a few weeks. Infants may be born with full heads of hair; others, particularly Caucasian infants, may have very fine hair or may even be bald. Amongst fair-skinned parents, this fine hair may be blonde, even if the parents are not. An infant's hair color and texture can change: red can give way to blond, curly can go straight, and thick, dark hair could reappear a lot sparser and lighter. The scalp may also be temporarily bruised or swollen, especially in hairless newborns, and the area around the eyes may be puffy.\nLength.\nIn developed countries, the average total body length of a newborn is , although premature newborns may be much smaller.\nThe way to measure a baby's length is to lay the baby down and stretch a measuring tape from the top of the head to the bottom of the heel.\nWeight.\nIn developed countries, the average birth weight of a full-term newborn is approximately , and is typically in the range of .\nOver the first 5\u20137 days following birth, the body weight of a term neonate decreases by 3\u20137%, and is largely a result of the resorption and urination of the fluid that initially fills the lungs, in addition to a delay of often a few days before breastfeeding becomes effective. After the first week, healthy term neonates should gain 10\u201320 grams/kg/day.\nSkin.\nImmediately after birth, a newborn's skin is often grayish to dusky blue in color. As soon as the newborn begins to breathe, usually within a minute or two, the skin's color reaches its normal tone. Newborns are wet, covered in streaks of blood, and coated with a white substance known as vernix caseosa, which is hypothesised to act as an antibacterial barrier. The newborn may also have Mongolian spots, various other birthmarks, or peeling skin, particularly on the wrists, hands, ankles, and feet.\nUmbilical cord.\nThe umbilical cord of a newborn is bluish-white in color. After birth, the umbilical cord is normally cut, leaving a 1\u20132\u00a0inch stub. The umbilical stub will dry out, shrivel, darken, and spontaneously fall off within about 3 weeks. This will later become a belly-button after it heals.\nThe umbilical cord contains three vessels: two arteries and one vein. The two arteries carry blood from the baby to the placenta while one vein carries blood back to the baby.\nGenitals.\nA newborn's genitals are enlarged and reddened, with male infants having an unusually large scrotum. The breasts may also be enlarged, even in male infants. This is caused by naturally occurring maternal hormones and is a temporary condition. Females (and sometimes males) may actually discharge milk from their nipples (sometimes called witch's milk), or a bloody or milky-like substance from the vagina. In either case, this is considered normal and will disappear with time.\nCare and feeding.\nInfants cry as a form of basic instinctive communication. A crying infant may be trying to express a variety of feelings including hunger, discomfort, overstimulation, boredom, wanting something, or loneliness.\nInfants are altricial and are fully dependent on their mothers or an adult caretaker for an extended period of time. Breastfeeding is the recommended method of feeding by all major infant health organizations. If breastfeeding is not possible or desired, bottle feeding is done with expressed breast-milk or with infant formula. Infants are born with a sucking reflex allowing them to extract the milk from the nipples of the breasts or the nipple of the baby bottle, as well as an instinctive behavior known as \"rooting\" with which they seek out the nipple. Sometimes a wet nurse is hired to feed the infant, although this is rare, especially in developed countries.\nAdequate food consumption at an early age is vital for an infant's development. The foundations of optimum health, growth, and neurodevelopment across the lifespan are established in the first 1,000 days of life. From birth to six months, infants should consume only breast milk or an unmodified milk substitute. As an infant's diet matures, finger foods may be introduced as well as fruit, vegetables and small amounts of meat.\nAs infants grow, food supplements can be added. Many parents choose commercial, ready-made baby foods to supplement breast milk or formula for the child, while others adapt their usual meals for the dietary needs of their child. Whole cow's milk can be used at one year, but lower-fat milk is not recommended until the child is two to three years old. Weaning is the process through which breast milk is eliminated from the infant's diet through the introduction of solid foods in exchange for milk. Until they are toilet-trained, infants in industrialized countries wear diapers. The transition from diapers to training pants is an important transition in the development of an infant to that of a toddler. Children need more sleep than adults\u2014up to 18 hours for newborn babies, with a declining rate as the child ages. Until babies learn to walk, they are carried in the arms, held in slings or baby carriers, or transported in baby carriages or strollers. Most industrialized countries have laws requiring child safety seats for babies in motor vehicles.\nCommon care issues.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBenefits of touch.\nExperiments have been done with infants up to four months of age using both positive touch (stroking or cuddling) and negative touch (poking, pinching, or tickling). The infants who received the positive touch cried less often and vocalized and smiled more than the infants who were touched negatively. Infants who were the recipients of negative touch have also been linked with emotional and behavioral problems later in life. A lower amount of physical violence in adults has been discovered in cultures with greater levels of positive physical touching.\nLanguage development.\nCaregivers of an infant are advised to pick up on the infant's facial expressions and mirror them. Reproducing and empathizing with their facial expressions enables infants to experience effectiveness and to recognize their own actions more easily (see mirror neurons). Exaggeratedly reproduced facial expressions and gestures are recommended, as they are clearer forms of expression. The baby's babbling should also be picked up and repeated. By imitating each other's sounds the first simple dialogues are initiated. Accentuated pronunciation and melodic intonation make it easier to recognize individual words in a sentence. However, it is not advisable to use simplified \"baby talk\" (e.g. \"Did you 'ouch'?\" instead of, \"Did you hurt yourself?\").\nEven if parents cannot yet understand infants' babbling, a timely response by parents to babbling leads to faster language acquisition. This was confirmed by researchers who first studied mothers' behavior towards 8-month-old infants and later tested the infants' vocabulary when they were 15 months old. A first important development of infants is the discovery that they can influence their parents through babbling (development of intentional communication). Parents can encourage this by engaging with their infants in babbling. This in turn promotes further language development, as infants then turn to their parents more often.\nPrevious studies have shown that the infant's speech is encouraged when parents, for example, smile in the infant's direction or touch the infant every time the infant looks at them and babbles. It also helps if parents respond to what they think their baby is saying (for example, giving a ball or commenting when the baby looks at the ball and babbles). Responding to sounds produced when the baby looks at an object (object-directed vocalizations) thus provide an opportunity to learn the name of the object. In this way, babies also learn that sounds are associated with objects. However, language development is only achieved if parents react positively (e.g. smile) in response to the infant's babbling. A high response rate without a connection to the infant's utterances does not lead to language promotion. It is detrimental to language development if a mother instead tries to divert the infant's attention to something else.\nSleep.\nA 2018 review analysed 146 studies on infant sleep behavior and listed several factors that show an effect on sleep duration and the number of night awakenings. However, research has indicated that frequent wakings are protective of SIDS.\nInfant sleep is not linear, ebbing and flowing with developmental milestones and age.\nThe National Sleep Foundation gives a rough recommendation on sleep hours, that commonly decreases with increasing age.\nMaternal sensitivity.\nMaternal sensitivity plays a particular role in the relationship with the infant and for favorable emotional development. This means being attentive to the infant's behavioral expressions, not misinterpreting the infant's expressions because of one's own moods, reacting immediately to the situation and finding a response that is appropriate to the context and the expressed needs. A secure attachment is promoted through empathetic and adequate as well as prompt responses. In accordance with their basic needs, infants show an inborn behavior of seeking closeness to the mother \u2013 or to another primary caregiver \u2013 and thus in turn foster an attachment. When separated from the mother, infants protest by crying and by body movements.\nOther.\nWearing has a calming effect on infants. A 2013 study showed that infants placed in a cradle cried and kicked more often and had an increased heart rate (so the infants were stressed), while those picked up and carried by the mother while walking around calmed down significantly. The effect of being held motionless in the arm was intermediate between that of being carried around and that of being put down. That carrying (e.g., in a baby sling) makes infants more content and makes them cry less had already been shown in a randomized study in 1986.\nFor infant feeding, breastfeeding is recommended by all major infant health organizations.\nMany airlines refuse boarding for all babies aged under 7 days (for domestic flights) or 14 days for international flights. Asiana Airlines allows babies to board international flights at 7 days of age. Garuda Indonesia disallows all babies under the age of 14 days to board any flights.\nDelta Air Lines allows infants to travel when they are less than 7 days old when they present a physician travel approval letter. Skywest will not allow an infant less than 8 days old on board.\nBehaviour.\nEmotional development.\nAttachment theory is primarily an evolutionary and ethological theory whereby the infant or child \"seeks proximity\" to a \"specified attachment figure\" in situations of alarm or distress for the purpose of survival. The forming of attachments is considered to be the foundation of the infant/child's capacity to form and conduct relationships throughout life. Attachment is not the same as love or affection although they often go together. Attachment and attachment behaviors tend to develop between the age of six months and 3 years. Infants become attached to adults who are sensitive and responsive in social interactions with the infant, and who remain as consistent caregivers for some time. Parental responses lead to the development of patterns of attachment, which in turn lead to 'internal working models' which will guide the individual's feelings, thoughts, and expectations in later relationships. There are a number of attachment 'styles' namely 'secure', 'anxious-ambivalent', 'anxious-avoidant', (all 'organized') and 'disorganized', some of which are more problematic than others. A lack of attachment or a seriously disrupted capacity for attachment could potentially amount to serious disorders.\nInfants develop distinct relationships to their mothers, fathers, siblings, and non-familial caregivers. Beside the dyadic attachment relationships also a good quality of the triadic relationships (mother \u2013 father \u2013 infant) is important for infant mental health development.\nResponse to sounds.\nInfants respond to the sound of snake hissing, angry voices of adults, the crackling sound of a fire, thunder, and the cries of other infants. They have a drop in heart rate, their eyes blinking, increased turning toward the speakers or parent, all of these indicating that they were paying more attention. This is believed to be an evolutionary response to danger. Babies' ability to accurately locate sounds is refined during their first year.\nHealth issues.\nDiseases.\nThe infant is undergoing many adaptations to extrauterine life, and its physiological systems, such as the immune system, are far from fully developed. Potential diseases of concern during the neonatal period include:\nMortality.\nInfant mortality is the death of an infant in the first year of life, often expressed as the number of deaths per 1,000 live births (infant mortality rate). Major causes of infant mortality include dehydration, infection, congenital malformation and SIDS.\nThis epidemiological indicator is recognized as a very important measure of the level of health care in a country because it is directly linked with the health status of infants, children, and pregnant women as well as access to medical care, socioeconomic conditions, and public health practices.\nThere is a positive relationship between national wealth and good health. The rich and industrialized countries of the world, prominently Canada, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Japan, spend a large proportion of their wealthy budget on the health care system. As, a result, their health care systems are very sophisticated, with many physicians, nurses, and other health care experts servicing the population. Thus, infant mortality is low. On the other hand, a country such as Mexico, which spends disproportionately less of its budget on healthcare, suffers from high mortality rates. This is because the general population is likely to be less healthy. In the U.S., infant mortality rates are especially high in minority groups. For instance, non-Hispanic black women have an infant mortality rate of 13.63 per 1,000 live births whereas in non-Hispanic white women it was much lower at a rate of 5.76 per 1,000 live births. The average infant mortality rate in the U.S. is 6.8 per 1,000 live births.\nBabyhood.\nBabyhood is a critical period in personality development when the foundations of adult personality are laid. In contrast, toddler is used to denote a baby that has achieved relative independence, in moving about, and feeding.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73166", "revid": "2308770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73166", "title": "Karl Salomo Zachariae von Lingenthal", "text": "Karl Salomo Zachariae von Lingenthal, (14 September 1769 \u2013 27 March 1843), a German jurist, was born at Meissen in Saxony, the son of a lawyer, and was the father of Karl Eduard Zachariae.\nVon Lingenthal received his early education at the famous public school of St. Afra in Meissen and later studied philosophy, history, mathematics and jurisprudence at the University of Leipzig. In 1792 he went to Wittenberg University as tutor to one of the counts of Lippe, and continued his legal studies.\nIn 1794 he became \"Privatdozent\", lecturing on Canon law, in 1798 extraordinary professor, and 1802 ordinary professor of feudal law.\nFrom that time to his death in 1843, with the exception of a short period in which public affairs occupied him, he poured out a succession of works covering the whole field of jurisprudence, and was a copious contributor to periodicals. In 1807 he received a call to Heidelberg, then beginning its period of splendour as a school of law. There, resisting many calls to G\u00f6ttingen, Berlin and other universities, he remained until his death. In 1820 he took his seat, as representative of his university, in the upper house of the newly constituted parliament of Baden.\nThough he himself prepared many reforms - notably in the harsh criminal code - he was, by instinct and conviction, conservative and totally opposed to the violent democratic spirit which dominated the second chamber, and brought it into conflict with the grand-duke and the German federal government.\nAfter the remodelling of the constitution in a \"reactionary\" sense, he was returned, in 1825, by the district of Heidelberg to the second chamber, of which he became the first vice-president, and in which he proved himself more \"loyal\" than the government itself. With the growth of parliamentary Liberalism, however, he grew disgusted with politics, from which he retired altogether in 1829. He then devoted himself wholly to juridical work and to the last days of his life toiled with the ardour of a young student.\nWorks and studies.\nThe German universities then enjoyed, in regard to legal questions of international importance, a moral jurisdiction dating from the Middle Ages, and Zachariae was often consulted as to questions arising in Germany, France and England.\nElaborate \"opinions,\" some of them forming veritable treatises - e.g. on Sir Augustus d'Este's claim to the dukedom of Sussex, Baron de Bode's claim as an English subject to a share in the French indemnity, the dispute as to the debts due to the elector of Hesse-Kassel (or Hesse-Cassel), confiscated by Napoleon, and the constitutional position of the Mecklenburg landowners - were composed by Zachariae.\nLarge fees which he received for these opinions and the great popularity of his lectures made him rich, and he was able to buy several estates; from one of which, Lingenthal, he took his title when, in 1842, he was ennobled by the grand-duke. He died on 27 March 1843. He had married in 1811, but his wife died four years later, leaving him a son, Karl Eduard.\nZachariae's writings are many and multifarious. They deal with almost every branch of jurisprudence; they are philosophical, historical and practical, and relate to Roman, Canon, German, French and English law. The first book of much consequence which he published was \"Die Einheit des Staats und der Kirche mit R\u00fccksicht auf die Deutsche Reichsverfassung\" (1797), a work on the relations of church and state, with special reference to the constitution of the empire, which displayed the writer's power of analysis and his skill in making a complicated set of facts appear to be deductions from a few principles.\nIn 1805 appeared \"Versuch einer allgemeinen Hermeneutik des Rechts\"; and in 1806 \"Die Wissenschaft der Gesetzgebung\", an attempt to find a new theoretical basis for society in place of the opportunist politics which had led to the cataclysm of the French Revolution. This basis he seemed to discover in something resembling Jeremy Bentham's utilitarianism.\nZachariae's last work of importance was \"Vierzig B\u00fccher vom Staate\" (1839\u20131842), to which his admirers point as his enduring monument. It has been compared to Montesquieu's \"L'Esprit des lois,\" \"The Spirit of the Laws\" and covers no small part of the field of Buckle's first volume of the History of Civilization. But though it contains proof of vast erudition and many original ideas as to the future of the state and of law, it lacks logical sequence, and is, consequently, full of contradictions.\nIts fundamental theory is that the state had its origin, not in a contract (Rousseau-Kant), but in the consciousness of a legal duty. What Machiavelli was to the Italians and Montesquieu to the French, Zachariae aspired to become to the Germans; but he lacked their patriotic inspiration, and so failed to exercise any permanent influence on the constitutional law of his country.\nAmong other important works of Zachariae are his \"Staatsrecht\", and his treatise on the Code Napol\u00e9on, \"Handbuch des Franz\u00f6sischen Civilrechts\" (1st print Heidelberg; 1808), of which several French editions were published, and which was translated into Italian. He strongly referred in his work to the importance of Roman Codification.\nZachariae edited with Karl Joseph Mittermaier the \"Kritische Zeitschrift f\u00fcr Rechtswissenschaft und Gesetzgebung des Auslandes\", and the introduction which he wrote illustrates his wide reading and his constant desire for new light upon old problems. Though Zachariae's works have been superseded, they were in their day epoch-making, and they have been superseded by books which, without them, could not have been written.\nFor an account of Zachariae and his works, see Robert von Mohl, \"Geschichte u. Literatur der Staatswissenschaften\" (1855\u201358), and Charles Brocher, \"K. S. Zachariae, sa vie et ses oeuvres\" (1870); cf. also his biography in \"Allgem. Deutsche Biographie\" (vol. 44) by Wilhelm Fischer, and \"Zachariae von Lingenthal\" in Franz von Holtzendorff's \"Rechts-Lexicon\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73168", "revid": "50097956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73168", "title": "Phineas Parkhurst Quimby", "text": "American writer and folk healer, 1802 \u2013 1866\nPhineas Parkhurst Quimby (February 16, 1802 \u2013 January 16, 1866) was an American folk healer, mentalist and mesmerist. His work is widely recognized as foundational to the New Thought spiritual movement.\nEarly life.\nBorn in the small town of Lebanon, New Hampshire, Quimby was one of seven children and the son of a blacksmith and his wife. As was customary for his social and economic class at that time, Quimby received little formal education. He later wrote that he suffered from consumption (now called tuberculosis) in his youth, a disease that then had no cure, and was prescribed calomel by his doctor. The calomel was no cure, and began to rot his teeth.\nQuimby began experimenting with his own ideas for a cure. He found that intense excitement (such as galloping on his horse) alleviated his pain for brief periods of time, and he became interested in the mind's ability to affect the body. He claimed to have cured himself of consumption by his methods.\nMesmerism.\nAbout 1836 Charles Poyen came to Maine from France on an extended lecture tour in New England about mesmerism, also widely known as hypnotism. He was a French mesmerist who followed in the tradition of Armand-Marie-Jacques de Chastenet, Marquis of Puys\u00e9gur. The \"McClure\u2019s\" magazine 1907 biographical serial of Mary Baker Eddy written by Willa Cather &amp; Georgine Milmine started the misunderstanding that Quimby was a follower of Poyen and followed him around\u2014which is not supported by the Quimby family or Quimby's writings. In fact, Quimby wrote about seven years later about hearing Poyen lecture: \"Mesmerism was introduced into the U[nited] State[s] by M. Charles Poyen, a French gentleman, who did not appear to be highly blest with the powers of magnetising to the satisfaction of his audience in his public lectures. I had the pleasure of listening to one of his lectures, &amp; pronounced it a humbug as a matter of course. And that his remarkable experiments, which were related, were, in my belief, equally true with witch craft\u2014I had never been a convert to witch craft, nor had even had any personal interviews[?] with ghosts or hobgoblins &amp; therefore considered all stories bordering on the marvelous as delusive\u2014\". Instead it appears that it was Robert Hanham Collyer, another practitioner of animal magnetism, who visited Belfast in 1841, who attracted Quimby's interest:\n\"Next came Dr Collyer, who perhaps did more to excite a spirit of enquirey throughout the community than any who have succeeded.\"\nAbout 1842 Quimby encountered Lucius Burkmar, a local youth who was particularly susceptible to hypnosis. Finding him useful to work with, Quimby and Burkmar developed a tour of their own. Quimby demonstrated mesmeric practice with Burkmar in front of large crowds.\nLater Quimby and Burkmar stopped touring. Quimby claimed to heal people of ailments which doctors could not cure. Quimby told his patients that disease was caused by false beliefs, and that the cure was in the explanation of this. Quimby published a flyer, \"TO THE SICK,\" that was used about late 1850s to early 1860s and read as follows. It is an important statement of his beliefs:\nDR. P. P. QUIMBY would respectfully announce to the citizens of [blank space to be filled in] and vicinity, that he will be at the [blank space to be filled in] where he will attend to those wishing to consult him in regard to their health, and, as his practise is unlike all other medical practise, it is necessary to say that he gives no medicines and makes no outward applications, but simply sits down by the patients, tells them their feelings and what they think is their disease. If the patients admit that he tells them their feelings, &amp;c., then his explanation is the cure; and, if he succeeds in correcting their error, he changes the fluids of the system and establishes the truth, or health. The Truth is the Cure. This mode of practise applies to all cases. If no explanation is given, no charge is made, for no effect is produced. His opinion without an explanation is useless, for it contains no knowledge, and would be like other medical opinions, worse than none. This error gives rise to all kinds of quackery, not only among regular physicians, but those whose aim is to deceive people by pretending to cure all diseases. The sick are anxious to get well, and they apply to these persons supposing them to be honest and friendly, whereas they are made to believe they are very sick and something must be done ere it is too late. Five or ten dollars is then paid, for the cure of some disease they never had, nor ever would have had but for the wrong impressions received from these quacks, or robbers, (as they might be called,) for it is the worst kind of robbery, tho' sanctioned by law. Now, if they will only look at the true secret of this description, they will find it is for their own selfish objects\u2014to sell their medicines. Herein consists their shrewdness!\u2014to impress patients with a wrong idea, namely\u2014that they have some disease. This makes them nervous and creates in their minds a disease that otherwise would never have been thought of. Wherefore he says to such, never consult a quack: you not only lose your money, but your health.&lt;br&gt;\nHe gives no opinion, therefore you lose nothing. If patients feel pain they know it, and if he describes their pain he feels it, and in his explanation lies the cure. Patients, of course, have some opinion as to what causes pain\u2014he has none, therefore the disagreement lies not in the pain, but in the cause of the pain. He has the advantage of patients, for it is very easy to convince them that he had no pain before he sat down by them. After this it becomes his duty to prove to them the cause of their trouble. This can only be explained to patients, for which explanation his charge is [blank space to be filled in] dollars. If necessary to see them more than once, [blank space to be filled in] dollars. This has been his mode of practice for the last seventeen years. For the past eight years he has given no medicines, nor made any outward applications.&lt;br&gt;\nThere are many who pretend to practice as he does, but when a person while in \"a trance,\" claims any power from the spirits of the departed, and recommends any kind of medicine to be taken internally or applied externally beware! believe them not, \"for by their fruits ye shall know them.\nPersonal life.\nQuimby married in 1827 and had a family of four children. One of his sons, George, was a follower and strong defender of him, working to differentiate his work from that of Mary Baker Eddy, a patient who later founded Christian Science. His son owned his father's writings, which were mostly not released until the 1920s, after the son's death.\nInventor.\nBy trade Quimby was a watch and clockmaker. He also was a daguerreotypist, and he invented items and held several patents for a variety of unrelated, larger mechanical devices.\nPatients.\nAmong the people who claimed to be cured by Quimby were Julius Dresser and his wife Annetta, the former from \"longstanding afflictions\" and the later from what at the time may have been labeled hysteria. Their son, Horatio Dresser, wrote extensively on Quimby's theories. He edited and collected many of Quimby's papers in his book \"Health and the Inner Life: An Analytical and Historical Study of Spiritual Healing and Theories\" (1906). He also edited and published selected Quimby papers in the book, \"The Quimby Manuscripts\" (1921).\nMary Baker Eddy, the founder of Christian Science, was perhaps the most influential person connected to Quimby, and according to Garry Wills her relation to Quimby is likely the main reason he is remembered today. She had sought healing from Quimby in 1862 after reading a circular which advertised that he gave \"no medicines or outward applications ... The Truth is the Cure.\" Eddy, who had been brought up in a religious Congregational household, had suffered from illnesses most of her life and had been searching for healing like what she read in the gospel. Later, claims were made that she was at least partially inspired by Quimby in her theology. However, both Quimby's son and Christian Scientists have pointed out major differences between Quimbyism and Christian Science. Biographer Gillian Gill and others agreed, pointing out that because of its theism, Christian Science differs considerably from the teachings of Quimby, who did not base his work in religion.\nWarren Felt Evans was a Methodist minister who was moving over to Swedenborgianism about the time that he visited Quimby twice about 1863. While he was reputed to be a student of Quimby, modern scholarship has shown that he considered himself an equal of Quimby and not a student.\nBeliefs.\nQuimby has sometimes been connected with Transcendentalism, especially by historians relying on the Dresser version of his writings, however his knowledge of Emerson and the Transcendentalists \"was no doubt tenuous and secondhand at best\" according to Albanese, and it was really only \"Dresser's spiritualized Quimby that fit this classification\" according to Hazen. \nLegacy.\nQuimby is sometimes identified as the \"founder of New Thought,\" but his actual influence is debated. Since Quimby's writings were not available until Dresser's \"The Quimby Manuscripts\" in 1921, they did not directly effect New Thought's development during its formative period. Barry Morton, a scholar of faith healing, has said that Quimby's constant practice of his mind cure method led him to make important discoveries related to curing psychosomatic illnesses, and in effect started a \"gnostic\" healing tradition. Some of his methods were adopted by John Alexander Dowie, who revolutionized Christian faith healing in the 1880s.\nBibliography.\nAlthough Quimby never published anything in his lifetime, a number of his writings have been published after his death. The publication of Quimby's writings and their editors are as follows:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73170", "revid": "22338671", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73170", "title": "Aladdin (1992 Disney film)", "text": "1992 animated Disney film\nAladdin is a 1992 American animated musical fantasy film based on the Arabic folktale \"Aladdin\" from \"One Thousand and One Nights\". Produced by Walt Disney Feature Animation, it was directed by John Musker and Ron Clements, both of whom co-wrote the screenplay with Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio. The film features the voices of Scott Weinger, Robin Williams, Linda Larkin, Jonathan Freeman, Frank Welker, Gilbert Gottfried, and Douglas Seale. The story follows an Arabian street urchin named Aladdin, who discovers a magic lamp containing a genie, with whose help he disguises himself as a wealthy prince and tries to impress the Sultan of Agrabah to win the heart of his free-spirited daughter, Princess Jasmine, as the Sultan's evil vizier, Jafar, plots to steal the magic lamp.\nLyricist Howard Ashman pitched the idea to Disney Studios president, Jeffrey Katzenberg, and the screenplay went through three drafts before Katzenberg would agree to its production. The animators based their designs on the work of caricaturist Al Hirschfeld, and computers were used for both finishing the artwork and creating some animated elements. Composed by Alan Menken, the musical score features six songs with lyrics written by both Ashman and Tim Rice (who took over following Ashman's death).\n\"Aladdin\" was released on November 11, 1992 to critical and commercial success: critics praised the animation and Williams' performance as the genie, and it became the highest-grossing film of the year, with an earning of over $504\u00a0million in worldwide box-office revenue. On release, it became the first animated feature to reach the half-billion-dollar mark, and was the fifth highest-grossing film at the time of its release and the highest-grossing animated film of all time until it was surpassed by \"The Lion King\" (1994).\n\"Aladdin\" garnered two Academy Awards, as well as other accolades for its soundtrack, which had the first number from a Disney feature to earn a Grammy Award for Song of the Year, for the film's \"A Whole New World\", sung by Peabo Bryson and Regina Belle. The film's home VHS release set a sales record, grossing approximately $500million in the United States. \"Aladdin\"'s success led to various derived works and other material inspired by the film, including two direct-to-video sequels, \"The Return of Jafar\" and \"Aladdin and the King of Thieves\", an animated television series, and a Broadway adaptation. A live-action film adaptation directed by Guy Ritchie was released on May 24, 2019.\nPlot.\nJafar, a sorcerer and the royal vizier of the fictional Middle Eastern city of Agrabah, seeks a magic lamp hidden within the Cave of Wonders that only \"the diamond in the rough\" can retrieve, who turns out to be a young kind-hearted street urchin named Aladdin, daily taking food alongside his pet monkey, Abu. Meanwhile, Princess Jasmine is unsatisfied with her sheltered life in the palace, so she escapes and encounters Aladdin. As a bond between Aladdin and Jasmine develops, Jafar has the palace guards capture and imprison Aladdin, who learns Jasmine's identity. Jasmine demands that Jafar release Aladdin, but he lies that Aladdin has already been beheaded.\nJafar, disguised as an elderly beggar, frees Aladdin and Abu and orders them to retrieve the lamp from the cave. The cave's guardian grants Aladdin entry, but warns him to touch only the lamp. Aladdin finds both the lamp and a flying magic carpet inside, but Abu grabs a large jewel and triggers a cave-in. They flee to the entrance and give the lamp to Jafar, who attempts to kill Aladdin and throws the pair into the cave. While trapped underground, Abu reveals to Aladdin that he stole the lamp back. Aladdin rubs the lamp, from which the Genie emerges. The Genie grants Aladdin three wishes, although Aladdin tricks him into freeing them from the cave without using a wish. Upon learning the Genie's desire to be released from servitude, Aladdin promises to use his last wish to free him. To woo Jasmine, Aladdin uses his first wish to become a prince.\nAt the suggestion of his parrot sidekick, Iago, Jafar plans to marry Jasmine and then kill both her and her father, the Sultan. Meanwhile, Aladdin arrives in Agrabah as Prince Ali, but Jasmine is uninterested in his advances. That night, Aladdin takes Jasmine on a romantic ride on the carpet. After she deduces that Aladdin is the boy she had met earlier, he lies that he sometimes dresses as a commoner to escape palace life. Aladdin brings Jasmine home, but Jafar's guards ambush him and throw him into the sea, where the Genie uses Aladdin's second wish to rescue him. Returning to the palace, Aladdin reveals Jafar's plot to Jasmine and the Sultan, but Jafar realizes Aladdin's identity and escapes from the guards.\nWith everything seemingly resolved, the Genie requests his freedom; Aladdin declines, worried that he needs the Genie's facade to stay with Jasmine. The heart-broken Genie retreats into his lamp, which is later stolen by Iago and brought to Jafar. Now the Genie's master, Jafar uses his first two wishes to become sultan, then a powerful sorcerer, and sends Aladdin to a frozen wasteland. Using the magic carpet, Aladdin escapes and returns to Agrabah, where he fights Jafar for the lamp. Aladdin taunts Jafar for being less powerful than the Genie, tricking him into using his last wish to become a genie himself. This causes Jafar to become trapped in his new lamp, taking Iago with him. The Genie throws Jafar's lamp into the Cave of Wonders.\nThe Genie encourages Aladdin to use his third wish to regain his royal title and legally marry Jasmine. Aladdin instead decides to keep his promise, wishing the Genie free. The Sultan allows Jasmine to marry whomever she chooses, and she gladly chooses Aladdin. The Genie bids the group a fond farewell and leaves to explore the world, while Aladdin and Jasmine start their new life together.\nProduction.\nScript and development.\nIn 1988, lyricist Howard Ashman had pitched the idea of an animated musical adaptation of \"Aladdin\". Ashman had written a 40-page film treatment, remaining faithful to the plot and characters of the original story but envisioned as a campy 1930s-style musical with a popular 1930s-style Genie. With partner, Alan Menken, Ashman composed several songs and added original characters to the story, such as Aladdin's friends, Babkak, Omar and Kassim.\nHowever, Michael Eisner did not think that a story set in the Middle East would be commercially appealing, and their project was removed from active development. Ashman and Menken were soon recruited to compose songs for \"Beauty and the Beast\". Linda Woolverton, who had also worked on \"Beauty and the Beast\", used their treatment and developed a draft with inspired elements from \"The Thief of Bagdad\", such as a villain named Jaf'far, an aged sidekick retired human thief named Abu, and a human handmaiden for the princess.\nDirectors Ron Clements and John Musker joined the production, picking \"Aladdin\" from three projects offered; the other two were an adaptation of \"Swan Lake\" and \"King of the Jungle\", which eventually became \"The Lion King\". Before Ashman's death in March 1991, he and Menken composed \"Arabian Nights\", \"Friend Like Me\", \"Prince Ali\" and Ashman's last song, \"Humiliate the Boy\".\nMusker and Clements wrote a draft of the screenplay, and delivered a story reel to studio chief Jeffrey Katzenberg in April 1991. Katzenberg thought that the script \"didn't engage\", and on a day known by the staff as \"Black Friday\", he demanded that the entire story be rewritten without rescheduling the film's November 25, 1992, release date. Katzenberg requested for Clements and Musker to not be heavily dependent on Ashman's vision, and the removal of Aladdin's mother, remarking: \"Eighty-six the mother. The mom's a zero.\"\nKatzenberg also influenced changing the plot element about Jasmine's marriage, which originally had her to be married by age sixteen as required by law, to remove the age\u2014the Sultan says only, \"your next birthday\"\u2014and make it more specific that her suitor needed to be a prince, which would also set up the ending in which the Sultan, inspired by Aladdin's altruism, changes the law to make it legal for Jasmine to able to marry anyone she deems worthy.\nScreenwriting duo Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio were brought in to rework the story, and the changes they made included the removal of Aladdin's mother, the strengthening of the character of Princess Jasmine, and the deletion of several of Ashman and Menken's songs. Aladdin's personality was rewritten to be \"a little rougher, like a young Harrison Ford\"; the parrot, Iago, originally conceived as an uptight British archetype, was reworked to a comic role after the filmmakers saw Gilbert Gottfried in \"Beverly Hills Cop II\", who was cast for the role. By October 1991, Katzenberg was satisfied with the new version of \"Aladdin\". As with Woolverton's screenplay, several characters and plot elements were based on \"The Thief of Bagdad\", although the location of the film was changed from Baghdad to the fictional Arabian city of Agrabah due to the Gulf War. Because the war prevented them from travelling to Baghdad for research, most of their research took place at the Saudi Arabian expo at the Los Angeles Convention Center.\nAccording to a 1994 article in \"The Advocate\", Katzenberg asked Thomas Schumacher, an openly gay producer, if any of the gay references in the film offended him, such as a scene in which the Genie becomes an \"effeminate clothier\", and another in which he tells Aladdin: \"I really like you too, kid, but that doesn't mean I want to pick out curtains with you.\" Schumacher responded that such references were in \"good fun\", remarking: \"I know we all argue amongst ourselves, but why try to deny the fact that swishy fashion designers exist? They do! What are we running from? Show me ten hairdressers; I'll show you eight gay men.\"\nDesign and animation.\nThe design for most characters is based on the work of caricaturist Al Hirschfeld, which production designer, Richard Vander Wende, also considered appropriate to the theme, due to similarities to the flowing and swooping lines found in Arabic calligraphy. Jafar's design was not based on Hirschfeld's work, because Jafar's supervising animator, Andreas Deja, wanted the character to be contrasting. Each character was animated alone, with the animators consulting with each other to make scenes with interrelating characters.\nBecause Aladdin's animator, Glen Keane, was working in the California branch of Walt Disney Feature Animation, and Jasmine's animator, Mark Henn, was in Florida at Disney-MGM Studios, they had to frequently phone, fax or send designs and discs to each other. The animators filmed monkeys at the San Francisco Zoo to study their movements for Abu's character. Iago's supervising animator, Will Finn, tried to incorporate some aspects of Gottfried's appearance into the parrot's design, especially his semi-closed eyes and the always-appearing teeth. Some aspects of the Sultan were inspired by the Wizard of Oz, to create a bumbling authority figure.\nAndreas Deja, Jafar's supervising animator, tried to incorporate Jonathan Freeman's facial expressions and gesturing into the character. Animator Randy Cartwright described working on the Magic Carpet as challenging, since it is only a rectangular shape that expresses itself through pantomime\u2014\"It's sort of like acting by origami\". Cartwright kept folding a piece of cloth while animating to see how to position the Carpet. After the character animation was done, the carpet's surface design was applied digitally.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"In early screenings, we played with him being a little bit younger, and he had a mother in the story.\u00a0[...]\u00a0In design he became more athletic-looking, more filled out, more of a young leading man, more of a teen-hunk version than before.\"\n\u2013John Musker on Aladdin's early design\nDesigned by a team led by supervising animator, Glen Keane, Aladdin was initially going to be as young as thirteen, and was originally made to resemble actor Michael J. Fox. During production, it was decided that the design was too boyish and lacked appeal, so the character was made \"seventeen to eighteen\", and redesigned to add elements derived from actor Tom Cruise and Calvin Klein models.\nFor the scenery design, various architectural elements seen in 19th-century orientalist paintings and photographs of the Arab world were used for guidance. Other inspirations for design were Disney's animated films from the 1940s and '50s and the 1940 film \"The Thief of Bagdad\". The coloring was done with the computerized CAPS process, and the color motifs were chosen according to the personality\u2014the protagonists use light colors, such as blue, the antagonists darker ones, such as red and black, and Agrabah and its palace use the neutral color, yellow. Computer animation was used for several elements of the film, such as the tiger entrance of the Cave of Wonders and the scene in which Aladdin tries to escape the collapsing cave. Some of the software that was used was Pixar's RenderMan.\nMusker and Clements created the Genie with Robin Williams in mind; although Katzenberg suggested actors such as John Candy, Steve Martin and Eddie Murphy, Williams was approached and eventually accepted the role. Williams came for voice recording sessions during breaks while filming two films he was making at the time, \"Hook\" and \"Toys\". Unusual for an animated film, much of Williams's dialogue was ad-libbed. For some scenes, Williams was given topics and dialogue suggestions, but allowed to improvise his lines. It is estimated that Williams improvised 52 characters. Eric Goldberg, the supervising animator for the Genie, reviewed Williams's recorded dialogue, and selected the best gags and lines that his crew would create character animation to match.\nThe producers added many in-jokes and references to Disney's previous works in the film, such as a \"cameo appearance\" from directors, Clements and Musker, and drawing some characters based on Disney workers. Beast, Sebastian and Pinocchio make brief appearances, and the wardrobe of the Genie at the end of the film\u2014a Goofy hat, a Hawaiian shirt, and sandals\u2014are a reference to a short film that Robin Williams did for the Disney-MGM Studios tour in the late 1980s.\nRobin Williams's conflicts with the studio.\nIn gratitude for his success with Touchstone Pictures's \"Good Morning, Vietnam\", Robin Williams voiced the Genie for SAG scale pay ($75,000) instead of his usual asking fee of $8\u00a0million, on the condition that neither his name nor image be used for marketing, and that his character take no more than 25% of space on advertising artwork, since Williams's film, \"Toys\", was scheduled for release one month following \"Aladdin\"'s debut. For financial reasons, the studio reneged on both counts, especially in poster art, by having the Genie in 25% of the image but having other major and supporting characters portrayed considerably smaller. The Disney Hyperion book, \"Aladdin: The Making of an Animated Film\", lists both of Williams's characters, \"the Peddler\" and \"the Genie\", ahead of main characters, but was forced to refer to him as only \"the actor signed to play the Genie\".\nDisney, while not using Williams's name in commercials as per the contract, used his voice for the Genie in the commercials and used the Genie character to sell toys and fast food tie-ins, without having to pay Williams additional money. Williams unhappily quipped at the time, \"You realize when you work for Disney why the mouse has only four fingers--because he can\u2019t pick up a check.\" Williams explained to \"New York\" magazine that his previous \"Mork &amp; Mindy\" merchandising was different because \"the image is theirs. But the voice, that's me; I gave them myself. When it happened, I said, 'You know I don't do that.' And they [Disney] apologized; they said it was done by other people.\"\nDisney attempted to assuage Williams by sending him a Pablo Picasso painting worth more than $1\u00a0million, but this move failed to repair the damaged relationship, as the painting was a self-portrait of Picasso as Vincent van Gogh, and apparently really \"clashed\" with the Williams's wilder home decor. Williams refused to sign for the 1994 direct-to-video sequel \"The Return of Jafar\", and he was replaced by Dan Castellaneta as the Genie's voice actor. When Jeffrey Katzenberg was replaced by Joe Roth as chairman at Walt Disney Studios, Roth organized a public apology to Williams. In turn, Williams would reprise the role in the second sequel, \"Aladdin and the King of Thieves\", in 1996.\nMusic.\n\"Aladdin\" was the third\u2014after \"The Little Mermaid\" and \"Beauty and the Beast\"\u2014and final Disney film that Alan Menken and Howard Ashman had collaborated on, with Tim Rice as lyricist after Ashman had died in March 1991. Although fourteen songs were written for \"Aladdin\", only seven are featured in the film, three by Ashman and four by Rice. Menken, Ashman and Rice were praised for creating a soundtrack that is \"consistently good, rivaling the best of Disney's other animated musicals from the '90s\".\nThe Special Edition soundtrack released in 2004 included four songs in early animation tests and a music video of one, \"Proud of Your Boy\", performed by Clay Aiken, which also appears on the album, \"Disneymania 3\". The pop duo version of the song, \"A Whole New World\", performed by Peabo Bryson and Regina Belle, which plays over the end credits, is, as of 2024[ [update]], the only Disney song to win a Grammy Award for Song of the Year.\nThemes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The original story was sort of a winning the lottery kind of thing\u00a0...\u00a0Like having anything you could wish for would be the greatest thing in the world and having it taken away from you is bad, but having it back is great. We didn't really want that to be the message of the movie.\"\n\u2013Ron Clements\nThe filmmakers thought that the moral message of the original tale was inappropriate, and decided to \"put a spin on it\" by making the fulfillment of wishes seem like a great solution, but eventually becoming a problem. Another major theme was avoiding an attempt to be what the person is not\u2014both Aladdin and Jasmine get into trouble pretending to be different people, and Prince Ali's persona fails to impress Jasmine, who falls for Aladdin only when she finds out who he truly is. Themes of imprisonment\u2014a fate that befalls most of the film's characters\u2014are also presented. Aladdin and Jasmine are limited by their lifestyles, while the Genie is attached to his lamp, and Jafar to the Sultan, being represented visually by the prison-like walls and bars of the Agrabah palace and the scene involving caged birds, which Jasmine eventually frees. Jasmine is also depicted as a different type of Disney Princess, being rebellious against the royal life and the social structure.\nRelease.\nBox office.\nA large promotion campaign preceded \"Aladdin\"'s debut in theaters, with the film's trailer attached to most Disney VHS releases (including \"One Hundred and One Dalmatians\" in April 1992 and \"Beauty and the Beast\" in October that year), and numerous tie-ins and licensees being released. \"Aladdin\" was released on November 11, 1992, in two theaters (the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles and the City Cinemas 1, 2 and 3rd Avenue in New York City), and grossed $196,664 in its first 5 days. The film expanded to 1,131 theaters on November 25, 1992, grossing $19.2\u00a0million for the weekend, finishing second at the U.S. box office, behind \"\". It took eight weeks for the film to surpass \"Beauty and the Beast\" as the most successful animated Disney film at the domestic box office (surpassed by \"The Lion King\" in 1994).\nFor its eighth week of release, \"Aladdin\" collected $15.6\u00a0million and reached the number one spot at the box office, beating \"A Few Good Men\". By February 1993, it surpassed \"Batman Returns\" to become the highest-grossing 1992 film domestically. In the United States, the film held the top spot five times weekly and breaks the record for the week between Christmas and New Year's Eve, with $32.2\u00a0million during its 22-week run. \"Aladdin\" was the most successful film of 1992, grossing $217\u00a0million in the United States, and over $504\u00a0million worldwide. It was the biggest gross for an animated film until \"The Lion King\" two years later, and was the first full-length animated film to gross $200\u00a0million in the United States and Canada. Additionally, it was the first film to cross that mark since \"\".\nOutside of the United States and Canada, the film grossed $200\u00a0million in 1993, and $250\u00a0million by January 1994. In Europe, \"Aladdin\" defeated \"Jurassic Park\" to become the continent's box-office leader for the week of November 26. It set an opening weekend record in South Africa. By 2002, the film grossed $287\u00a0million overseas and $504 million worldwide. It sold an estimated 52.4million tickets in the United States and Canada. When adjusted for inflation (in 2022 dollars), its domestic gross totaled $491.4million.\nHome media.\nThe film was first released in VHS on September 29, 1993, as part of the Walt Disney Classics line, although it was not officially advertised until October 1. In its first three days of availability, \"Aladdin\" sold 10.8\u00a0million copies, setting the fastest sales record and grossing about $ in the United States. In less than three weeks, the VHS release of \"Aladdin\" sold more than 16million units and grossed over $ in the United States. On release of the Sega Genesis video game adaptation in November, \"Aladdin\" sold approximately 30\u00a0million home video units, earning more than $ in the United States. It was the best-selling home video release until a record broken by \"The Lion King\". This VHS edition entered moratorium on April 30, 1994. A THX-certified widescreen LaserDisc was issued on September 21, 1994, and a Spanish-dubbed VHS for the American market was released on April 14, 1995. In Japan, 2.2million home video units were sold by 1995.\nOn October 5, 2004, \"Aladdin\" was re-released onto VHS and for the first time released on DVD, as part of Disney's Platinum Edition line. The DVD release featured retouched and cleaned-up animation, which had been prepared for the film's planned but ultimately cancelled IMAX reissue in 2003, and a second disc with bonus features. Accompanied by a $19\u00a0million marketing campaign, the DVD sold about 3\u00a0million units in its first month. The film's soundtrack was available in its original Dolby 5.1 track or in a new Disney Enhanced Home Theater Mix. The DVD went into moratorium in January 2008 with its sequels.\nWalt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released the film on a Diamond Edition Blu-ray on October 13, 2015. The film was released on Digital HD on September 29, 2015. In its first week of release on home media in the United States, the film topped the Blu-ray sales chart and debuted at number 2 at the Nielsen VideoScan First Alert chart, which tracks overall disc sales behind the disaster film, \"San Andreas\". The film's Blu-ray release sold 1.81million units and grossed $39\u00a0million, as of 2017[ [update]].\n\"Aladdin\" was re-released on HD and 4K digital download on August 27, 2019, with a physical media re-release on Blu-ray and Ultra HD Blu-ray on September 10, 2019, as part of the Walt Disney Signature Collection.\nReception.\nCritical reception.\nUpon release, \"Aladdin\" received positive reviews from film critics. The review aggregator website, Rotten Tomatoes, reports that of critics give the film a positive review, with an average rating of . The site's consensus reads: \"A highly entertaining entry in Disney's renaissance era, \"Aladdin\" is beautifully drawn, with near-classic songs and a cast of scene-stealing characters.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 86 out of 100, based on 25 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a rare \"A+\" grade, on a scale of A+ to F.\nMost critics praised Robin Williams's performance as the Genie, with Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" declaring that children \"needn't know precisely what Mr. Williams is evoking to understand how funny he is\". Brian Lowry of \"Variety\" praised the cast of characters, describing the expressive magic carpet as \"its most remarkable accomplishment\", and considered that \"\"Aladdin\" overcomes most story flaws thanks to sheer technical virtuosity\".\nPeter Travers of \"Rolling Stone\" stated that the film's comedic aspect made it accessible to both children and adults, a vision shared with Desson Howe of \"The Washington Post\", who also said that \"kids are still going to be entranced by the magic and adventure\". Warner Bros. Cartoons director Chuck Jones called the film \"the funniest feature ever made\", and James Berardinelli gave the film three and a half stars out of four, praising the \"crisp visuals and wonderful song-and-dance numbers\".\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" awarded the film 3 stars out of 4, and commented that Williams and animation \"were born for one another.\" However, he considered the music to be inferior to \"The Little Mermaid\" and \"Beauty and the Beast\", and claimed that Aladdin and Jasmine were \"pale and routine\". He criticized what he saw as the film's use of ethnic stereotypes, writing, \"Most of the Arab characters have exaggerated facial characteristics\u2014hooked noses, glowering brows, thick lips\u2014but Aladdin and the princess look like white American teenagers.\" Olly Richards of \"Empire Magazine\" awarded the film 5 stars out of 5, and said \"The movie that brought a hip new sensibility to animated features and which still stands up in the age of Pixar and DreamWorks thanks largely to a blistering improv turn from Robin Williams.\"\nThe film did not go without criticism. In a scathing review, Ed Gonzalez of \"Slant Magazine\" described the film as racist, ridiculous, and a \"narcissistic circus act\" from Robin Williams.\nControversies.\nOne of the verses of the opening song \"Arabian Nights\", in which the speaker uses the lyric \"where they cut off your ear if they don't like your face\" to describe his homeland, was altered to \"where it's flat and immense and the heat is intense\" following complaints from the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee (ADC). The revision first appeared on the 1993 video release. The original lyric was intact on the initial CD soundtrack release, but the rereleases use the edited lyric. The Broadway adaptation also uses the edited line. The subsequent line, however, \"It's barbaric, but hey, it's home\", was left intact.\nThe film has also been subject to criticism for its use of Orientalist stereotypes that depict Arab societies as exotic and foreign. The ADC has pointed out that the characters in the movie that the viewer is supposed to identify and sympathize with are generally presented with more white features, while the villains are presented with more Arab features. Other people have pointed out that the movie is quite inaccurate in its depictions of Arab societies. The main palace is inspired by Mughal architecture, but many of the clothes are Turkish in origin, and the outside environment is closer to that of the Arabian Desert.\n\"Entertainment Weekly\" ranked \"Aladdin\" in a list of the most controversial films in history due to this incident. The number has been described in reviews as \"simultaneously glamorizing and barbarizing the Arab world\". The ADC also complained about the portrayal of the lead characters, Aladdin and Jasmine. They accused the filmmakers of anglicizeing their features and giving them Anglo-American accents, in contrast to the other characters, which have \"foreign accents, grotesque facial features, and appear villainous or greedy\". In October 2020, in response to the criticism and in acknowledgment of racial stereotypes in the wake of the George Floyd protests, Disney added a disclaimer to many of their features, including \"Aladdin\", on Disney+, acknowledging the content as racist.\nAnother scene in which Aladdin is threatened by the tiger Rajah on the palace balcony was controversial as well. In the scene, some viewers reported hearing Aladdin quietly utter the phrase, \"Good teenagers, take off your clothes\", which they considered a subliminal reference to promiscuity. However, according to the commentary track on the 2004 DVD, while Musker and Clements did admit that Scott Weinger ad-libbed during the scene, they claimed that \"we did not record that, we would not record that\", and said that the line was, \"Good tiger, take off and go...\", and that the word, \"tiger\", is overlapped by Rajah's snarl. After the word \"tiger\", a second voice can be heard that can be assumed to have been accidentally grafted into the soundtrack. Later editions of the movie edit the line to avoid further speculation.\nAnimation enthusiasts have noticed similarities between \"Aladdin\" and Richard Williams's unfinished film, \"The Thief and the Cobbler\" (also known as \"The Princess and the Cobbler\" under Allied Filmmakers and \"Arabian Knight\" under Miramax Films). These similarities include a similar plot, similar characters, scenes, and background designs, and the antagonist Zig-Zag's resemblance to character design and mannerisms to the Genie and Jafar. Although \"Aladdin\" was released first, \"The Thief and the Cobbler\" initially began production in the 1960s, and was mired in difficulties, including financial problems, copyright issues, story revisions and late production times caused by separate studios trying to finish the film after Richard Williams was fired from the project for lack of finished work. The late release, coupled with Miramax purchasing and re-editing the film, has sometimes resulted in \"The Thief and the Cobbler\" being labeled a rip-off of \"Aladdin\".\nLegacy.\nAlongside its role in the Disney Renaissance, \"Aladdin\" is often credited as the catalyst in the rise of casting film stars as voice actors in Hollywood-animated films with the success of Robin Williams's Genie performance. Entertainment writer Scott Meslow wrote that, compared with the character of Aladdin, \"Williams's Genie is the character audiences responded to, and\u2014more importantly to Disney\u2014its most marketable character by far\", which he concluded led to the \"celebrification\" of later animated films, such as \"Shark Tale\" and \"Puss in Boots\".\nSequels and spin-offs.\nBefore the theatrical release of \"Aladdin\", Disney commissioned Tad Stones and Alan Zaslove to produce an animated series of \"Aladdin\", following the recently developed one of \"The Little Mermaid\". Stones liked the character of Iago and wanted him in the cast, so he came up with an idea for a followup story that would free him from Jafar to join Aladdin. Stones suggested turning it into a wholesale direct-to-video sequel, as opposed to an hourlong television special, and \"The Return of Jafar\" was released in June 1994. The film saw the debut of a new character, Abis Mal, voiced by Jason Alexander, and all of the original cast returned, except for Robin Williams, replaced by Dan Castellaneta, and Douglas Seale, replaced by Val Bettin.\nThe plot focuses mainly on Jafar seeking revenge on Aladdin. However, this time, with Iago on Aladdin's side, Abis Mal becomes Jafar's new henchman. Aside from a preview on The Disney Channel in early 1994, the \"Aladdin\" TV series followed in September on the syndicated The Disney Afternoon block. The episodes focused on Aladdin's adventures after the events of the second film. In 1996, the final sequel to \"Aladdin\", \"Aladdin and the King of Thieves\" was released on video. The story concludes as Aladdin and Jasmine are about to be married and Aladdin discovers that his father is still alive, but is the king of all thieves in Agrabah.\nThe \"Aladdin\" characters made a crossover with \"\", and were featured as guests in the television series, \"House of Mouse\", and related works to those series\u2014Jafar was the leader of the villains in \"Mickey's House of Villains\".\nThe film also inspired a Disney On Ice presentation, and two attractions in Disney's theme parks: \"The Magic Carpets of Aladdin\", a Dumbo the Flying Elephant-like ride at both Magic Kingdom at Walt Disney World Resort, Walt Disney Studios Park at Disneyland Resort Paris and Tokyo DisneySea;, the show \"\" at Disney's California Adventure Park and The Magic Lamp Theater at Tokyo DisneySea.\nVideo games.\nWith the film's release, three different video games based on \"Aladdin\" were released, one by Virgin Interactive for the Mega Drive, Game Boy (ported to the Game Boy Color), Nintendo Entertainment System, Amiga and IBM PC compatibles; another by SIMS for the Game Gear and Master System; and a third by Capcom for the Super NES (ported to the Game Boy Advance in 2002).\nThe television series inspired another game by Argonaut Games, entitled \"Aladdin: Nasira's Revenge\" and released in 2000 for the PlayStation and PC. Also, in 2004 Vivendi Universal released \"Disney's Aladdin Chess Adventures\", a chess computer game with the Aladdin license.\nThe \"Kingdom Hearts\" series features a playable \"Aladdin\" world known as Agrabah. In \"Kingdom Hearts\" and \"\", the plotline is loosely related to the storyline of the original film. In \"Kingdom Hearts II\", it is a mixture of \"Aladdin\" and \"The Return of Jafar\". The Genie is also a recurring summon in the series.\nLive-action adaptation.\nOn July 15, 2015, the studio announced the development of a live-action comedy adventure prequel called \"Genies\". The film was being written by Mark Swift and Damian Shannon, while Tripp Vinson was on board to produce via his Vinson Films banner. It was intended to serve as a lead to the live-action \"Aladdin\" film. On November 8, Disney revealed that it had originally planned to use Robin Williams's unused lines from the 1991\u201392 recording sessions for the film, but that his will prohibited the studio from using his likeness for 25 years after his death in 2014.\nIn October 2016, it was reported that Disney was developing a live-action adaptation of \"Aladdin\", with Guy Ritchie signed to direct the film. John August wrote the script, which retains the musical elements of the original film, while Dan Lin is attached as producer. Lin revealed that they were looking for a diverse cast. In April 2017, Will Smith entered talks to play the Genie. Alan Menken said that filming was slated to begin in August 2017.\nProduction had originally been scheduled to begin in July, but was delayed due to Disney having trouble finding the right people to play Aladdin and Jasmine. British actress Naomi Scott and Indian actress Tara Sutaria were being considered to play Jasmine. For the role of Aladdin, British actors Riz Ahmed and Dev Patel were initially considered, but it was decided that a newcomer should be cast in the role. In July 2017, it was announced that Egyptian-Canadian actor Mena Massoud had been cast as Aladdin, Scott as Jasmine, and Smith as the Genie. At the 2017 D23 Expo, Menken announced that he would be cowriting new songs for the film with Academy Award winners Pasek and Paul, while Vanessa Taylor would rewrite the script.\nIn August 2017, Marwan Kenzari, Nasim Pedrad and Numan Acar joined the cast as Jafar, Dalia and Hakim, respectively. The following month, Billy Magnussen and Navid Negahban were cast as Prince Anders and the Sultan, respectively. Filming began September 6, 2017, at Longcross Studios and concluded January 24, 2018. The film was released May 24, 2019.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73171", "revid": "40943757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73171", "title": "Booze", "text": "Booze may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "73172", "revid": "16226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73172", "title": "Thrymskvitha", "text": ""}
{"id": "73174", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73174", "title": "Kiribati/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "73176", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73176", "title": "Kiribati/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "73177", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73177", "title": "Kiribati/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "73178", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73178", "title": "Kiribati/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "73179", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73179", "title": "Kiribati/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "73180", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73180", "title": "Kiribati/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "73185", "revid": "31", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73185", "title": "Non-government organisation", "text": ""}
{"id": "73186", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73186", "title": "Numbers in Germanic paganism", "text": "The numbers three, nine, and other multiples of three are significant numbers in Germanic paganism. Both numbers (and multiples thereof) appear throughout surviving attestations of ancient Germanic folklore, in both mythology and Germanic paganism. Along with the number 27, both numbers also figure into the lunar Germanic calendar.\nExamples.\nEmphasis on the numbers three, nine, and multiples of three occur frequently in the ancient Germanic record. Examples include:\nWest Germanic.\n\"Old English\"\n\"Old High German\"\nNorth Germanic.\nThe North Germanic record frequently mentions the numbers three, nine, and multiples of three. A few examples of these many occurrences in Norse mythology include:\nExterior to texts on mythology, accounts of Temple of Uppsala by Adam of Bremen in what is today Sweden and of Lejre in today's Denmark by Thietmar of Merseburg purport that pagan sacrificial feasts occurred at these locations lasting nine days, where \"supposedly nine victims were sacrificed each day\". According to Garde\u0142a, \"Leaving aside the problem of the historical veracity of these two Latin accounts, as well as the lack of tangible traces of violent and large-scale sacrificial acts in the archaeological record at Uppsala and Lejre, the fact that both Adam and Thietmar consistently refer to the number nine in ritual contexts leads to the supposition that the chroniclers wove their stories around an authentic and widespread idea rooted in the Viking Age.\"\nIbn Fadl\u0101n's eyewitness account of the Viking Age Scandinavian Rus' in the first half of the 10th century on the Volga river mentions that the deceased Rus' leader's body was ritually left in a chamber for nine days before being set ablaze on a burning ship with a variety of goods and the body of a female slave.\nArchaeology.\nA variety of objects found in the Germanic cultural sphere have been interpreted by scholars as reflecting a particular focus on the number nine. These include:\nScholastic reception.\nAccording to scholar Rudolf Simek, \"apart from the number three, which played a role in many other cultures, nine is the mythical number of the Germanic tribes. Documentation for the number nine is found in both myth and cult.\" In addition to the importance of three and nine, Simek highlights the importance of the number 27 (27/3=9) for the Germanic lunar calendar.\nScholars Mindy MacLeod and Bernard Mees note that, \"the number nine plays a significant role in Germanic folklore: charms frequently contain nine ingredients or specify a ritual to be performed nine times\". The two highlight the instruction in the Old English \"\u00c6cerbot\" for the speaker to \"turn to the east and bow nine times\", the \"Nine Herbs Charm\", and a variety of other items as examples.\nAs highlighted by scholar Leszek Garde\u0142a (National Museum of Denmark), \"surviving sagas and poems reveal that certain numbers held special significance among Norse societies. This was certainly the case with the numbers three and nine which are frequently mentioned in connection with the sphere of religion and/or ritual practice.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73188", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73188", "title": "St. Peter's Basilica", "text": "Roman Catholic basilica and landmark in Vatican City\nThe Papal Basilica of Saint Peter in the Vatican (), or simply St. Peter's Basilica (; ), is a church of the Italian High Renaissance located in Vatican City, an independent microstate enclaved within the city of Rome, Italy. It was initially planned in the 15th century by Pope Nicholas V and then Pope Julius\u00a0II to replace the ageing Old St. Peter's Basilica, which was built in the fourth century by Roman emperor Constantine the Great. Construction of the present basilica began on 18\u00a0April 1506 and was completed on 18\u00a0November 1626.\nDesigned principally by Donato Bramante, Michelangelo, and Carlo Maderno, with piazza and fittings by Gian Lorenzo Bernini, Saint Peter's is one of the most renowned works of Italian Renaissance architecture and is the largest church in the world by interior measure. While it is neither the mother church of the Catholic Church nor the cathedral of the Diocese of Rome (these equivalent titles being held by the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran in Rome), Saint Peter's is regarded as one of the holiest Catholic shrines. It has been described as \"holding a unique position in the Christian world\", and as \"the greatest of all churches of Christendom\".\nCatholic tradition holds that the basilica is the burial site of Saint Peter, chief among Jesus's apostles and also the first Bishop of Rome (Pope). Saint Peter's tomb is directly below the high altar of the basilica, also known as the \"Altar of the Confession\". For this reason, many popes, cardinals and bishops have been interred at St. Peter's since the Early Christian period.\nSt. Peter's is famous as a place of pilgrimage and for its liturgical functions. The pope presides at a number of liturgies throughout the year both within the basilica or the adjoining St. Peter's Square; these liturgies draw audiences numbering from 15,000 to over 80,000 people. St. Peter's has many historical associations, with the early Christian Church, the Papacy, the Protestant Reformation and Catholic Counter-Reformation and numerous artists, especially Michelangelo. As a work of architecture, it is regarded as the greatest building of its age. \nSt. Peter's is ranked second, after the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran, among the four churches in the world that hold the rank of major papal basilica, all four of which are in Rome, and is also one of the Seven Pilgrim Churches of Rome. Contrary to popular misconception, it is not a cathedral because it is not the seat of a bishop.\nOverview.\nSt. Peter's is a church built in the Renaissance style located in the Vatican City west of the River Tiber and near the Janiculum Hill and Hadrian's Mausoleum. Its central dome dominates the skyline of Rome. The basilica is approached via St. Peter's Square, a forecourt in two sections, both surrounded by tall colonnades. The first space is oval and the second trapezoidal. The fa\u00e7ade of the basilica, with a giant order of columns, stretches across the end of the square and is approached by steps on which stand two statues of the first-century apostles to Rome, Saints Peter and Paul.\nThe basilica is cruciform in shape, with an elongated nave in the Latin cross form but the early designs were for a centrally planned structure and this is still in evidence in the architecture. The central space is dominated both externally and internally by one of the largest domes in the world. Set into the niches of the dome's four gargantuan support piers are colossal statues representing the four major holy relics believed to be held in the basilica: St. Longinus with his spear, St. Helena with the True Cross, St. Veronica with her veil, and St. Andrew, whose skull was possessed by the Vatican until the 20th century. The entrance is through a narthex, or entrance hall, which stretches across the building. One of the decorated bronze doors leading from the narthex is the Holy Door, opened only during jubilees.\nThe interior dimensions are vast when compared to other churches. One author wrote: \"Only gradually does it dawn upon us \u2013 as we watch people draw near to this or that monument, strangely they appear to shrink; they are, of course, dwarfed by the scale of everything in the building. This in its turn overwhelms us.\"\nThe nave which leads to the central dome is in three bays, with piers supporting a barrel vault, the highest of any church. The nave is framed by wide aisles which have a number of chapels off them. There are also chapels surrounding the dome. Moving around the basilica in a clockwise direction they are: The Baptistery, the Chapel of the Presentation of the Virgin, the larger Choir Chapel, the altar of the Transfiguration, the Clementine Chapel with the altar of Saint Gregory, the Sacristy Entrance, the Altar of the Lie, the left transept with altars to the Crucifixion of Saint Peter, Saint Joseph and Saint Thomas, the altar of the Sacred Heart, the Chapel of the Madonna of Column, the altar of Saint Peter and the Paralytic, the apse with the Chair of Saint Peter, the altar of Saint Peter raising Tabitha, the altar of St. Petronilla, the altar of the Archangel Michael, the altar of the Navicella, the right transept with altars of Saint Erasmus, Saints Processo and Martiniano, and Saint Wenceslas, the altar of St. Jerome, the altar of Saint Basil, the Gregorian Chapel with the altar of the Madonna of Succour, the larger Chapel of the Holy Sacrament, the Chapel of Saint Sebastian and the Chapel of the Piet\u00e0. The Monuments, in a clockwise direction, are to: Maria Clementina Sobieska, The Stuarts, Benedict XV, John XXIII, St. Pius X, Innocent VIII, Leo XI, Innocent XI, Pius VII, Pius VIII, Alexander VII, Alexander VIII, Paul III, Urban VIII, Clement X, Clement XIII, Benedict XIV, St Peter (Bronze Statue), Gregory XVI, Gregory XIV, Gregory XIII, Matilda of Canossa, Innocent XII, Pius XII, Pius XI, Christina of Sweden, and Leo XII.\nAt the heart of the basilica, beneath the high altar, is the \"Confessio\" or \"Chapel of the Confession\", named in reference to the confession of faith by St. Peter, which led to his martyrdom. Two curving marble staircases lead to this underground chapel at the level of the Constantinian church and immediately above the purported burial place of Saint Peter. Pope Gregory XVI granted a \"perpetual privilege\" in 1836 authorizing any Catholic priest to celebrate Mass at the altar in the chapel.\nThe entire interior of St. Peter's is lavishly decorated with marble, reliefs, architectural sculpture and gilding. The basilica contains a large number of tombs of popes and other notable people, many of which are considered outstanding artworks. There are also a number of sculptures in niches and chapels, including Michelangelo's \"Piet\u00e0\". The central feature is a baldachin, or canopy over the Papal Altar, designed by Gian Lorenzo Bernini. The apse culminates in a sculptural ensemble, also by Bernini, and containing the symbolic \"Chair of Saint Peter\".\nThe American philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson described St. Peter's as \"an ornament of the earth\u00a0... the sublime of the beautiful.\"\nStatus.\nSt. Peter's Basilica is one of the papal basilicas (previously styled \"patriarchal basilicas\") and one of the four Major Basilicas of Rome the others (all of which are also Papal Basilicas) being the Basilicas of St. John Lateran, St. Mary Major, and St. Paul outside the Walls. The rank of major basilica confers on St. Peter's Basilica precedence before all minor basilicas worldwide. However, unlike all the other Papal Major Basilicas, it is wholly within the territory, and thus the sovereign jurisdiction, of the Vatican City State, and not that of Italy.\nIt is the most prominent building in the Vatican City. Its dome is a feature of the skyline of Rome and covers an area of . One of the holiest sites of Christianity and Catholic Tradition, it is traditionally the burial site of its titular, St. Peter, who was the head of the twelve Apostles of Jesus and, according to tradition, the first Bishop of Antioch and later the first Bishop of Rome, rendering him the first Pope. Although the New Testament does not mention St. Peter's martyrdom in Rome, tradition, based on the writings of the Fathers of the Church, holds that his tomb is below the baldachin and the altar of the Basilica in the \"Confession\". For this reason, many Popes have, from the early years of the Church, been buried near Pope St. Peter in the necropolis beneath the Basilica. Construction of the current basilica, over the old Constantinian basilica, began on 18 April 1506 and finished in 1615. At length, on 18 November 1626 Pope Urban VIII solemnly dedicated the Basilica.\nSt. Peter's Basilica is neither the Pope's official seat nor first in rank among the Major Basilicas of Rome. This honour is held by the Pope's cathedral, the Archbasilica of St. John Lateran, the mother church of all churches in communion with the Catholic Church. However, St. Peter's is functionally the Pope's principal church, as most Papal liturgies and ceremonies take place there due to its size, proximity to the Papal residence, and location within the Vatican City proper. The \"Chair of Saint Peter\", or cathedra, an ancient chair sometimes presumed to have been used by St. Peter himself, but which was a gift from Charles the Bald and used by many popes, symbolizes the continuing line of apostolic succession from St. Peter to the reigning Pope. It occupies an elevated position in the apse of the Basilica, supported symbolically by the Doctors of the Church and enlightened symbolically by the Holy Spirit.\nAs one of the constituent structures of the historically and architecturally significant Vatican City, St. Peter's Basilica was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1984 under criteria (i), (ii), (iv), and (vi). With an exterior area of , an interior area of , St. Peter's Basilica is the largest Christian church building in the world by the two latter metrics and the second largest by the first as of 2016[ [update]]. The top of its dome, at , also places it as the second tallest building in Rome as of 2016[ [update]]. The dome's soaring height placed it among the tallest buildings of the Old World, and it continues to hold the title of tallest dome in the world. Though the largest dome in the world by diameter at the time of its completion, it no longer holds this distinction.\nHistory.\nSaint Peter's burial site.\nAfter the crucifixion of Jesus, it is recorded in the Biblical book of the Acts of the Apostles that one of his twelve disciples, Simon known as Saint Peter, a fisherman from Galilee, took a leadership position among Jesus' followers and was of great importance in the founding of the Christian Church. The name Peter is \"Petrus\" in Latin and \"Petros\" in Greek, deriving from \"petra\" which means \"stone\" or \"rock\" in Greek, and is the literal translation of the Aramaic \"Kepa\", the name given to Simon by Jesus. (, and see )\nCatholic tradition holds that Peter, after a ministry of thirty-four years, travelled to Rome and met his martyrdom there along with Paul on 13 October 64 AD during the reign of the Roman Emperor Nero. His execution was one of the many martyrdoms of Christians following the Great Fire of Rome. According to Jerome, Peter was crucified head downwards, by his own request because he considered himself unworthy to die in the same manner as Jesus. The crucifixion took place near an ancient Egyptian obelisk in the Circus of Nero. The obelisk now stands in St. Peter's Square and is revered as a \"witness\" to Peter's death. It is one of several ancient Obelisks of Rome.\nAccording to tradition, Peter's remains were buried just outside the Circus, on the Mons Vaticanus across the Via Cornelia from the Circus, less than from his place of death. The Via Cornelia was a road which ran east-to-west along the north wall of the Circus on land now covered by the southern portions of the Basilica and St. Peter's Square. A shrine was built on this site some years later. Almost three hundred years later, Old St. Peter's Basilica was constructed over this site.\nThe area now covered by the Vatican City had been a cemetery for some years before the Circus of Nero was built. It was a burial ground for the numerous executions in the Circus and contained many Christian burials as for many years after the burial of Saint Peter, many Christians chose to be buried near him.\nIn 1939, in the reign of Pope Pius XII, 10 years of archaeological research began under the crypt of the basilica in an area inaccessible since the ninth century. The excavations revealed the remains of shrines of different periods at different levels, from Clement VIII (1594) to Callixtus II (1123) and Gregory I (590\u2013604), built over an aedicula containing fragments of bones that were folded in a tissue with gold decorations, tinted with the precious murex purple. Although it could not be determined with certainty that the bones were those of Peter, the rare vestments suggested a burial of great importance. On 23 December 1950, in his pre-Christmas radio broadcast to the world, Pope Pius XII announced the discovery of Saint Peter's tomb.\nOld St. Peter's Basilica.\nOld St. Peter's Basilica was the fourth-century church begun by the Emperor Constantine the Great between 319 and 333 AD. It was of typical basilical form, a wide nave and two aisles on each side and an apsidal end, with the addition of a transept or bema, giving the building the shape of a tau cross. It was over long, and the entrance was preceded by a large colonnaded atrium. This church had been built over the small shrine believed to mark the burial place of St. Peter, though the tomb was \"smashed\" in 846 AD. It contained a very large number of burials and memorials, including those of most of the popes from St. Peter to the 15th century. Like all of the earliest churches in Rome, both this church and its successor had the entrance to the east and the apse at the west end of the building. Since the construction of the current basilica, the name \"Old St. Peter's Basilica\" has been used for its predecessor to distinguish the two buildings.\nPlan to rebuild.\nBy the end of the 15th century, having been neglected during the period of the Avignon Papacy, the old basilica had fallen into disrepair. It appears that the first pope to consider rebuilding or at least making radical changes was Pope Nicholas V (1447\u20131455). He commissioned work on the old building from Leone Battista Alberti and Bernardo Rossellino and also had Rossellino design a plan for an entirely new basilica, or an extreme modification of the old. His reign was frustrated by political problems and when he died, little had been achieved. He had, however, ordered the demolition of the Colosseum and by the time of his death, 2,522 cartloads of stone had been transported for use in the new building. The foundations were completed for a new transept and choir to form a domed Latin cross with the preserved nave and side aisles of the old basilica. Some walls for the choir had also been built.\nPope Julius II planned far more for St Peter's than Nicholas V's program of repair or modification. Julius was at that time planning his own tomb, which was to be designed and adorned with sculpture by Michelangelo and placed within St Peter's. In 1505 Julius made a decision to demolish the ancient basilica and replace it with a monumental structure to house his enormous tomb and \"aggrandize himself in the popular imagination\". A competition was held, and a number of the designs have survived at the Uffizi Gallery. A succession of popes and architects followed in the next 120 years, their combined efforts resulting in the present building. The scheme begun by Julius II continued through the reigns of Leo X (1513\u20131521), Adrian VI (1522\u20131523), Clement VII (1523\u20131534), Paul III (1534\u20131549), Julius III (1550\u20131555), Marcellus II (1555), Paul IV (1555\u20131559), Pius IV (1559\u20131565), Pius V (saint) (1565\u20131572), Gregory XIII (1572\u20131585), Sixtus V (1585\u20131590), Urban VII (1590), Gregory XIV (1590\u20131591), Innocent IX (1591), Clement VIII (1592\u20131605), Leo XI (1605), Paul V (1605\u20131621), Gregory XV (1621\u20131623), Urban VIII (1623\u20131644) and Innocent X (1644\u20131655).\nFinancing with indulgences.\nOne method employed to finance the building of St. Peter's Basilica was the granting of indulgences in return for contributions. A major promoter of this method of fund-raising was Albrecht, Archbishop of Mainz and Magdeburg, who had to clear debts owed to the Roman Curia by contributing to the rebuilding program. To facilitate this, he appointed the German Dominican preacher Johann Tetzel, whose salesmanship provoked a scandal and led to the Protestant Reformation.\nDigital copies.\nIn the 2020s, the Vatican began seeking to use digital recreations of the Basilica in order to enhance education and allow people to experience it without needing to visit in person. In 2024, the Vatican partnered with Microsoft to create an interactive 3D model of the Basilica. The model was generated with artificial intelligence using over 400,000 high-resolution photographs taken by drones. Microsoft president Brad Smith described the project as \"one of the most technologically advanced and sophisticated projects of its kind that has ever been pursued\". The Vatican further collaborated with Microsoft in 2025 through the creation of another interactive version of the Basilica, this time recreated in the video game \"Minecraft\". The \"Minecraft\" map, titled \"Peter is Here\", was developed as part of the 2025 Jubilee with the goal of engaging young audiences.\nArchitecture.\nSuccessive plans.\nPope Julius's scheme for the grandest building in Christendom was the subject of a competition for which a number of entries remain intact in the Uffizi Gallery, Florence. It was the design of Donato Bramante that was selected, and for which the foundation stone was laid in 1506. This plan was in the form of an enormous Greek cross with a dome inspired by that of the huge circular Roman temple, the Pantheon. The main difference between Bramante's design and that of the Pantheon is that where the dome of the Pantheon is supported by a continuous wall, that of the new basilica was to be supported only on four large piers. This feature was maintained in the ultimate design. Bramante's dome was to be surmounted by a lantern with its own small dome but otherwise very similar in form to the Early Renaissance lantern of Florence Cathedral designed for Brunelleschi's dome by Michelozzo.\nBramante had envisioned that the central dome would be surrounded by four lower domes at the diagonal axes. The equal chancel, nave and transept arms were each to be of two bays ending in an apse. At each corner of the building was to stand a tower, so that the overall plan was square, with the apses projecting at the cardinal points. Each apse had two large radial buttresses, which squared off its semi-circular shape.\nWhen Pope Julius died in 1513, Bramante was replaced with Giuliano da Sangallo and Fra Giocondo, who both died in 1515 (Bramante himself having died the previous year). Raphael was confirmed as the architect of St. Peter's on 1 August 1514. The main change in his plan is the nave of five bays, with a row of complex apsidal chapels off the aisles on either side. Raphael's plan for the chancel and transepts made the squareness of the exterior walls more definite by reducing the size of the towers, and the semi-circular apses more clearly defined by encircling each with an ambulatory.\nIn 1520 Raphael also died, aged 37, and his successor Baldassare Peruzzi maintained changes that Raphael had proposed to the internal arrangement of the three main apses, but otherwise reverted to the Greek cross plan and other features of Bramante. This plan did not go ahead because of various difficulties of both Church and state. In 1527 Rome was sacked and plundered by Emperor Charles V. Peruzzi died in 1536 without his plan being realized.\nAt this point Antonio da Sangallo the Younger submitted a plan which combines features of Peruzzi, Raphael and Bramante in its design and extends the building into a short nave with a wide fa\u00e7ade and portico of dynamic projection. His proposal for the dome was much more elaborate in both structure and decoration than that of Bramante and included ribs on the exterior. Like Bramante, Sangallo proposed that the dome be surmounted by a lantern which he redesigned to a larger and much more elaborate form. Sangallo's main practical contribution was to strengthen Bramante's piers, which had begun to crack.\nOn 1 January 1547, in the reign of Pope Paul III, Michelangelo, then in his seventies, succeeded Sangallo the Younger as \"Capomaestro\", the superintendent of the building program at St Peter's. He is to be regarded as the principal designer of a large part of the building as it stands today, and as having brought the construction to a point where it could be carried through. He did not take on the job with pleasure; it was forced upon him by Pope Paul, frustrated at the death of his chosen candidate, Giulio Romano and the refusal of Jacopo Sansovino to leave Venice. Michelangelo wrote, \"I undertake this only for the love of God and in honour of the Apostle\". He insisted that he should be given a free hand to achieve the ultimate aim by whatever means he saw fit. \nMichelangelo's contribution.\nMichelangelo took over a building site at which four piers, enormous beyond any constructed since ancient Roman times, were rising behind the remaining nave of the old basilica. He also inherited the numerous schemes designed and redesigned by some of the greatest architectural and engineering minds of the 16th century. There were certain common elements in these schemes. They all called for a dome to equal that engineered by Brunelleschi a century earlier and which has since dominated the skyline of Renaissance Florence, and they all called for a strongly symmetrical plan of either Greek Cross form, like the iconic St. Mark's Basilica in Venice, or of a Latin Cross with the transepts of identical form to the chancel, as at Florence Cathedral.\nEven though the work had progressed only a little in 40 years, Michelangelo did not simply dismiss the ideas of the previous architects. He drew on them in developing a grand vision. Above all, Michelangelo recognized the essential quality of Bramante's original design. He reverted to the Greek Cross and, as Helen Gardner expresses it: \"Without destroying the centralising features of Bramante's plan, Michelangelo, with a few strokes of the pen converted its snowflake complexity into massive, cohesive unity.\"\nAs it stands today, St. Peter's has been extended with a nave by Carlo Maderno. It is the chancel end (the ecclesiastical \"Eastern end\") with its huge centrally placed dome that is the work of Michelangelo. Because of its location within the Vatican State and because the projection of the nave screens the dome from sight when the building is approached from the square in front of it, the work of Michelangelo is best appreciated from a distance. What becomes apparent is that the architect has greatly reduced the clearly defined geometric forms of Bramante's plan of a square with square projections, and also of Raphael's plan of a square with semi-circular projections. Michelangelo has blurred the definition of the geometry by making the external masonry of massive proportions and filling in every corner with a small vestry or stairwell. The effect created is of a continuous wall surface that is folded or fractured at different angles, but lacks the right angles which usually define change of direction at the corners of a building. This exterior is surrounded by a giant order of Corinthian pilasters all set at slightly different angles to each other, in keeping with the ever-changing angles of the wall's surface. Above them, the huge cornice ripples in a continuous band, giving the appearance of keeping the whole building in a state of compression.\nDome: successive and final designs.\nThe dome of St. Peter's rises to a total height of from the floor of the basilica to the top of the external cross. It is the tallest dome in the world. Its internal diameter is , slightly smaller than two of the three other huge domes that preceded it, those of the Pantheon of Ancient Rome, , and Florence Cathedral of the Early Renaissance, . It has a greater diameter by approximately than Constantinople's Hagia Sophia church, completed in 537. It was to the domes of the Pantheon and Florence duomo that the architects of St. Peter's looked for solutions as to how to go about building what was conceived, from the outset, as the greatest dome of Christendom.\nBramante and Sangallo, 1506 and 1513.\nThe dome of the Pantheon stands on a circular wall with no entrances or windows except a single door. The whole building is as high as it is wide. Its dome is constructed in a single shell of concrete, made light by the inclusion of a large amount of the volcanic stones tuff and pumice. The inner surface of the dome is deeply coffered which has the effect of creating both vertical and horizontal ribs while lightening the overall load. At the summit is an ocular opening across which provides light to the interior.\nBramante's plan for the dome of St. Peter's (1506) follows that of the Pantheon very closely, and like that of the Pantheon, was designed to be constructed in Tufa Concrete for which he had rediscovered a formula. With the exception of the lantern that surmounts it, the profile is very similar, except that in this case, the supporting wall becomes a drum raised high above ground level on four massive piers. The solid wall, as used at the Pantheon, is lightened at St. Peter's by Bramante piercing it with windows and encircling it with a peristyle.\nIn the case of Florence Cathedral, the desired visual appearance of the pointed dome existed for many years before Brunelleschi made its construction feasible. Its double-shell construction of bricks locked together in a herringbone pattern (re-introduced from Byzantine architecture), and the gentle upward slope of its eight stone ribs made it possible for the construction to take place without the massive wooden formwork necessary to construct hemispherical arches. While its appearance, with the exception of the details of the lantern, is entirely Gothic, its engineering was highly innovative, and the product of a mind that had studied the huge vaults and remaining dome of Ancient Rome.\nSangallo's plan (1513), of which a large wooden model still exists, looks to both these predecessors. He realized the value of both the coffering at the Pantheon and the outer stone ribs at Florence Cathedral. He strengthened and extended the peristyle of Bramante into a series of arched and ordered openings around the base, with a second such arcade set back in a tier above the first. In his hands, the rather delicate form of the lantern, based closely on that in Florence, became a massive structure, surrounded by a projecting base, a peristyle and surmounted by a spire of conic form. According to James Lees-Milne the design was \"too eclectic, too pernickety and too tasteless to have been a success\".\nMichelangelo and Giacomo della Porta, 1547 and 1585.\nMichelangelo redesigned the dome in 1547, taking into account all that had gone before. His dome, like that of Florence, is constructed of two shells of brick, the outer one having 16 stone ribs, twice the number at Florence but far fewer than in Sangallo's design. As with the designs of Bramante and Sangallo, the dome is raised from the piers on a drum. The encircling peristyle of Bramante and the arcade of Sangallo are reduced to 16 pairs of Corinthian columns, each of high which stand proud of the building, connected by an arch. Visually they appear to buttress each of the ribs, but structurally they are probably quite redundant. The reason for this is that the dome is ovoid in shape, rising steeply as does the dome of Florence Cathedral, and therefore exerting less outward thrust than does a hemispherical dome, such as that of the Pantheon, which, although it is not buttressed, is countered by the downward thrust of heavy masonry which extends above the circling wall.\nThe ovoid profile of the dome has been the subject of much speculation and scholarship over the past century. Michelangelo died in 1564, leaving the drum of the dome complete, and Bramante's piers much bulkier than originally designed, each across. Following his death, the work continued under his assistant Jacopo Barozzi da Vignola with Giorgio Vasari appointed by Pope Pius V as a watchdog to make sure that Michelangelo's plans were carried out exactly. Despite Vignola's knowledge of Michelangelo's intentions, little happened in this period. In 1585 the energetic Pope Sixtus V appointed Giacomo della Porta who was to be assisted by Domenico Fontana. The five-year reign of Sixtus was to see the building advance at a great rate.\nMichelangelo left a few drawings, including an early drawing of the dome, and some details. There were also detailed engravings published in 1569 by Stefan du P\u00e9rac who claimed that they were the master's final solution. Michelangelo, like Sangallo before him, also left a large wooden model. Giacomo della Porta subsequently altered this model in several ways. The major change restored an earlier design, in which the outer dome appears to rise above, rather than rest directly on the base. Most of the other changes were of a cosmetic nature, such as the adding of lion's masks over the swags on the drum in honour of Pope Sixtus and adding a circlet of finials around the spire at the top of the lantern, as proposed by Sangallo.\nA drawing by Michelangelo indicates that his early intentions were towards an ovoid dome, rather than a hemispherical one. In an engraving in Galasso Alghisi' treatise (1563), the dome may be represented as ovoid, but the perspective is ambiguous. Stefan du P\u00e9rac's engraving (1569) shows a hemispherical dome, but this was perhaps an inaccuracy of the engraver. The profile of the wooden model is more ovoid than that of the engravings, but less so than the finished product. It has been suggested that Michelangelo on his death bed reverted to the more pointed shape. However, Lees-Milne cites Giacomo della Porta as taking full responsibility for the change and as indicating to Pope Sixtus that Michelangelo was lacking in the scientific understanding of which he himself was capable.\nHelen Gardner suggests that Michelangelo made the change to the hemispherical dome of lower profile in order to establish a balance between the dynamic vertical elements of the encircling giant order of pilasters and a more static and reposeful dome. Gardner also comments, \"The sculpturing of architecture [by Michelangelo]\u00a0... here extends itself up from the ground through the attic stories and moves on into the drum and dome, the whole building being pulled together into a unity from base to summit.\"\nIt is this sense of the building being sculptured, unified and \"pulled together\" by the encircling band of the deep cornice that led Eneide Mignacca to conclude that the ovoid profile, seen now in the end product, was an essential part of Michelangelo's first (and last) concept. The sculptor/architect has, figuratively speaking, taken all the previous designs in hand and compressed their contours as if the building were a lump of clay. The dome \"must\" appear to thrust upwards because of the apparent pressure created by flattening the building's angles and restraining its projections. If this explanation is the correct one, then the profile of the dome is not merely a structural solution, as perceived by Giacomo della Porta; it is part of the integrated design solution that is about visual tension and compression. In one sense, Michelangelo's dome may appear to look backward to the Gothic profile of Florence Cathedral and ignore the Classicism of the Renaissance, but on the other hand, perhaps more than any other building of the 16th century, it prefigures the architecture of the Baroque.\nCompletion.\nGiacomo della Porta and Domenico Fontana brought the dome to completion in 1590, the last year of the reign of Sixtus V. His successor, Gregory XIV, saw Fontana complete the lantern and had an inscription to the honour of Sixtus V placed around its inner opening. The next pope, Clement VIII, had the cross raised into place, an event which took all day, and was accompanied by the ringing of the bells of all the city's churches. In the arms of the cross are set two lead caskets, one containing a fragment of the True Cross and a relic of St. Andrew and the other containing medallions of the Holy Lamb.\nIn the mid-18th century, cracks appeared in the dome, so four iron chains were installed between the two shells to bind it, like the rings that keep a barrel from bursting. As many as ten chains have been installed at various times, the earliest possibly planned by Michelangelo himself as a precaution, as Brunelleschi did at Florence Cathedral.\nAround the inside of the dome is written, in letters high:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;TV ES PETRVS ET SVPER HANC PETRAM AEDIFICABO ECCLESIAM MEAM ET TIBI DABO CLAVES REGNI CAELORVM(\"...\u00a0you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church.\u00a0... and I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven\u00a0...\" Vulgate, .)\nBeneath the lantern is the inscription:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;S. PETRI GLORIAE SIXTVS PP. V. A. M. D. XC. PONTIF. V.(To the glory of St Peter; Sixtus V, pope, in the year 1590, the fifth of his pontificate.)\nDiscovery of Michelangelo draft.\nOn 7 December 2007, a fragment of a red chalk drawing of a section of the dome of the basilica, almost certainly by the hand of Michelangelo, was discovered in the Vatican archives. The drawing shows a small precisely drafted section of the plan of the entablature above two of the radial columns of the cupola drum. Michelangelo is known to have destroyed thousands of his drawings before his death. The rare survival of this example is probably due to its fragmentary state and the fact that detailed mathematical calculations had been made over the top of the drawing.\nAddition of nave and facade.\nOn 18 February 1606, under Pope Paul V, the dismantling of the remaining parts of the Constantinian basilica began. The marble cross that had been set at the top of the pediment by Pope Sylvester and Constantine the Great was lowered to the ground. The timbers were salvaged for the roof of the Borghese Palace and two rare black marble columns, the largest of their kind, were carefully stored and later used in the narthex. The tombs of various popes were opened, treasures removed and plans made for re-interment in the new basilica. The Pope had appointed Carlo Maderno in 1602. He was a nephew of Domenico Fontana and had demonstrated himself as a dynamic architect. Maderno's idea was to ring Michelangelo's building with chapels, but the Pope was hesitant about deviating from the master's plan, even though he had been dead for forty years. The \"Fabbrica\" or building committee, a group drawn from various nationalities and generally despised by the Curia who viewed the basilica as belonging to Rome rather than Christendom, were in a quandary as to how the building should proceed. One of the matters that influenced their thinking was the Counter-Reformation which increasingly associated a Greek Cross plan with paganism and saw the Latin Cross as truly symbolic of Christianity. The central plan also did not have a \"dominant orientation toward the east.\"\nAnother influence on the thinking of both the Fabbrica and the Curia was a certain guilt at the demolition of the ancient building. The ground on which it and its various associated chapels, vestries and sacristies had stood for so long was hallowed. The only solution was to build a nave that encompassed the whole space. In 1607 a committee of ten architects was called together, and a decision was made to extend Michelangelo's building into a nave. Maderno's plans for both the nave and the facade were accepted.\nThe building of the nave began on 7 May 1607, and proceeded at a great rate, with an army of 700 labourers being employed. The following year, the fa\u00e7ade was begun, in December 1614 the final touches were added to the stucco decoration of the vault and early in 1615 the partition wall between the two sections was pulled down. All the rubble was carted away, and the nave was ready for use by Palm Sunday.\nMaderno's facade.\nThe facade designed by Maderno, is wide and high and is built of travertine stone, with a giant order of Corinthian columns and a central pediment rising in front of a tall attic surmounted by thirteen statues: Christ flanked by eleven of the Apostles (except Saint Peter, whose statue is left of the stairs) and John the Baptist. The inscription below the cornice on the tall frieze reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;IN HONOREM PRINCIPIS APOST PAVLVS V BVRGHESIVS ROMANVS PONT MAX AN MDCXII PONT VII(In honour of the Prince of Apostles, Paul V Borghese, a Roman, Supreme Pontiff, in the year 1612, the seventh of his pontificate)\nThe facade is often cited as the least satisfactory part of the design of St. Peter's. The reasons for this, according to James Lees-Milne, are that it was not given enough consideration by the Pope and committee because of the desire to get the building completed quickly, coupled with the fact that Maderno was hesitant to deviate from the pattern set by Michelangelo at the other end of the building. Lees-Milne describes the problems of the fa\u00e7ade as being too broad for its height, too cramped in its details and too heavy in the attic story. The breadth is caused by modifying the plan to have towers on either side. These towers were never executed above the line of the facade because it was discovered that the ground was not sufficiently stable to bear the weight. One effect of the facade and lengthened nave is to screen the view of the dome, so that the building, from the front, has no vertical feature, except from a distance. \nBernini's Towers.\nPope Urban had long been a critic of Bernini's predecessor, Carlo Maderno. His disapproval of the architect's work stemmed largely from Maderno's design for the longitudinal nave of St. Peters, which was widely condemned for obscuring Michelangelo's dome. When the Pope gave the commission to Bernini he therefore requested that a new design for the facade's bell towers to be submitted for consideration. Baldinucci describes Bernini's tower as consisting of \"two orders of columns and pilasters, the first order being Corinthian\" and \"a third or attic story formed of pilasters and two columns on either side of the open archway in the center\".\nPope Urban desired the towers to be completed by a very specific date: 29 June 1641, the feast day dedicated to Saints Peter and Paul. To this end an order was issued which stated that \"all work should take a second seat to that of the campanile\". The south tower was completed on time even in spite of these issues, but records show that in the wake of the unveiling the Pope was not content with what he saw and he ordered the top level of Bernini's tower removed so that the structure could be made even grander. The tower continued to grow, and as the construction began to settle, the first cracks started to appear followed by Urban's infamous public admonishment of his architect.\nIn 1642 all work on both towers came to a halt. Bernini had to pay the cost for the demolition; eventually the idea of completing the bell towers was abandoned.\nNarthex and portals.\nBehind the fa\u00e7ade of St. Peter's stretches a long portico or \"narthex\" such as was occasionally found in Italian churches. This is the part of Maderno's design with which he was most satisfied. Its long barrel vault is decorated with ornate stucco and gilt, and successfully illuminated by small windows between pendentives, while the ornate marble floor is beamed with light reflected in from the piazza. At each end of the narthex is a theatrical space framed by ionic columns and within each is set a statue, an equestrian statue of Charlemagne (18th century) by Cornacchini in the south end and \"The Vision of Constantine\" (1670) by Bernini in the north end.\nFive portals, of which three are framed by huge salvaged antique columns, lead into the basilica. The central portal has a bronze door created by Antonio Averulino c.\u00a01440 for the old basilica and somewhat enlarged to fit the new space.\nMaderno's nave.\nTo the single bay of Michelangelo's Greek Cross, Maderno added a further three bays. He made the dimensions slightly different from Michelangelo's bay, thus defining where the two architectural works meet. Maderno also tilted the axis of the nave slightly. This was not by accident, as suggested by his critics. An ancient Egyptian obelisk had been erected in the square outside, but had not been quite aligned with Michelangelo's building, so Maderno compensated, in order that it should, at least, align with the Basilica's fa\u00e7ade.\nThe nave has huge paired pilasters, in keeping with Michelangelo's work. The size of the interior is so \"stupendously large\" that it is hard to get a sense of scale within the building. The four cherubs who flutter against the first piers of the nave, carrying between them two holy water basins, appear of quite normal cherubic size, until approached. Then it becomes apparent that each one is over 2 metres high and that real children cannot reach the basins unless they scramble up the marble draperies. The aisles each have two smaller chapels and a larger rectangular chapel, the Chapel of the Sacrament and the Choir Chapel. These are lavishly decorated with marble, stucco, gilt, sculpture and mosaic. Remarkably, all of the large altarpieces, with the exception of the Holy Trinity by Pietro da Cortona in the Blessed Sacrament Chapel, have been reproduced in mosaic. Two precious paintings from the old basilica, Our Lady of Perpetual Help and Our Lady of the Column are still being used as altarpieces.\nMaderno's last work at St. Peter's was to design a crypt-like space or \"Confessio\" under the dome, where the cardinals and other privileged persons could descend in order to be nearer to the burial place of the apostle. Its marble steps are remnants of the old basilica and around its balustrade are 95 bronze lamps.\nInfluence on church architecture.\nThe design of St. Peter's Basilica, and in particular its dome, has greatly influenced church architecture in Western Christendom. Within Rome, the huge domed church of Sant'Andrea della Valle was designed by Giacomo della Porta before the completion of St Peter's Basilica, and subsequently worked on by Carlo Maderno. This was followed by the domes of San Carlo ai Catinari, Sant'Agnese in Agone, and many others. Christopher Wren's dome at St Paul's Cathedral (London, England), the domes of Karlskirche (Vienna, Austria), St. Nicholas Church (Prague, Czech Republic), and the Pantheon (Paris, France) all pay homage to St Peter's Basilica.\nThe 19th and early-20th-century architectural revivals brought about the building of a great number of churches that imitate elements of St Peter's to a greater or lesser degree, including St. Mary of the Angels in Chicago, St. Josaphat's Basilica in Milwaukee, Immaculate Heart of Mary in Pittsburgh and Mary, Queen of the World Cathedral in Montreal, which replicates many aspects of St Peter's on a smaller scale. Postmodernism has seen free adaptations of St Peter's in the Basilica of Our Lady of Liche\u0144, and the Basilica of Our Lady of Peace of Yamoussoukro.\nBernini's furnishings.\nPope Urban VIII and Bernini.\nAs a young boy Gian Lorenzo Bernini (1598\u20131680) visited St. Peter's with the painter Annibale Carracci and stated his wish to build \"a mighty throne for the apostle\". His wish came true. As a young man, in 1626, he received the patronage of Pope Urban VIII and worked on the embellishment of the Basilica for 50 years. Appointed as Maderno's successor in 1629, he was to become regarded as the greatest architect and sculptor of the Baroque period. Bernini's works at St. Peter's include the baldachin (baldaquin, from Italian: \"baldacchino\"), the Chapel of the Sacrament, the plan for the niches and loggias in the piers of the dome and the chair of St. Peter.\nBaldacchino and niches.\nBernini's first work at St. Peter's was to design the baldacchino, a pavilion-like structure tall and claimed to be the largest piece of bronze in the world, which stands beneath the dome and above the altar. Its design is based on the \"ciborium\", of which there are many in the churches of Rome, serving to create a sort of holy space above and around the altar on which the Sacrament is laid for the Eucharist and emphasizing the significance of this ritual. These \"ciboria\" are generally of white marble, with inlaid coloured stone. Bernini's concept was for something very different. He took his inspiration in part from the baldachin or canopy carried above the head of the pope in processions, and in part from eight ancient columns that had formed part of a screen in the old basilica. Their twisted barley-sugar shape had a special significance as they were modelled on those of the Temple of Jerusalem and donated by the Emperor Constantine. Based on these columns, Bernini created four huge columns of bronze, twisted and decorated with laurel leaves and bees, which were the emblem of Pope Urban.\nThe baldacchino is surmounted not with an architectural pediment, like most baldacchini, but with curved Baroque brackets supporting a draped canopy, like the brocade canopies carried in processions above precious iconic images. In this case, the draped canopy is of bronze, and all the details, including the olive leaves, bees, and the portrait heads of Urban's niece in childbirth and her newborn son, are picked out in gold leaf. The baldacchino stands as a vast free-standing sculptural object, central to and framed by the largest space within the building. It is so large that the visual effect is to create a link between the enormous dome which appears to float above it, and the congregation at floor level of the basilica. It is penetrated visually from every direction, and is visually linked to the \"Cathedra Petri\" in the apse behind it and to the four piers containing large statues that are at each diagonal.\nAs part of the scheme for the central space of the church, Bernini had the huge piers, begun by Bramante and completed by Michelangelo, hollowed out into niches, and had staircases made inside them, leading to four balconies. There was much dismay from those who thought that the dome might fall, but it did not. On the balconies Bernini created showcases, framed by the eight ancient twisted columns, to display the four most precious relics of the basilica: the spear of Longinus, said to have pierced the side of Christ, the veil of Veronica, with the miraculous image of the face of Christ, a fragment of the True Cross discovered in Jerusalem by Constantine's mother, Helena, and a relic of Saint Andrew, the brother of Saint Peter. In each of the niches that surround the central space of the basilica was placed a huge statue of the saint associated with the relic above. Only \"Saint Longinus\" is the work of Bernini. (See below)\nCathedra Petri and Chapel of the Blessed Sacrament.\nBernini then turned his attention to another precious relic, the so-called \"Cathedra Petri\" or \"throne of St. Peter\" a chair which was often claimed to have been used by the apostle, but appears to date from the 12th century. As the chair itself was fast deteriorating and was no longer serviceable, Pope Alexander VII determined to enshrine it in suitable splendor as the object upon which the line of successors to Peter was based. Bernini created a large bronze throne in which it was housed, raised high on four looping supports held effortlessly by massive bronze statues of four Doctors of the Church, Saints Ambrose and Augustine representing the Latin Church and Athanasius and John Chrysostom, the Greek Church. The four figures are dynamic with sweeping robes and expressions of adoration and ecstasy. Behind and above the cathedra, a blaze of light comes in through a window of yellow alabaster, illuminating, at its centre, the Dove of the Holy Spirit. The elderly painter, Andrea Sacchi, had urged Bernini to make the figures large, so that they would be seen well from the central portal of the nave. The chair was enshrined in its new home with great celebration of 16 January 1666.\nBernini's final work for St. Peter's, undertaken in 1676, was the decoration of the Chapel of the Sacrament. To hold the sacramental Host, he designed a miniature version in gilt bronze of Bramante's Tempietto, the little chapel that marks the place of the death of St. Peter. On either side is an angel, one gazing in rapt adoration and the other looking towards the viewer in welcome. Bernini died in 1680 in his 82nd year.\nSt. Peter's Piazza.\nTo the east of the basilica is the \"Piazza di San Pietro\", (St. Peter's Square). The present arrangement, constructed between 1656 and 1667, is the Baroque inspiration of Bernini who inherited a location already occupied by an Egyptian obelisk which was centrally placed, (with some contrivance) to Maderno's facade. The obelisk, known as \"The Witness\", at and a total height, including base and the cross on top, of , is the second largest standing obelisk, and the only one to remain standing since its removal from Egypt and re-erection at the Circus of Nero in 37\u00a0AD, where it is thought to have stood witness to the crucifixion of Saint Peter. Its removal to its present location by order of Pope Sixtus V and engineered by Domenico Fontana on 28 September 1586, was an operation fraught with difficulties and nearly ended in disaster when the ropes holding the obelisk began to smoke from the friction. Fortunately this problem was noticed by Benedetto Bresca, a sailor of Sanremo, and for his swift intervention, his town was granted the privilege of providing the palms that are used at the basilica each Palm Sunday.\nThe other object in the old square with which Bernini had to contend was a large fountain designed by Maderno in 1613 and set to one side of the obelisk, making a line parallel with the facade. Bernini's plan uses this horizontal axis as a major feature of his unique, spatially dynamic and highly symbolic design. The most obvious solutions were either a rectangular piazza of vast proportions so that the obelisk stood centrally and the fountain (and a matching companion) could be included, or a trapezoid piazza which fanned out from the facade of the basilica like that in front of the Palazzo Pubblico in Siena. The problems of the square plan are that the necessary width to include the fountain would entail the demolition of numerous buildings, including some of the Vatican, and would minimize the effect of the facade. The trapezoid plan, on the other hand, would maximize the apparent width of the facade, which was already perceived as a fault of the design.\nBernini's ingenious solution was to create a piazza in two sections. That part which is nearest the basilica is trapezoid, but rather than fanning out from the facade, it narrows. This gives the effect of countering the visual perspective. It means that from the second part of the piazza, the building looks nearer than it is, the breadth of the facade is minimized and its height appears greater in proportion to its width. The second section of the piazza is a huge elliptical circus which gently slopes downwards to the obelisk at its centre. The two distinct areas are framed by a colonnade formed by doubled pairs of columns supporting an entablature of the simple Tuscan Order.\nThe part of the colonnade that is around the ellipse does not entirely encircle it, but reaches out in two arcs, symbolic of the arms of \"the Catholic Church reaching out to welcome its communicants\". The obelisk and Maderno's fountain mark the widest axis of the ellipse. Bernini balanced the scheme with another fountain in 1675. The approach to the square used to be through a jumble of old buildings, which added an element of surprise to the vista that opened up upon passing through the colonnade. Nowadays a long wide street, the Via della Conciliazione, built by Mussolini after the conclusion of the Lateran Treaties, leads from the River Tiber to the piazza and gives distant views of St. Peter's as the visitor approaches, with the basilica acting as a terminating vista.\nBernini's transformation of the site is entirely Baroque in concept. Where Bramante and Michelangelo conceived a building that stood in \"self-sufficient isolation\", Bernini made the whole complex \"expansively relate to its environment\". Banister Fletcher says \"No other city has afforded such a wide-swept approach to its cathedral church, no other architect could have conceived a design of greater nobility\u00a0... (it is) the greatest of all atriums before the greatest of all churches of Christendom.\"\nClocks.\nThe top of the facade of St. Peter's Basilica has two clocks and several sculptures. The clocks were created to replace Bernini's bell towers which had to be torn down due to insufficient support. The left hand clock shows Rome time, the right hand one shows European mean time. The statues are Christ the Redeemer, St. John the Baptist and 11 Apostles. From the left: St. Thadeus, St. Matthew, St. Philip, St. Thomas, St. James the Greater, St. John the Baptist, The Redeemer, St. Andrew, St. John the Evangelist, St. James the Lesser, St. Bartholomew, St. Simeon, and St. Matthias. Above the Roman clock is the coat of arms for the city-state of Vatican City since 1931 held by two angels.\nBells.\nThe Basilica has 6 bells, placed in the room under the Roman clock, only 3 of them are visible from ground level while the rest are hidden behind the bourdon. They range from the smallest which is 235\u00a0kg to the massive bourdon that approximately weighs 9 tonnes. From 1931, the bells are operated electrically, thus permitting even the largest bell to be tolled from a distance. The oldest bell Rota dates from 1353, and the bourdon called Campanone is rung at Christmas and Easter, on the Solemnity of Sts. Peter and Paul, and every time the Pope imparts the \"Urbi et Orbi\" blessing to the city and to the world. Campanone also announces the death of the pope and an election of a new pope.\nTreasures.\nTombs and relics.\nThere are over 100 tombs within St. Peter's Basilica (extant to various extents), many located beneath the Basilica. These include 91 popes, Saint Ignatius of Antioch, Holy Roman Emperor Otto II, and the composer Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina. Exiled Catholic British royalty James Francis Edward Stuart and his two sons, Charles Edward Stuart and Henry Benedict Stuart, Cardinal Bishop of Frascati, are buried here, having been granted asylum by Pope Clement XI. Also buried here are Maria Clementina Sobieska, wife of James Francis Edward Stuart, Queen Christina of Sweden, who abdicated her throne in order to convert to Catholicism, and Countess Matilda of Tuscany, supporter of the Papacy during the Investiture Controversy. The most recent interment was Pope Benedict XVI, on 5 January 2023. Beneath, near the crypt, is the recently discovered vaulted fourth-century \"Tomb of the Julii\". (See below for some descriptions of tombs).\nArtworks.\nTowers and narthex.\nRecently installed commemorative plaques read above the door as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;PAVLVS VI PONT MAX HVIVS PATRIARCALIS VATICANAE BASILICAE PORTAM SANCTAM APERVIT ET CLAVSIT ANNO IVBILAEI MCMLXXV(Paul VI, Pontifex Maximus, opened and closed the holy door of this patriarchal Vatican basilica in the jubilee year of 1975.)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;IOANNES PAVLVS II P.M. PORTAM SANCTAM ANNO IVBILAEI MCMLXXVI A PAVLO PP VI RESERVATAM ET CLAVSAM APERVIT ET CLAVSIT ANNO IVB HVMANE REDEMP MCMLXXXIII\u2013MCMLXXXIV(John Paul II, Pontifex Maximus, opened and closed again the holy door closed and set apart by Pope Paul VI in 1976 in the jubilee year of human redemption 1983\u20131984.)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;IOANNES PAVLVS II P.M. ITERVM PORTAM SANCTAM APERVIT ET CLAVSIT ANNO MAGNI IVBILAEI AB INCARNATIONE DOMINI MM\u2013MMI(John Paul II, Pontifex Maximus, again opened and closed the holy door in the year of the great jubilee, from the incarnation of the Lord 2000\u20132001.)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;FRANCISCVS PP. PORTAM SANCTAM ANNO MAGNI IVB MM\u2013MMI A IOANNE PAVLO PP. II RESERVATAM ET CLAVSAM APERVIT ET CLAVSIT ANNO IVB MISERICORDIAE MMXV\u2013MMXVI(Pope Francis opened and closed again the holy door, closed and set apart by Pope John Paul II in the year of the great jubilee 2000\u20132001, in the jubilee year of Mercy 2015\u20132016.)\nOlder commemorative plaques are removed to make way for the new plaque when the holy door is opened and sealed.\nArchpriests since 1053.\nList of archpriests of the Vatican Basilica:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73190", "revid": "48411818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73190", "title": "The Last Supper (Leonardo)", "text": "Mural painting by Leonardo da Vinci\nThe Last Supper ( or ) is a mural painting by the Italian High Renaissance artist Leonardo da Vinci, dated to c.\u20091495\u20131498, housed in the refectory of the Convent of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Milan, Italy. The painting represents the scene of the Last Supper of Jesus with the Twelve Apostles, as it is told in the Gospel of John\u00a0\u2013 specifically the moment after Jesus announces that one of his apostles will betray him. Its handling of space, mastery of perspective, treatment of motion and complex display of human emotion has made it one of the Western world's most recognizable paintings and among Leonardo's most celebrated works. Some commentators consider it pivotal in inaugurating the transition into what is now termed the High Renaissance.\nThe work was commissioned as part of a plan of renovations to the church and its convent buildings by Leonardo's patron Ludovico Sforza, Duke of Milan. In order to permit his inconsistent painting schedule and frequent revisions, it is painted with materials that allowed for regular alterations: tempera on gesso, pitch, and mastic. Due to the methods used, a variety of environmental factors, and intentional damage, little of the original painting remains today despite numerous restoration attempts, the last being completed in 1999. \"The Last Supper\" is Leonardo's largest work, aside from the \"Sala delle Asse\".\nPainting.\nCommission and creation.\n\"The Last Supper\" measures and covers an end wall of the dining hall at the monastery of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Milan, Italy. The theme was a traditional one for refectories, although the room was not a refectory at the time that Leonardo painted it. The main church building was still under construction while Leonardo was composing the painting. Leonardo's patron, Ludovico Sforza, planned that the church should be remodeled as a family mausoleum. To this end, changes were made, perhaps to plans by Donato Bramante. These plans were not fully carried out, and a smaller mortuary chapel was constructed, adjacent to the cloister. The painting was commissioned by Sforza to decorate the wall of the mausoleum. The lunettes above the main painting, formed by the triple arched ceiling of the refectory, are painted with Sforza coats-of-arms. The opposite wall of the refectory is covered by the \"Crucifixion\" fresco by Giovanni Donato da Montorfano, to which Leonardo added figures of the Sforza family in tempera; these figures have deteriorated in much the same way as has \"The Last Supper\".\nLeonardo worked on \"The Last Supper\" from about 1495 to 1498, but he did not work continuously. The beginning date is not certain, as the archives of the convent for the period have been destroyed. A document dated 1497 indicates that the painting was nearly completed at that date. A prior from the monastery reportedly complained to Leonardo about its delay. Leonardo wrote to the head of the monastery, explaining he had been struggling to find the perfect villainous face for Judas, and that if he could not find a face corresponding with what he had in mind, he would use the features of the prior who had complained.\nIn 1557, Gian Paolo Lomazzo wrote that Leonardo's friend Bernardo Zenale advised him to leave Christ's face unfinished, arguing that \"it would be impossible to imagine faces lovelier or gentler than those of James the Greater or James the Less.\" Leonardo apparently took the advice.\nMedium.\nLeonardo, as a painter, favoured oil painting, a medium which allows the artist to work slowly and make changes with ease. Fresco painting does not facilitate either of these objectives. Leonardo also sought a greater luminosity and intensity of light and shade (chiaroscuro) than could be achieved with fresco, in which the water-soluble colours are painted onto wet plaster, laid freshly each day in sections. Rather than using the proven method of painting on walls, Leonardo painted \"The Last Supper\" in tempera, the medium generally used for panel painting. The painting is on a stone wall sealed with a double layer of gesso, pitch, and mastic. Then he added an undercoat of white lead to enhance the brightness of the tempera that was applied on top. This was a method that had been described previously by Cennino Cennini in the 14th century. However, Cennini described the technique as being more risky than fresco painting, and recommended the use of painting in a more superficial medium for the final touches only.\nSubject.\n\"The Last Supper\" portrays the reaction given by each apostle when Jesus said one of them would betray him. All twelve apostles have different reactions to the news, with various degrees of anger and shock. The apostles were identified by their names, using an unsigned, mid-sixteenth-century fresco copy of Leonardo's Cenacolo. Before this, only Judas, Peter, John and Jesus had been positively identified. From left to right, according to the apostles' heads:\nIn common with other depictions of the Last Supper from this period, Leonardo seats the diners on one side of the table, so that none of them has his back to the viewer. The tablecloth is white with blue stripes, which are colours commonly associated with the Jewish people. This is the painting's only overt reference to the ethnicity of Jesus and his disciples. Most previous depictions excluded Judas by placing him alone on the opposite side of the table from the other eleven disciples and Jesus, or placing halos around all the disciples except Judas.\nLeonardo instead has Judas lean back into shadow. Jesus is predicting that his betrayer will take the bread at the same time he does to Thomas and James the Greater to his left, who react in horror as Jesus points with his left hand to a piece of bread before them. Distracted by the conversation between John and Peter, Judas reaches for a different piece of bread not noticing Jesus too stretching out with his right hand towards it (Matthew 26: 23). The angles and lighting draw attention to Jesus, whose turned right cheek is located at the vanishing point for all perspective lines. In addition, the painting demonstrated Leonardo's masterful use of perspective as it \"draws our attention to the face of Christ at the center of the composition, and Christ's face, through his down-turned gaze, directs our focus along the diagonal of his left arm to his hand and therefore, the bread.\"\nLeonardo reportedly used the likenesses of people in and around Milan as inspiration for the painting's figures. The convent's prior complained to Sforza of Leonardo's \"laziness\" as he wandered the streets to find a criminal to base Judas on. Leonardo responded that if he could find no one else, the prior would make a suitable model.\nWhile the painting was being executed, Leonardo's friend, the mathematician Luca Pacioli, called it \"a symbol of man's burning desire for salvation\".\nHistory.\nEarly copies.\nTwo early copies of \"The Last Supper\" are known to exist, presumed to be work by Leonardo's assistants. The copies are almost the size of the original, and have survived with a wealth of original detail still intact. One, by Giampietrino, is in the collection of the Royal Academy of Arts, London, and the other, by Cesare da Sesto, is installed at the Church of St. Ambrogio in Ponte Capriasca, Switzerland. A third copy (oil on canvas) is painted by Andrea Solari (c. 1520) and is on display in the Leonardo da Vinci Museum of the Tongerlo Abbey, Belgium.\nDamage and restorations.\nBecause Sforza had ordered the church to be rebuilt hastily, the masons filled the walls with moisture-retaining rubble. The painting was done on a thin exterior wall, so the effects of humidity were felt keenly, and the paint failed to properly adhere to it. Because of the method used, soon after the painting was completed on 9 February 1498 it began to deteriorate. In 1499, Louis XII contemplated removing the painting from the wall and taking it to France. As early as 1517, the painting was starting to flake, and in 1532 Gerolamo Cardano described it as \"blurred and colorless compared with what I remember of it when I saw it as a boy\". By 1556 \u2013 less than sixty years after it was finished \u2013 Giorgio Vasari described the painting as reduced to a \"muddle of blots\" so deteriorated that the figures were unrecognizable. By the second half of the 16th century, Gian Paolo Lomazzo stated that \"the painting is all ruined\". In 1652, a doorway was cut through the (then unrecognisable) painting, and later bricked up; this can still be seen as the irregular arch-shaped structure near the center base of the painting. It is believed, through early copies, that Jesus' feet were in a position symbolizing the forthcoming crucifixion. In 1768, a curtain was hung over the painting intended for its protection; the curtain instead trapped moisture on the surface, and whenever it was pulled back, it scratched the flaking paint.\nA first restoration was attempted in 1726 by Michelangelo Bellotti, who filled in missing sections with oil paint then varnished the whole mural. This repair did not last well and another restoration was attempted in 1770 by an otherwise unknown artist named Giuseppe Mazza. Mazza stripped off Bellotti's work then largely repainted the painting; he had redone all but three faces when he was halted due to public outrage. In 1796, French revolutionary anti-clerical troops used the refectory as an armory and stable; they threw stones at the painting and climbed ladders to scratch out the Apostles' eyes. Goethe wrote that in 1800, the room was flooded with two feet of water after a heavy rainstorm. The refectory was used as a prison; it is not known if any of the prisoners may have damaged the painting. In 1821, Stefano Barezzi, an expert in removing whole frescoes from their walls intact, was called in to remove the painting to a safer location; he badly damaged the center section before realizing that Leonardo's work was not a fresco. Barezzi then attempted to reattach damaged sections with glue. From 1901 to 1908, Luigi Cavenaghi first completed a careful study of the structure of the painting, then began cleaning it. In 1924, Oreste Silvestri did further cleaning, and stabilised some parts with stucco.\nDuring World War II, on 15 August 1943, the refectory was struck by Allied bombing; protective sandbagging prevented the painting from being struck by bomb splinters, but it may have been damaged by the vibration. Between 1946 and 1954, undertook a clean-and-stabilise restoration, which Brera director Fernanda Wittgens was involved in. Pellicioli reattached paint to the wall using a clear shellac, making it relatively darker and more colorful, and removed some of the overpainting. However, as of 1972, the repainting done in various restorations had made the heads of saints Peter, Andrew, and James differ significantly from the original design.\nMajor restoration.\nThe painting's appearance by the late 1970s had badly deteriorated. From 1978 to 1999, Pinin Brambilla Barcilon guided a major restoration project to stabilize the painting and reverse the damage caused by dirt and pollution. The eighteenth- and nineteenth-century restoration attempts were also reversed. Since it had proved impractical to move the painting to a more controlled environment, the refectory was instead converted to a sealed, climate-controlled environment, which meant bricking up the windows. Then, detailed study was undertaken to determine the painting's original form, using scientific tests (especially infrared reflectoscopy and microscopic core-samples), and original cartoons preserved in the Royal Library at Windsor Castle. Some areas were deemed unrestorable. These were re-painted using watercolor in subdued colors intended to indicate they were not original work, while not being too distracting.\nThis restoration took 21 years and, on 28 May 1999, the painting was returned to display. Intending visitors were required to book ahead and could only stay for 15 minutes. When it was unveiled, considerable controversy was aroused by the dramatic changes in colors, tones, and even some facial shapes. James Beck, professor of art history at Columbia University and founder of ArtWatch International, had been a particularly strong critic. Michael Daley, director of ArtWatch UK, has also complained about the restored version of the painting. He has been critical of Christ's right arm in the image which has been altered from a draped sleeve to what Daley calls \"muff-like drapery\".\nIn culture.\n\"The Last Supper\" has frequently been referenced, reproduced, or parodied in Western culture. Some of the more notable examples are:\nNon-modern painting, mosaic, and photography.\nA 16th-century oil on canvas copy is conserved in the abbey of Tongerlo, Antwerp, Belgium. It reveals many details that are no longer visible on the original. The Roman mosaic artist Giacomo Raffaelli made another life-sized copy (1809\u20131814), commissioned by Napoleon Bonaparte, that resides in the Minoritenkirche in Vienna.\nModern art.\nIn 1955, Salvador Dal\u00ed painted \"The Sacrament of the Last Supper\", with Jesus portrayed as blond and clean shaven, pointing upward to a spectral torso while the apostles are gathered around the table heads bowed so that none may be identified. It is reputed to be one of the most viewed paintings in the collection of the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C.\nMary Beth Edelson's \"Some Living American Women Artists / Last Supper\" (1972) appropriated \"The Last Supper\", with the heads of notable women artists collaged over the heads of Christ and his apostles. The artists collaged over the heads of Christ and his apostles in \"Some Living American Women Artists / Last Supper\" include Lynda Benglis, Louise Bourgeois, Elaine de Kooning, Helen Frankenthaler, Nancy Graves, Lila Katzen, Lee Krasner, Georgia O'Keeffe, Louise Nevelson, Yoko Ono, M. C. Richards, Alma Thomas, and June Wayne. As well, other women artists have their image shown in the border of the piece; in all eighty-two women artists are part of the whole image. This image, addressing the role of religious and art historical iconography in the subordination of women, became \"one of the most iconic images of the feminist art movement\".\nSculptor Marisol Escobar rendered \"The Last Supper\" as a life-sized, three-dimensional, sculptural assemblage using painted and drawn wood, plywood, brownstone, plaster, and aluminum. This work, \"Self-Portrait Looking at The Last Supper\" (1982\u20131984), is in New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art.\nArt dealer Alexander Iolas commissioned Andy Warhol to produce a series of paintings based on \"The Last Supper\", first exhibited in Milan in January 1987. The series would be the artist's last before his death.\nLiterature.\nIn her 1834 ekphrasic poem, \"The Last Supper\", Lydia Sigourney focuses on Christ's betrayer, repeatedly asks \"Is it I?\" and closes with the prayer that our feet be so guided:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAuthor Mary Shelley describes her impression of the painting in her travel narrative, \"Rambles in Germany and Italy\", published 1844:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;First we visited the fading inimitable fresco of Leonardo da Vinci. How vain are copies! not in one, nor in any print, did i ever see the slightest approach to the expression in our Savior's face, such as it is in the original. Majesty and love \u2013 these are the words that would describe it \u2013 joined to an absence of all guile that expresses the divine nature more visibly than I ever saw it in any other picture.\u2014\u200a\nOther speculation.\n\"The Last Supper\" has been the target of much speculation by writers and historical revisionists alike, usually centered on purported hidden messages or hints found within the painting, especially since the publication of Dan Brown's novel \"The Da Vinci Code\" (2003), in which one of the characters suggests that the person to Jesus' right (left of Jesus from the viewer's perspective) is actually Mary Magdalene. It also states that there was a letter 'glaring in the center of the painting' (M) standing for Matrimonio or Mary Magdalene. This speculation originated in earlier books \"The Templar Revelation\" (1997) by Lynn Picknett and \"The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail\" by Michael Baigent, Henry Lincoln and Richard Leigh (1982). Art historians hold that the figure is the Apostle John, who appears androgynous in line with Leonardo's characteristic fascination with blurring the lines between the sexes, a quality which is found in his other paintings, such as \"St. John the Baptist\" (painted c. 1513\u20131516). Christopher L. Hodapp and Alice Von Kannon comment, \"If he [John] looks effeminate and needs a haircut, so does James, the second figure on the left.\" According to Ross King, an expert on Italian art, Mary Magdalene's appearance at the last supper would not have been controversial and Leonardo would have had no motive to disguise her as one of the other disciples, since she was widely venerated in her role as the \"Apostle to the Apostles\" and was the patron of the Dominican Order, for whom \"The Last Supper\" was painted. There would have even been precedent for it, since the earlier Italian Renaissance painter Fra Angelico had included her in his painting of the Last Supper.\nThe painting contains several possible numerical references, including to the number three. The Apostles are seated in groups of three, there are three windows behind Jesus, and the shape of Jesus' figure resembles a triangle. His hands are located at the golden ratio of half the height of the composition. The painting can also be interpreted using the Fibonacci series: one table, one central figure, two side walls, three windows and figures grouped in threes, five groups of figures, eight panels on the walls and eight table legs, and thirteen individual figures. Debates among art historians still surround the use of the Fibonacci series as some argue that its purposeful use did not fully begin to be applied to architecture until the early 19th century.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73192", "revid": "1307901977", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73192", "title": "Codex Seraphinianus", "text": "Illustrated encyclopedia by Luigi Serafini\nThe Codex Seraphinianus is an illustrated encyclopedia of an imaginary world, created by Italian artist, architect and industrial designer Luigi Serafini between 1976 and 1978 and first published in 1981. It has approximately 360 pages (depending on edition) and is written in an imaginary writing system.\nOriginally published in Italy, it has been released in several countries.\nDescription.\nThe \"Codex\" is an encyclopedia in manuscript with copious hand-drawn, colored-pencil illustrations of bizarre and fantastical flora, fauna, anatomies, fashions, and foods. It has been compared to the still undeciphered Voynich manuscript, the story \"Tl\u00f6n, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius\" by Jorge Luis Borges, and the artwork of M. C. Escher and Hieronymus Bosch.\nThe illustrations are often surreal parodies of things in the real world, such as a bleeding fruit, a plant that grows into roughly the shape of a chair and is subsequently made into one, and a copulating couple who metamorphose into an alligator. Others depict odd, apparently senseless machines, often with delicate appearances and bound by tiny filaments. Some illustrations are recognizable as maps or human faces, while others (especially in the \"physics\" chapter) are mostly or totally abstract. Nearly all of the illustrations are brightly coloured and highly detailed.\nWriting system.\nThe false writing system appears modeled on Western writing systems, with left-to-right writing in rows and an alphabet with uppercase and lowercase letters, some of which double as numerals. Some letters appear only at the beginning or end of words, similar to Semitic writing systems. The curvilinear letters are rope- or thread-like, with loops and even knots, and are somewhat reminiscent of Sinhala script.\nIn a talk at the Oxford University Society of Bibliophiles on 11 May 2009, Serafini stated that there is no meaning behind the \"Codex\"'s script, which is asemic; that his experience in writing it was similar to automatic writing; and that what he wanted his alphabet to convey was the sensation children feel with books they cannot yet understand, although they see that the writing makes sense for adults. However, the book's page-numbering system was decoded by Allan C. Wechsler and Bulgarian linguist Ivan Derzhanski, as being a variation of base 21.\nContents.\nThe book is in eleven chapters, in two sections. The first section appears to describe the natural world of flora, fauna and physics. The second deals with various aspects of human life, including garments, history, cuisine and architecture. Each chapter seems to address a general encyclopedic topic, as follows:\nAfter the last chapter is a table of contents or index, followed by an apparent afterword whose writing is more casually rendered.\nTwo plates in the sixth chapter contain lines of French text, a quote from Marcel Proust's \"\u00c0 la recherche du temps perdu: Albertine disparue\" (\"In Search of Lost Time: Albertine Gone\"). The words scattered on the floor of the illustration are from the same book.\nEditions.\nThe original edition was issued in two volumes:\nTwo years later, a single-volume edition was issued in the United States, in Germany and in the Netherlands:\nThe 1980s editions were out of print for several years before Franco Maria Ricci published an augmented, single-volume edition in 1993:\nIn 2006, Rizzoli published an expanded, but less expensive, edition in Italy. It features additional illustrations and a preface by the author:\nIn 2013, Rizzoli published a second revised edition, as well as limited, signed, and numbered \"deluxe\" edition. They printed 300 copies in Italian and 300 in English:\nIn 2016, a 2017 \"Codex Seraphinianus\" wall calendar was published by Universe Publishing.\nRizzoli published a 40th anniversary edition of \"Codex Seraphinianus\" with some additional material in 2021. \nReception.\nBaird Searles, in \"Asimov's Science Fiction\" (April 1984), says \"the book lies in the uneasy boundary between surrealism and fantasy, given an odd literary status by its masquerade as a book of fact\".\nDouglas Hofstadter, in \"Metamagical Themas\", finds many of the illustrations \"grotesque and disturbing\" and others \"extremely beautiful and visionary\". He says the book \"seems [to some people] to glorify entropy, chaos, and incomprehensibility\".\nAmerican journalist Jim Dwyer finds that the work is an early critique of the Information Age.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73193", "revid": "50919439", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73193", "title": "Longchenpa", "text": "Tibetan Buddhist scholar\nLongchen Rabjam Drim\u00e9 \u00d6zer (Tibetan: \u0f40\u0fb3\u0f7c\u0f44\u0f0b\u0f46\u0f7a\u0f53\u0f0b\u0f62\u0f56\u0f0b\u0f60\u0f56\u0fb1\u0f58\u0f66\u0f0b\u0f54\u0f0b\u0f51\u0fb2\u0f72\u0f0b\u0f58\u0f7a\u0f51\u0f0b\u0f60\u0f7c\u0f51\u0f0b\u0f5f\u0f7a\u0f62\u0f0d, Wylie: \"klong chen rab 'byams pa dri med 'od zer\"), or simply Longchenpa (1308\u20131364, \"The Vast Expanse\") was a Tibetan scholar-yogi of the Nyingma school, the 'Old School' of Tibetan Buddhism. According to tibetologist David Germano, Longchenpa's work led to the dominance of the Longchen Nyingthig lineage of Dzogchen, the Great Perfection, over the other Dzogchen traditions. He is also responsible for the scholastic systematization of Dzogchen thought within the context of the wider Tibetan Vajrayana tradition of Buddhist philosophy. \nDzogchen thought was highly developed among both the Old School and New Sarma schools. Germano also notes that Longchenpa's work is \"generally taken to be the definitive expression of the Great Perfection with its precise terminological distinctions, systematic scope, and integration with the normative Buddhist scholasticism that became dominant in Tibet during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.\"\nLongchenpa is known for his voluminous writings, including the highly influential \"Seven Treasuries\" and his compilation of the Dzogchen text and commentary, the \"Nyingtig Yabshi, The Inner Essence in Four Parts\".\"\" Longchenpa was also a Tert\u00f6n or treasure revealer, and some of his works, like the \"Khadro Yangtig,\" are considered terma and revealed treasure texts. Longchenpa's oeuvre of over 270 texts encapsulates the core of Nyingma thought and praxis and is a critical link between the school's exoteric Sutra and esoteric Tantra teachings.\nLongchenpa's work also unified the various Dzogchen traditions of his time into a single system. Longchenpa is known for his skill as a poet and his works are written in a unique literary voice which was widely admired and imitated by later Nyingma figures.\nLongchenpa was the Khenpo of Samye Monastery, Tibet's first monastery, and the first Buddhist monastery established in the Himalayas. He spent most of his life travelling or in spiritual retreat.\nBiography.\nIncarnation lineage.\nThe incarnation lineage of Longchenpa is traced to Princess Pema Sal (c.758-766), King Trisong Deutsen's daughter and Padmasambhava's student who died young from a bug bite. Padmasambhava briefly revived her to give her the Khandro Nyingtik empowerment.\nShe incarnated as Pema Ledrel Sal (1291-1315/1319), the \"fifth pure rebirth\" of Princess Pema Sal, who became a great Terton as prophesied by Padmasambhava. He revealed the Khandro Nyingtik cycle as a terma treasure at the age of 23 years. He then incarnated as the great Terton and scholar Longchenpa in the 14th century, who then incarnated as the Terton Pema Lingpa (1450-1521).\nYouth.\nLongchen Rabjam was born in 1308 in a village in the Dra Valley in Yuru, U-Tsang. He was born to the Nyingma lama Lopon Tsensung, a descendent of the Rog clan. Longchenpa's mother died when he was nine and his father died two years after. After being orphaned, he entered Samye monastery in 1320 under the Abbot Sonam Rinchen and master Lopon Kunga Ozer. Longchenpa was an avid student with a great capacity for memory.\nIn 1327, Longchenpa moved to the Kadam monastic college of Sangpu Neutok, the most esteemed center of learning in Tibet at the time. He stayed for six years at Sangpu, mastering the entire scholastic curriculum of logical-epistemology, yogacara and madhyamaka as well as poetics. During this period, Longchenpa also received teachings and transmissions from different Tibetan Buddhist traditions, including Kadam, Sakya, Kagyu and Nyingma. Longchenpa studied under various teachers, including the famous Third Karmapa Rangjung Dorje (1284-1339), from whom he received the six yogas of the K\u0101lacakra and the six dharmas of N\u0101ropa.\nLongchenpa left Sangpu to practice in the solitude of the mountains, after coming into conflict with certain Khampa scholars. After leaving Sangpu, Longchenpa entered a period of retreat for eight months in complete darkness (winter 1332\u20131333), where he had some important visions of a young girl who promised to watch over him and grant him blessings. Afterwards, Longchenpa met his main teacher, the Ngagpa Rigdzin Kumaradza (1266-1343), from whom he received Dzogchen teachings while traveling from valley to valley with a nomadic group of about seventy students. It is said Longchenpa lived in great poverty during this period, sleeping on a sack and eating only barley.\nLongchenpa accompanied Kumaradza and his disciples for two years, during which time he received all of Rigdzin Kumaradza's transmissions (mainly focusing on the \"Vima Nyingthig\" and the \"Khandro Nyingthig)\". Longchenpa was permitted to teach after a three-year period of retreat (1336-1338) in mChims phu, not far from Samye (according to the \"mThong snang \u2019od kyi dra ba\", other sources give longer periods like six years). He is said to have had various visions of different deities, including Padmasambhava, black Vajrav\u0101r\u0101h\u012b, Guru drag po, and the goddess Adamantine Turquoise Lamp (\"rDo rje gyu sgron ma\")\nMature period.\nIn 1340, Longchenpa then gathered a group of eight male and female students in order to initiate them into the Dzogchen teachings. During this initial period of teaching, Longchenpa and his students experienced a series of visions of dakinis, and states of possession that only happened to the women of the group. These experiences convinced him and his disciples that Longchenpa should teach the Dzogchen lineage of the Menngagde, the Esoteric Instruction cycle.\nLongchenpa also compiled the main texts of the \"Vima Nyingthig\" and the \"Khandro Nyingthig\" along with a series of his own commentaries on these works. Most of Longchenpa's mature life was spent in his hermitage at Gangri Thokar, either in meditation retreat or studying and composing texts.\nIn 1350, at the age of 42, Longchenpa had a vision of Vimalamitra in which he was asked to restore the temple of Zhai Lhakhang, where the \"Seventeen Tantras\" had been concealed by Nyang Tingdzin Zangpo. In the process of this work, Longchenpa accepted a Drikung Kagyu student named Kunga Rinchen. Kunga Rinchen had political designs and came into conflict with the powerful Changchub Gyaltsen, who had the support of the Mongolian Authorities in Peking who attacked Kunga Rinchen's monastery.\nLongchenpa fled to Bumthang, Bhutan to avoid conflict. Here he relinquished his monastic vows, married and had a daughter and a son. He also founded a series of small monasteries in Bhutan, including Tharpaling Monastery, his main seat. Longchenpa's lineage survives in Bhutan. After living in Tharpa Ling for 10 years, he returned to Tibet and was reconciled with Changchub Gyaltsen, who even became Longchenpa's student.\nLegacy.\nLongchenpa's writings and compilations were highly influential, especially on the Nyingma tradition. According to Germano, Longchenpa's work:\nhad an immediate impact, and in subsequent centuries was to serve as the explicit model for many Nyingma compositions. In particular, his Seminal Heart writings were intensely philosophical as well as contemplative, and architectonic in nature. Though on the whole their characteristic doctrines and terminology are present in the earlier literature stemming from ICe btsun seng ge dbang phyug onwards, their terminological precision, eloquent style, systematic range and structure, and integration with normative Buddhist discourse constitute a major innovation in and of themselves.\nA detailed account of Longchenpa's life and teachings is found in \"Buddha Mind\" by Tulku Thondup Rinpoche, \"A Marvelous Garland of Rare Gems\" by Nyoshul Khenpo, and \"The Life of Longchenpa\" by Jampa Mackenzie Stewart. Pema Lingpa, the famous \"terton\" (finder of sacred texts) of Bhutan, is regarded as the immediate reincarnation of Longchenpa.\nDzogchen.\nView of Dzogchen.\nLongchenpa is widely considered the single most important writer on Dzogchen teachings. He was a prolific author and scholar, as well as a compiler of Dzogchen texts. According to David Germano, Longchenpa's work systematized the Dzogchen tradition and its extensive literature while also providing it with a scholastic and philosophical structure based on the standard doctrinal structures that were becoming dominant in the Tibetan Buddhism of late tenth to thirteenth centuries.\nAccording to Germano, Longchenpa's main Dzogchen scriptural sources were: \"(i) the \"Kun byed rgyal po\", (ii) \"The Seventeen Tantras of the Great Perfection\" (including two closely affiliated tantras\u2014the \"kLong gsal\" and \"Thig le kun gsal\") (iii) the \"Seminal Heart system of Vimalamitra\" (\"Bi ma snying thig\") and (iv) the \"Seminal Heart system of the Dakini\" (\"mKha' 'gro snying thig\").\" Longchenpa's Dzogchen philosophy is based on the Dzogchen view outlined in these tantric texts. This worldview sees all phenomena (\"dharmas\", Tib. \"chos)\" as the emanations or expressions (\"rtsal\"), displays (\"rol pa\"), and adornments (\"rgyan\") of an ultimate nature or principle (\"Dharmat\u0101,\" Tib. \"chos nyid,\" or \"Dharmadh\u0101tu,\" Tib. \"chos kyi dbyings\")\nThis ultimate principle is described in various ways by Longchenpa, using terminology that is unique to Dzogchen, such as the basis or ground (\"gzhi\") or the \"nature of mind\" (\"sems nyid\"). Longchenpa describes this fundamental basis as being primordially pure and empty while also having the nature of a subtle self-arising awareness. This empty and spontaneous primordial glow (\"ye gdangs\") is the subtle basis for the arising of all phenomenal appearances.\nLongchenpa brought Dzogchen thought more closely into dialogue with scholastic Buddhist philosophy and the Sarma tantric systems which were normative in the Tibetan academic institutions of his time. One of Longchenpa's main motivations was to provide a learned defense of Dzogchen thought and practice. Longchenpa's writings also intended to prove the overall superiority of the Dzogchen path over the other eight vehicles of sutra and tantra. His work also posits that this supreme Dzogchen view is not just the pinnacle of Buddhism (which Longchenpa compares the peak of a mountain), but it is in fact a keystone to the entire Buddhist Dharma, without which the \"lower vehicles\" cannot be fully understood or justified (just like one cannot see the entirety of a mountain unless one is at the top).\nIn his \"Theg mchog mdzod\", Longchenpa also provides an extensive doxography of Buddhism (based on the nine yanas) in order to explain why Dzogchen (i.e. Atiyoga) deserves the highest rank in this doxography. Longchenpa's understanding of the relationship between Dzogchen and the lower vehicles is inclusive, and he sees Dzogchen as embracing all of the eight vehicles while also sublimating and transcending them.\nDzogchen practice.\nLongchenpa categorized Dzogchen as a teaching within \"secret mantra\" (Vajrayana), and specifically, he considered it to be part of the perfection stage of secret mantra practice, defining this \"great perfection phase\" (\"rdzogs rim chenpo\"), as \"resting in the pristine unfabricated enlightening-mind of awareness\" (in his \"bSam gtan ngal gso\" 80.2). Furthermore, Longchenpa defended the validity of Dzogchen as a stand-alone system of formless and effortless perfection stage practice, which did not require preliminary practice of the generation stage of deity yoga (unlike other tantric systems) nor standard tantric initiation rituals. Instead, for Longchenpa, the practice of Dzogchen merely relies on a pointing out (\"sems khrid\") of the mind's nature in an encounter with a teacher.\nIn his \"Grub mtha' mdzod\", Longchenpa describes how Dzogchen transcends the classic tantric generation and perfection stages which for him are based on effort, mental constructs and fixation. For Longchenpa, Dzogchen relies on simple (\"spros med\") and more natural methods which are based on the recognition of the nature of the mind and the Dzogchen view (\"Ita ba\") of reality. Longchenpa also argues that this Dzogchen method is \"superior to that of stress-filled actualization involved in ordinary generation and perfection\" (\"Zab mo yang tig\" vol. 11, 344.2-6).\nIn the root verses and auto-commentary to his chapter on meditation within \"The Treasury of the Dharmadhatu\" (\"chos dbyings mdzod\"), Longchenpa placed strong emphasis on the importance of the practice of the \"four ways of resting\" in the nature of awareness (\"cog gzhag bzhi\") and the \"three samadhis\" (\"ting nge 'dzin gsum\"), offering also detailed explanations for their practice. In the foreword to the book \"The Meditations of Longchen Rabjam\", Thrangu Rinpoche explicitly notes:One of the most renowned presentations of Dzogchen is given in Longchen Rabjam\u2019s \"Ch\u00f6ying Dz\u00f6d\". This text gives clear instructions on how to develop the view and practice the meditation of resting in the nature of awareness. Studying and practicing these meditations will be of great benefit to everyone who encounters these instructions.\nLongchenpa also critiques tantric perfection stage methods (such as the six yogas of Naropa) which focus on manipulating the winds (\"vayu\") in the channels (\"nadis\") of the subtle body in order to confine them into the central channel. Longchenpa sees these techniques are inferior, because they are strenuous and forceful and may lead to delusory appearances. Longchenpa contrasts these tantric techniques with those of Dzogchen in which \"the winds are left to naturally calm down of their own accord, there is no insertion into the central channel.\"\nGermano describes Longchenpa's view on this topic as follows:In his \"Grub mtha' mdzod\" kLong chen rab 'byams pa also incisively criticizes these normative modernist tantric practices of forcefully inserting the energy winds into the central channel in the attempt to achieve primordial gnosis. He contrasts this to Great Perfection contemplation in which the body's luminous channels are let be, and thus naturally expand outwards from their current presence as a thin thread of light at the body's center, so as to directly permeate one's entire existence and dissolve all energy blockages therein. He retains the emphasis on the body's center and light-experiences, yet undercuts the tone of control and manipulation.\nWorks.\nLongchenpa wrote over 270 works according to Tulku Thondup.\nSeven treasuries.\n\"The Seven Treasuries\" (\"mdzod bdun\"), which elucidate the meaning of the Nyingma school's worldview and Dzogchen, are his most influential and famous original treatises.\nThe \"Seven Treasuries\" are:\nAccording to Germano, the \"Tsik D\u00f6n Dz\u00f6\" and the \"Tekchok Dz\u00f6\" together constitute Longchenpa's primary scholastic work on the Dzogchen tradition.\n\"Nyingthig Yabshi\".\nLongchenpa compiled various Dzogchen Menngagde scriptures (including the \"Seventeen Tantras\") into the collection known as the \"Nyingthig Yabshi\" (\"The Inner Essence in Four Parts\"). In this compilation, Longchenpa combines his editions of the \"Vima Nyingtig\" and the \"Khandro Nyingthig,\" along with his own commentaries on these cycles (the \"Lama Yangtik\" and the \"Khandro Yangtik\" respectively)\".\" Longchenpa also composed a supplementary commentary to the \"Nyingthig Yabshi,\" called the \"Zabmo Yangtig.\"\nAccording to Germano, Longchenpa's compilation \"brought much needed order and organizational clarity to the at times chaotic mass of the Vimalamitra-transmitted Seminal Heart scriptures inherited from Kumaradza.\"\nOther works.\nSome of his other important original compositions include:\nEnglish translations.\nSeven Treasuries.\n1.\n2.\n3.\n4.\n6.\n7.\nTrilogy of Natural Ease.\n1.\n2.\n3.\nName and titles.\nLongchenpa's names given below are indicative of the high regard in which he and his teachings are held. Like the Third Karmapa Rangjung Dorje, Rongzompa and Jigme Lingpa, he carried the title \"Kunkhyen\" (Tibetan; \"All-Knowing\").\nVarious forms and spellings of Longchenpa's full name(s), in which \"Longchen\" means \"great expanse\", \"vast space\", and \"Rab 'byams\" \"cosmic\", \"vast\", \"extensive\", \"infinite\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73195", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73195", "title": "Shantideva", "text": "8th-century Indian Buddhist monk and scholar\nShantideva (Sanskrit: \u015a\u0101ntideva; ; Tibetan: \u0f5e\u0f72\u0f0b\u0f56\u0f0b\u0f63\u0fb7\u0f0d, THL: \"Zhiwa Lha\"; ; ) was an 8th-century CE Indian philosopher, Buddhist monk, poet, and scholar at the mahavihara of Nalanda. He was an adherent of the M\u0101dhyamaka philosophy of N\u0101g\u0101rjuna. Abhayadatta Sri also lists Shantideva as one of the eighty-four mahasiddhas and is known as Bhusuku Pa (\u5e03\u82cf\u56fa\u5df4).\nTwo works of Shantideva are extant, the \"Bodhisattvacary\u0101vat\u0101ra\" and the \"\u015aik\u1e63\u0101samuccaya\", both of which were written with the intention of being training manuals for one who intends to follow the path of the bodhisattva. The Bodhisattvacary\u0101vat\u0101ra in particular was the subject of both Indian and Tibetan commentaries during the period it was written and has also received large amounts of attention from both academics and lay practitioners in recent years as well including a commentary written by the 14th Dalai Lama.\nBiography.\nThere are two sources of Shantideva's life composed by the Tibetan historians; Buton Rinchen Drub and Taranatha. Recent scholarship has also brought to light a short Sanskrit language biography of Shantideva in a 14th-century Nepalese manuscript. \nAccording to one source, Shantideva was born in the Saurastra region (in modern-day Gujarat), son of a King Kalyanavarman, and went by the name \u015aantivarman. But Vibh\u016bticandra's \"Bodhicary\u0101vat\u0101rat\u0101tparyapa\u00f1jik\u0101 Vi\u015be\u1e63adyotan\u012b\", the earliest extant biography of Shantideva, details that he was born in Southern India, in the city of Sringara, and his father was a King Ma\u00f1ju\u015br\u012bvarman. As per Vibh\u016bticandra, Shantideva ran away from home on the advice of his mother and travelled to Bengal and then Magadha. He served in the court of a Magadhan king and after leaving, arrived in Nalanda. During his stay in Nalanda, he was given the nickname, Bh\u016bsuku due to his practice of Samadhi.\nAccording to Pema Ch\u00f6dr\u00f6n, \"Shantideva was not well-liked at Nalanda\" due to his idleness.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Apparently he was one of those people who didn't show up for anything, never studying or coming to practice sessions. His fellow monks said that his three \"realizations\" were eating, sleeping, and shitting.\nAccording to legend, Shantideva was goaded by his fellow monks into giving a talk to the entire university body while sitting on a large lion throne with the hope that on being exposed as unable to recite any scriptures, he would leave the monastery on his own accord. Shantideva easily climbed the throne and recited stanza 9.35 of \"The Way of the Bodhisattva\". The legend continues that at this point, the bodhisattva Manjushri appeared and then suddenly disappeared together with Shantideva. Following this event, when the monks investigated his cells, they discovered his three works, the S\u016btrasamuccaya, the \u015aik\u1e63\u0101samuccaya, and the completed Bodhicary\u0101vat\u0101ra.\nConversionary activities in Magadha.\nBu Ston details several tales from Shantideva's life which detail how he converted 500 Magadhans to Buddhism. It is said that Shantideva lived alongside the non-Buddhists while they were experiencing a natural disaster which led to them suffering from starvation. As he was appointed the head of these people, Shantideva demonstrated his supernatural abilities as he managed to make a single bowl of rice suffice for all of the 500. Similar stories are found in other sources detailing how Santideva would feed hundreds of beggars.\nWorks.\n\"\u015aik\u1e63\u0101samuccaya\".\nThe \"\u015aik\u1e63\u0101samuccaya\" (\"Training Anthology\") is a prowith work in 19 chapters. It is organized as a commentary on 27 short mnemonic verses known as the \"\u015aik\u1e63\u0101samuccaya K\u0101rik\u0101\". It consists primarily of quotations (of varying length) from s\u016btras, authoritative texts considered to be the word of the Buddha\u2014generally those s\u016btras associated with Mah\u0101y\u0101na tradition, including the \"Samadhiraja Sutra\".\n\"Bodhicaryavatara\".\nShantideva is particularly renowned as the author of the \"Bodhisattvacary\u0101vat\u0101ra\". A variety of English translations exist, sometimes glossed as \"A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life\" or \"Entering the Path of Enlightenment.\" It is a long poem describing the process of enlightenment from the first thought to full buddhahood and is still studied by Mahayana and Vajrayana Buddhists today.\nAn introduction to and commentary on the \"Bodhisattvacary\u0101vat\u0101ra\" by the 14th Dalai Lama called \"A Flash of Lightning in the Dark of Night\" was printed in 1994. A commentary on the Patience chapter was provided by the Dalai Lama in \"Healing Anger\" (1997), and his commentaries on the Wisdom chapter are in \"Practicing Wisdom\" (2004). http:// has written a commentary based on that given by Patrul Rinpoche, translated by the Padmakara Translation Group. Patrul was a wandering monk of great scholarship who dedicated his life to propagating the \"Bodhisattvacary\u0101vat\u0101ra\".\nPhilosophical views.\nPersonal identity and free will.\nFollowing the Buddha, \u015a\u0101ntideva believed that our innate investment in an inherent, personal, self or essence is not only groundless but toxic. Goodman suggests that \u015a\u0101ntideva also touches on the problem of free will in the \"Bodhicary\u0101vat\u0101ra\", writing that \"whatever transgressions (apar\u0101dha) and vile actions (p\u0101pa) there are, all arise through the power of conditioning factors, while there is nothing that arises independently.\"\nEthical views.\nIn line with his views on personal identity and the nature of the self, \u015a\u0101ntideva wrote that one ought to \"stop all the present and future pain and suffering of all sentient beings, and to bring about all present and future pleasure and happiness\", in what may have been \"the very earliest clearly articulated statement of that view, preceding Jeremy Bentham by approximately a thousand years\".\nHis basis for preferring altruism over egoism is that \"the continuum of consciousness, like a queue, and the combination of constituents, like an army, are not real. The person who experiences suffering does not exist.\" Similarly, he asks, \"when happiness is dear to me and others equally, what is so special about me that I strive after happiness only for myself?\"\nBodhicitta.\nThe Bodhisattva is the central focus for both of the texts attributed to Shantideva. Bodhicitta is the mind that is focused on attaining the status of bodhisattva. The early chapters of the Bodhisattvacary\u0101vat\u0101ra are focused on praising the virtuous qualities of bodhicitta and also on how to strengthen and maintain it.\nShantideva states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Those who long to overcome the abundant miseries of mundane existence, those who wish to dispel the adversities of sentient beings, and those who yearn to experience a myriad of joys should never forsake bodhicitta.\"\nShantideva also argued that the development of Bodhicitta was beneficial not just to those who are following the path of the Bodhisattva but also to those who are pursuing their well-being and happiness. His view is that the mind of one who has developed Bodhicitta is the solution to countering mental afflictions (klesas) such as cravings (Ta\u1e47h\u0101) and anger (krodha).\nGenerosity.\nReferences to generosity (known as D\u0101na in the Indian tradition), can be found throughout both of Shantideva's extant works. Shantideva mainly views generosity as a specific mental state where an individual has renounced all of their possessions. It does not necessarily refer to the distribution of one's own possessions. The bodhisattva achieves the mental state of \"generosity\" by renouncing three things; the body, the possessions, and karmic merit. This is viewed by Shantideva as an important requirement for one who is on the path of the Bodhisattva. Shantideva also states in the Bodhicary\u0101vat\u0101ra that he believes generosity to be beneficial by comparing it with nirvana:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Abandoning everything is nirvana, and my mind seeks nirvana. If I must abandon it, it is better that I give it to sentient beings.\"\nHence from this passage, Shatideva believes the perfection of generosity to be liberation. This conception of generosity is therefore twofold with generosity benefiting oneself and benefiting others at the same time.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73196", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73196", "title": "Amanda Craig", "text": "British novelist, critic and journalist\nAmanda Craig (born 1959) is a British novelist, critic and journalist.\nEarly life.\nBorn in South Africa, Craig grew up in Italy before moving to London. Her parents were British journalist, author and UN Press Officer Dennis Craig and South African journalist Zelda Wolhuter, who left Johannesburg following the Sharpeville Massacre and the rise of apartheid. Craig studied at Bedales School and read English Literature at Clare College, Cambridge. After graduation, she worked briefly in advertising for J. Walter Thompson and Terence Conran before leaving to work as a cleaner for 18 months. She then became a journalist.\nWriting.\nFor ten years, she was the children's books critic for \"The Times\" and a features writer for \"The Sunday Times\". She has contributed to \"The Observer\", \"The Guardian\", the \"New Statesman\" and BBC Radio 4. As a journalist, Craig won the British Press Awards 1995 Young Journalist of the Year and the 1997 Catherine Pakenham Award. She worked on the staff of \"Tatler\" and the \"Sunday Express\" before becoming a freelance feature writer, literary critic and columnist for \"The Daily Telegraph\", \"The Sunday Times\", the \"Daily Mail\", \"The Independent\", and \"The Observer\". She judged the Whitbread Novel Award in 2005, the Booktrust Teen Book Award in 2008, and the 2018 Wingate Prize. Craig was dropped as a judge for the Mslexia Fiction &amp; Memoir Competition by women\u2019s writing magazine \"Mslexia\" in September 2020 after she signed a letter to \"The Times\" condemning online abuse of J.K. Rowling.\nCraig has written a cycle of nine interconnected novels dealing with contemporary British society. Her 1996 novel \"A Vicious Circle\" was originally contracted to be published by Hamish Hamilton, but was cancelled after a libel threat from David Sexton, literary editor of the \"Evening Standard\" and former boyfriend of Craig's at Cambridge, fifteen years previously. The novel was bought by Fourth Estate and published three months later.\nAlthough each novel can be read separately, they are linked to each other by common characters and themes, thus constituting a novel sequence. Craig has been cited as a state-of-the-nation novelist by Sameer Rahim in \"Prospect\" and by \"The Sunday Times\". Usually, Craig takes a minor character and makes him or her the protagonist of her next work. She has been praised by Allison Pearson in \"The Sunday Telegraph\" for her \"...wit, indignation, an ear for the telling phrase and an unflagging attention to all the individual choices by which we define ourselves \u2013 where we stand as a society and how we decline and fall.\"\nCraig's fourth novel, \"In a Dark Wood\", concerned the interplay between fairytales and manic depression, and her fifth, \"Love in Idleness\", updates Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", setting the story in a holiday villa near Cortona, Italy. Her sixth novel, \"Hearts and Minds\", concerned with the lives of legal and illegal immigrants in London, was longlisted for the 2009 Baileys Women's Prize for Fiction.\nHer seventh novel, \"The Lie of the Land\" (2017), depicted a London professional couple who can't afford to divorce and move to Devon to a rented house which has been the scene of a murder, was cited as \"in the vanguard of the Brexit novel\" by Danuta Kean in \"The Guardian\". It was praised by Henry Hitchings in the \"Financial Times\", who commented: \"An enjoyable, sharp-witted and at times knowingly melodramatic novel, it lives up to the promise of its title \u2013 diagnosing the state of the nation without becoming grandiose, and debunking a few quaint myths about the patterns and textures of rural life.\" It was BBC Radio 4's \"Book at Bedtime\" in August 2017. \"The Guardian\" chose it as one of the 2017 Books of the Year, as did \"The Irish Times\", \"The Financial Times\", \"The Observer\", and \"The Telegraph\".\nCraig has set two of her novels, \"A Private Place\" and \"The Lie of the Land\", in Devon, a county that she has compared to C. S. Lewis's Narnia. In an interview with Jackie McGlone of \"The Glasgow Herald,\" Craig described how encountering the poverty of North Devon shocked her. Her eighth novel, \"The Golden Rule,\" was published in 2020 and was described as a \"wry comedy-cum-thriller reimagining of Patricia Highsmith \"Strangers on a Train\" and \"Beauty and the Beast\"\", \"offering comfort and wit, compassion and philosophical speculation,\" although one critic commented of the millennial protagonist: \"Craig\u2019s language choices... make her seem weirdly prim. \"The Golden Rule\" was longlisted for the 2021 Women's Prize for fiction. Her ninth novel was \"The Three Graces\" (2023), described by \"The Telegraph\" as \"smartly plotted but ultimately lightweight.\"\nCraig is interested in fairytales and children's fiction, and was one of the first critics to praise J. K. Rowling, Philip Pullman, Cressida Cowell, Stephenie Meyer, Anthony Horowitz, Malorie Blackman and Suzanne Collins.\nCraig gave https:// and https:// stating that both had influenced her novels and her life-choices.\nFollowing her struggle to get \"A Vicious Circle\" published, she became an active campaigner with International PEN for the reform of UK libel laws.\nIn an opinion piece in \"The Independent\", Craig asked why fiction remains obsessed by historical fiction and neglects the contemporary, saying she has \"set out to take the DNA of a Victorian novel \u2013 its spirit of realism, its strong plot, its cast of characters who are not passively shaped by circumstances but who rise to challenges or escape them.\" She has said in interviews that she considers writing contemporary fiction to be \"a moral duty\".\nShe was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 2018.\nCraig's short stories have been published in \"Good Housekeeping\", \"The Mail on Sunday\", the \"Sunday Express\", the \"New Statesman\" and collections such as Valentine's Day \"Duckworth\" and \"Good Housekeeping\" \"Great Escapes\" in support of Childline.\nIn 2011, she contributed the short story \"Red Berries\" to an anthology supporting the Woodland Trust. The anthology, \"Why Willows Weep\", has so far helped the Woodland Trust plant approximately 50,000 trees, and was re-released in paperback format in 2016. In 2017 she contributed the short story \"Metamorphosis 2\" about a celebrity inspired by Katie Hopkins who transforms into a gigantic cockroach to the anthology \"A Country of Refuge\" supporting refugees.\nShe has written forewords for the 2021 Abacus reissues of 5 novels by Beryl Bainbridge - \"Every Man For Himself\", \"Master Georgie\", \"The Birthday Boys\", \"According to Queenie\" and \"The Bottle Factory Outing\", 2 novels by Eva Ibbotson - \"The Secret Countess\" and \"A Glove Shop In Vienna\", reissued by Macmillan - plus Alison Lurie's Pulitzer Prize-winning \"Foreign Affairs\".\nAdaptations.\nIn 2023, it was announced that the rights to \"The Three Graces\" had been optioned by television company Monumental Television.\nPersonal life.\nCraig is married to British economist Rob Cohen, with whom she has two children. She lives in London and Devon.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73198", "revid": "30394555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73198", "title": "Conradh na Gaeilge", "text": "Organisation that promotes the Irish language\n (; historically known in English as the Gaelic League) is a social and cultural organisation which promotes the Irish language in Ireland and worldwide. The organisation was founded in 1893 with Douglas Hyde as its first president, when it emerged as the successor of several 19th century groups such as the Gaelic Union. The organisation was a spearhead of the Gaelic revival and of \"Gaeilgeoir\" activism.\nWhile Hyde succeeded in drawing unionists to the League, the organisation increasingly gave expression to the nationalist impulse behind the language revival. From 1915, members of its executive acknowledged the leadership of the Irish Republican Brotherhood in the struggle for Irish statehood. After the creation of the Irish Free State, and limited advances with respect to the teaching and official use of the language, many members transferred their commitment to the new institutions, political parties and education system.\nIn 2008, Conradh na Gaeilge adopted a new constitution, dropping the post-1915 references to \"Irish freedom\", while reaffirming the ambition to restore Irish as the language of everyday life throughout Ireland. In Northern Ireland, it campaigned for an Irish Language Act. In the absence of an agreed Stormont executive, in 2022 the Westminster Parliament incorporated many of its proposed provisions in the Identity and Language (Northern Ireland) Act.\nFoundation: \"De-Anglicising Ireland\".\n\"Conradh na Gaeilge\", the Gaelic League, a successor to Ulick Bourke's earlier Gaelic Union, was formed in 1893, at a time when Irish as a spoken language appeared to be on the verge of extinction. Analysis of the 1881 Census showed that at least 45% of those born in Ireland in the first decade of the 19th century had been brought up as Irish speakers. Figures from the 1891 census suggested that just 3.5% were being raised speaking the language. Ireland had become an overwhelmingly English-speaking country. Spoken mainly by peasants and farm labourers in the poorer districts of the west of Ireland, Irish was widely seen, in the words of Matthew Arnold, as \"the badge of a beaten race.\"\nThe first aim of the League was to maintain the language in the \"Gaeltacht\", the largely western districts in which spoken Irish survived. The late 20th-century \"Gaeilgeoir\" activist Aod\u00e1n Mac P\u00f3ilin notes, however, that \"the main ideological impact of the language movement was not in the \"Gaeltacht\", but among English-speaking nationalists\". The League developed \"both a conservationist and a revivalist role\".\nThe League's first president, Douglas Hyde (\"D\u00fabhghl\u00e1s de h\u00cdde\"), the son of a Church of Ireland rector from County Roscommon, helped create an ethos in the early days that attracted a number of unionists into its ranks. Remarkably, these included the Rev. Richard Kane, Grand Master of the Belfast Orange Lodge and organiser of the Anti-Home Rule Convention of 1892. But from the beginning there was an unresolved conflict between non-political rhetoric and the nationalism implicit in the League's revivalist project.\nWith the aid of Eugene O'Growney (author of \"Simple Lessons in Irish\") Eoin MacNeill, Thomas O'Neill Russell and others, the League was launched in the wake of an address Hyde delivered to the Irish National Literary Society, on 25 November 1892: \u2018\"The Necessity for De-Anglicising Ireland\u2019\". Citing Giuseppe Mazzini (the Italian nationalist who had been the inspiration for the rare language enthusiast among the Young Irelanders, Thomas Davis), Hyde argued that \"in Anglicising ourselves wholesale we have thrown away with a light heart the best claim we have to nationality\".\nImplicitly, this was a criticism of the national movement as it had developed since Catholic emancipation. Although a gaeilgeoir, Daniel O'Connell had declared himself \"sufficiently utilitarian not to regret [the] gradual abandonment\" of the language. For Emancipator's keenest supporters, the \"positive and unmistakable\" mark of distinction between Irish and English was \"the distinction created by religion\". Hyde's project spoke to a new exclusionary sense of what it is to be Irish. The simple practice of referring to Gaelic as \"the Irish language\", consciously or not, rendered \"those who did not speak it as less Irish, and those who did not even acknowledge its status as non-Irish\".\nThe League rapidly developed into the leading institution promoting the Gaelic Revival, organising Irish classes and student immersions in the Gaeltacht, and publishing in Irish. The League's first newspaper was \"An Claidheamh Soluis\" (The Sword of Light) and its most noted editor was P\u00e1draig Pearse. The motto of the League was \"Sinn F\u00e9in, Sinn F\u00e9in amh\u00e1in\" (Ourselves, Ourselves alone).\nEarly campaigns.\nAmong the League's few campaign successes in its first decade was acceptance by the Post Office of parcels and letters addressed in Irish, and the recognition of St. Patrick's Day as a national holiday.\nWith national feeling heightened in part by the Boer War, membership increased from 1900. The number of branches rose from 43 in 1897 to 600 in 1904 with a membership of 50,000. A more substantial victory followed: in 1904 Irish was introduced into the national school curriculum.\nThe Catholic church, however, was not an early ally. The clergy had played a significant role in the decline of the language. In the National schools they had punished children for speaking it (a legacy, in part, of the Irish-language missionary activity of the Protestant churches).\nThe national cause.\nHyde declared that \"The Irish language, thank God, is neither Protestant nor Catholic, it is neither a Unionist nor a Separatist.\" Although the League took this non-political principle seriously enough to decline participation in the unveiling of a 1798 centenary monument to Wolfe Tone, much like the Gaelic Athletic Association the organisation served as an occasion and cover for nationalist recruitment. Se\u00e1n T. O'Kelly recalls that, as early 1903, as a travelling manager for \"An Claidheamh Soluis,\" he was in a position to recruit young men for Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB) in every one of 32 counties. It was through the League that many future leaders of the independence struggle first met, laying the foundation for groups such as the Irish Volunteers (1913).\n\"While being non-political\", Michael Collins saw the League, by \"its very nature\", as \"intensely national\". Under a system of foreign rule that made the people \"forget to look to themselves, and to turn their backs upon their own country\", it did \"more than any other movement to restore national pride, honour and self-respect\". Arthur Griffith had been similarly dismissive of the League's political neutrality of the League. Popular support for the revival of the language, he argued, sprang precisely from its role as a mark of Irish nationality.\nAs the nationalist impulse behind the League became more obvious, and in particular as the League began to work more closely with the Catholic Church to secure support for teaching Irish in the schools, Unionists withdrew. Hyde's effort to leave space for unionists was lost. They were themselves moving toward a distinct Ulster unionism which rejected any form of Irish cultural identity.\nIncreasingly Republicans were blunt about what they saw as the League's place within the nationalist movement. The paper, \"Irish Freedom\", declared:The work of the Gaelic League is to prevent the assimilation of the Irish nation by the English nation [...] The work is as essentially anti-English as the work attempted by Fenianism or the Society of United Irishmen [...] The Irish language is a political weapon of the first importance against English encroachment.The issue of the League's political independence was decided at its Annual General Meeting held in Dundalk in 1915. Rumours circulated that John Redmond's Irish Parliamentary Party were seeking to take over the League as they had earlier attempted to take over the Irish Volunteers. Diarmuid Lynch of the IRB mobilised Brotherhood members positioned throughout the League to secure the nominations and votes required to appoint a new \"Coiste\" (executive) that \"was safe from the IRB viewpoint\".\nNorthern Protestants.\nThe first Ulster branch of the Gaelic League was formed in east Belfast in 1895, a year after the death of Robert Shipboy MacAdam who, with Dr. James MacDonnell, had presided over a precursor of the League earlier in the century: \"Cuideacht Gaoidhilge Uladh / T\"he Ulster Gaelic Society (1828\u20131843). The new Belfast branch was formed under the active patronage (until he left to become Church of Ireland Lord Bishop of Ossory) of the Rev. John Baptiste Crozier and the presidency of his parishioner, Dr. John St Clair Boyd, both unionists, and of the Orange Order Grand Master, the Rev. Richard Rutledge Kane. Claiming to afford a \"common platform to Catholic and Protestant\", by 1899 the League had nine branches in the city including one in the unionist Shankill ward where, in the 1911 census, 106 people recorded themselves as Irish speakers.\nFor other Protestant pioneers of the Irish language in the north the League was a non-sectarian door into the nationalist community with whom their political sympathies lay. This was the case for Alice Milligan, publisher in Belfast of \"The Shan Van Vocht.\" Milligan's command of Irish was never fluent, and on that basis Patrick Pearse was to object when, in 1904, the Gaelic League hired her as a travelling lecturer. She proved herself by establishing new branches throughout Ireland and raising funds along the way. In the north, in Ulster, she focused on the more difficult task of recruiting Protestants, working with, among other activists, Hyde, Ada McNeill, Roger Casement, Alice Stopford Green, Stephen Gwynn, and Seamus McManus.\nJames Owen Hannay (better known as the novelist George A. Birmingham), originally of Belfast, was co-opted onto the League's national executive body in December 1904 while a Church of Ireland (Anglican) rector in Westport in County Mayo. Hyde and Arthur Griffith sympathised with Hannay's desire for a \"union of the two Irish democracies\", Catholic in the south and Protestant in the north. In the north Hannay saw a potential ally in Lindsay Crawford and his Independent Orange Order. Like the \"Conradh na Gaeilge\", he saw the IOO as \"profoundly democratic in spirit\" and independent of \"the rich and the patronage of the great\".\nCrawford, who stood for election to the League's executive committee, was critical of what he regarded as the League's impractical romanticism. In his paper, \"Irish Protestant\", he suggested that the Irish Ireland movement needed an injection of \"Ulsteria\", an \"industrial awakening on true economic lines: it is wrong when people crave bread to offer them 'language and culture'\".\nOffence taken at his successful play \"General John Regan,\" and his defence of Crawford's opposition to church control of education, strained Hannay's relations with nationalists and he withdrew from League. Meanwhile, in North America, Crawford (who had found no political home in Ireland) went on to campaign with Eamon de Valera for recognition and support for the republic proclaimed in 1916.\nErnest Blythe, who joined the Irish Republican Brotherhood in 1909 with the distinction of maintaining for three years his membership of the Orange Order, had as his first \"Conradh na Gaeilge\" teacher Sin\u00e9ad Flanagan, de Valera's future wife. To improve his knowledge of the Irish language, he lived in the County Kerry Gaeltacht earning his keep as an agricultural labourer. A similar path was followed by IRB organiser of the Irish Volunteers, Bulmer Hobson.\nParticipation of women.\nAlice Milligan was exceptional among the League's leading activists as a northern Protestant, but less so as a woman. All the priorities of the larger Irish-Ireland movement which developed around the revival of the language, including teaching children a national history and literature, and the use and consumption of Irish-made products, were associated with the sphere of home and community in which women were accorded initiative. In comparison to the political parties (whether republican or constitutionalist), organisations, like the League, promoting a cultural agenda were comparatively open and receptive to women.\nThe League encouraged female participation from the start and women filled prominent roles. Local notables, such as Lady Gregory in Galway, Lady Esmonde in County Wexford, and Mary Spring Rice in County Limerick, and others such as M\u00e1ire N\u00ed Sh\u00failleabh\u00e1in and Norma Borthwick, founded and led branches. In positions of trust, however, women remained a decided minority. At the annual national convention in 1906 women were elected to seven of the forty-five positions on the Gaelic League executive. Executive members included M\u00e1ire N\u00ed Chinn\u00e9ide, \u00dana N\u00ed Fhaircheallaigh (Agnes O'Farrelly, who wrote pamphlets on behalf of the League), Bean an Doc U\u00ed Choisdealbha, M\u00e1ire N\u00ed hAod\u00e1in, M\u00e1ire de Built\u00e9ir, Nellie O'Brien, Eibhl\u00edn N\u00ed Dhonnabh\u00e1in, and Eibhl\u00edn Nic Niocaill.\nM\u00e1ire de Built\u00e9ir, who is credited with suggesting the term Sinn F\u00e9in to Arthur Griffith, made it clear that women could make their contribution to the cultural revival without relinquishing their traditional roles. \"Let it be thoroughly understood\", she insisted, \"that when Irish women are invited to take part in the language movement, they are not required to plunge into the vortex of public life. No the work they can best do is work to be done in the home. There mission is to make the homes of Ireland Irish\".\nCriticism.\nFormed in the wake of the disgrace and fall of the nationalist leader Charles Stewart Parnell and defeat of the second Home Rule Bill, the League drew upon a generation frustrated and disillusioned with electoral politics. But proponents of new and rival movements were sceptical of the cultural activism offered by the League.\nWriting in Alice Milligan's Belfast monthly, labour and socialist leader James Connolly maintained that in the absence of a creed capable of challenging the rule of the capitalist, landlord and financier, the nationalism of the Irish language movement would achieve little. His friend and collaborator Frederick Ryan, secretary of the Irish National Theatre Society, acknowledged the \"pathos\" in that in \"young men and women rushing to acquire the rudiments of Irish (and it seldom gets beyond that) in order to show that they are not as other nations\", but suggested that it did not \"correlate with the active desire for political freedom\". Most leaders of the Gaelic League desired \"a return to medievalism in thought, in literature, in pastimes, in music and even in dress\", but a nation, he argued, is not morally raised by dwelling on its past. Rather it must deal with its present political, economic, and social problems, something of which Ireland is capable without assuming \"the enormous burden of adopting what is now virtually a new language\".\nPatrick Pearse, who had joined the League while in his teens, responded in \"An Claidheamh Soluis\" by defending a \"critical traditionalism\". The cultural self-belief promoted by the League does not call for \"folk attitudes of mind\" or \"folk conventions of form\". Irish artists might have to \"imbibe their Irishness from the peasant, since the peasants alone possess Irishism, but they need not and must not [...] be afraid of modern culture\". Deriving \"what is best in medieval Irish literature\", the new Irish prose would be characterised by a \"terseness\", \"crispness\", and \"plain straightforwardness\" entirely conducive to the demands of the modern nation-state and economy.\nIn the Irish Free State.\nWith the foundation of the Irish Free State many members believed that the Gaelic League had taken language revival as far as it could and that the task now fell to the new Irish Government. They ceased their League activities and were absorbed into the new political parties and into state bodies such as the Army, Police, Civil Service, and into the school system in which Irish was made compulsory. With the organisation paying a less prominent role in public life, It fared badly in the 1925 Seanad election. All its endorsed candidates, including Hyde, were rejected.\nFrom 1926 there was growing disquiet among League members over the government's failure to implement the recommendations of its own Gaeltacht Commission. Despite being presided over by Blythe, one of their own, the Ministry of Finance baulked at the proposal for free secondary school education for Gaeltacht children (something that was not available anywhere in Ireland until the 1960s). The League was also alarmed by the Anglicising and cosmopolitan influences of state radio (great objection was made to its programming of Jazz). The failure of the Cumann na nGaedheal government to commit to a more comprehensive programme for defending and promoting Irish and what was perceived, typically in conservative folk terms, as its supporting culture, helped rally support for de Valera's anti-Treaty republican party Fianna Fail. Partly in recognition of his services in the League services, under de Valera's new constitution, Hyde served as the first President of Ireland from June 1938 to June 1945.\nIn 1927, An Coimisi\u00fan Le Rinc\u00ed Gaelacha (CLRG) was founded as a subcommittee of the League to investigate the promotion of traditional Irish dance. Eventually, CLRG became a largely independent organisation, though it is required by its constitution to share three board members with the League.\nContemporary campaigns for language rights.\nConradh na Gaeilge, in alliance with other groups such as Gluaiseacht Chearta Sibhialta na Gaeltachta, was instrumental in the community campaigns which led to the creation of RT\u00c9 Raidi\u00f3 na Gaeltachta (1972), \u00dadar\u00e1s na Gaeltachta (1980), and TG4 (1996). The organisation successfully campaigned for the enactment of the Official Languages Act, 2003 which gave greater statutory protection to Irish speakers and created the position of (the Languages Commissioner). Conradh na Gaeilge was among the principal organisations responsible for co-ordinating the successful campaign to make Irish an official language of the European Union.\nIn 2008 during the presidency of D\u00e1ith\u00ed Mac C\u00e1rthaigh, Conradh na Gaeilge adopted a new constitution reverting to its pre 1915 non-political stance restating its aim as that of an Irish-speaking Ireland (\"It is the aim of the Organisation to reinstate the Irish language as the everyday language of Ireland\") and dropping any reference to Irish freedom.\nIn recent years Conradh na Gaeilge has remained central to campaigns to protect language rights throughout Ireland. This strategy encompasses the promotion of increased investment in Gaeltacht areas, advocacy for increased provision of state services through Irish, the development of Irish language hubs in urban areas, and the Acht Anois campaign for the enactment of an Irish Language Act to protect the language in Northern Ireland.\nThe decision of the Democratic Unionist Party to resist a stand-alone Irish Language Act, in part by insisting on compensating provisions for Ulster Scots, became one of the principal, publicly acknowledged, sticking points in the three years of on and off again negotiations required to restore the power-sharing executive in 2020. The 2020 New Decade, New Approach agreement promised both the Irish language and Ulster-Scots new Commissioners to \"support\" and \"enhance\" their development but does not accord them equal legal status. While Ulster Scots was to be recognised as a regional or minority language for the \"encouragement\" and \"facilitation\" purposes of Part II of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, provision for Irish was to meet the more stringent Part III obligations in respect of education, media and administration.\nIn 2022, with unionist protest against the Northern Ireland Protocol having resulted in a further suspension of devolved government, the United Kingdom Parliament incorporated the language provisions of \"New Decade, New Approach\" in the Identity and Language (Northern Ireland) Act. The president of the Conradh na Gaeilge, Paula Melvin, hailed the passing of the legislation, but said the bill was \"not our final destination\". The organisation would turn its attention to both implementing and to strengthening the legislation: \"painful experience with the British government has taught us to take nothing for granted\".\nBranches.\nConradh na Gaeilge has a number of branches across Ireland and internationally which organise locally, and are governed by committee.\nPresidents.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "73199", "revid": "50905994", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73199", "title": "Cambridge University Press", "text": "Publishing arm of the University of Cambridge\nCambridge University Press is the university press of the University of Cambridge. Granted a letters patent by King Henry VIII in 1534, it is the oldest university press in the world. Cambridge University Press merged with Cambridge Assessment to form Cambridge University Press and Assessment under Queen Elizabeth II's approval in August 2021. However, the Press retains an independent existence within the larger entity.\nWith a global sales presence, publishing hubs, and offices in more than 40 countries, it has published over 50,000 titles by authors from over 100 countries. Its publications include more than 420 academic journals, monographs, reference works, school and university textbooks, and English language teaching and learning publications. It also publishes Bibles, runs a bookshop in Cambridge, sells through Amazon, and has a conference venues business in Cambridge at the Pitt Building and the Sir Geoffrey Cass Sports and Social Centre. It also serves as the King's Printer.\nCambridge University Press, as part of the University of Cambridge, is a non-profit organization. Cambridge University Press joined The Association of American Publishers trade organization in the Hachette v. Internet Archive lawsuit which resulted in the removal of access to over 500,000 books from global readers.\nHistory.\nCambridge University Press is the oldest university press in the world. It originated from letters patent granted to the University of Cambridge by Henry VIII in 1534. Cambridge was one of the two privileged presses (the other being Oxford University Press). Authors published by Cambridge have included John Milton, William Harvey, Isaac Newton, Bertrand Russell, and Stephen Hawking.\nUniversity printing began in Cambridge when the first practising University Printer, Thomas Thomas, set up a printing house in 1584. The first publication was a book, \"Two Treatises of the Lord His Holie Supper\". In 1591, the first Cambridge Bible was printed by John Legate and in 1629, Cambridge folio edition of the King James Bible was printed by Thomas and John Buck.\nIn July 1697, the Duke of Somerset made a loan of \u00a3200 to the university \"towards the printing house and press\" and James Halman, Registrary of the university, lent \u00a3100 for the same purpose.\nA new home for the press, The Pitt Building, on Trumpington Street in the centre of Cambridge was completed in 1833, which was designed by Edward Blore. It became a listed building in 1950.\nIn the early 1800s, the press pioneers the development of stereotype printing, allowing successive printings from one setting. The press began using steam-powered machine presses by the 1850s. It was in this period that the press turned down what later became the Oxford English Dictionary \u2013 a proposal for which was brought to Cambridge by James Murray before he turned to Oxford.\nThe press journals publishing programme began in 1893 with the \"Journal of Physiology\" and then the \"Journal of Hygiene and Biometrika\". By 1910 the press had become a well-established journal publisher with a successful list which includes its first humanities title, \"Modern Language Review\". 1956 saw the first issue of the \"Journal of Fluid Mechanics\".\nThe press has published 170+ Nobel Prize winners, the first in 1895.\nIn 1913, the Monotype system of hot-metal mechanised typesetting was introduced at the press.\nIn 1949, the press opened its first international branch in New York.\nThe press moved to its current site in Cambridge in 1963. The mid-century modern building, University Printing House, was constructed in 1961\u20131963. The building was designed by Beard, Bennett, Wilkins and Partners.\nIn 1975, the press launched its English language teaching publishing business.\nIn 1981, the press moved to a new site on Shaftsbury Road. The Edinburgh Building was purpose-built with an adjoining warehouse to accommodate the press's expansion. It was built in 1979\u201380 by International Design and Construction. The site was demolished in 2017 to make way for the construction of Cambridge Assessment's Triangle Building.\nIn 1989, the press acquired the long-established Bible and prayer-book publisher Eyre &amp; Spottiswoode, which gave the press the ancient and unique title of The Queen's Printer.\nIn 1992, the press opened a bookshop at 1 Trinity Street, Cambridge, which was the oldest-known bookshop site in Britain as books have been sold there since 1581. In 2008 the shop expanded into 27 Market Hill where its specialist Education and English Language Teaching shop opened the following year. The press bookshop sells Press books as well as Cambridge souvenirs such as mugs, diaries, bags, postcards, maps.\nIn 1993, the Cass Centre was opened to provide sports and social facilities for employees and their families.\nIn 1999, Cambridge Dictionaries Online was launched.\nIn 2012, the press sold its printing operation to MPG Books Group and now uses third parties around the world to provide its print publications.\nIn 2019, the press released a new concept in scholarly publishing through Cambridge Elements where authors whose works are either too short to be printed as a book or too long to qualify as a journal article could have these published within 12 weeks.\nIn 2021, Cambridge University Press merged with Cambridge Assessment. The new organisation was called Cambridge University Press &amp; Assessment.\nIn 2022, Amira Bennison was elected chair of the Cambridge University Press academic committee, replacing Kenneth Armstrong.\nOpen access.\nCambridge University Press has stated its support for a sustainable transition to open access. It offers a range of open access publishing options under the heading of Cambridge Open, allowing authors to comply with the Gold Open Access and Green Open Access requirements of major research funders. It published Gold Open Access journals and books and works with publishing partners such as learned societies to develop Open Access for different communities. It supports Green Open Access (also called Green archiving) across its journals and monographs, allowing authors to deposit content in institutional and subject-specific repositories. It also supports sharing on commercial sharing sites through its Cambridge Core Share service.\nIn recent years it has entered into several Read &amp; Publish Open Access agreements with university libraries and consortia in several countries, including a landmark agreement with the University of California. In its 2019 Annual Report, Cambridge University Press stated that it saw such agreements \"as an important stepping stone in the transition to Open Access\".\nIn 2019, the press joined with the University of Cambridge's research and teaching departments to give a unified response to Plan S, which calls for all publications resulting from publicly funded research to be published in compliant open access journals or platforms from 2020. The response emphasized Cambridge's commitment to an open access goal which works effectively for all academic disciplines, was financially sustainable for institutions and high-quality peer review, and which leads to an orderly transition.\nThe Press is a member of the Open Access Scholarly Publishers Association and the International Association of STM Publishers.\nIn 2023, more than 50 per cent of Cambridge University Press research articles were in open access mode.\nNobel prize winners published by Cambridge University Press.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOrganisational governance and operational structure.\nRelationship with the University of Cambridge.\nCambridge University Press was a non-teaching department of the University of Cambridge. The press has, since 1698, been governed by the press 'Syndics' (originally known as the 'Curators'), 18 senior members of the University of Cambridge who, along with other non-executive directors, bring a range of subject and business expertise. The Chair of the syndicate in 2021 was Professor Stephen Toope (Vice-Chancellor of the University of Cambridge). The syndicate has delegated its powers to a Press &amp; Assessment Board; and to an Academic Publishing Committee and an English Language Teaching &amp; Education Publishing Committee.\nThe Press &amp; Assessment Board is responsible for setting overarching strategic direction. The Publishing Committees provide quality assurance and formal approval of the publishing strategy.\nThe operational responsibility of the press was delegated by the Syndics to the Secretary of the Syndicate and the Chief Executive.\nOperational structure.\nUntil August 2021, Cambridge University Press had three publishing groups:\nFrom 1 August 2021 onwards, Cambridge University Press became solely the academic and bible publishing division of Cambridge University Press &amp; Assessment. The English and education arms of the organisation merged with the equivalent departments of Cambridge Assessment to form new, merged divisions.\nDigital developments.\nIn 2011, Cambridge University Press adopted SAP software. Cambridge University Press works closely with IT services firm Tech Mahindra on SAP, and with Cognizant and Wipro on other systems.\nIn 2016, Cambridge Books Online and Cambridge Journals Online were replaced by Cambridge Core \u2013 a single platform to access its publishing (\"the home of academic content from Cambridge University Press\"&lt;ref name=\"cambridge.org/core/about\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;). It provided significantly enhanced interfaces and upgraded navigation capabilities, as well as article-level and chapter-level content selection. A year after Cambridge Core went live, the press launched Cambridge Core Share, functionality to allow users to generate and share links with free access to selected journal articles, an early sign of the press's commitment to open research.\nIn 2020, Cambridge University Press partnered with online library Perlego to offer students access to digital textbooks.\nIn 2021, the press acquired CogBooks. The technology adapts and responds to users, \"recommending course material needed to optimise learning\".\nIn 2021, the press began migrating its website onto Drupal.\nControversies.\nTax exemption controversy.\nIn May 1940, CUP applied to the Inland Revenue for the exemption of its printing and publishing profits from taxation, equivalent to charitable status. After a November 1940 Inland Revenue hearing, CUP's application was refused \"on the ground that, since the Press was printing and publishing for the outside world and not simply for the internal use of the University, the Press's trade went beyond the purpose and objects of the University and (in terms of the Act) was not exercised in the course of the actual carrying out of a primary purpose of the University\". In November 1975, with CUP facing financial collapse, CUP's chief executive Geoffrey Cass wrote a 60-page \"preliminary letter\" to the Inland Revenue again seeking tax-exemption. A year later Cass's application was granted in a letter from the Inland Revenue, though the decision was not made public. After consulting CUP, Cambridge's 'sister' press, the giant Oxford University Press presented their own submission and received similar exemption. In 2003 OUP's tax exemption was publicly attacked by Joel Rickett of The Bookseller in \"The Guardian\". In 2007, with the new 'public benefit' requirement of the revised Charities Act, the issue was re-examined with particular reference to the OUP. In 2008 CUP's and OUP's privilege was attacked by rival publishers. In 2009 \"The Guardian\" invited author Andrew Malcolm to write an article on the subject.\nIn 2007, from the National Archives at Kew, Malcolm obtained scans of CUP's unsuccessful applications for tax-exemption made in the 1940s and 1950s and their later successful applications in the 1970s. He then indexed and posted these on the Akmedea website. Late in 2020, the papers held at Kew were withdrawn from public access and ruled closed for 50 years until 1 January 2029. This rendered the scans on the website their only public source.\nIn 2021, the documents were cited in a discussion on the formation of Cambridge University Press &amp; Assessment reported in the Cambridge University Reporter. D.D.K.Chow of Trinity College, expressed concerns about the lack of academic leadership of the new body:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"For 323 years, the Press has been tightly controlled under the University's academic leadership through the Press Syndicate (formerly Curators)...However, the Council's report proposes a Press and Assessment Syndicate, without such academic leadership...The proposed change in composition of the Syndicate...is in stark contrast to the arguments used by the Press to obtain its current tax exemption. In a landmark letter to the Inland Revenue in 1975, Sir Geoffrey Cass, then Chief Executive of the Press, wrote: \"The Press of Cambridge University is actually no more than a department of the University, with no independent status of its own, governed by academic senior members of the University\" and that it was not \"an almost semi-independent 'international publisher'...Without adequate academic leadership, it would be all too easy for commercial concerns to override academic values, removing public benefit...If the Regent House does zippo to provide leadership on the Press and Assessment Syndicate, treating Cambridge University Press and Cambridge Assessment as cash cows, there is little reason for the University to continue owning them.\"\nAlms for Jihad.\nIn 2007, controversy arose over the press's decision to destroy all remaining copies of its 2006 book \"Alms for Jihad: Charity and Terrorism in the Islamic World\", by Burr and Collins, as part of the settlement of a lawsuit brought by Saudi billionaire Khalid bin Mahfouz. Within hours, \"Alms for Jihad\" became one of the 100 most sought after titles on Amazon.com and eBay in the United States. The press sent a letter to libraries asking them to remove copies from circulation. The press subsequently sent out copies of an \"errata\" sheet for the book.\nThe American Library Association issued a recommendation to libraries still holding \"Alms for Jihad\": \"Given the intense interest in the book, and the desire of readers to learn about the controversy first hand, we recommend that U.S. libraries keep the book available for their users.\" The publisher's decision did not have the support of the book's authors and was criticized by some who claimed it was incompatible with freedom of speech and with freedom of the press and that it indicated that English defamation laws were excessively strict. In the \"New York Times Book Review\" (7 October 2007), United States Congressman Frank R. Wolf described Cambridge's settlement as \"basically a book burning\". The press pointed out that, at that time, it had already sold most of its copies of the book.\nThe press defended its actions, saying it had acted responsibly and that it was a global publisher with a duty to observe the laws of many different countries.\n\"Cambridge University Press v. Patton\".\nIn this case, originally filed in 2008, CUP et al. accused Georgia State University of infringement of copyright. The case closed on 29 September 2020, with GSU as the prevailing party.\n\"The China Quarterly\".\nOn 18 August 2017, following an \"instruction\" from a Chinese import agency, Cambridge University Press used the functionality that had been built into Cambridge Core to temporarily delete politically sensitive articles from \"The China Quarterly\" on its Chinese website. The articles focused on topics China regards as taboo, including the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre, Mao Zedong's Cultural Revolution, the 2014 Hong Kong protests, and ethnic tensions in Xinjiang and Tibet. On 21 August 2017, in the face of growing international protests, Cambridge University Press announced it would immediately repost the articles to uphold the principle of academic freedom on which the university's work was founded.\nIn a discussion reported in the Cambridge University Reporter, D.K.K.Chow declared, \"Without academic leadership on the matter, the University's basic ethical values were cast aside by commercial considerations. This instigated public debate, which would have been avoided had academic leadership been more vigilant, causing unnecessary damage to the University's reputation. The Press statement explained that lack of academic leadership was to blame: 'This decision was taken as a temporary measure pending discussion with the academic leadership of the University.'\"\n\"The Cambridge Handbook of Privatization\".\nIn February 2021, the forthcoming \"Cambridge Handbook of Privatization\" was found to have included a chapter by J. Mark Ramseyer in which he described Koreans murdered in the Kant\u014d Massacre of 1923 as \"gangs\" that \"torched buildings, planted bombs, [and] poisoned water supplies\". Editors Avihay Dorfman and Alon Harel acknowledged the historical distortions of the chapter, but gave Ramseyer a chance to revise. Harel described the inclusion of the original chapter as an \"innocent and very regrettable\" mistake on the part of the editors.\nCorporate social responsibility.\nCommunity.\nThe Press undertakes community engagement in Cambridge and around the world where there are Press employees. Annually, the press selects a UK Charity of the Year, which has included local charities Centre 33 (2016 and 2017), Rowan Humberstone (2018), and Castle School (2019). In 2016, some of the press's community works included its continued support to Westchester Community College in New York, the installation of hygienic facilities in an Indonesian rural school, raising funds to rehabilitate earthquake-stricken schools in Nepal, and guiding students from Coleridge Community College, Cambridge in a CV workshop. On World Book Day 2016, the press held a digital Shakespeare publishing workshop for students and their teachers. Similarly, their Indian office conducted a workshop for teachers and students in 17 schools in Delhi to learn the whole process of book publishing. The press donated more than 75,000 books in 2016.\nAn apprenticeship programme for people interested in careers in publishing was established in 2016; by 2022 it had 200 active apprentices in the UK in a wide range of roles.\nEnvironment.\nThe Press monitors its emissions annually, has converted to energy-saving equipment, minimizes plastic use and ensures that their paper was sourced ethically.\nIn 2019, the World Wildlife Fund awarded its highest score to the press of Three Trees, based on the press's timber purchasing policy, performance statement and its responsible sourcing of timber. The press won the Independent Publishers Guild Independent Publishing Awards for sustainability in 2020 and in 2021. Its public commitments to sustainability include being a signatory of the UN Global Compact and to the goals of the Cambridge Zero initiative run by the University of Cambridge \u2013 to being carbon zero on all energy-related emissions by 2048.\nCambridge University Press was a signatory of the SDG Publishers Compact, and has taken steps to support the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in the publishing industry. \nThese include publishing a new set of open access journals known as Cambridge Prisms, relevant to the SDGs, that includes \"Coastal Futures\", \"Precision Medicine\", \"Global Mental Health\", \"Extinction\", \"Plastics\", \"Water\" and \"Drylands\". Cambridge also worked with the Association of Learned and Professional Society Publishers (ALPSP) to create the University Press Redux Sustainability Award in 2020. The inaugural award was given to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) for its SDG Pathfinder, an open-access digital discovery tool for finding content and data relating to the SDGs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73200", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73200", "title": "False writing system", "text": ""}
{"id": "73202", "revid": "1715997", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73202", "title": "Blohm and Voss", "text": ""}
{"id": "73204", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73204", "title": "General Election", "text": ""}
{"id": "73205", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73205", "title": "Castilla\u2013La Mancha", "text": "Autonomous community of Spain\nCastilla\u2013La Mancha (, ; ) is an autonomous community of Spain. Comprising the provinces of Albacete, Ciudad Real, Cuenca, Guadalajara and Toledo, it was created in 1982. The government headquarters are in Toledo, which is the capital \"de facto\".\nIt is a landlocked region largely occupying the southern half of the Iberian Peninsula's Inner Plateau, including large parts of the catchment areas of the Tagus, the Guadiana and the J\u00facar, while the northeastern relief comprises the Sistema Ib\u00e9rico mountain massif. It is one of the most sparsely populated of Spain's regions, with Albacete, Guadalajara, Toledo, Talavera de la Reina and Ciudad Real being the largest cities.\nCastilla\u2013La Mancha is bordered by Castile and Le\u00f3n, Madrid, Aragon, Valencia, Murcia, Andalusia, and Extremadura. Prior to its establishment as an autonomous community, its territory was part of the New Castile (\"Castilla la Nueva\") region along with the province of Madrid, except for Albacete province, which was part of the former Murcia region.\nGeography.\nCastilla\u2013La Mancha is located in the middle of the Iberian Peninsula, occupying the greater part of the Submeseta Sur, the vast plain composing the southern part of the Meseta Central. The Submeseta Sur (and the autonomous community) is separated from the Submeseta Norte (and the community of Castilla y Le\u00f3n) by the mountain range known as the Sistema Central. Despite this, the region has no shortage of mountain landscapes: the southern slopes of the aforementioned Sistema Central in the north, the Sistema Ib\u00e9rico in the northeast, and the Sierra Morena and Montes de Toledo in the south.\nCastilla\u2013La Mancha is the third largest of Spain's autonomous regions, with a surface area of , representing 15.7 percent of Spain's national territory.\nThe regional urban structure is polycentric, with no dominant central city. Insofar the largest municipality (Albacete) is located in the peripheral southeast, Madrid (outside the region), exerts influence over the extension of the so-called Corredor del Henares into the province of Guadalajara (including the provincial capital) as well as the north of the province of Toledo. The rest of urban centres lie on the central plains (with for example, the presence of intermediate agro-cities in La Mancha), contrasting with the sparsely populated mountains and other peripheral areas.\nRelief.\nThe Meseta is the dominant landscape unit of a great part of the territory of Castilla\u2013La Mancha: a vast, uniform plain with little relief.\nThe west-to-east Montes de Toledo range cuts across the meseta separating the (northern) Tagus and the (southern) Guadiana drainage basins. The most outstanding peaks of this modest mountain range include La Villuerca () and Rocigalgo ().\nIn contrast, a more mountainous zone surrounds the Meseta and serves as the region's natural border. In the north of the Province of Guadalajara, bordering Madrid and Segovia, is a mountain range forming part of the Sistema Central, among which can be distinguished the mountain ranges Pela, Ayll\u00f3n, Somosierra, Barahona and Ministra, with the headwaters of the rivers Jarama, Ca\u00f1amares and Henares. The Sistema Central also penetrates the northwest of the province of Toledo: a southwest to northeast sub-range known as the Sierra de San Vicente, bordered on the north by the Ti\u00e9tar and on the south by the Alberche and the Tagus, rising up to its maximum heights at the summits of Cruces (1373 m), Pelados (1331 m) and San Vicente (1321 m).\nOn the northwest is the Sistema Ib\u00e9rico, where there is important fluvial and especially karstic activity, which has given rise to such landscapes as the Ciudad Encantada, the Callejones de Las Majadas and the Hoces del Cabriel.\nIn the southeast is the ridge of the Sierra Morena, the southern border of the Meseta Central and the region's border with Andalusia. Within the Sierra Morena, distinction can be made between the Sierra Madrona, Sierra de Alcudia and Sierra de San Andr\u00e9s. At the other southern extreme of Castilla\u2013La Mancha, the Sierra de Alcaraz and Sierra del Segura form part of the Sistema B\u00e9tico.\nHydrography.\nThe territory of Castilla\u2013La Mancha is divided into five principal watersheds. The Tagus, Guadiana, and Guadalquivir drain into the Atlantic Ocean and the J\u00facar and Segura into the Mediterranean Sea. The Tagus provides water for some 587,000 inhabitants in a watershed of . It includes the entire province of Guadalajara and the greater part of the province of Toledo, including the two largest cities of the latter province: the capital, Toledo, as well as Talavera de la Reina.\nThe Guadiana watershed extends in Castilla\u2013La Mancha, 37 percent of that river's entire watershed, with a population of 583,259 inhabitants. It includes the southern part of the province of Toledo, nearly all of the province of Ciudad Real (except the very south), the southwest of the province of Cuenca and the northwest of the province of Albacete. The Guadalquivir watershed extends over 5.2 percent of the surface area of the autonomous community, extending through the southern parts of the provinces of Ciudad Real and Albacete, including such important population center as Puertollano.\nThe J\u00facar watershed had, in 2006, 397,000 inhabitants in an area of , 19.9 percent of the Castillian-Manchegan territory and 36.6 percent of total of the J\u00facar watershed. It includes the eastern parts of the provinces of Cuenca and Albacete, including their respective capitals. Finally, the 34 municipalities of southeastern Albacete fall in the Segura watershed, with an extent of .\nClimate.\nThe predominant climate in Castilla-La-Mancha is the hot summer mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Csa\"), while the cold semi-arid climate (\"BSk\") is also significant occupying most of the provinces of Toledo and Albacete. The warm summer mediterranean climate (\"Csb\") can also be found, especially in the north of the community. To a lesser extent, there is the presence of an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\") along the border with Aragon.\nLack of a marine influence leads to much more extreme temperatures: hotter summers and quite cold winters, with a daily oscillation as high as on some areas. Summer is the driest season, with temperatures often exceeding , and temperatures above are common in several areas. In winter, temperatures often drop below , producing frosts on clear nights, and occasional snow on cloudy nights. Most of the community has continental influences, although the climate is not exactly continental, as the average temperatures in the coldest month are above . Annual temperature ranges can reach over .\nCastilla\u2013La Mancha is part of what has traditionally been called \"Espa\u00f1a Seca\" (\"Dry Spain\"). Precipitation in general is relatively scarce, even in areas with a Mediterranean climate, although there are areas that receive more than . Precipitation presents a notable gradient from the center of the region, where it does not surpass per year, to the mountains where it can exceed per year, on the slopes of the Sierra de Gredos and the Serran\u00eda de Cuenca. The greater part of the region has less than of rain annually. The driest area of Castilla-La-Mancha is in the southeast of the community, near the border with the Region of Murcia, where rainfall does not exceed .\nHistory.\nEarly human history of the territory.\nThe Pinedo site presents material linked to the transition from earlier settlers to the Early Acheulean. Archaeological sites related to the Middle Acheulean in the current-day region lie on the Campo de Calatrava as well as in the source of the Villanueva river, the Guadiana catchment area and the Segura catchment area. The Upper Acheulean sites are mostly located within the limits of the current-day province of Ciudad Real, substantially increasing in number and territorial spread across the region for the ensuing Middle Paleolithic. The Upper Paleolithic in the region presents instances of the art of the Upper Paleolithic in the Serran\u00eda del Alto Tajo and the Upper J\u00facar. There are instances of Cardium pottery in Caudete from the Early Neolithic.\nThe natural region of La Mancha presents a number of archaeological sites related to the so-called Culture of Las Motillas of the Bronze Age, tentatively considered as the earliest reported case of human culture in Western Europe able to implement a system of underground water collection, whose installment is possibly connected to the surface water crisis caused by the 4.2 kiloyear event. A number of these Bronze Age settlements, the \"motillas\", were built over Chalcolithic settlements.\nDuring the Iron Age II (La T\u00e8ne culture), the territory occupied by the current provinces of Ciudad Real and Albacete had a larger influence from Punic-Phoenician and Greek colonists, while the territory occupied by the current provinces of Toledo, Guadalajara and Cuenca was more influenced by the substrate of the earlier Atlantic Bronze, helping to line up the diffuse separation of two large groups of pre-Roman peoples (\"Iberi\" and \"Celtiberi\").\nIberian-related peoples dwelling the southern rim of the inner plateau such as the Oretani and Contestani were organised in tribes ruled by a kinglet or chieftain, each one controlling a number of settlements. The main cog of the Iberian form of settlement was the \"oppidum\". From the 7th century BC onward, the Celtiberian settlements were characterised instead by the somewhat smaller \"castros\".\nIn the 2nd century BC, by the time of the advent of the Roman conquest wars, the first actual cities had begun to grow in the inner plateau. The Roman conquest brought substantial transformations to the Carpetani urban settlements, including the social division between slaves and freemen, the monetary economy, the fostering of manufacture and trade or the new Roman acculturation.\nThe territory of the current region was mining-rich in Antiquity, with mentions in classical sources to the mining of cinnabar from Sisapo, silver, gold and other minerals such as selenite from Segobriga and the \"laminitana\" sharpening stone.\nBuilt from scratch on state initiative, the founding of the city of Reccopolis by Visigoths in the late 6th century was a singular development in the context of the European Early Middle Ages.\nFollowing the 8th century Muslim conquest of the Iberian Peninsula, just after the 741 Berber Revolt, the so-called Middle March of Al-Andalus (\"al-\u0164\u0101\u011fr al-Awsat\") was created as territorial sub-division, existing for the rest of the ensuing emiral and caliphal period of Al-Andalus. During this era, the Middle March had eminently a military nature, both shielding the core of Al-Andalus from the raids of the Northern Christian polities as well as serving as staging ground for Muslim offensive campaigns against the former. Berber clans such as the Masmuda Banu-Salim (linked to the founders of Guadalajara) or the Hawwara Banu Zennun (based in the Kura of Santover) had an important role in the Muslim settlement of parts of the Middle March. The city of Toledo stood distinctly unruly towards the Cordobese authorities, and remained a major city of al-Andalus, preserving quite of its former importance and hosting a leading cultural centre that lasted even after the Christian conquest.\nAs consequence of the fitna of al-Andalus in the early 11th century, an independent polity with its center in Toledo (the Taifa of Toledo), emerged, roughly occupying the territory of the current-day provinces of Toledo, Ciudad Real, Guadalajara and Cuenca (as well as that of Madrid),\nFollowing the Christian conquest of Toledo in 1085, the ensuing unsuccessful attempts by North-African Almoravids and Almohads to take the city turned the territory of the inner plateau south of the Tagus subject to extreme warfare for about a century and a half. The military insecurity south of the Tagus constrained the colonisation process undertaken by the new Castilian rulers. This underpinned the features of a sparse population in the region; as a result, ranching became a mainstay of the economy, which later led to the leading role of the military orders. The latter controlled over 20,000\u00a0km2 in the region of \"La Mancha\", managed from just 25 castles. The weak Christian grip over the territory collapsed after their crushing defeat from the Almohads in Alarcos (1195). Christian control south of the Tagus would only start to consolidate after the 1212 battle of Las Navas. The weak settlement and insecurity also allowed for countryside banditry (the so-called \"golfines\") in the area of the Montes de Toledo until its progressive quelling, already effective by the late 13th century. By that time, rural beekeepers self-organised to repel the predatory practices in the \"monte\" by the golfines, whose presence in the Montes de Toledo was further obliterated by the creation of the so-called \"hermandades viejas\" by councils at Toledo, Talavera or Villa Real in the dawn of the 14th century.\nDespite a poorly representative degree of permeability, urban oligarchies in the current-day region during the Late Middle Ages were largely perpetuated by means of lineage, through inheritance and marriage. Following the ascension of the Trast\u00e1maras, the territory of the current-day province of Toledo underwent a process of seigneuralization, and a number of non-religious lordships were progressively created in the area. The 15th century also brought a growing importance of the political elites belonging to towns of the southern meseta in the affairs of the Crown of Castile relative to the prior uncontested preponderance of those elites from towns north of the Sistema Central.\nThroughout the 18th century, following the War of Spanish Succession, the Spanish Bourbon monarchs sought to equilibrate the commercial balance with the exterior carrying out an economic policy that tried to foster industrial capacity through economic interventionism. The State shall either stimulate the capacity of private capital or simply provide the capital itself. Examples of royal manufactures created in the 18th century included the Real F\u00e1brica de Pa\u00f1os in Guadalajara, the Real F\u00e1brica de Sedas in Talavera de la Reina, or the Real F\u00e1brica de Pa\u00f1os in Brihuega.\nThe current provincial configuration roughly dates from the 1833 division by Javier de Burgos, establishing the outline of the modern provinces of Albacete, Ciudad Real, Cuenca, Guadalajara and Toledo, bar relatively minor later adjustments. Albacete was part, together with Murcia of a wider region, whereas Ciudad Real, Cuenca, Guadalajara, and Toledo formed a region together with the Province of Madrid, \"New Castile\". The justice administration stood in between the national and provincial levels of government (also unaligned with the purported regional classification insofar Albacete is concerned), with the \"audiencia\" of Albacete managing the provinces of Albacete, Cuenca and Ciudad Real, and the \"audiencia\" of Madrid managing the provinces of Toledo and Guadalajara (and that of Madrid).\nThe aforementioned modifications to the 1833 division include the party of Villena (lost by Albacete to Alicante in 1836), Requena (lost by Cuenca to Valencia in 1851), Villarrobledo (lost by Ciudad Real to Albacete c.\u20091846) or Valdeavero (lost by Guadalajara to Madrid in 1850). The provincial government institution was the \"provincial deputation\".\nThe agrarian capitalism favoured by the bourgeoisie in the 19th century enshrined an economy based on cereal commodities and the primary sector, favouring the leveling of the reduced industrial activity\u2014chiefly textile\u2014in the territory corresponding to the current-day region, whereas mining output\u2014with sites such of the mercury deposits in Almad\u00e9n or the coal deposits in Puertollano\u2014remained below potential. A silver rush broke out in the mining district around Hiendelaencina after 1844. Large-scale mining of lead and zinc in San Quint\u00edn (province of Ciudad Real) ensued in between 1884 and 1934. The arrival of railway transport in the mid 19th-century subordinated the interests of the provinces to those of Madrid and the Levante, although it fostered the development of some urban centres such as those of Alc\u00e1zar de San Juan, Manzanares and Albacete. The five provinces lost relative demographic weight relative to the national total over the course of the century.\nThe territory of the current-day region was singularly affected by the \"desamortizaciones\", particularly those of Mendiz\u00e1bal and Madoz. From 1836 to 1924 of land were auctioned (1,100,000 hectares of municipal properties and the rest church's property). They were purchased by the political and economic elites of the country.\nSeeking to curb immigration to the Spanish capital, the so-called Madrid Decongestion Plan of 1959 created planned industrial estates in Alc\u00e1zar de San Juan, Manzanares, Guadalajara, and Toledo. The plan did not yield the expected results as Madrid kept growing and the industrial zones eventually stagnated.\nRegionhood.\nUnder the auspices of the 1978 Constitution, a decree-law was issued on 15 November 1978, establishing the conditions of the \"pre-autonomous regime\" of the \"Castilian-Manchegan region\". A joint assembly of legislators and provincial deputies of the provinces of Albacete, Ciudad Real, Cuenca, Guadalajara, Toledo was established in Manzanares in 1981 to draft the early sketch of the regional statute. On 17 June 1982, the Congress of Deputies approved the final text of the regional statute (an organic law), which was later published on 16 August 1982, giving birth to the autonomous community of \"Castilla-La Mancha\". The constituent process of the autonomous community was sealed with the election of the first regional legislature in May 1983 and the ensuing investiture of Jos\u00e9 Bono as regional president. By December 1983 still less than half of citizens actually knew the autonomous community they belonged to.\nSince its opening in 1979 the Tagus-Segura Water Transfer has caused a severe social-economic impact on the region, with the water resources available in the Tagus headwaters decreasing by about a 47.5% after 1980.\nRegional divisions.\nToledo\nGuadalajara\nCiudad Real\nCuenca\nAlbacete\nCastilla\u2013La Mancha is divided into 5 provinces named after their capital cities. The following category includes:\nAccording to the official data of the INE, Castilla\u2013La Mancha consists of 919 municipalities, which amount to 11.3 percent of all the municipalities in Spain. 496 of these have less than 500 inhabitants, 231 have between 501 and 2,000 inhabitants, 157 between 2,000 and 10,000 inhabitants, and only 35 have more than 10,000 inhabitants. The municipalities in the north are small and numerous, while in the south they are larger and fewer. This reflects different histories of how these sub-regions were repopulated during the \"Reconquista\". \nOfficial symbols.\nThe Organic Law 9/1982 (August 10, 1982), which is the Statute of Autonomy of Castilla\u2013La Mancha established the flag of Castilla\u2013La Mancha and the law 1/1983 (30 June 1983) established the coat of arms.\nFlag.\nSeven different designs for a flag were proposed during the era of the \"pre-autonomous\" region. The selected design was that of heraldist Ram\u00f3n Jos\u00e9 Maldonado. This was made official in Article 5 of the Statute of Autonomy:\nCoat of arms.\nThe coat of arms of Castilla\u2013La Mancha is based on the flag of the region, and not the other way around, as is more typical in heraldry. Article 1 of the law 1/1983 describes it as follows:\nThe coat of arms of the Communities of Castilla\u2013La Mancha is party per pale. On the dexter [the statute literally says \"On the first quarter\"], on a field gules a castle Or, embattled, port and windows of azure and masoned sable. On the sinister [the statute literally says \"The second quarter\"], a field argent. On the crest, a royal crown enclosed, which is a circle of Or crimped with precious gems, composed of eight finials, of \"Acanthus mollis\", five visible, topped by pearls and whose leaves emerge from diadems, which converge in a globe of azure or blue, with a semimeridian and the equator Or topped by a cross Or. The crown lined with gules or red.\nSome institutions of the region have adopted this coat of arms as part of their own emblem, among these the Cortes of Castilla\u2013La Mancha, the Consultative Council and the University of Castilla\u2013La Mancha.\nAnthem.\nAlthough Article 5 of the Statute of Autonomy indicates that the region will have its own anthem, after more than 25 years no such anthem has been adopted. Among the proposed anthems have been the \"Canci\u00f3n del Sembrador\" (\"Song of the Sower\") from the zarzuela \"La rosa del azafr\u00e1n\" by Jacinto Guerrero, the \"Canto a la Mancha\" (\"Song of La Mancha\") by Tom\u00e1s Barrera, and many others, such as one presented by a group of citizens from Villarrobledo with the title \"Patria sin fin\" (\"Fatherland without end\").\nGovernment and administration.\nArticle 8 of the Statute of Autonomy states that the powers of the region are exercised through the Junta of Communities of Castilla\u2013La Mancha (\"Junta de Comunidades de Castilla\u2013La Mancha\"). Organs of the Junta are the Cortes of Castilla\u2013La Mancha, the President of the Junta and the Council of Government.\nCortes of Castilla\u2013La Mancha.\nThe Cortes of Castilla\u2013La Mancha represent the popular will through 33 deputies elected by universal adult suffrage through the secret ballot. They are elected for a term of four years under a proportional system intended to guarantee representation to the various territorial zones of Castilla\u2013La Mancha. The electoral constituency is at the level of each province, with provinces being assigned the following number of deputies as of 2023: Albacete, 7; Ciudad Real, 7; Cuenca, 5; Guadalajara, 5; and Toledo, 9. Article 10 of the Statute of Autonomy states that elections will be convoked by the President of the Junta of Communities, following the General Electoral Regime (\"R\u00e9gimen Electoral General\"), on the fourth Sunday in May every four years. This stands in contrast to the autonomous communities of the Basque Country, Catalonia, Galicia, Andalusia and the Valencian Community where the president has the power to convoke elections at any time.\nSince the Spanish regional elections of 2023, the Cortes of Castilla\u2013La Mancha has consisted of 17 deputies from social democratic PSOE, 12 from conservative People's Party and 4 from far right Vox. The Cortes sits in the former Franciscan convent in Toledo, the \"Edificio de San Gil\" (\"San Gil building\").\nCouncil of Government.\nThe Council of Government is the collegial executive organ of the region. It directs regional political and administrative action, exercises an executive function and regulatory powers under the Spanish Constitution of 1978, the Statute of Autonomy, and the laws of the nation and region. The Council of Government consists of the president, vice presidents (if any) and the Councilors.\nPresident of the Junta.\nThe President of the Junta directs the Council of Government and coordinates the functions of its members. The president is elected by the Cortes from among its members, then formally named by the monarch of Spain. The president's official residence is the Palace of Fuensalida in Toledo.\nDemography.\nLarge parts of the region are experiencing a demographic decline. In contrast, besides the provincial capitals, two specific areas bordering the Madrid region associated to the Madrid metropolitan area have experienced a population growth well above the national average: La Sagra (around the A-42 highway) and the Henares Corridor (around the A-2). Overall, as of 2016, the NUTS-2 region of Castilla\u2013La Mancha featured an average index of demographic vulnerability of 30, similar to those of the European regions of Upper Palatinate (Germany), Styria (Austria), Catalonia (Spain), Overijssel (Netherlands) and Campania (Italy).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNumber of inhabitants.\nAccording to the official 11 January 2008 data of the INE Castilla\u2013La Mancha has 2,043,100 inhabitants in its five provinces. Despite being the third largest of Spains communities by surface area (after Castilla y Le\u00f3n and Andalusia), it is only the ninth most populous. Castilla\u2013La Mancha has just 4.4 percent of Spain's population.\nPopulation density.\nWith an average population density of , Castilla\u2013La Mancha has the least dense population in all of Spain: the national average is . Industrialized zones such as the Henares Corridor (along the river Henares, a tributary of the Jarama) with a density of , the comarca of la Sagra or the industrial zone of Sonseca are dramatically more dense than the region as a whole.\nComposition of population by age and sex.\nThe population pyramid of Castilla\u2013La Mancha is typical for a developed region, with the central zone wider than the base or the upper zone. The population between 16 and 44 years of age represents about 44 percent, from 45 to 64 about 21.3 percent, with those 15 and under constituting 15 percent and those over 65, 18 percent. These data show the progressive aging of the \"castellanomanchego\" population.\nThe region has about 9,000 more males than females; in percentage terms, 50.3 percent versus 49.7 percent. This is opposite to Spain as a whole, where women constitute 50.8 percent of the population.\nBirth rate, death rate, life expectancy.\nAccording to 2006 INE numbers, the birth rate in Castilla\u2013La Mancha is 10.21 per thousand inhabitants, lower than the national average of 10.92 per thousand. The death rate is 8.83 per thousand inhabitants, higher than the national average of 8.42 per thousand.\nLife expectancy at birth is one of the highest in Spain: 83.67 years for women and 77.99 years for men.\nForeign population.\nAs of 2022, the region had a foreign population of 193,475. Most of the foreigners had Romanian or Moroccan citizenship.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUrban areas.\nThe 2020 report on urban areas in Spain published by the Ministry of Transports, Mobility and Urban Agenda identifies among the urban areas in the region (with population data referring to 2019) those of Albacete (173,329), Guadalajara (161,683), Toledo (123,509), Talavera de la Reina (94,028), Ciudad Real (90,114), Cuenca (54,690) and Puertollano (47,035).\nEconomy.\nCastilla\u2013La Mancha generates a GDP of \u20ac33,077,484,000, 3.4 percent of the Spanish GDP, placing it ninth among the 19 Spanish autonomous communities. GDP has been roughly 3.4 percent of the national GDP since at least 2000. A per capita GDP of \u20ac17,339 places Castilla\u2013La Mancha 17th among the 19 communities, with only Andalusia and Extremadura having lower per capita GDP; the national average is \u20ac22,152. Nonetheless, in the early to mid-1990s, Sonseca in the province of Toledo several times had the highest per capita income in Spain.\nAs of 2017, the regional gross value added structure is as follows: \nAccording to the statistics of the INE's Encuesta de Poblaci\u00f3n Activa for the first trimester of 2007, the active work force of Castilla\u2013La Mancha numbered 896,513 persons, of whom 827,113 were employed and 69,900 unemployed, giving a workforce density of 55.5 percent of the population and an unemployment rate of 7.7 percent.\nAgriculture and husbandry.\nAgriculture and husbandry, still the foundation of the local economy, constitutes 11.6 percent of regional GDP, and employs 9.9 percent of the active workforce.\nFifty-two percent of the soil of Castilla\u2013La Mancha is considered \"dry\". Agricultural activities have historically been based on the cultivation of wheat (37.0 percent), grapes (17.2 percent) and olives (6.6 percent). Castilla\u2013La Mancha has some of the most extensive vineyards in Europe, nearly . The vineyards are predominantly, but by no means exclusively, in the west and southwest of La Mancha. In 2005 the region produced of grapes, constituting 53.4 percent of Spain's national production. After grapes, the next most important agricultural product is barley, , 25.0 percent of the national total.\nAs of 2014, the region (primarily areas in the provinces of Cuenca and Albacete) was by far the largest producer of garlic in Spain, which was in turn the largest producer country in Europe. Black truffle is produced in areas of the provinces of Guadalajara, Cuenca and Albacete. The overwhelming majority of the saffron produced in Spain (97%) originates from the region.\nThe region concentrates the 81% of pistachio-cultivated area in the country, which increased fortyfold in a decade becoming the first European producer and fifth worldwide in the early 2020s.\nIn terms of agricultural productivity and income, since Spain's incorporation into the European Union (EU) the primary sector of the regional economy has evolved dynamically. Among the reasons for this are growth rates higher than the national average, as well as increased capitalization fostering specialization and modernization, including the integration an externalization of the sector, whereby activities previously performed on the farm are now performed elsewhere. These changes have been fostered by the regional articulation of the EU's Common Agricultural Policy. Since 1986, subsidies have played a significant role in this sector.\nAnimal husbandry plays a lesser, but not negiglible, role in the regional economy. 2005 statistics show 3,430,501 head of sheep, 1,602,576 pigs, 405,778 goats and 309,672 cattle; these last produce of milk each year.\nApiculture (bee-keeping) is another significant part of the primary sector output, with 190,989 hives as of 4 October 2017.\nIndustry and construction.\nTraditionally, Castilla\u2013La Mancha has had little industrial production, due to several factors among which are low population density and a shortage of qualified workers. However, since Spain's incorporation into the EU, there has been much progress. Industry has been growing as a sector of the regional economy at a faster pace than nationally. July 2006 figures show the region as third among the autonomous communities in the rate of growth of the industrial sector. Regional industrial GDP grew 2.8 percent in 2000\u20132005, compared to 1 percent nationally for the same period.\nThe greatest obstacles to industrial growth in the region have been:\nThe principal industrial areas within the region are Sonseca and its comarca, the Henares Corridor, Puertollano, Talavera de la Reina, La Sagra y Almansa, as well as all of the provincial capitals.\nAs throughout Spain in recent decades, the construction sector is one of the strongest. It employs 15.6 percent of the work force and produces 10.1 percent of regional GDP. It is one of the fastest-growing sectors of the economy: growth in 2006 was 13.6 percent. Most of the construction sector, is housing, including a new city of 30,000 inhabitants, Ciudad Valdeluz in Yebes, Guadalajara; 13,000 dwellings in Sese\u00f1a, Toledo and the Reino de Don Quijote complex in the province of Ciudad Real, with 9,000 dwellings and 4,000 hotel beds.\nAs of 2019, the regional defence industry ranks third in Spain after those of Madrid and Andalusia, with a 5.8% share of sales. The bulk of the defence industry lies in cities such as Illescas, Toledo, Cedillo, Valdepe\u00f1as, Puertollano, Ciudad Real or Albacete. The Airbus Group is present in Illescas since 1992 and in Albacete (Airbus Helicopters) since 2005.\nEnergy.\nAlthough wind energy and solar energy have been playing increasingly important roles in Castilla\u2013La Mancha, the majority of the energy generated in the region comes from the region's large thermal power stations: the Elcogas Thermal Power Station (owned by Elcogas) and Puertollano Thermal Power Station (owned by E.ON) in Puertollano as well as the Aceca Thermal Power Station in Villaseca de la Sagra (owned by Iberdrola and Uni\u00f3n Fenosa).\nCastilla\u2013La Mancha is also the home of the Trillo Nuclear Power Plant near Trillo, Guadalajara.\nExisting solar thermal power plants (all using a parabolic trough collector) in the region include Manchasol-1 and Manchasol-2 in Alc\u00e1zar de San Juan (49.9 and 50 MW respectively), Helios 1 and Helios 2 in Puerto L\u00e1pice (50 MW each), Ibersol Ciudad Real in Puertollano (50 MW).\nRegarding photovoltaic power plants, Pic\u00f3n I, Pic\u00f3n II and Pic\u00f3n III (50 MW each), located in Porzuna, were put into operation in 2019.\nMining.\nThe region is rich in mineral resources, particularly the south, and they have been exploited since Antiquity.\nAs of 2018, with 270 active mining sites (only one of them an underground mine), most of the extractive sector is dedicated to aggregates, clays, plasters and other mineral products, accounting for a 10.15% of active sites in Spain.\nRecent mining projects brought forward by the regional government in the province of Ciudad Real, rich in a number of strategic minerals, include those of tungsten (in between Almod\u00f3var del Campo and Aben\u00f3jar), phosphates (in Fontanarejo), and titanium and zirconium (in between Puebla de Don Rodrigo and Arroba de los Montes), but their final authorisations pend on satisfactory environmental impact statements, and they have also met the opposition from environmental organisations.\nService sector.\nThe majority of the regional workforce\u201455.5 percent\u2014is employed in the service sector, generating 49.8 percent of regional GDP, according to Economic and Social Council of Castilla\u2013La Mancha (\"Consejo Econ\u00f3mico y Social de Castilla\u2013La Mancha\", CES) data for 2006. Although a large sector of the regional economy, it is small by national standards: 67.2 percent of employment in Spain is in the service sector. Counted in the service sector are commerce, tourism, hospitality, finance, public administration, and administration of other services related to culture and leisure.\nThe Madrid's urban decongestion has favoured the development of logistics businesses and platforms in Azuqueca de Henares and Illescas, which neighbor the Madrid region.\nIn the area of tourism, there has been a great deal of growth, with Castilla\u2013La Mancha becoming in recent decades one of the principal tourist destinations in the Spanish interior. During 2006 the region had more than 2 million tourists (3 percent more than the previous year) for a total of 3,500,000 overnight hotel stays. Rural tourism increased 14 percent in overnight stays in a single year. From 2000 to 2005 the number of hotel beds increased 26.4 percent to 17,245 beds in 254 hotels. In the same period, the number of \"casas rurales\" (for farm stays) increased 148 percent to 837 and the number of beds in such facilities 175 percent to 5,751.\nHealth.\nThe Servicio de Salud de Castilla\u2013La Mancha (SESCAM, \"Health Service of Castilla\u2013La Mancha\"), part of the Consejer\u00eda de Salud y Bienestar Social (\"Council of Health and Social Welfare\") is the entity in charge of health in Castilla\u2013La Mancha. It is an integral part of Spain's National Health System, based on universal coverage, equal access, and public financing.\nFor the purposes of healthcare provision, the region is divided in 8 health areas (Albacete, la Mancha Centro, Guadalajara, Ciudad Real, Cuenca, Talavera de la Reina, Toledo, and Puertollano). Those are further subdivided in basic health zones.\nEducation.\nThe Junta of Castilla\u2013La Mancha assumed responsibility for education in the autonomous community as of January 1, 2000, directly managing over 1,000 schools, with 22,000 teachers and 318,000 students. In the 2006\u20132007 school year, the region had 324,904 students below the university level, of whom 17.7 percent were in private schools. In that same year, the region had 1,037 schools and 30,172 schoolteachers; 15.2 percent of the schools were private.\nThe decentralized University of Castilla\u2013La Mancha was formally established in 1982 and has operated since 1985.\nThere are four main campuses, one each at Albacete, Ciudad Real, Cuenca and Toledo, with classes also offered in Almad\u00e9n, Talavera de la Reina and Puertollano. The university offers 54 degree programs (\"titulaciones\"). The province of Guadalajara stands outside the regional university, with its own University of Alcal\u00e1 offering degrees in education, business, tourism, technical architecture, and nursing. The National University of Distance Education also offers services in the region through five affiliated centers, one in each province: Albacete (with an extension in Almansa), Valdepe\u00f1as, Cuenca, Guadalajara, and Talavera de la Reina. Finally, the Men\u00e9ndez Pelayo International University has a location in Cuenca.\nIn the 2005\u201306 school year, the region had 30,632 students enrolled at universities, down 1.0 percent from the previous year.\nHistorically, the region has had other universities, but these no longer exist. The present University of Castilla\u2013La Mancha uses one of the buildings of the Royal University of Toledo (1485\u20131807). Other former universities in the region were the Royal and Pontifical University of Our Lady of Rosario in Almagro (1550\u20131807) and the University of San Antonio de Porta Coeli in Sig\u00fcenza founded in the 15th century by Cardinal Pedro Gonz\u00e1lez de Mendoza and, like the others, closed in the Napoleonic era.\nTransportation.\nHighways.\nCastilla\u2013La Mancha has the most kilometers of \"autopistas\" (a type of limited access highway) and \"autov\u00edas\" dual carriageways, with a total of . The most heavily trafficked of these are the radial routes surrounding Madrid and the routes in and out of the city, but there are also routes within Castilla\u2013La Mancha, and national and international routes that pass through the province, including highways in the International E-road network.\nThe regional government put into action a \"Plan Regional de Autov\u00edas\" with the objective that all municipalities with 10,000 or more inhabitants would be connected to an \"autov\u00eda\". If it is completed, 96 percent of the region's population will live within 15 minutes of a high-capacity road. Among the developed projects of this plan are:\nThe \"red auton\u00f3mica\"\u2014the road network of the autonomous community\u2014currently extends , of which correspond to the basic network, to the comarcal networks and to local networks.\nRailways.\nRenfe, Spain's state-owned railway operator operates numerous trains throughout Castilla\u2013La Mancha.\nLong distance.\nNumerous long-distance rail lines (\"l\u00edneas de largo recorrido\") pass through Castilla\u2013La Mancha, most of them radiating out of Madrid. Some of these are high-velocity trains (Alta Velocidad Espa\u00f1ola AVE):\nLocal trains.\nTwo local commuter rail lines out of Madrid (\"Cercan\u00edas Madrid\") pass through Castilla\u2013La Mancha. The C-2 line stops in Azuqueca de Henares in the province of Guadalajara and in the city of Guadalajara itself. The C-3 to Aranjuez used to stop at Sese\u00f1a, but service to that station was discontinued in April 2007.\nAirports.\nAir transport is marginal in the region. Castilla\u2013La Mancha has two airports, the Albacete Airport (no cargo transport and with an insignificant civilian use) and the Ciudad Real Central Airport, which was affected by the 2008 crisis and closed in 2012, although efforts have been pursued to reactivate the latter. Relatively close airports outside the region include those in Madrid, Valencia and Alicante.\nCulture.\nHeritage protection.\nThe region hosts several World Heritage Sites: Toledo (since 1986), Cuenca (since 1996) and Almad\u00e9n (together with the Slovenian town of Idrija under the \"Heritage of Mercury. Almad\u00e9n and Idrija\" joint site) since 2012.\nAs of 2020, the region features 644 \"bienes de inter\u00e9s cultural\" (BIC) across the 5 provinces: Albacete (92), Ciudad Real (108), Cuenca (99), Guadalajara (104) and Toledo (238) plus another 3 transcending the provincial borders.\nThe regional legislation in force concerning the cultural heritage dates from 2013. Restrictions on the modification of historical buildings or the use of metal detectors were introduced then.\nInformational notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73208", "revid": "16477971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73208", "title": "Guadalajara, Spain", "text": "Guadalajara ( , ) is a city and municipality in Spain, located in the autonomous community of Castilla\u2013La Mancha. It is the capital of the Province of Guadalajara.\nGuadalajara lies on the central part of the Iberian Peninsula at roughly metres above sea level. Most of the city housing is located on the left (southern) bank of the Henares, in between the river and the moors of La Alcarria. In addition to the city, the municipality also includes the villages of Iri\u00e9pal, Taracena, Usanos, and Valdenoches. As of 2025[ [update]], Guadalajara has a registered population of 93,470, which makes it the region's second most populated municipality.\nFounded in the 9th century as Mad\u012bnat al-Fara\u0177 under the Emirate of C\u00f3rdoba, it became a stronghold of the Masmuda Berber clan of the Ban\u016b S\u0101lim. After Christian conquest in 1085 from the Taifa of Toledo, it grew into becoming a sizeable town of the Crown of Castile under control of the Mendoza family. It was a hub for mystical iluminismo in the 16th century in the Kingdom of Toledo. Depopulation and decay of key economy parametres ensued in the 17th century. Growth in the 21st century was caused by its closeness to the functional urban area of Madrid.\nHistory.\nAlleged identification with Arriaca.\nA Roman town called \"Arriaca\", possibly founded by a pre-Roman culture, is suggested to have been located in that region. There is however no archeological proof of its existence, only references in texts such as the \"Ruta Antonina\", which describe it as being in the hands of the Carpetani when encountered by the Romans. The city, as \"Caracca\", was incorporated into the Roman province of Hispania Tarraconensis. The city was on the high road from Emerita (modern M\u00e9rida) to Caesaraugusta (modern Zaragoza), 22 M. P. northeast of Complutum (modern Alcal\u00e1 de Henares).\nEarly Middle Ages.\nThe founding of Guadalajara, dating from the Islamic period, is attributed to a person named \"Fara\u0177\". It was officially known as Mad\u012bnat al-Fara\u0177 in the 9th and 10th centuries. The town was later known as W\u0101d\u012b Al-\u1e24ij\u0101ra (), possibly meaning \"Valley of Stones\" (as in river gravel); in theory it may be a literal translation of the Iberian name \"Arriaca\". It has also been proposed that \"\u1e24aj\u0101ra\" should not be understood as 'stones'/'gravel', but in the sense of 'castles' or 'fortified rocks'.\nW\u0101d\u012b Al-\u1e24ij\u0101ra and its surroundings were part of the Middle March of Al-Andalus, controlled by the Masmuda Berber clan of the Ban\u016b S\u0101lim who governed on behalf of the Umayyad rulers of C\u00f3rdoba. During the Muslim period an \"alc\u00e1zar\" (fortress) was built by the mid-9th century, as well as the Bridge over the Henares (its construction has been tentatively dated by the late 10th century or early 11th century). Walls enclosing the city were also built by then. In 920, the Ban\u016b S\u0101lim were routed from W\u0101d\u012b Al-\u1e24ij\u0101ra (reportedly because the local population resented their rule) by Abd al-Rahman III, who attempted to directly rule the territory.\nThe city was part of the territory annexed by Alfonso VI of Le\u00f3n and Castile in the 1085 conquest of the Taifa of Toledo, with W\u0101d\u012b Al-\u1e24ij\u0101ra surrendering and offering no resistance. Tradition claims however that a contingent led by \u00c1lvar F\u00e1\u00f1ez de Minaya (one of the lieutenants of El Cid) seized the city on 24 June, at night.\nThe area was repopulated with people from the North (Castilians from the mountains and Merindades, Basques and Navarreses mainly).\nAlfonso VII granted Guadalajara its first \"fuero\" on 3 May 1133. This charter progressively incorporated several amendments. The second \"fuero\", probably conceived during the reign of Alfonso VIII, was anyway confirmed by Ferdinand III on 26 May 1219 and 13 April 1251.\nFor most of its history, up until the 20th century, Guadalajara's water supply came from two sources: the Henares river and the springs located along the cornice formed by the border of the limestone moors of La Alcarria. Control over the scarce water resources was fought over and it became a symbol of social status for the local nobility during the Late Middle Ages.\nDuring the reign of Alfonso X of Castile (r. 1253\u20131284), the protection of the king allowed the city to develop its economy by protecting merchants and allowing markets.\nRule of the Mendozas.\nTraditionally a \"realengo\" ('royal demesne') town, with a vote in the Cortes of Castile, the town came under the influence of the powerful Mendoza family until well into the Early Modern period. Despite the former meddling that underpinned the political control of the city, Guadalajara was not enshrined as formal seigneurial jurisdiction of the Mendozas in a legal sense. The family included \u00cd\u00f1igo L\u00f3pez de Mendoza, also known as Marqu\u00e9s de Santillana (1398\u20131458), and Pedro Gonz\u00e1lez de Mendoza (1428\u20131495), Great Cardinal of Spain and adviser of the Catholic Monarchs.\nThe Mendoza family held the title of Dukes and Duchesses of El Infantado from 1475. On 25 March 1460, Henry IV granted Guadalajara the status of 'City'. In this period, the Mendoza Family ordered the building of El Palacio del Infantado as their main residence. It was completed in the early 1480s and it is considered by many the oldest surviving building built in a pure Renaissance style outside Italy.\nThe city's economy prospered thanks to the development of a specialised artisanate and a bustling trade.\nIn the Middle Ages, Guadalajara was home to a large Jewish community that maintained four synagogues as well as other communal institutes, including the society \"Malbish Arumim\" (\"Clothe the Naked\") and a study house or yeshiva. These included the Great Synagogue, the Synagogue of the Toledanos (established by Jews from Toledo), the Synagogue de los Matutes (or Old Synagogue), and another known as the Midras. Around the time of the 1492 expulsion, the synagogues became the subject of disputes among local religious institutions. The Great Synagogue was sold in May 1492 and soon transferred to the church of Santa Mar\u00eda de la Fuente, which converted it into a hospital. The Synagogue of the Toledanos was granted to the monastery of San Antol\u00edn for use as a hospital and home for aged friars.\nIn the early 16th century, the city was one of the main focal points of the \"iluminismo\" (or \"alumbrados\") in the Kingdom of Toledo, linked to heterodox religious figures such as Isabel de la Cruz and Mar\u00eda de Cazalla.\nIn the context of the Revolt of the Comuneros across the Crown of Castile, the \"comunero\" rebels in Guadalajara, as early as 5 June 1520, asked the Duke of the Infantado, Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, to join the anti-imperial revolt. The demonstrators lit the houses of the \"procurators\" who went to the Cortes of La Coru\u00f1a to vote in favour of the taxes and obligations levied by Emperor Charles V. The Duke of Infantado played a cautious waiting game to see which side would win, finally choosing to endorse the Emperor in 1521. He ordered the beheading of the local leaders of the insurgency and the deportation of his own son and successor \u00cd\u00f1igo L\u00f3pez de Mendoza, who had leaned towards the \"comunero\" cause.\nBy 1591, the city had a population of 6,754.\nCrisis.\nThe Crisis of the 17th century took a heavy toll in many Castilian cities, and particularly in Guadalajara. The city was affected by the 1610 expulsion of the moriscos both in terms of the net demographic loss (10% of the population) as well as by their critical weight in key sectors of the local economy such as the artisanate and trade. Many palaces were left forsaken. The Mendozas left the city for good in 1657.\nDuring the War of the Spanish Succession, in the early 18th century, Guadalajara was sacked. Ravaged by the \"Austracist\" army, a largely ruined Guadalajara hit then its lowest demographic point, with only around 2,200 inhabitants. Without external assistance the city may have simply ceased to exist. The 20,000,000 \"maravedies\" indebted to the Royal Treasury were forgiven in 1716. Philip V ordered the establishment of the Real F\u00e1brica de Pa\u00f1os (Royal Factory of Clothes), which was opened in the city in 1719 in the Palacio del Marqu\u00e9s de Montesclaros, critically helping the city to move on from the calamitous situation it found itself.\nContemporary times.\nThe 19th century started with two major setbacks: the damages caused by the Peninsular War (1808\u20131814) and the closing of the Real F\u00e1brica de Pa\u00f1os in 1822. In 1808, Guadalajara was taken by the French Army led by General Hugo and the city was destroyed. During the war, the 14 convents in the city were abandoned and turned into barracks, paving the way for the future processes of \"desamortizaci\u00f3n\", most decisively in between 1833 and 1843.\nThe \"desamortizaci\u00f3n\" entailed the change of use of religious buildings (turned to hospitals, high schools, military workshops), the demolition of some convents to widen street space and to erect new residential areas, and the reduction of the share of church properties in the estate structure.\nBoth the declaration of Guadalajara as provincial capital and the parallel installment of the Academy of Military Engineers in the city in 1833, fostered some slow growth.\nRailway transport arrived to the city with the opening of the Madrid\u2013Guadalajara stretch of the Madrid\u2013Zaragoza line (built by the Compa\u00f1\u00eda de los Ferrocarriles de Madrid a Zaragoza y Alicante, MZA) on 3 May 1859. Conversely, the Guadalajara\u2013Jadraque stretch to the northeast was opened on 5 October 1860.\nThe municipality had a population of 12,662 in 1900, the most populated municipality in the province, followed by Sig\u00fcenza (10,581). The 20th century saw the construction of the current water supply system bringing the waters of the Sorbe to the city.\nOn 21 July 1936, following the general coup d'\u00e9tat of 18 July that sparked the Spanish Civil War (1936\u20131939), the conspiring officers in the city (joined by the forces of public order and some civilians, amounting to an overall force of roughly 800) seized control of the city. The next day, the Republican Government in Madrid sent Ildefonso Puigdendolas to quell the rebellion and secure the city. The rebels were pushed in retreat to the \"Cuartel de Aerostaci\u00f3n\", where they surrendered. The militias executed roughly one hundred of them.\nThe city was the target of several aerial bombing attacks by the Francoists; the most famous, in December 1936, struck the Palacio del Infantado.\nOn 8 March 1937, the four divisions of the Italian Corpo Truppe Volontarie (CTV), attacked Republican positions outside Guadalajara as a supporting diversionary attack supporting the Nationalist Jarama Offensive began at the beginning of February. After four days of a slow, cautious advance during rainy weather, the tanks started attacking along paved roads and outran the air and anti-aircraft artillery support. Shortly thereafter, Republican airplanes in newly clear skies found the tanks and infantry in a traffic jam on the main road into Guadalajara. The Republican aircraft attacked and destroyed all the vehicles in the mechanized spearhead. The CTV retreated with casualties in the thousands. Ernest Hemingway labeled the attack \"Italian d\u00e9b\u00e2cle at Guadalajara.\" As a result of the victory, Republican forces enjoyed an increase in recruitment.\nThis defeat at Guadalajara had two long-standing effects. First, the Italian Army of the Mussolini dictatorship acquired a reputation for incompetence that lasted until the armistice of 1943. Second, some observing nations adopted a doctrine that ruled out tanks operating as an independent force but emphasized tying them tightly to large infantry formations.\nThe Civil War and the heavy fighting around the city caused significant damage. After two decades of slow rebuilding, Guadalajara was included in 1959 in the development plans for alleviating the congestion of Madrid's industrial estates (\"El Plan de Descongesti\u00f3n Industrial de Madrid en Castilla-La Mancha\"). These plans attempted to move industrial and accompanying residential growth to the periphery, including in Guadalajara. Since then, Guadalajara has been one of the fast-growing Spanish cities.\nGuadalajara absorbed the municipalities of Taracena, Valdenoches and Iri\u00e9pal in 1969, Marchamalo in 1972 and Usanos in 1973. Later, in 1999, Marchamalo segregated from Guadalajara, becoming a standalone municipality again.\nNowadays, Guadalajara is involved in urban development plans that are quickly increasing the population of the city. New districts like Aguas Vivas (Live Waters) have been inaugurated.\nCiudad Valdeluz was planned to increase the number of inhabitants of Guadalajara by 30,000, creating a new city around the AVE Station (Spanish High-Speed Trains). The company investing in the construction of Ciudad Valdeluz went bankrupt. Fewer than 500 inhabitants decided to occupy their flats and the remaining infrastructure is slow degrading. The AVE trains are used by only 60 passengers a day.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nGuadalajara is located in the central part of the Iberian Peninsula, in the southern half of the Inner Plateau.\nChosen as settlement on the basis of defensive purposes, the historic urban core of the city lies on a small elevation near the left-bank of the Henares River, also enclosed to the East and West by two small ditches corresponding to two watercourses, Alam\u00edn and San Antonio, respectively, forming a narrow and easily defendable space upon their confluence with the Henares.\nThe municipality spans across a total area of 235.49\u00a0km2.\nClimate.\nGuadalajara enjoys a cold semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"BSk\") bordering on a mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csa\") with continental influences for being well inland at 700 meters above sea level. Summers are hot with relatively cool nights, while winters are cool with cold nights. The lowest temperature ever recorded in Guadalajara is on 12 January 2009. The highest temperature ever recorded is on 10 August 2012.\nPolitics and administration.\nGuadalajara is a municipality, the basic level of local division in Spain. The Ayuntamiento is the body charged with the municipal government and administration. The Plenary of the \"ayuntamiento\" is formed by 25 elected municipal councillors, who in turn invest the mayor. The last municipal election took place on 26 May 2019. Since June 2019, the current mayor is Alberto Rojo Blas (Spanish Socialist Workers' Party).\nDemographics.\nUrban area.\nThe 2020 report on urban areas in Spain published by the Ministry of Transports, Mobility and Urban Agenda identifies an urban area formed by the municipality of Guadalajara together with the neighbouring municipalities of Azuqueca de Henares, Alovera, Cabanillas del Campo, Marchamalo, Villanueva de la Torre and Chiloeches, with a population of 161,683 (2019).\nArchitecture.\nThe bridge across the Henares river is Arab but built on Roman foundations. It has several historic buildings such as the Palacio del Infantado, as well as many churches, such as the church of San Gin\u00e9s. Although Guadalajara is the biggest city in its diocese, the cathedral is located in the nearby town of Sig\u00fcenza. However, in Guadalajara, there is a \"co-cathedral\", the church of Saint Mary, in Mudejar style. Very close to this church, is placed the chapel known as \"Capilla de Luis de Lucena\", which has several fresco paintings on its walls and ceiling. The Church of los Remedios was declared \"Bien de Inter\u00e9s Cultural\" in 1924, and currently serves as the auditorium of the University of Alcal\u00e1. The Church of la Piedad was declared \"Bien de Inter\u00e9s Cultural\" in 1931.\nBefore the Civil War, Guadalajara was also known to be among the cities with most number of antique azulejos in the Iberian Peninsula housed in their buildings, since the city housed the largest collection of azulejos from Talavera de la Reina pottery; now almost all of those azulejos are lost.\nThe small villages (\"pedan\u00edas\") of Iri\u00e9pal, Taracena, Usanos, and Valdenoches that belong to the municipality feature few monumental landmarks other than their humble rural churches. Thus, in Iri\u00e9pal there is the Concepci\u00f3n church, constructed in the 16th century, which is known for its Mud\u00e9jar tower. In Taracena there is the 17th century Church of the Immaculate, in a very simple Renaissance style. In Usanos, there is the 13th-century Romanesque church of the Assumption, considerably remodeled in later periods and which features a crenelated tower.\nOther types of monuments that are also noteworthy are the Iri\u00e9pal laundry, work of 1910 in historicist style with funding from the Jose Santa Mar\u00eda de Hita Foundation, and Iri\u00e9pal (1858) and Valdenoches (1656) funds.\nThroughout all the villages there are examples of Castilian mansions, quite modest compared to those in the cities. Of note also is Villaflores, a farming village built in 1887, designed by Ricardo Vel\u00e1zquez Bosco and commissioned to Maria Diega Desmaissi\u00e8res.\nTransport.\nGuadalajara is served by two railway stations:\nSports.\nThe local men's football team, CD Guadalajara, currently play at the Tercera Divisi\u00f3n, the fourth tier of the Spanish football system. Their home pitch is the Pedro Escart\u00edn.\nThe BM Guadalajara play at the ASOBAL league, the top tier of the men's handball system in Spain. Their home fixtures are played at the Palacio Multiusos de Guadalajara. Guadalajara was one of the host cities of the 2013 World Men's Handball Championship.\nInternational relations.\nGuadalajara is twinned with:\nNotable people.\nDistinguished people from or related to the town were:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73209", "revid": "50128823", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73209", "title": "Guadalajara", "text": "Guadalajara ( , ) is the capital and the most populous city in the western Mexican state of Jalisco, as well as the most densely populated municipality in Jalisco. According to the 2020 census, the city has a population of 1,385,629 people, making it the 8th most populous city in Mexico, while the Guadalajara metropolitan area has a population of 5,268,642, making it the third-largest metropolitan area in the country and the twenty-second largest metropolitan area in the Americas. Guadalajara has the second-highest population density in Mexico with over 10,361 people per km2, surpassed only by Mexico City. Within Mexico, Guadalajara is a center of business, arts and culture, technology and tourism; as well as the economic center of the Baj\u00edo region. It usually ranks among the 100 most productive and globally competitive cities in the world. It is home to numerous landmarks, including the Guadalajara Cathedral, Degollado Theatre, the Templo Expiatorio, the UNESCO World Heritage site Hospicio Caba\u00f1as, and the San Juan de Dios Market\u2014the largest indoor market in Latin America.\nA settlement was established in the region of Guadalajara in early 1532 by , a Basque conquistador in the expedition of . The settlement was renamed and moved several times before assuming the name Guadalajara after the birthplace of Guzm\u00e1n and ending up at its current location in the Atemajac Valley in 1542. On November 8, 1539, the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V had granted a coat of arms and the title of city to the new town and established it as the capital of the Kingdom of Nueva Galicia, part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain. After 1572, the Royal Audiencia of Guadalajara, previously subordinate to Mexico City, became the only authority in New Spain with autonomy over Nueva Galicia, owing to rapidly growing wealth in the kingdom following the discovery of silver. By the 18th century, Guadalajara had taken its place as Mexico's second largest city, following mass colonial migrations in the 1720s and 1760s. During the Mexican War of Independence, independence leader established Mexico's first revolutionary government in Guadalajara in 1810. The city flourished during the (1876\u20131911), with the advent of the Industrial Revolution, but its growth was hampered significantly during the Mexican Revolution (1910\u20131920). In 1929, the Cristero War ended within the confines of the city, when President proclaimed the . The city saw continuous growth throughout the rest of the 20th century, attaining a metro population of 1\u00a0million in the 1960s and surpassing 3\u00a0million in the 1990s.\nGuadalajara is a Gamma+ global city, and one of Mexico's most important cultural centers. It is home to numerous mainstays of Mexican culture, including Mariachi, Tequila, and Birria and hosts numerous notable events, including the Guadalajara International Film Festival, one of the most important film festivals in Latin America, and the Guadalajara International Book Fair, the largest book fair in the Americas. The city was the American Capital of Culture in 2005 and has hosted numerous global events, including the 1970 FIFA World Cup, the 1986 FIFA World Cup, the 1st Ibero-American Summit in 1991, and the 2011 Pan American Games. The city is home to numerous universities and research institutions, including the University of Guadalajara and the , two of the highest-ranked universities in Mexico.\nEtymology.\nThe conquistador named the city in honor of the conqueror of western Mexico, , who was born in Guadalajara, Spain, which is derived from Moorish Arabic (), which means 'Valley of the Stones', or 'Fortress Valley'.\nHistory.\nPre-Hispanic era.\nUnlike the surrounding areas, the central Atemajac Valley (where Guadalajara is located) contained no human settlements. To the east of the Atemajac Valley were the Tonallan and Tetl\u00e1n peoples. At the extremes were the Zapopan, Atemajac, Zoquipan, Tesistan, Coyula, and Huentit\u00e1n.\nThe historic city center encompasses what was once four population centers, as the villages of the Mezquit\u00e1n, Analco, and Mexicaltzingo were annexed to the Atemajac site in 1669.\nFoundation.\nGuadalajara was originally founded at three other sites before moving to its current location. The first colonial settlement in 1532 was in Mesa del Cerro, now known as Nochistl\u00e1n, Zacatecas. This site was colonized by Crist\u00f3bal de O\u00f1ate as commissioned by Nu\u00f1o de Guzm\u00e1n, with the purpose of securing recent conquests and \"defending\" them from the \"still-hostile natives\". This colonized settlement did not last long due to its lack of usable water sources. In 1533 it was moved to a site near Tonal\u00e1. Four years later, Guzm\u00e1n ordered that the village be moved to Tlacot\u00e1n. During this time, the Spanish king Charles I granted the city the coat of arms which it retains to this day.\nDuring the Mixt\u00f3n War (1540\u20131542), the Caxcan, Portecuex, and Zacateco peoples, fought back against colonizers under the command of Tenamaxtli. The war was initiated in response to the heinous treatment of indigenous peoples by Nu\u00f1o de Guzm\u00e1n, in particular the enslavement of captured natives. After multiple defeats, Viceroy Antonio de Mendoza took control of the Spanish campaign to suppress the revolt. The conflict ended after Mendoza made concessions such as freeing enslaved indigenous peoples and granting amnesty. The village of Guadalajara barely survived the war, and the villagers attributed their survival to the Archangel Michael, who remains the patron of the city to this day.\nAfter the war, the city was moved once again\u2014this time to a more defensible location. This final relocation would prove permanent. In 1542, records indicate that 126 people were living in Guadalajara. That same year, it was granted cityhood by the king of Spain. Guadalajara was officially founded on February 14, 1542, in the Atemajac Valley. The colonized settlement was named for Nu\u00f1o de Guzm\u00e1n's Spanish hometown.\nIn 1559, royal and bishopric offices for the province of Nueva Galicia were moved from Compostela to Guadalajara and, in 1560, Guadalajara became the province's new capital. Construction of the cathedral began in 1563. In 1575, religious orders such as the Augustinians and Dominicans arrived, eventually making the city a center for evangelization efforts.\nWhile capital of the Kingdom of Nueva Galicia, the city's inhabitants achieved a high standard of living, due to flourishing industry, agriculture, commerce, mining, and trade. The Guadalajara of the 16th century was a rather small and often overlooked community. It was mainly frequented by traveling merchants. Several epidemics drastically reduced the city's indigenous population, leading to the construction of its first hospital in 1557.\nGuadalajara's economy during the 18th century was based on agriculture and the production of non-durable goods such as textiles, shoes and food products.\nDespite epidemics, plagues, and earthquakes, Guadalajara would become one of the most important population centers in New Spain.\nThe city's heyday attracted numerous architects, philosophers, lawyers, scientists, poets, writers, and speakers; Francisco Javier Clavijero and Mat\u00edas \u00c1ngel de la Mota Padilla were among the most prominent. In 1771, Bishop Fray Antonio Alcalde arrived in the city and founded the Civil Hospital and the University of Guadalajara. In 1791, the University of Guadalajara was established. The dedication was held in 1792 at the site of the old Santo Tomas College. While the institution was founded during the 18th century, it would not be fully developed until the 20th century, starting in 1925. In 1794, the Hospital Real de San Miguel de Bel\u00e9n, or simply the Hospital de Bel\u00e9n, was opened.\nIn 1793, Mariano Vald\u00e9s T\u00e9llez Giron ran the city's first printing press, whose first publication was a funeral eulogy for Fray Antonio Alcalde.\nIndependence.\nGuadalajara remained the capital of Nueva Galicia with some modifications until the Mexican War of Independence. Miguel Hidalgo entered San Pedro (now Tlaquepaque) on November 25, 1810, and the next day he was greeted effusively in Guadalajara. The city's workers had experienced poor living conditions and were swayed by promises of lower taxes and the abolition of slavery. Despite a soured welcome, due to the rebel army's violence toward city residents, especially royalists, Hidalgo kept his promise and, on December 6, 1810, slavery was abolished in Guadalajara, a proclamation which has been honored since the end of the war. During this time, he founded the newspaper , dedicated to the insurgent cause.\nRoyalist forces marched to Guadalajara, arriving in January 1811 with nearly 6,000\u00a0men. Insurgents Ignacio Allende and Mariano Abasolo wanted to concentrate their forces in the city and plan an escape route should they be defeated, but Hidalgo rejected this idea. Their second choice was to make a stand at the Puente de Calderon just outside the city. Hidalgo had between 80,000 and 100,000\u00a0men and 95\u00a0cannons, but the better-trained royalists won, decimating the insurgent army and forcing Hidalgo to flee toward Aguascalientes. Guadalajara remained in royalist hands until near the end of the war.\nOn January 17, 1817, the insurgent army was again defeated on the outskirts of Guadalajara in the Battle of Calder\u00f3n Bridge.\nNew Galicia, now Jalisco, adhered to the Plan de Iguala on June 13, 1821.\nIn 1823, Guadalajara became the capital of the newly founded state of Jalisco. In 1844, General Mariano Paredes y Arrillaga initiated a revolt against the government of President Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna. Santa Anna personally ensured that the revolt was quelled. However, while Santa Anna was in Guadalajara, a revolt called the Three Hour Revolution brought Jos\u00e9 Joaqu\u00edn Herrera to the presidency and put Santa Anna into exile.\nPresident Benito Ju\u00e1rez made Guadalajara the seat of his government in 1856, during the Reform War. French troops entered the city during the French Intervention in 1864, and it was retaken by Mexican troops in 1866.\nDespite the violence, the 19th century was a period of economic, technological and social growth for the city. After Independence, small-scale industries developed, many of which were owned by European immigrants. Rail lines connecting the city to the Pacific coast and north to the United States intensified trade and allowed the shipment of products from rural areas of Jalisco. Ranch Culture became a very important aspect of Jalisco and Guadalajara's identities during this time. From 1884 to 1890, electrical and railroad services, as well as the Guadalajara Observatory were established.\n20th century.\nThroughout the twentieth century, seeing growth in its industrial, tourist, and service industries, Guadalajara began a period of rapid transformation into the metropolis it is today. The city would gain the second largest economy in Mexico, following only by Mexico City. After the Mexican Revolution of 1910, Guadalajara became the second most populous city in the country. However, the decades that followed brought a number of regional wars in the states of Jalisco, Michoac\u00e1n, and Guanajuato. The aftermath of the Great Depression took a further toll on the city. Fortunately, by the 1940s the city would experience industrial, demographic, and trade growth.\nIn 1910, the Mexican Revolution began, bringing an end to the . With conflict concentrated in the capital, Guadalajara experienced relative calm. After the Cristero Conflict, peace returned to Guadalajara and the city flourished, outgrowing its colonial roots. This period saw the birth of new schools of architecture that would decorate the city from the 1920s to the 1980s.\nGuadalajara again experienced substantial growth after the 1930s, and the first industrial park was established in 1947. Its population surpassed one million in 1964, and by the 1970s it was Mexico's second-largest city and the largest in western Mexico. Most of the modern city's urbanization took place between the 1940s and the 1980s, with the population doubling every ten years until it stood at 2.5 million in 1980. The population of the municipality has stagnated, and even declined, slowly but steadily, since the early 1990s.\nThe increase in population brought with it an increase in the size of what is now called Greater Guadalajara, rather than an increase in the population density of the city. Migrants coming into Guadalajara from the 1940s to the 1980s were mostly from rural areas and lived in the city center until they had enough money to buy property. This property was generally bought in the edges of the city, which were urbanizing into , or residential areas. In the 1980s, it was described as a \"divided city\" east to west based on socioeconomic class. Since then, the city has evolved into four sectors, which are still more or less class-centered. The upper classes tend to live in Hidalgo and Ju\u00e1rez in the northwest and southwest, while the lower classes tend to live in the city center, Libertad in the northeast, and southeast in Reforma. However, lower class development has expanded on the city's periphery and upper and middle classes are migrating toward Zapopan, making the situation less neatly divided.\nSince 1996, the activity of multinational corporations has had a significant effect on the economic and social development of the city. The presence of companies such as Kodak, Hewlett-Packard, Motorola and IBM has been based on production facilities built outside the city proper, bringing in foreign labor and capital. This was made possible in the 1980s by surplus labor, infrastructure improvements, and government incentives. These companies focus on electrical and electronic items, which is now one of Guadalajara's two main products (the other being beer). This has internationalized the economy, steering it away from manufacturing and toward services, dependent on technology and foreign investment. This has not been favorable for the unskilled working class and traditional labor sectors.\nThe 1992 Guadalajara explosions occurred on April 22, 1992, when gasoline explosions in the sewer system over four hours destroyed of streets in the downtown district of Analco. Gante Street was the most damaged. Officially, 206 people were killed, nearly 500 injured and 15,000 were left homeless. The estimated monetary damage ranges between $300 million and $1 billion. The affected areas can be recognized by their more modern architecture.\nThree days before the explosion, residents started complaining of a strong gasoline-like smell coming from the sewers. City workers were dispatched to check the sewers and found dangerously high levels of gasoline fumes. However, no evacuations were ordered. An investigation into the disaster found that there were two precipitating causes. The first was new water pipes that were built too close to an existing gasoline pipeline. Chemical reactions between the pipes caused erosion. The second was a flaw in the sewer design that did not allow accumulated gases to escape.\nArrests were made to indict those responsible for the blasts. Four officials of Pemex (the state oil company) were indicted and charged on the basis of negligence. Ultimately, however, these people were cleared of all charges. Calls for the restructuring of PEMEX were made but they were successfully resisted.\nThe 1990s were marked by events such as the explosions of April 22, 1992, the Mexican peso crisis of 1994, and the murder of the Cardinal Juan Jes\u00fas Posadas Ocampo in 1993. The 1992 explosions caused massive infrastructure damage to hundreds of houses, avenues, streets, and businesses in the Analco neighborhood (), \"without a clear delineator of information and responsibilities to date\", in one of the most tragic events in the history of Guadalajara. The investigation of the facts lasted more than 11 years in which insufficient evidence was found to appoint a manager, investigations are now closed attributing the events to an accident. This event, in addition to Mexico's 1994 economic crisis, resulted in the loss of Guadalajara's industrial power.\nInternational events.\nThe city has hosted numerous important international events, such as the first Cumbre Iberoamericana in 1991. The Third Summit of Heads of State and Governments of Latin America, the Caribbean, and the European Union was hosted in 2004. Guadalajara was also the venue to the Encuentro Internacional de Promotores y Gestores Culturales in 2005. The 2011 Pan American Games were staged and Guadalajara was named the American Capital of Culture in 2005 as well as the Ciudad Educadora in 2006. Guadalajara has been recognized as Mexico's first Smart City due to its use of developing technology.\nExpansion and municipality merger.\nThe city expanded rapidly before merging with the Zapopan municipality. Among the developments created during this period were the Guadalajara Expo, the light rail, shopping centers, the expansion of streets and avenues, and the birth and development of road infrastructure, services, tourism, industrial, etc. The first shopping center in Latin America emerged in the city, the first urban electric-train system in Latin America, and the first private university in Mexico.\nIn a 2007 survey entitled \"Cities of the Future\", \"FDi magazine\" ranked Guadalajara first among major Mexican cities and second among major North American cities in terms of economic potential, behind Chicago. The magazine also rated it as the most business-friendly Latin American city in 2007.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Guadalajara has a humid subtropical climate (\"Cwa\"), a temperate climate that is quite close to a tropical climate, featuring dry warm winters and wet, mildly hot summers. Guadalajara's climate is influenced by its high altitude and the general seasonality of precipitation patterns in western North America.\nAlthough the temperature is warm year-round, Guadalajara has strong seasonal variation in precipitation. The northward movement of the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone brings a great deal of rain in the summer months, whereas, for the rest of the year, the climate is rather dry, although daily rainfall records in each dry season month range from to . The extra moisture during the wet months moderates the temperatures, resulting in cooler days and nights during this period. The highest temperatures are usually reached in May averaging , but can reach up to just before the onset of monsoon season. March tends to be the driest month and July the wettest, with an average of of rain, over a quarter of the annual average of about .\nDuring the summer, afternoon storms are very common and can sometimes bring hail flurries to the city, especially toward late August or September. Winters are relatively warm despite the city's altitude, with January daytime temperatures reaching about and nighttime temperatures about . However, the outskirts of the city (generally those close to the Primavera Forest) experience on average cooler temperatures than the city itself. There, temperatures around can be recorded during the coldest nights. Frost may also occur during the coldest nights, but temperatures rarely fall below in the city, making it an uncommon phenomenon. Cold fronts in winter can sometimes bring light rain to the city for several days in a row. Snowfall is extraordinarily rare, with the last recorded one occurring in December 1997, which was the first time in 116 years, as it had previously last fallen in 1881.\nTopography.\nGuadalajara's natural wealth is represented by the La Primavera Forest, Los Colomos, and the Barranca de Huentit\u00e1n. The flora in these areas includes michoacan pines, several species of oak, sweetgum, ash, willow, and introduced trees such as poincianas, jacarandas, and ficus. It also includes orchids, roses, and various species of fungi. The fauna includes typical urban fauna in addition to 106 species of mammals, 19 species of reptiles, and six species of fish.\nLa Barranca de Huentit\u00e1n (the Huentit\u00e1n Forest) (also known as Barranca de Oblatos and Barranca de Oblatos-Huentit\u00e1n) is a National Park located just north of the municipality of Guadalajara. The barranca (canyon) borders two colonias (neighborhoods) of the city, Oblatos and Huentitan.\nIt covers approximately , and varies in altitude. The funicular railway in the park starts at above sea level and rises to above sea level. In the 16th century, during the Spanish Conquest, the Huentit\u00e1n area including the canyon was the site of battles between local Indian populations and the Spanish. Later, it was the site of battles between different factions during the Mexican Revolution and the Cristero Rebellion.\nThe canyon is a biogeographic corridor that is home to four types of vegetation: deciduous tropical forest, gallery forest, heath vegetation, and secondary vegetation. In addition to introduced species, there are many native species of flora and fauna. The canyon is studied by national and international researchers as it contains great biological diversity due to its geographical location.\nOn June 5, 1997, it was declared a Protected Natural Area, as an Area Subject to Ecological Conservation (Zona Sujeta a Conservaci\u00f3n Ecol\u00f3gica).\nLa Cascada Cola de Caballo (The Horse Tail Waterfall) is located on the Guadalajara to Zacatecas road (Highway 54, km 15) a few kilometers from the Northern Peripheral, just after passing the village of San Esteban. The waterfall is fed by a stream from the Atemajac Valley. It is close to Guadalajara and a town with very little development, and as a result of poor ecological practices, it is very polluted.\nEl Bosque los Colomos, the Colomos Forest, is located in the northwestern part of Guadalajara along the Rio Atemajac. It is in a wealthy part of the metropolitan area, and has been developed for recreation rather than being preserved in its wild state. The river was once one of the main sources of water supply to the city, and today continues to provide water to some surrounding colonias (neighborhoods). Currently, this forest covers an area of in which pine trees, eucalyptus trees, and cedars predominate. The park has jogging tracks, gardens (including a Japanese garden), ponds, a bird lake, instructional areas for school field days, playgrounds, camping areas, and horses to ride.\nOther places of interest around Guadalajara include Camachos Aquatic Natural Park, a commercial water park, and Barranca Colimilla, a canyon with hiking trails near Tonala, east of Guadalajara.\nUrbanism.\nGuadalajara's street plan has evolved over time into a radial urban plan, with five major routes into and out of the city. It is surrounded by ring roads.\nThe original city of Guadalajara was planned on a grid, with north\u2013south and east\u2013west intersecting streets.\nOver time, villages surrounding Guadalajara were incorporated into the city - first Analco to the southeast, then Mexicaltzingo to the south, Mezquitan to the north, and San Juan de Dios to the east, all of which introduced more variety to the plan. As it grew towards the west, it kept the original north\u2013south orientation. As it grew towards the east, this grid was tilted towards the south-east to match up with the grids of the former towns Analco and San Juan de Dios, across the river from central Guadalajara on the eastern side of Rio San Juan de Dios (Rio San Juan de Dios is now underground; it runs beneath Calzada Independencia).\nWhen the railway was introduced to Guadalajara in 1888, the southern part of the city began development, and its streets aligned with the grid to the east of the old Rio San Juan de Dios. Additional 20th-century expansion of the city introduced even more variety, as developers introduced different kinds of non-grid street plans in new areas. During the government of Jos\u00e9 de Jes\u00fas Gonz\u00e1lez Gallo, between 1947 and 1953, major public works changed the urban landscape of the historic center of the city.\nMajor controversial projects included the widening of Avenida 16 de Septiembre and Avenida Ju\u00e1rez, which were no longer adequate to handle car traffic in the center of the city. In the process, many buildings of architectural and historical value were demolished. Historical buildings around Guadalajara Cathedral were also demolished to leave large open spaces on the four sides of the Cathedral in the form of a large Latin cross, in which the cathedral is now centered. There were other, somewhat less controversial, projects to improve the flow of traffic and increase commerce in other parts of the city.\nDistricts.\nGuadalajara is made up of more than 2,300 colonias (neighborhoods) in the Metropolitan Area. The oldest parts of the city include Centro (the oldest in the city), Santuario, Mexicaltzingo, Mezquitan, Analco, and San Juan de Dios. Private houses in the oldest sector of the city are mostly made up of one- and two-level houses, with architectural styles ranging from simple colonial architecture to the Churrigueresco, Baroque, and early nineteenth century European styles.\nJust west of the oldest part of the city are upper-class colonias built in the nineteenth and early twentieth century, containing the neoclassical structures and houses of the Porfiriato. In the 1920s, 1930s, 1940s and 1950s well-to-do Tapatios expanded into colonias Lafayette, Americana, Moderna, and Arcos Vallarta. New architectural trends of the 1960s and 1970s also left their mark in colonias such as colonia Americana, Vallarta Poniente, Moderna, Providencia, Vallarta San Jorge, Jardines del Bosque, and Chapalita.\nThe Metropolitan Area has more wealthy neighborhoods than any other part of western Mexico. These colonias are located both inside and outside the municipality of Guadalajara, including some in its neighboring municipalities of Zapopan and Tlajomulco, in the west and south. Some of these colonias are: Colinas de San Javier, Puerta de Hierro, Providencia, Chapalita, Country Club, Ciudad del Sol, Valle Real, Lomas del Valle, Santa Anita Golf Club, El Cielo, Santa Isabel, Virreyes, Ciudad Bugambilias, Las Ca\u00f1adas, and Royal Country.\nIn general, residents in the west of the city are the wealthiest, while residents in the east are the poorest.\nNew development to accommodate the growing population is made up of a mix of middle-class colonias and housing complexes developed as part of government plans, and colonias developed less formally for working-class people. The Metropolitan Area extends to the west in colonias such as Pinar de la Calma, Las Fuentes, Paseos del Sol, El Colli Urbano, and La Estancia and extends to the east in colonias such as San Juan Bosco, San Andr\u00e9s, Oblatos, Santa Cecilia, Insurgentes, Jardines de la Paz, and Tetl\u00e1n.\nThe expansion of the population creates a constant demand for more colonias and more government infrastructure services.\nParks.\nParks and forests are important in Guadalajara; while many of the oldest neighborhoods of the municipality of Guadalajara do not have sufficient green spaces, of the three most important metropolitan areas in Mexico, the Guadalajara Metropolitan Area (ZMG) has the greenest areas and plants.\n\"The most important parks are:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCoat of arms.\nThe coat of arms or seal of Guadalajara consists of a blue field, a pine of sinople outlined, two lions rampantes of color, opposite to forehead and the legs on the trunk, embroidery is of gold, consists of seven arms of gules. For stamp, closed helmet and for cimera a flag of gules, loaded with a cross of Jerusalem to the one that uses as shaft a lance of the same color, the lambrequins are of gold and blue alternated.\nThe blue field means loyalty and serenity, the pine of sinople means noble thoughts, the lions sovereignty and warlike spirit, the arms mean protection, favor and purity of the feelings, honor to the Battle of Baeza against the Moors in 1227. The helmet represents a degree of nobility, victory in the combat, the cross of Jerusalem means that the conquerors were descendants of the gentlemen of the crusades, and the lance signifies strength that is tempered by prudence.\nCharles V, Holy Roman Emperor, granted the title of city to Guadalajara and granted the shield in 1539.\nDemographics.\nThe most current figures by the National Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI), confirmed in 2010, the municipality of Guadalajara has a population of approximately 1,495,189, with a population in the metropolitan area of 4,334,878, the most populous city in the state of Jalisco, the most conurbation-highest-population within the province of Jalisco of the Guadalajara metropolitan area, and the second-most populous city in Mexico; the first being Mexico City.\nIn 2007, the United Nations listed the world's 100 most populous urban agglomerations. Mexico excelled with three cities on the list: Mexico City, Guadalajara, and Monterrey. Guadalajara ranked 66th in these cities, followed by Sydney and Washington, D.C. On the Latin American list, Guadalajara ranked 10th.\nThe municipality of Guadalajara is located in the center of the State, a little to the east, at coordinates 20-&amp;36'\u00a040\" to 20-\u00a045'\u00a000\" north latitude and 103-\u00a016'\u00a000\" to 103-\u00a024'\u00a000\" west-latitude and 103-&amp;16'\u00a000\" to 103-\u00a024'\u00a000\" west-west longitude, at a height of 1700 meters above sea level.\nThe municipality of Guadalajara is bounded to the north by Zapopan and Ixtlahuac\u00e1n del R\u00edo, to the east by Tonal\u00e1 and Zapotlanejo, to the south with Tlaquepaque and to the west with Zapopan.\nGuadalajara Metropolitan Area.\nThe Guadalajara metropolitan area is the second most populous metropolitan area in the country and the agglomeration has six central municipalities and three exterior municipalities. The central municipalities are Guadalajara, Zapopan, Tlaquepaque, Tonal\u00e1, Tlajomulco, and El Salto, Jalisco. The exterior municipalities are Ixtlahuac\u00e1n de los Membrillos, Juanacatl\u00e1n, and Zapotlanejo.\nThe growth of the city is due to Guadalajara absorbing the closest communities. This was the case with the former communities Atemajac, Huentit\u00e1n, Tetl\u00e1n, Analco, Mexicaltzingo, Mezquitan, and San Andr\u00e9s, among others.\nSome of the closest communities to Guadalajara:\nEconomy.\nGuadalajara has the third-largest economy and industrial infrastructure in Mexico and contributes 37% of the state of Jalisco's total gross production. Its economic base is strong and well-diversified, mainly based on commerce and services, although the manufacturing sector plays a defining role. It is ranked in the top ten in Latin America in gross domestic product and the third-highest ranking in Mexico.\nIn its 2007 survey entitled \"Cities of the Future\", \"FDi magazine\" ranked Guadalajara highest among major Mexican cities and designated Guadalajara as having the second strongest economic potential of any major North American city behind Chicago. \"FDI\" ranked it as the most business-friendly Latin American city in 2007. The same research noted Guadalajara as a \"city of the future\" due to its youthful population, low unemployment and large number of recent foreign investment deals; it was found to be the third most business-friendly city in North America.\nIn 2009 Moody's Investors Service assigned ratings of Ba1 (Global Scale, local currency) and A1.mx (Mexican national scale). During the prior five years, the municipality's financial performance had been mixed but had begun to stabilize in the latter two years. Guadalajara manages one of the largest budgets among Mexican municipalities and its revenue per capita indicator (Ps. $2,265) places it above the average for Moody's-rated municipalities in Mexico.\nThe city's economy has two main sectors. Commerce and tourism employ most: about 60% of the population. The other is industry, which has been the engine of economic growth and the basis of Guadalajara's economic importance nationally even though it employs only about a third of the population. Industries here produce products such as food and beverages, toys, textiles, auto parts, electronic equipment, pharmaceuticals, footwear, furniture and steel products.\nTwo of the major industries have been textiles and shoes, which are still dynamic and growing. Sixty percent of manufactured products are sold domestically, while forty percent are exported, mostly to the United States. This makes Guadalajara's economic fortunes dependent on those of the U.S., both as a source of investment and as a market for its goods.\nThe city has to compete with China, especially for electronics industries which rely on high volume and low wages. This has caused it to move toward high-mix, mid-volume, and value-added services, such as automotive. However, its traditional advantage of proximity to the U.S. market is one reason Guadalajara stays competitive. Mexico ranked third in 2009 in Latin America for the export of information technology services, behind Brazil and Argentina. This kind of service is mostly related to online and telephone technical support. The major challenge this sector has is the lack of university graduates who speak English.\nTechnology.\nThe electronics and information technology sectors that have nicknamed the city the \"Silicon Valley of Mexico.\" Guadalajara is the main producer of software, electronic and digital components in Mexico. Telecom and computer equipment from Guadalajara accounts for about a quarter of Mexico's electronics exports. Companies such as General Electric, IBM, Sanmina, Intel, HCL Technologies, Hitachi, Hewlett Packard Enterprise, HP Inc, Siemens, Flextronics, Oracle, Wipro, Tata Consultancy Services, Cognizant Technology Solutions and Jabil Circuit have facilities in the city or its suburbs. This phenomenon began after the passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). International firms started building facilities in Mexico, especially Guadalajara, displacing Mexican firms, especially in information technology. One of the problems this has created is that when there are economic downturns, these international firms scale back.\nGuadalajara was selected as \"Smart City\" in 2013 by IEEE, the world's largest professional association for the advancement of technology.\nSeveral cities invest in the areas of research to design pilot projects and as an example, in early March in 2013 was the first \"Cluster Smart Cities\" in the world, composed of Dublin, Ireland; San Jose, California; Cardiff, Wales, and Guadalajara, Jalisco, whose objective is the exchange of information and experiences that can be applied in principle to issues of agribusiness and health sciences.\nThe Secretariat of Communications and Transportation also reported that Guadalajara, Jalisco was chosen as the official venue for the first \"Digital Creative City of Mexico and Latin America\", which will be the spearhead for Mexico to consolidate the potential in this area.\nThe \"Cluster Smart Cities\" unprecedented in the world, will focus on what each of these cities is making in innovation and the creation of an alliance to attract technology. The Ministry of Innovation, Science, and Technology (SICyT ) of Jalisco, said the combination of talent development investments allows Jalisco to enter the \"knowledge economy.\"\nFrom 25 to 28 October 2015, the city was the venue for the first conference of the Smart Cities Initiative.\nIndustries.\nMost of the economy revolves around commerce, employing 60% of the population. This activity has mainly focused on the purchase and sale of the following products: food and beverages, textiles, electronic appliances, tobacco, cosmetics, sports articles, construction materials, and others. Guadalajara's commercial activity is second only to Mexico City.\nThe city is the national leader in the development and investment of shopping malls. Many shopping centers have been built, such as Galeries Plaza, one of the largest shopping centers in Latin America, and Andares. Galer\u00edas Guadalajara covers and has 220 stores. It contains the two largest movie theaters in Latin America, both with IMAX screens. It hosts art exhibits and fashion shows and has an area for cultural workshops. Anchor stores includes Liverpool and Sears and specialty stores such as Hugo Boss, Max Mara, Lacoste, Tesla Motors, Costco. Best Buy opened its first Guadalajara store here. It has an additional private entrance on the top floor of the adjacent parking lot. Another Best Buy store was inaugurated in Ciudadela Lifestyle Center mall, which was the chain's third-largest in the world, according to the company.\nAndares is another important commercial center in Zapopan. This $530 million mixed-use complex opened in 2008, designed by renowned Mexican Sordo Madaleno architecture firm features luxury residences and a high-level mall anchored by two large department stores, Liverpool and El Palacio de Hierro. The 133,000 m2 (1,400,000+ sq ft) mall offers hundreds of stores, a big food court located on the second floor, and several restaurants at the Paseo Andares.\nA large segment of the commercial sector caters to tourists and other visitors. Recreational tourism is mainly concentrated in the historic downtown. In addition to being a cultural and recreational attraction and thanks to its privileged geographical location, the city serves as an axis to nearby beach destinations such as Puerto Vallarta, Manzanillo and Mazatl\u00e1n. Other types of visitors include those who travel to attend seminars, conventions and other events in fields such as academic, entertainment, sports, and business. The best-known venue for this purpose is the Expo Guadalajara, a large convention center surrounded by several hotels. It was built in 1987, and it is considered the most important convention center in Mexico.\nForeign trade.\nMost of Guadalajara's economic growth since 1990 has been tied with foreign investment. International firms have invested here to take advantage of the relatively cheap but educated and highly productive labor, establishing manufacturing plants that re-export their products to the United States, as well as provide goods for the domestic Mexican market.\nA media report in early October 2013 stated that five major Indian IT (information technology) companies have established offices in Guadalajara, while several other Indian IT companies continue to explore the option of expanding to Mexico. Due to the competitiveness in the Indian IT sector, companies are expanding internationally and Mexico offers an affordable opportunity for Indian companies to better position themselves to enter the United States market. The trend emerged after 2006 and the Mexican government offers incentives to foreign companies.\nExports from the city went from US$3.92 billion in 1995 to 14.3 billion in 2003. From 1990 to 2000, socio-economic indicators show that quality of life improved overall; however, there is still a large gap between the rich and the poor, and the rich have benefited from the globalization and privatization of the economy more than the poor.\nInternational investment has affected the labor market in the metro area and that of the rural towns and villages that surround it. Guadalajara is the distribution center for the region and its demands have led to a shifting of employment, from traditional agriculture and crafts to manufacturing and commerce in urban centers. This has led to mass migration from the rural areas to the metropolitan area.\nCulture.\nGuadalajara has a lively cultural life. The city exhibits works by international artists and is a must-see for international cultural events whose radius of influence reaches most of the countries of Latin America, including the southwestern United States.\nIts historic center houses colonial buildings of a religious and civil character, which stand out for their architectural and historical significance, and constitute a rich mixture of styles whose root is found in indigenous cultural contributions (mainly of incorporated into the Mozarabic and the castilian), and later in modern European influences (mainly French and Italian). The historic center also has museums, theaters, galleries, libraries, auditoriums, and concert halls. Some of these buildings date from the sixteenth and seventeenth century, such as the Cathedral of the Archdiocese of Guadalajara, among others.\nThe city has several radio stations focused on culture, one of them being Red Radio University of Guadalajara (XHUG-F), which is transmitted to the rest of the state and neighboring states and internationally through the Internet; it is also the first broadcaster via podcast in the country. The city produces a fully cultural television channel, XHGJG-TV; Guadalajara is the only city to produce a cultural cutting channel in the country in addition to the Mexico, D.F.A. in Mexico City.\nThis city has been the cradle and dwelling of distinguished poets, writers, painters, actors, film directors and representatives of the arts, etc., such as Jos\u00e9 Clemente Orozco, Dr. Atl, Roberto Montenegro, Alejandro Zohn, Luis Barrag\u00e1n, Carlos Orozco Romero, Federico Fabregat, Raul Anguiano, Juan Soriano, Javier Campos Cabello, Martha Pacheco, Alejandro Colunga, Jos\u00e9 Fors, Juan Kraeppellin, Davis Birks, Carlos Vargas Pons, Jis, Trino, Erandini, Enrique Oroz, Rub\u00e9n M\u00e9ndez, Mauricio Toussaint, Scott Neri, Paula Santiago, Edgar Cobian, L. Felipe Manzano, and (the artist formerly known as Mevna); the freeplay guitarist and music composer for the movies \"El Mariachi\" and \"The Legend of Zorro\", Paco Renter\u00eda; important exponents of literature such as Juan Rulfo, Francisco Rojas, Agust\u00edn Y\u00e1\u00f1ez, El\u00edas Nandino, Idella Purnell, Jorge Souza, among others; classic repertoire composers such as Gonzalo Curiel, Jos\u00e9 Pablo Moncayo, Antonio Navarro, Ricardo Zohn, Carlos S\u00e1nchez-Guti\u00e9rrez and Gabriel Pareyon; film directors such as Felipe Cazals, Jaime Humberto Hermosillo, Erik Stahl, Guillermo del Toro; and actors such as Katy Jurado, Enrique Alvarez Felix, and Gael Garc\u00eda Bernal.\nGuadalajara was the first Mexican city to be accepted as a member of the International Association of Educational Cities due to its strong character and identity, potential for economic development through culture.\nGuadalajara was designated as the World Book Capital for 2022 by UNESCO.\nDespite the Guadalajara area historically being an ethnically Caxcan region, the Nahua peoples form the majority of Guadalajara's indigenous population. There are several thousand indigenous language speakers in Guadalajara although the majority of the indigenous population is integrated within the general population and can speak Spanish.\nMuseums.\nThe museums in Guadalajara are an extension of the cultural infrastructure of this city. Many of them stand out for their architectural and historical significance. There are more than 189 forums of art exhibition among cultural centers, museums, private galleries, and cultural spaces of the town hall, several of them with centuries of existence and some others in the process of being built. The museums in Guadalajara belong to the cultural framework of the city, among which are in all its genres exhibiting history, paleontology, archeology, ethnography, paintings, crafts, plastic, photography, sculpture, works of circuits international art, etc.\nGuadalajara has twenty two museums, which include the Regional Museum of Jalisco, the Wax Museum, the Trompo M\u00e1gico children's museum and the Museum of Anthropology. The Former Hospice Caba\u00f1as in the historic center is a World Heritage Site. For these attributes and others, the city was named an American Capital of Culture in 2005.\nGuadalajara and the surrounding metropolitan area have numerous public, private, and digital libraries for the search and consultation of information. The promotion of culture and the enrichment of reading have made it easier for the citizen to require several facilities in the city. Some of the libraries also have a physical enclosure\u2014among them the historic Octavio Paz Ibero-American Library of the University of Guadalajara and the Public Library of the State of Jalisco located in the adjoining city of Zapopan\u2014with options for querying digital information over the Internet.\nThe Jalisco Regional Museum (formerly the seminary of San Jos\u00e9) was built at the beginning of the 18th century to be the Seminario Conciliar de San Jos\u00e9. From 1861 to 1914, it housed a school called Liceo de Varones. In 1918, it became the Museum of Fine Arts. In 1976, it was completely remodeled for its present use. The museum displays its permanent collection in 16 halls, 15 of which are dedicated to Paleontology, Pre-History, and Archeology. One of the prized exhibits is a complete mammoth skeleton. The other two halls are dedicated to painting and history. The painting collection includes works by Juan Correa, Crist\u00f3bal de Villalpando and Jos\u00e9 de Ibarra.\nArchitecture.\nThe style of architecture prevalent in Europe during the founding of Guadalajara is paralleled in the city's colonial buildings. The Metropolitan Cathedral and Teatro Degollado are the purest examples of neoclassical architecture. The historical center hosts religious and civil colonial buildings, which are noted for their architectural and historical significance and are a rich mix of styles that are rooted in indigenous cultural contributions (mainly from Ute origin), incorporated in the Mozarabic and castizo, and later in modern European influences (mainly French and Italian) and American (specifically, from the United States).\nGuadalajara's historical center has an assortment of museums, theaters, galleries, libraries, auditoriums and concert halls, particular mention may be made to Former Hospice Caba\u00f1as (which dates from the 18th century), the Teatro Degollado (considered the oldest opera house in Mexico), the Teatro Galer\u00edas and the Teatro Diana. The Former Hocpice Caba\u00f1as, which is home to some of the paintings (murals and easel) by Jos\u00e9 Clemente Orozco, was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1997. Among the many notable structures is the International Headquarters Temple of in Colonia Hermosa Provincia, which is the largest in Latin America.\nDuring the Porfiriato the French style invaded the city because of the passion of former president Porfirio D\u00edaz in the trends of French style, also Italian architects were responsible for shaping the Gothic structures that were built in the city. The passage of time reflected different trends from the baroque to churrigueresque, Gothic and neoclassical pure.\nThe French-inspired \"Lafayette\" neighborhood has many fine examples of early 20th-century residences that were later converted into boutiques and restaurants.\nEven the architectural lines typical of the decades of the 1940s, 1950s and 1960s the Art Deco and bold lines of postmodern architects of the time. Architectural styles found in the city include Baroque, Viceregal, Neoclassical, Modern, Eclectic, Art Deco and Neo-Gothic.\nThe modern architecture of Guadalajara has numerous figures of different architectural production from the neo-regionalism to the primitiveness of the 1960s, and the brutalism of the 1970s. Some of these architects are: Rafael Urz\u00faa, Luis Barrag\u00e1n, Ignacio D\u00edaz Morales, Pedro Castellanos, Erich Coufal Kieswetter, Julio de la Pe\u00f1a, Eduardo Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez Valencia, F\u00e9lix Aceves Ortega.\nFestivals.\nGuadalajara is also known for several large cultural festivals. The International Film Festival of Guadalajara is a yearly event which happens in March. It mostly focuses on Mexican and Latin American films; however, films from all over the world are shown. The event is sponsored by the Universidad de Guadalajara, CONACULTA, the Instituto Mexicano de Cinematograph\u00eda as well as the governments of the cities of Guadalajara and Zapopan. The 2009 festival had over 200 films shown in more than 16 theaters and open-air forums, such as the inflatable screens set up in places such as Chapultepec, La Rambla Catalu\u00f1a, and La Minerva. In that year, the event gave out awards totaling US$500,000. The event attracts names such as Mexican director Guillermo del Toro, Greek director Constantin Costa-Gavras, Spanish actor Antonio Banderas and U.S. actor Edward James Olmos.\nThe Guadalajara International Book Fair is the largest Spanish-language book fair in the world, held each year over nine days at the Expo Guadalajara. Over 300 publishing firms from 35 countries regularly attend, demonstrating the most recent productions in books, videos and new communications technologies. The event awards prizes such as the Premio FIL for literature, the Premio de Literatura Sor Juana In\u00e9s de la Cruz, also for literature, and the Reconocimento al M\u00e9rito Editorial for publishing houses. There is an extensive exposition of books and other materials in Spanish, Portuguese and English, covering academia, culture, the arts and more for sale. More than 350,000 people attend from Mexico and abroad. In 2009, Nobel prize winner Orhan Pamuk, German children's author Cornelia Funke and Peruvian writer Mario Vargas Llosa participated with about 500 other authors present. Activities include book presentations, academic talks, forums, and events for children.\nThe Danza de los Tastoanes is an event hosted annually on July 25 at the Municipal President's building, where the folklore dancers perform one of the oldest traditional dances and combat battle performance to honor the combats against the Spanish.\nThe Festival Cultural de Mayo (May Cultural Festival) began in 1988. In 2009, the event celebrated the 400th anniversary of relations between Mexico and Japan, with many performances and exhibitions relation to Japanese culture. The 2009 festival featured 358 artists in 118 activities. Each year a different country is \"invited.\" Past guests have been Germany (2008), Mexico (2007), Spain (2006) and Austria (2005). France is the 2013 guest.\nThe Expo Ganadera is an event hosted annually in the month of October where people from all over the country attend to display the best examples of the breed and their quality that is produced in Jalisco. The event also works to promote technological advances in agriculture. The event also has separate sections for the authentic Mexican cuisine, exhibitions of livestock, charreria, and other competitions that display the Jalisco traditions.\nNotable festivals include:\nLandmarks.\nThe historic downtown of Guadalajara is the oldest section of the city, where it was founded and where the oldest buildings are. It centers on Paseo Morelos/Paseo Hospicio from the Plaza de Armas, where the seats of ecclesiastical and secular power are, east toward the Plaza de los Mariachis and the Former Hospice Caba\u00f1as. The Plaza de Armas is a rectangular plaza with gardens, ironwork benches and an ironwork kiosk which was made in Paris in the 19th century.\nWithin Guadalajara's historic downtown, there are many squares and public parks: Morelos Park, Mariachis Square, Founders Square, Tapat\u00eda Square, Agave Square, Parque Revolucion, Sanctuary Garden, Arms Square, Plaza de la Liberaci\u00f3n, Guadalajara Square and the Jalisco Famous People Roundabout, the last four of which surround the cathedral to form a Latin Cross.\nConstruction began on the Metropolitan Cathedral in 1558 and the church was consecrated in 1616. Its two towers were built in the 19th century after an earthquake destroyed the originals. They are considered one of the city's symbols. The architecture is a mix of Gothic, Baroque, Moorish and Neoclassical. The interior has three naves and eleven side altars, covered by a roof supported by 30 Doric columns.\nThe Jalisco Famous People Roundabout (Rotonda de los Hombres Ilustres) is a monument made of quarried stone, built in 1952 to honor the memory of distinguished people from Jalisco. A circular structure of 17 columns surrounds 98 urns containing the remains of those honored. Across the street is the municipal palace which was built in 1952. It has four fa\u00e7ades of quarried stone. It is mostly of Neoclassical design with elements such as courtyards, entrances, and columns that imitate the older structures of the city.\nThe Palace of the State Government is in Churrigueresque and Neoclassical styles and was begun in the 17th century and finished in 1774. The interior was completely remodeled after an explosion in 1859. This building contains murals by Jos\u00e9 Clemente Orozco, a native of Jalisco, including \"Lucha Social\", \"Circo Pol\u00edtico\", \"Las Fuerzas Ocultas\", and \"Hidalgo\", which depicts Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla with his arm raised above his head in anger at the government and the church.\nThe cathedral is bordered to the east by the Plaza de la Liberaci\u00f3n (Freedom Square), nicknamed the Two Cups Square (Plaza de las Dos Copas), referring to the two fountains on the east and west sides. Facing this square is the Degollado Theater (Teatro Degollado). It was built in the mid-nineteenth century in Neoclassical design. The main portal has a pediment with a scene in relief called \"Apollo and the Muses\" sculpted in marble by Benito Casta\u00f1eda. The interior vaulted ceiling is painted with a fresco by Jacobo G\u00e1lvez and Gerardo Su\u00e1rez which depicts a scene from the \"Divine Comedy\". Behind the theater is another square with a fountain called the Founders Fountain (Fuente de los Fundadores). The square is in the exact spot where the city was founded and contains a sculpture depicting Crist\u00f3bal de O\u00f1ate at the event.\nBetween the Cathedral and the Hospice is the large Plaza Tapat\u00eda, which covers . Its centerpiece is \"Inmolaci\u00f3n de Quetzalc\u00f3atl\". Southeast of this square is the Mercado Libertad, also called the Mercado de San Juan de Dios, one of the largest traditional markets in Mexico. The Temple of San Juan de Dios, a Baroque church built in the 17th century, is next to the market.\nAt the far east end is the Plaza de los Mariachis and the Former Hospice Caba\u00f1as. The Plaza de los Mariachis is faced by restaurants where one can hear live mariachis play, especially at night. The Caba\u00f1s Former Hospice extends along the entire east side of the Plaza. This building was constructed by Manuel Tols\u00e1 beginning in 1805 under orders of Carlos III. It was inaugurated and began its function as an orphanage in 1810, in spite of the fact that it would not be finished until 1845. It was named after Bishop Ruiz de Caba\u00f1as y Crespo. The fa\u00e7ade is Neoclassical and its main entrance is topped by a triangular pediment. Today, it is the home of the Instituto Cultural Caba\u00f1as (Caba\u00f1as Cultural Institute) and its main attraction is the murals by Jos\u00e9 Clemente Orozco, which cover the main entrance hall. Among these murals is \"Hombre del Fuego\" (Man of Fire), considered to be one of Orozco's finest works.\nOff this east\u2013west axis are other significant constructions. The Legislative Place is Neoclassical and was originally built in the 18th century. It was reconstructed in 1982. The Palace of Justice was finished in 1897. The Old University Building was a Jesuit college named Santo Tom\u00e1s de Aquino. It was founded in 1591. It became the second Mexican University in 1792. Its main portal is of yellow stone. The Casa de los Perros (House of the Dogs) was constructed in 1896 in Neoclassical design. On Avenida Juarez is the Sanctuary of Nuestra Se\u00f1ora del Carmen which was founded between 1687 and 1690 and remodeled completely in 1830. It retains its original coat of arms of the Carmelite Order as well as sculptures of the prophets Elijah and Elisha. Adjoining it is what is left of the Carmelite monastery, which was one of the richest in New Spain.\nMusic.\nMariachi music is strongly associated with Guadalajara both in Mexico and abroad even though the musical style originated in the nearby town of Cocula, Jalisco. The connection between the city and mariachi began in 1907 when an eight-piece mariachi band and four dancers from the city performed on stage at the president's residence for both Porfirio D\u00edaz and the Secretary of State of the United States. This made the music a symbol of west Mexico, and after the migration of many people from the Guadalajara area to Mexico City (mostly settling near Plaza Garibaldi), it then became a symbol of Mexican identity as well.\nGuadalajara hosts the Festival of Mariachi and Charreria, which began in 1994. It attracts people in the fields of art, culture and politics from Mexico and abroad. Regularly the best mariachis in Mexico participate, such as Mariachi Vargas, Mariachi de Am\u00e9rica and Mariachi los Camperos de Nati Cano. Mariachi bands from all over the world participate, coming from countries such as Venezuela, Cuba, Belgium, Chile, France, Australia, Slovak Republic, Canada and the United States.\nThe events of this festival take place in venues all over the metropolitan area, and include a parade with floats. In August 2009, 542 mariachi musicians played together for a little over ten minutes to break the world record for largest mariachi group. The musicians played various songs ending with two classic Mexican songs \"Cielito Lindo\" and \"Guadalajara.\" The feat was performed during the XVI Encuentro Internacional del Mariachi y la Charreria. The prior record was 520 musicians in 2007 in San Antonio, Texas.\nIn the historic center of the city is the Plaza de los Mariachis, named such as many groups play here. The plaza was renovated for the 2011 Pan American Games in anticipation of the crowds visiting. Over 750 mariachi musicians play traditional melodies on the plaza, and along with the restaurants and other businesses, the plaza supports more than 830 families.\nA recent innovation has been the fusion of mariachi melodies and instruments with rock and roll performed by rock musicians in the Guadalajara area. An album collecting a number of these melodies was produced called \"Mariachi Rock-O.\" There are plans to take these bands on tour in Mexico, the United States and Europe.\nThe city is also host to several dance and ballet companies such as the Chamber Ballet of Jalisco, the Folkloric Ballet of the University of Guadalajara, and the University of Guadalajara Contemporary Ballet.\nThe city is home to a renowned symphony orchestra. The Orquesta Filarm\u00f3nica de Jalisco (Jalisco Philharmonic Orchestra) was founded by Jos\u00e9 Rol\u00f3n in 1915. It held concerts from that time until 1924, when state funding was lost. However, the musicians kept playing to keep the orchestra alive. This eventually caught the attention of authorities and funding was restated in 1939. Private funding started in the 1940s and in 1950, an organization called Conciertos Guadalajara A. C. was formed to continue fundraising for the orchestra. In 1971, the orchestra became affiliated with the Department of Fine Arts of the State of Jalisco. The current name was adopted in 1988/ International soloists such as Paul Badura-Skoda, Claudio Arrau, J\u00f6rg Demus, Henryck Szeryng, Nicanor Zabaleta, Pl\u00e1cido Domingo, Kurt Rydl and Alfred Brendel have performed with the organization. Today the orchestra is under the direction of Marco Parisotto.\nCuisine.\nAs in the rest of Mexico, food in Guadalajara is a mix of pre-Hispanic and Spanish influences. Typical Mexican dishes, such as pozole, tamales, sopes, enchiladas, tacos, menudo (soup), carne en su jugo and frijoles charros are popular.\nOne dish specific to Guadalajara is the \"torta ahogada.\" It consists of a salted bun or roll (typically birote) smeared with refried beans, with fried pork cut into pieces \u2014 also known as \"carnitas\" \u2014 all in tomato sauce seasoned with spices. It is eaten with onions reduced in lemon and hot sauce. Accompanying drinks can include tejuino, which is made with a base of sourdough corn accompanied by lemon ice cream, or tepache, which is made from the bark of fermented pineapple.\nAnother typical meal of Guadalajara and the entire state of Jalisco is the \"birria\", which is usually made with either pork, beef, or goat. Handcrafted birria is made in a special oven, which can be underground and covered with maguey leaves; the meat can be mixed with a tomato broth and spices, or consumed separately. The traditional way of preparing birria is to pit roast the meat and spices wrapped in maguey leaves. It is served in bowls with minced onion, limes and tortillas.\nAnother typical dish of the tapat\u00eda kitchen is the \"carne en su jugo\" This dish consists of a beef broth with beans from the pot and is accompanied by bacon, coriander, onion, and radish (sliced or whole). The dessert that is considered as a typical tapat\u00edo is the jericalla.\nWhen the Spanish conquistadors arrived in the Aztec empire, a few religious ceremonies included eating pozole made with hominy and human flesh. This was the first type of pozole mentioned in Spanish writing, as a ritual dish eaten only by select priests and noblemen. The meat from the thighs of slain enemy warriors was used. The Franciscan missionaries ended this custom when they banned Aztec religious ceremonies. The pozole in the local common cuisine was related to the ritual dish, but prepared with turkey meat, and later pork, not with human flesh.\nOther dishes that are popular here include pozole, a soup prepared with hominy, pork or chicken, topped with cabbage, radishes, minced onions, and other condiments; pipi\u00e1n, which is a sauce prepared with peanuts, squash and sesame seed, and bi\u00f3nico, a local dessert.\nJericallas are a typical Guadalajara dessert that is similar to flan, that was created to give children proper nutrients while being delicious. It is made with eggs, milk, sugar, vanilla, and cinnamon, and baked in the oven where it is broiled to the point that a burnt layer is produced. The burnt layer at the surface is what makes this dessert special and delicious.\nOne of the drinks that is popular in Guadalajara is Tejuino, a refreshing drink that contains a corn fermented base with sugarcane, lime, salt and chili powder.\nThe city hosts the Feria Internacional Gastronom\u00eda (International Gastronomy Fair) each year in September showcasing Mexican and international cuisines. Many restaurants, bars, bakeries and caf\u00e9s participate as well as producers of beer, wine and tequila.\nSports.\nGuadalajara is home to four professional football teams; Guadalajara, also known as \"Chivas\", Atlas, C.D. Oro and Universidad de Guadalajara. Guadalajara is the most followed club in the country, They have won the Mexican Primera Divisi\u00f3n a total of 12 times, and have won the Copa MX four times. In 2017 Chivas became the first team in Mexican football history to win a Double (a league and cup title) in a single season on two different occasions and their first since the 1969\u201370 season. Chivas went on to win the 2018 CONCACAF Champions League final against Major League Soccer side Toronto FC, the second time they have won the tournament. Chivas won the first ever CONCACAF Champions League and are the only Guadalajara-based football team to win the tournament. Atlas also plays in the Mexican Primera Divisi\u00f3n. They are known in the country as 'The academy', hence they have provided Mexico's finest football players, among them: Rafael M\u00e1rquez, Oswaldo S\u00e1nchez, P\u00e1vel Pardo, Andr\u00e9s Guardado, and the Mexican national team's former top scorer Jared Borgetti. Atlas also won several championships in amateur tournaments, and the first championship for a Guadalajaran team in 1951. They won the first division championship again in 2021. Estudiantes was associated with the Universidad Aut\u00f3noma de Guadalajara A.C. It played in the Primera Divisi\u00f3n, with home games in the \"Estadio 3 de Marzo\" (March 3 Stadium, for the university's 1935 date of founding). They've won also a single Championship back in 1994 as they defeated Santos. The team moved to Zacatecas and became the Mineros de Zacatecas in May 2014.\nStarting in October 2014, Guadalajara rejoined the Liga Mexicana del Pac\u00edfico baseball tournament with the Charros de Jalisco franchise in play at the Athletic Stadium. Charreada, the Mexican form of rodeo and closely tied to mariachi music, is popular here. The biggest place for Charreada competitions, the VFG Arena, is located near the Guadalajara Airport founded by singer Vicente Fern\u00e1ndez. Every September 15, charros make a parade in the downtown streets to celebrate the Charro and Mariachi Day.\nGuadalajara hosted the 2011 Pan American Games. Since winning the bid to host the Games, the city had been undergoing extensive renovations. The games brought in more than 5,000 athletes from approximately 42 countries from the Americas and the Caribbean. Sports included aquatics, football, racquetball, and 27 more, with six others being considered. COPAG (the Organizing Committee for the Pan American Games Guadalajara 2011) had a total budget of US$250 million with the aim of updating the city's sports and general infrastructure. The center of the city was repaved and new hotels were constructed for the approximately 22,000 rooms that were needed in 2011. The new bus rapid transit (BRT) system, Macrob\u00fas, was launched in March and runs along Avenida Independencia. The Pan-American village was built around the Bajio Zone. After the Games, the buildings will be used for housing. There are already 13 existing venues in Guadalajara that the games will use, including the Jalisco Stadium, UAG 3 de Marzo Stadium, and the UAG Gymnasium. Eleven new sporting facilities were created for the event. Other works included a second terminal in the airport, a highway to Puerto Vallarta and a bypass for the southern part of the city.\nLorena Ochoa, a now-retired former #1 female golfer, Sergio P\u00e9rez, a former Formula One driver, and Javier \"Chicharito\" Hern\u00e1ndez, a forward who currently plays for LA Galaxy and the Mexico national team were also born in the city. Additionally, Sa\u00fal \u201cCanelo\u201d \u00c1lvarez, a world champion boxer in four weight classes and two-time undisputed super middleweight champion, was born in and fights out of Guadalajara. \nThe city hosted the 2021 WTA Finals, the first time the tournament was played in Latin America.\nThe city will be one of three cities in Mexico to host matches during the 2026 FIFA World Cup.\n\"Tapat\u00edo\".\n (used as in male gender) is a Mexican colloquial term which refers to someone born in the state of . Tapat\u00eda is the female gender equivalent. Tapat\u00edo/Tapat\u00eda is also used as an adjective for anything associated with or anything of the state of . The word derives from the Nahuatl word , the name of a monetary unit in pre-Columbian times which became most closely associated with the region which today is Guadalajara.\nGovernment.\nAs the capital of the state, the city is the seat of the state's government. As a result, state politics have a heavy influence on local decision-making and vice versa. Historically, the mayorship of the city has been a common leaping platform for the state governorship. Additionally, because of the sheer size of the Guadalajara Metropolitan Area vis-\u00e0-vis the rest of the state, the city's urban agglomeration\u2014largely dominated and coordinated by the Guadalajara city council\u2014captures 12 of the 20 seats in the state legislature allocated by the district.\nAll three branches of the state government are concentrated around the historic city center, with the Palace of Government, the seat of the state executive, immediately southeast of the cathedral. North, across the Freedom Square (Plaza de la Liberaci\u00f3n), is the State Legislature Building, and immediately east of the latter is the Supreme Tribunal of State Justice.\nLike other municipalities in Mexico, Guadalajara is governed by a municipal president, who exercises executive power for three consecutive years. This office is currently occupied by Enrique Alfaro (Movimiento Ciudadano).\nThe legislature has the cabildo, formed by the form chosen by the candidate for mayor, made up of aldermen, who are not elected by the people by direct or indirect voting, but the return happens automatically if the mayor wins.\nThe municipality is divided into five electoral districts for the purpose of election of representatives of the city in the federal legislature. These districts are the VIII, IX, XI, XIII, and XIV of the state of Jalisco.\nThe city and the municipality of Guadalajara are essentially co extensive with over 99% of the municipality living within the city limits and nearly all of the municipality urbanized. Urbanization centered on the city spreads out over seven other municipalities; of Zapopan, Tlaquepaque, Tonal\u00e1, Tlajomulco, El Salto, Ixtlahuac\u00e1n de los Membrillos, and Juanacatl\u00e1n.\nThese areas form the \"Guadalajara Metropolitan Area\" (Zona Metropolitana de Guadalajara in Spanish), which is the most populous in the state of Jalisco and the third most populous in the country after the Mexico City Metropolitan area. This metropolitan area had a population of 4,298,715 in 2008.\nEducation.\nGuadalajara is an important hub for higher education in both Mexico and Latin America, as the home to numerous nationally and internationally ranked universities and research centers.\nThe most important is the University of Guadalajara, which was established on October 12, 1791, by royal decree. The entity underwent a number of reorganizations since then, but the modern university as it exists today was established in 1925, when the governor of Jalisco convened professors, students and others to re-establish the university. These precepts were organized into a law called the Organic Law (Ley Org\u00e1nica). It was ranked fifth among the best Mexican universities in 2012.\nGuadalajara is home to (UAG), which was founded in 1935 and is the oldest private university in Mexico, and Universidad del Valle de Atemajac (UNIVA), and the Western Institute of Technology and Higher Education.\nThe city hosts campuses of several private schools, including:\nIn addition, the city hosts numerous international schools, including:\nTransportation.\nGuadalajara is well connected by a number of modern highways. These include Fed 15D, which connects the city northwestward to Nogales, Sonora, via Tepic, Nayarit and eastwards to Mexico City via Morelia; Fed 80D which runs northeast toward Aguascalientes; and Fed 54D which runs southward to the coast via Colima. The city's well-connected transportation infrastructure allows easy access to Mexico City, to the southeast, and to the major beach resorts of Manzanillo, Mazatl\u00e1n and Puerto Vallarta to the southwest, northwest, and west, respectively.\nThe Guadalajara International Airport, also known as Guadalajara International Airport (ICAO code: MMGL) opened in 1966. It is located south of downtown Guadalajara, and it was built in the city of Tlajomulco, near Chapala. The airport is the third most active in the country (after Mexico City and Canc\u00fan) with direct flights to many Mexican and American cities.\nWithin the city itself, there are many forms of public transportation. The Guadalajara light rail system, named SITEUR (Sistema de Tren El\u00e9ctrico Urbano), Spanish for Urban Electrical Train System, provides rapid transit service within Guadalajara and the neighboring municipalities of Zapopan and Tlaquepaque. It consists of 3 lines: line 1, running from north to south, with 19 stations, line 2, running from downtown to the east, with 10 stations and line 3. The trains are electric and have a top speed of . The 48 articulated cars currently in service were built in Mexico by Concarril/Bombardier. Construction on a third line began in 2014 and concluded in 2020. Line 3 runs from Zapopan, in the northwest, to Tlaquepaque and Tonal\u00e1, in the southeast, via the city center.\nThe Guadalajara Macrob\u00fas (also known as \"Mi Macro\") is a public transportation system based on the concept of bus rapid transit, where each bus has a single route and boarding station. Phase I of the Macrob\u00fas project opened in 2009 with a corridor following Calzada Independencia and serving 27 stations. Mi Macro Perif\u00e9rico is the newest line of the Guadalajara Macrob\u00fas system, running 41.6 kilometers along the Anillo Perif\u00e9rico, connecting with most transportation systems in the city. A new line of Mi Macro is expected to run along Carretera a Chapala, connecting with the Guadalajara International Airport.\nThe Guadalajara trolleybus system has been operating since the 1970s, along with many city buses run by private companies and a bustling network of pedestrianized streets.\nMi Bici P\u00fablica, PBSC Urban Solutions-based public bike share system, was launched in 2014. In 2016, the city implemented 242 docking stations and 2116 bikes. As of September 2018 Mi Bici has 19,664 annually subscribed users.\nIn Guadalajara, a person spends an average of 82 minutes per weekday commuting with public transportation. 23% of public transit riders, ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 15 min, while 22% of riders wait for an average of over 20 minutes each day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 8\u00a0km, and 16% travel for over 12\u00a0km in a single direction.\nInternational relations.\nDiplomatic missions.\nGuadalajara hosts the presence of numerous diplomatic missions, as well as numerous honorary consulates:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nGuadalajara is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDomestic cooperation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73210", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73210", "title": "Military of Kiribatiy", "text": ""}
{"id": "73211", "revid": "50655340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73211", "title": "1979 United Kingdom general election", "text": "The 1979 United Kingdom general election was held on Thursday 3 May 1979 to elect 635 members to the House of Commons. The election was held following the defeat of the Labour government in a no-confidence motion on 28 March 1979, six months before the Parliament was due for dissolution in October 1979.\nThe Conservative Party, led by Margaret Thatcher, ousted the incumbent Labour government of Prime Minister James Callaghan, gaining a parliamentary majority of 43 seats. The election was the first of four consecutive election victories for the Conservative Party, and Thatcher became the United Kingdom's and Europe's first elected female head of government, marking the beginning of 18 years in government for the Conservatives and 18 years in opposition for Labour.\nUnusually, the date chosen coincided with the 1979 local elections. The local government results provided some source of comfort to the Labour Party, who recovered some lost ground from local election reversals in previous years, despite losing the general election. The parish council elections were pushed back a few weeks.\nThe previous parliamentary term had begun in October 1974, when Harold Wilson led Labour to a majority of three seats, seven months after forming a minority government following a hung parliament and the failure of Edward Heath's Conservative government to form a coalition with the Liberals. Wilson had previously led the party in government from October 1964 to June 1970, and had served as party leader since February 1963.\nHowever, after just two years back in Downing Street, he had resigned as prime minister, being succeeded by James Callaghan; and within a further year the government's narrow parliamentary majority had gone. Callaghan made agreements with the Liberals and later the Ulster Unionists, as well as the Scottish and Welsh nationalists, in order to remain in power. The Lib-Lab pact lasted until July 1978.\nHowever, on 28 March 1979, following the defeat of the Scottish devolution referendum, Thatcher tabled a motion of no confidence in Callaghan's Labour government, which was passed by just one vote (311 to 310), triggering a general election six months before the end of the government's term. It was the first government to lose a motion of no-confidence in the House of Commons since the first Labour government led by Ramsay MacDonald in October 1924.\nThe Labour campaign was hampered by recent memories of a series of industrial disputes and strikes during the winter of 1978\u201379, known as the Winter of Discontent, and the party focused its campaign on support for the National Health Service and full employment. After intense media speculation that a general election would be held before the end of 1978, Callaghan had announced early in the autumn of that year that a general election would not take place that year, having received private polling data which suggested a parliamentary majority was unlikely.\nThe Conservative campaign employed the advertising agency Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, and pledged to control inflation as well as curbing the power of the trade unions. The Conservatives also ran their campaign on the theme that \"Labour Isn't Working\" (unemployment reached a 40-year high of 1.5 million during 1978). The Liberal Party was damaged by allegations that Jeremy Thorpe, its former leader, had been involved in a homosexual affair and had conspired to murder his former lover. The Liberals were now being led by David Steel, meaning that all three major parties entered the election with a new leader.\nThe election saw a 5.2% swing from Labour to the Conservatives, the largest swing since the 1945 election, which Clement Attlee won for Labour. Margaret Thatcher became prime minister, and Callaghan was replaced as Labour leader by Michael Foot in 1980. The results of the election were broadcast live on the BBC, and presented by David Dimbleby and Robin Day, with Robert McKenzie on the \"Swingometer\", and further analysis provided by David Butler. It was the first general election to feature Rick Wakeman's song \"Arthur\" during the BBC's coverage. On ITV, the election broadcast was hosted by Alastair Burnet, Martyn Lewis, Peter Snow and Leonard Parkin.\nBecause of the anaemic economic and social backdrop in this election, it presaged the 1980 United States presidential election 18 months later in which, in a situation with some parallels, incumbent US President Jimmy Carter was likewise defeated by Republican challenger Ronald Reagan, an advocate of similar socioeconomic policies to those of Margaret Thatcher's Britain.\nFuture Prime Minister John Major, who went on to succeed Thatcher in November 1990, entered Parliament at this election, retaining the Huntingdonshire seat in Cambridgeshire for the Conservatives. Prominent MPs Jeremy Thorpe, Shirley Williams and Barbara Castle were among the members of parliament who retired or lost their seats.\nAs of 2025, this is the earliest British election from which a major party leader (Steel) is still alive.\nTimeline.\nAfter suffering a vote of no confidence on 28 March 1979, Prime Minister James Callaghan was forced to announce that he would request a dissolution of Parliament to bring about a general election. The key dates were as follows:\nBackground.\nCallaghan succeeded Harold Wilson as the Labour prime minister after the latter's surprise resignation in April 1976. By March 1977, Labour had become a minority government after two by-election defeats cost them the three-seat majority they had won in October 1974, and from March 1977 to August 1978 Callaghan governed by an agreement with the Liberal Party through the Lib\u2013Lab pact. Callaghan had considered calling an election in the autumn of 1978, but ultimately decided that imminent tax cuts, and a possible economic upturn in 1979, could favour his party at the polls and delayed the election until the following year. Although published opinion polls suggested that he might win, private polls commissioned by the Labour Party from MORI had suggested the two main parties had much the same level of support.\nHowever, events would soon overtake the Labour government and prove Callaghan's decision to delay an election to be a costly mistake. A series of industrial disputes in the winter of 1978\u201379, dubbed the \"Winter of Discontent\", led to widespread strikes across the country and seriously hurt Labour's standings in the polls while boosting support for the Conservative opposition. When the Scottish National Party (SNP) withdrew support for the Scotland Act 1978, a vote of no confidence was held and passed by one vote on 28 March 1979, forcing Callaghan to call a general election. As the previous election had been held in October 1974, Labour could have held on until the autumn of 1979 if it had not been for the lost confidence vote.\nMargaret Thatcher had won her party's 1975 leadership election over former leader Edward Heath, taking over the leadership of the party in February 1975, four months after the party's failure to win the October 1974 election. Heath had led the party for a decade but lost three of the four elections he contested.\nDavid Steel had replaced Jeremy Thorpe as leader of the Liberal Party in 1976, after allegations of homosexuality and conspiracy to murder his former lover forced Thorpe to resign. The Thorpe affair led to a fall in the Liberal vote, after what had been thought to be a breakthrough in the February 1974 election.\nCampaign.\nThis was the first election since 1959 to feature three new leaders for the main political parties. The three main parties all advocated cutting income tax. Labour and the Conservatives did not specify the exact thresholds of income tax they would implement but the Liberals did, claiming they would have income tax starting at 20% with a top rate of 50%.\nWithout explicitly mentioning Thatcher's sex, Callaghan was (as Christian Caryl later wrote) \"a master at sardonically implying that whatever the leader of the opposition said was made even sillier by the fact that it was said by a woman\". Thatcher used the tactics that had defeated her other male opponents: constantly studying, sleeping only a few hours a night, and exploiting her femininity to appear as someone who understood housewives' household budgets.\nA proposal for the two main party leaders to participate in two televised debates was put forward by former Labour MP turned broadcaster Brian Walden. These would have been produced by LWT and were planned to be shown on ITV on 22 &amp; 29 April 1979. While James Callaghan immediately accepted Walden's proposal, Margaret Thatcher decided to \"wait a few days before replying\" to the invitation. According to \"The Glasgow Herald,\" Some of Mrs Thatcher's advisers were concerned that she had more to lose from such debates, fearing that it would lead to a \"presidential-style 'Her or me' campaign\" which would see policy issues become of less importance. However it was also reported that the danger of declining was that Mrs Thatcher would be charged by Labour as being \"scared\" to face the Prime Minister. At the insistence of the Liberals, their leader David Steel was also invited by LWT to take part, and accepted the offer. However, Mrs Thatcher declined the offer to take part, saying that the election was for a government, not a president, which meant that the debates did not go ahead.\nLabour.\nThe Labour campaign reiterated their support for the National Health Service and full employment and focused on the damage they believed the Conservatives would do to the country. In an early campaign broadcast, Callaghan asked: \"The question you will have to consider is whether we risk tearing everything up by the roots.\" Towards the end of Labour's campaign, Callaghan claimed a Conservative government \"would sit back and just allow firms to go bankrupt and jobs to be lost in the middle of a world recession\" and that the Conservatives were \"too big a gamble to take\".\nThe Labour Party manifesto, \"The Labour way is the better way\", was issued on 6 April. Callaghan presented five priorities:\nConservatives.\nThe Conservatives campaigned on economic issues, pledging to control inflation and to reduce the increasing power of the trade unions who supported mass strikes. They also employed the advertising agency Saatchi &amp; Saatchi who had created the \"Labour Isn't Working\" poster.\nThe Conservative campaign was focused on gaining support from traditional Labour voters who had never voted Conservative before, first-time voters, and people who had voted Liberal in 1974. Thatcher's advisers, Gordon Reece and Timothy Bell, co-ordinated their presentation with the editor of \"The Sun\", Larry Lamb. \"The Sun\" printed a series of articles by disillusioned former Labour ministers (Reg Prentice, Richard Marsh, Lord George-Brown, Alfred Robens and Lord Chalfont) detailing why they had switched their support to Thatcher. She explicitly asked Labour voters for their support when she launched her campaign in Cardiff, claiming that Labour was now extreme. Choosing to start her campaign in the strongly Labour-supporting city was part of Thatcher's strategy of appealing to skilled manual workers (NRS social group C2), whom both parties had previously seen as certain Labour voters; she thought that many of these would support her promises to reduce unions' power and enact the Right to Buy their homes. On 29 April the Conservatives held a massive rally in London for Conservative trade unionists. The \"Glasgow Herald\" called it an \"astonishing rally\" which it likened to \"the razza-matazz of an American presidential-style jamboree\" and stated \"Nothing quite like it has been seen before in a General Election in Britain.\" Several celebrities including Lulu, Molly Weir and Nigel Davenport appeared to support Thatcher and the Conservatives, while others like Eric Sykes and Les Dawson sent messages of support. It was also announced former Labour MP Eddie Griffiths was backing the Conservatives against his former party.\nAn analysis of the election result showed that the Conservatives gained an 11% swing among the skilled working class (the C2s) and a 9% swing amongst the unskilled working class (the DEs).\nThatcher's stance on immigration in the late 1970s (following the vast immigration from Asian and African-Caribbean nations during the 1950s and 1960s) was perceived as part of a rising racist public discourse, As Leader of the Opposition, Thatcher believed that the National Front (NF) was winning over large numbers of Conservative voters with warnings against floods of immigrants. Her strategy was to undermine the NF narrative by acknowledging that many of its voters had serious concerns in need of addressing. The National Front had a relatively small following and did not win any seats in parliament.\nThatcher criticised Labour immigration policy in January 1978, with the goal of attracting voters away from the NF and to the Conservatives. Her rhetoric was followed by an increase in Conservative support at the expense of the NF. Critics on the left reacted by accusing her of pandering to racism. Sociologists Mark Mitchell and Dave Russell responded that Thatcher had been badly misinterpreted, arguing that race was never an important focus of Thatcherism. Throughout her premiership both major parties took similar positions on immigration policy, having in 1981 passed the British Nationality Act with bipartisan support. No policies aimed at restricting immigration were passed or proposed by her government, and the subject of race was never highlighted by Thatcher in any of her major speeches as prime minister. Although Thatcher had pledged to address concerns felt by NF voters including matters related to immigration and presided over a period of disaffected race relations early in her premiership, the Conservative Party under her leadership actively began reaching out to ethnic minority voters ahead of the 1983 general election.\nThe Conservative manifesto, drafted by Chris Patten and Adam Ridley and edited by Angus Maude, reflected Thatcher's views and was issued on 11 April. It promised five major policies:\nResults.\nIn the end, the overall swing of 5.2% was the largest since 1945, and gave the Conservatives a workable majority of 43 for the country's first female prime minister. The Conservative victory in 1979 also marked a change in government which would continue for 18 years, including the entire 1980s, until the Labour victory of 1997. It marked a period of political stability in the United Kingdom following four changes of government in the space of 15 years. Although the Conservatives would go on to win more seats under Thatcher in 1983 and 1987, and again under Boris Johnson in 2019, the Tories have never since matched the 43.9% of the popular vote they won in 1979. This also remains the most recent election in which the Tories won an overall majority from opposition.\nThe SNP saw a massive collapse in support, losing 9 of its 11 MPs. The Liberal Party had a disappointing election; its scandal-hit former leader Jeremy Thorpe lost his seat in North Devon to the Conservatives.\nThe National Front (NF) would record their highest ever vote in a general election with 0.6% of the popular vote. They would decline after. This was also the highest vote for a British Far-right party until 2010 when the British National Party received a higher popular vote. \n&lt;section begin=\"UK General Election 1979\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73213", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73213", "title": "Sanctuary", "text": "Sacred place\nA sanctuary, in its original meaning, is a sacred place, such as a shrine, protected by ecclesiastical immunity. By the use of such places as a haven, by extension the term has come to be used for any place of safety. This secondary use can be categorized into human sanctuary, a safe place for people, such as a political sanctuary; and non-human sanctuary, such as an animal or plant sanctuary.\nReligious sanctuary.\n\"Sanctuary\" is a word derived from the Latin , which is, like most words ending in , a container for keeping something in\u2014in this case holy things or perhaps cherished people (/). The meaning was extended to places of holiness or safety. Its origin is the principle of independence and immunity of religious orders from \"temporal\" powers.\nIn many religious buildings \"sanctuary\" has a specific meaning, covering part of the interior. \nSanctuary as area around the altar.\nIn many Western Christian traditions including Catholic, Lutheran, Methodist, and Anglican churches, the area around the altar is called the sanctuary; it is also considered holy because of the belief in the physical presence of God in the Eucharist, both during the Mass and in the church tabernacle at other times.\nIn many churches the architectural term \"chancel\" covers the same area as the sanctuary, and either term may be used. In some Protestant churches, the term \"sanctuary\" denotes the entire worship space while the term \"chancel\" refers only to the area around the communion table.\nIn many Western traditions, altar rails and sometimes steps would demarcate the sanctuary or chancel from the rest of the building. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, Eastern Catholic Churches of Syro-Malabar Church, Byzantine rite and Coptic Orthodox Churches, the sanctuary is separated from the nave (where worshippers pray) by an iconostasis, literally a wall of icons, with three doors in it. In other Oriental Orthodox traditions, a sanctuary curtain is used.\nThe terminology that applies the word \"sanctuary\" to the area around the altar does not apply to Christian churches alone: King Solomon's temple, built in about 950 BC, had a sanctuary (\"Holy of Holies\") where the Ark of the Covenant was, and the term applies to the corresponding part of any house of worship. In most modern synagogues, the main room for prayer is known as the sanctuary, to contrast it with smaller rooms dedicated to various other services and functions.\nIn synagogues there is a raised bimah in the sanctuary, from which services are conducted, which is where the ark holding the Torah may reside; some synagogues, however, have a separate bimah and ark-platform.\nSanctuary as a sacred place.\nIn Europe, Christian churches were sometimes built on land considered to be a particularly holy spot. Often these there were legends associated with these locations regarding miracles or martyrdom believed to have taken place or where a holy person was buried. Examples are St. Peter's Basilica in Rome and St. Albans Cathedral in England, which commemorate the martyrdom of Saint Peter (the first Pope) and Saint Alban (the first Christian martyr in Britain), respectively. Such locations were also often the sites of religious importance to the community before Christianity arrived.\nThe place and the church built there were considered to have been sanctified (made holy) by what happened there. In modern times, the Catholic Church has continued this practice by placing in the altar of each church, when it is consecrated for use, a box (the \"sepulcrum\") containing relics of one or more saints, usually martyrs. This relic box is removed when the church is deconsecrated as a holy space. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, the antimension on the altar serves a similar function. It is a cloth icon of Christ's body taken down from the cross, and typically has the relics of a saint sewn into it. In addition, it is signed by the parish's bishop, and represents his authorization and blessing for the Eucharist to be celebrated on that altar.\nHuman sanctuary.\nTraditions of Sanctuary.\nAlthough the word \"sanctuary\" is often traced back only as far as the Greek and Roman empires, the concept itself has likely been part of human cultures for thousands of years. The idea that persecuted persons should be given a place of refuge is ancient, perhaps even primordial, deriving itself from basic features of human altruism. In studying the concept across many cultures and times, anthropologists have found sanctuary to be a highly universal notion, one which appears in almost all major religious traditions and in a variety of diverse geographies. \"Cities of refuge\" as described by the Book of Numbers and Deuteronomy in the Old Testament, as well as the Bedouin idea of , or the \"taking of refuge\", indicate a strong tradition of sanctuary in the Middle East and Northern Africa. In the Americas, many native tribes shared similar practices, particularly in the face of invading European powers. Despite tensions between groups, many tribes still offered and received sanctuary, taking in those who had fled their tribal lands or feared persecution by the Spanish, English, and French.\nLegal sanctuary.\nSome (but not all) temples offered sanctuary to criminals or runaway slaves. When referring to prosecution of crimes, sanctuary can mean one of the following:\nChurch sanctuary.\nA sacred place, such as a church, in which fugitives formerly were immune to arrest (recognized by English law from the fourth to the seventeenth century). While the practice of churches offering sanctuary is still observed in the modern era, it no longer has any legal effect and is respected solely for the sake of tradition.\nThe term \"sanctuary\" is also used to denote the part of the church which contains the main or \"high\" altar.\nPolitical sanctuary.\nImmunity to arrest afforded by a sovereign authority. The United Nations has expanded the definition of \"political\" to include race, nationality, religion, political opinions and membership or participation in any particular social group or social activities. People seeking political sanctuary typically do so by asking a sovereign authority for asylum.\nRight of asylum.\nMany ancient peoples recognized a religious right of asylum, protecting those accused of a crime from legal action and from exile to some extent. This principle was adopted by the early Christian church, and various rules developed for what the person had to do to qualify for protection and just how much protection it was.\nBased on an account by Gregory of Tours in late 6th century France, sanctuary was already practiced, but was not all the time respected. In England, King \u00c6thelberht made the first laws regulating sanctuary in about AD\u00a0600, though Geoffrey of Monmouth in his \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" (c.\u00a01136) says that the legendary pre-Saxon king Dunvallo Molmutius (4th/5th century\u00a0BC) enacted sanctuary laws in the Molmutine Laws as recorded by Gildas (c.\u00a0500\u2013570). By Norman times, there had come to be two kinds of the sanctuary: churches licensed by the king had a broader version, while other churches had a lower level. The medieval system of asylum was abolished entirely in England by James I in 1623.\nPolitical asylum.\nDuring the Wars of the Roses of the 15th century when the Lancastrians or Yorkists would suddenly gain the upper hand by winning a battle, some adherents of the losing side might find themselves surrounded by adherents of the winning side and unable to return to their own side, so they would rush to sanctuary at the nearest church until it was safe to leave it. A prime example is Queen Elizabeth Woodville, consort of Edward IV of England.\nIn 1470, when the Lancastrians briefly restored Henry VI to the throne, Edward's queen was living in London with several young daughters. She moved with them into Westminster Abbey for sanctuary, living there in royal comfort until Edward was restored to the throne in 1471 and giving birth to their first son Edward during that time. When King Edward IV died in 1483, Elizabeth (who was highly unpopular with even the Yorkists and probably did need protection) took her five daughters and youngest son (Richard, Duke of York; Prince Edward had his own household by then) and again moved into sanctuary at Westminster Abbey. She had all the comforts of home; she brought so much furniture and so many chests that the workmen had to break holes in some of the walls to move everything in fast enough to suit her.\nIn 1917, during World War I, Russia's Allies made the controversial decision to deny political sanctuary to Tsar Nicholas II and his immediate family when he was overthrown in the February Revolution. As a result in July, 1918, Nicholas and his family were executed while confined to the Ipatiev House in Yekaterenburg.\nIn 1939, months before World War II began, 937 Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany on board the MS St. Louis met the same fate, first by Cuba\u2014their original destination\u2014and afterwards by the United States and Canada. As a result, 620 of them were forced back to Europe, where many of them died in Nazi concentration camps during the war. This incident was the subject of Gordon Thomas' and Max Morgan-Witts' 1974 novel, \"Voyage of the Damned\" and its 1976 movie adaptation.\nIn 1970, Simonas Kudirka was denied U.S. sanctuary when he attempted to defect from the then-Soviet Union by jumping from his \"mother ship\", 'Sovetskaya Litva', onto the USCGC Vigilant when it was sailing from New Bedford while Kudirka's ship was anchored at Martha's Vineyard. Kudrika was accused of stealing 3,000 roubles from Sovetskaya Litva's safe and when the U.S. State Department didn't help him, Kudrika was sent back to the Soviet Union, where he was convicted of treason and sentenced to ten years of hard labor. Because Kudirka could claim American citizenship through his mother, he was allowed to return to the United States in 1974. His plight was the subject of Algis Ruksenas' 1973 book \"Day of Shame: The Truth About The Murderous Happenings Aboard the Cutter Vigilant During the Russian-American Confrontation off Martha's Vineyard\" and the 1978 TV movie \"The Defection of Simas Kudirka\", starring Alan Arkin.\nTen years later, Ukrainian youth, Walter Polovchak, became a cause c\u00e9l\u00e8bre in the 1980s because of his request in 1980 at age 12 to remain in the United States permanently after announcing that he didn't want to return with his parents to what was then Soviet Ukraine, and was the subject of a five-year struggle between U.S. and Soviet courts over his fate, which was decided in his favor in 1985 when Walter turned 18 that October 3 and was no longer a juvenile and thus no longer required to return to the Soviet Union if he didn't want to.\nAlso in the 1980s, Estonian national and alleged Nazi war criminal, Karl Linnas, was the target of several sanctuary denials outside the United States before he was finally returned in 1987 to the then-USSR to face a highly likely death penalty for alleged war crimes that he was convicted of in 1962 (see Holocaust trials in Soviet Estonia). Linnas died of a heart attack in a Leningrad prison hospital on July 2, 1987, while waiting for a possible retrial in Gorbachev's courts, 25 years after Khrushchev's courts convicted him in absentia.\nSanctuary versus asylum.\nThe concepts of sanctuary and asylum are defined very similarly at their most basic level. Both terms involve the granting of safety or protection from some type of danger, often implied to be a persecuting, oppressive power. The divergence between these terms stems primarily from their societal associations and legal standing; while asylum understood in its political sense implies legally-binding protection on the part of a state entity, sanctuary often takes the form of moral and ethical activism that calls into question decisions made by the institutions in power.\nIn many instances, the sanctuary is not incorporated into the law but operated in defiance of it. Efforts to create a sanctuary for the persecuted or oppressed are often undertaken by organizations, religious or otherwise, who work outside of mainstream avenues to ameliorate what they see as deficiencies in the existing policy. Though these attempts to provide sanctuary have no legal standing, they can be effective in catalyzing change at community, local, and even regional levels. Sanctuary can also be integrated into these levels of government through \"Sanctuary bills\", which designate cities and sometimes states as safe spaces for immigrants deemed illegal by the federal government. These bills work to limit the cooperation of local and regional governments with the national government's efforts to enforce immigration law. In recognition of their progressiveness and boldness in the face of perceived injustice, \"Sanctuary bills\" are commonly referred to as \"activist law\".\nSanctuary in contemporary society.\nFor the last few centuries, it has become less common to invoke sanctuary as a means of protecting persecuted peoples. Yet, the 1980s saw a massive resurgence of cases as part of the U.S.-Central American sanctuary movement. This resurgence was part of a broader anti-war movement that emerged to protest U.S. foreign policy in Central America. The movement grew out of the sanctuary practices of political and religious organizations in both the United States and Central America. It was initially sparked by immigrant rights organizations in well-established Central American communities. These organizations first opposed U.S. foreign policy in Central America and then shifted towards aiding an ever-increasing number of Central Americans refugees. Working in tandem, immigrant rights organizations and churches created many new organizations that provided housing and legal services for newly arrived immigrants. These organizations also advocated for the creation of sanctuary spaces for those fleeing war and oppression in their home countries. By 1987, 440 cities in the United States had been declared \"sanctuary cities\" open to migrants from civil wars in Central America.\nThe immigrant-religious organization partnerships of the sanctuary movement remain active, providing essential services to immigrant populations. Particularly notable in recent years is their legal and advocacy work. By providing legal representation to asylum seekers who may not be able to afford it, these organizations give their clients a better chance of winning their respective cases. As of 2008, detained asylum seekers with legal representation were six times more likely to win their cases for asylum, and non-detained asylum seekers with representation were almost three times more likely to win asylum compared with those without it. The pro bono legal services provided by these organizations also work to alleviate stress on an adjudication system that is already overloaded with cases\u2014a 2014 study of the system showed that about 250 asylum officers at any one time are tasked with interviewing an average of 28,000 asylum seekers. These sanctuary-based organizations also engage in larger-scale advocacy work that allows them to reach immigrant populations beyond the communities they work in. According to a study done by the \"New Sanctuary Movement\" organization, at least 600,000 people in the United States have at least one family member in danger of deportation. Legislative and judicial advocacy work at the regional and even national level allows organizations to support this group of people by influencing policy.\nFrom the 1980s continuing into the 2000s, there also have been instances of immigrant rights organizations and churches providing \"sanctuary\" for short periods to migrants facing deportation in Germany, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland, Australia and Canada, among other nations. In 2007, Iranian refugee Shahla Valadi was granted asylum in Norway after spending seven years in church sanctuary after the initial denial of asylum. From 1983 to 2003 Canada experienced 36 sanctuary incidents. In 2016, an Icelandic church declared that they would harbor two failed asylum seekers who violated the Dublin Regulation, and police removed them for deportation, as ecclesiastical immunity has no legal standing.\nOther uses.\nWhen referring to a shelter from danger or hardship, sanctuary can mean one of the following:\nA place offering protection and safety; a shelter, typically used by displaced persons, refugees, and homeless people.\nA source of help, relief, or comfort in times of trouble typically used by victims of war and disaster.\nAn institution for the care of people, especially those with physical or mental impairments, who require organized supervision or assistance.\nA place where an individual can work safely and in a natural environment \nThe term \"sanctuary\" has further come to be applied to any space set aside for private use in which others are not supposed to intrude, such as a \"man cave\".\nNon-human sanctuary.\nAnimal sanctuary.\nAn animal sanctuary is a facility where animals are brought to live and be protected for the rest of their lives. Unlike animal shelters, sanctuaries maintain each animal until its natural death, instead of providing temporary shelter until the animal is placed with individuals or groups.\nPlant sanctuary.\nPlant sanctuaries are areas set aside to maintain functioning natural ecosystems, to act as refuges for species and to maintain ecological processes that cannot survive in most intensely managed landscapes and seascapes. Protected areas act as benchmarks against which we understand human interactions with the natural world.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73214", "revid": "40014237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73214", "title": "List of bishops of Warmia", "text": "This is a list of Bishops and Prince-Bishops of the Diocese of Warmia (, , ), which was elevated to the Archdiocese of Warmia in 1992.\nThe Bishopric was founded in 1243 as the Bishopric of Ermland, one of four bishoprics of Teutonic Prussia. In 1356 it became an Imperial Prince-Bishopric under Emperor Charles IV, and from 1512 until 1930 it was an exempt diocese. From 1947 to 1972 the episcopal see was left vacant following the expulsion of the German population and the Bishop of Ermland from Prussia. The cathedral capitular canons elected capitular vicars for the time sede vacante, recognised by the Holy See.\nIn 1972 the Holy See installed a new Polish diocese, which in 1992 was elevated to an archdiocese.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73215", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73215", "title": "Programmable logic device", "text": "Reconfigurable digital circuit element\nA programmable logic device (PLD) is an electronic component used to build reconfigurable digital circuits. Unlike digital logic constructed using discrete logic gates with fixed functions, the function of a PLD is undefined at the time of manufacture. Before the PLD can be used in a circuit it must be programmed to implement the desired function. Compared to fixed logic devices, programmable logic devices simplify the design of complex logic and may offer superior performance. Unlike for microprocessors, programming a PLD changes the connections made between the gates in the device.\nPLDs can broadly be categorised into, in increasing order of complexity, simple programmable logic devices (SPLDs), comprising programmable array logic, programmable logic array and generic array logic; complex programmable logic devices (CPLDs); and field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs).\nHistory.\nIn 1969, Motorola offered the XC157, a mask-programmed gate array with 12 gates and 30 uncommitted input/output pins.\nIn 1970, Texas Instruments developed a mask-programmable IC based on the IBM read-only associative memory or ROAM. This device, the TMS2000, was programmed by altering the metal layer during the production of the IC. The TMS2000 had up to 17 inputs and 18 outputs with 8 JK flip-flops for memory. TI coined the term \"programmable logic array\" (PLA) for this device.\nIn 1971, General Electric Company (GE) was developing a programmable logic device based on the new programmable read-only memory (PROM) technology. This experimental device improved on IBM's ROAM by allowing multilevel logic. Intel had just introduced the floating-gate UV EPROM so the researcher at GE incorporated that technology. The GE device was the first erasable PLD ever developed, predating the Altera EPLD by over a decade. GE obtained several early patents on programmable logic devices.\nIn 1973 National Semiconductor introduced a mask-programmable PLA device (DM7575) with 14 inputs and 8 outputs with no memory registers. This was more popular than the TI part but the cost of making the metal mask limited its use. The device is significant because it was the basis for the field programmable logic array produced by Signetics in 1975, the 82S100. (Intersil actually beat Signetics to market but poor yield doomed their part.)\nIn 1974 GE entered into an agreement with Monolithic Memories (MMI) to develop a mask-programmable logic device incorporating the GE innovations. The device was named \"programmable associative logic array\" or PALA. The MMI 5760 was completed in 1976 and could implement multilevel or sequential circuits of over 100 gates. The device was supported by a GE design environment where Boolean equations would be converted to mask patterns for configuring the device. The part was never brought to market.\nPLA.\nIn 1970, Texas Instruments developed a mask-programmable IC based on the IBM read-only associative memory or ROAM. This device, the TMS2000, was programmed by altering the metal layer during the production of the IC. The TMS2000 had up to 17 inputs and 18 outputs with 8 JK flip-flops for memory. TI coined the term programmable logic array for this device.\nA programmable logic array (PLA) has a programmable AND gate array, which links to a programmable OR gate array, which can then be conditionally complemented to produce an output. A PLA is similar to a ROM concept; however, a PLA does not provide full decoding of a variable and does not generate all the minterms as in a ROM.\nThe programmable logic sequencer (PLS/FPLS) is similar to a PLA, but with integral registered outputs using a number of flip-flops to allow creation of some state machines. Signetics introduced the first FPLS in 1979.\nPAL.\nPAL devices have arrays of transistor cells arranged in a \"fixed-OR, programmable-AND\" plane used to implement \"sum-of-products\" binary logic equations for each of the outputs in terms of the inputs and either synchronous or asynchronous feedback from the outputs.\nMMI introduced a breakthrough device in 1978, the programmable array logic or PAL. The architecture was simpler than that of Signetics' FPLA because it omitted the programmable OR array. This made the parts faster, smaller and cheaper. They were available in 20-pin 300-mil DIP packages, while the FPLAs came in 28-pin 600-mil packages. The PAL Handbook demystified the design process. The PALASM design software (PAL assembler) converted the engineers' Boolean equations into the fuse pattern required to program the part. The PAL devices were soon second-sourced by National Semiconductor, Texas Instruments and AMD.\nAfter MMI succeeded with the 20-pin PAL parts, AMD introduced the 24-pin 22V10 PAL with additional features. After buying out MMI (1987), AMD spun off a consolidated operation as Vantis, and that business was acquired by Lattice Semiconductor in 1999.\nGALs.\nAn improvement on the PAL was the generic array logic device, or GAL, invented by Lattice Semiconductor in 1985. This device has the same logical properties as the PAL but can be erased and reprogrammed. The GAL is very useful in the prototyping stage of a design when any bugs in the logic can be corrected by reprogramming. GALs are programmed and reprogrammed using a PAL programmer, or, in the case of chips that support it, by using the in-circuit programming technique.\nLattice GALs combine CMOS and electrically erasable (E2) floating gate technology for a high-speed, low-power logic device. A similar device called a PEEL (programmable electrically erasable logic) was introduced by the International CMOS Technology (ICT) corporation.\nSometimes GAL chips are referred as simple programmable logic device (SPLD), analogous to complex programmable logic device (CPLD) below.\nCPLDs.\nPALs and GALs are available only in small sizes, equivalent to a few hundred logic gates. For bigger logic circuits, complex PLDs or CPLDs can be used. These contain the equivalent of several PALs linked by programmable interconnections, all in one integrated circuit. CPLDs can replace thousands, or even hundreds of thousands, of logic gates.\nSome CPLDs are programmed using a PAL programmer, but this method becomes inconvenient for devices with hundreds of pins. A second method of programming is to solder the device to its printed circuit board, then feed it with a serial data stream from a personal computer. The CPLD contains a circuit that decodes the data stream and configures the CPLD to perform its specified logic function. Some manufacturers, such as Altera and Atmel (now Microchip), use JTAG to program CPLDs in-circuit from .JAM files.\nFPGAs.\nWhile PALs were being developed into GALs and CPLDs (all discussed above), a separate stream of development was happening. This type of device is based on gate array technology and is called the field-programmable gate array (FPGA). Early examples of FPGAs are the 82S100 array and 82S105 sequencer, by Signetics, introduced in the late 1970s. The 82S100 was an array of AND terms. The 82S105 also had flip-flop functions.\nFPGAs use a grid of logic gates, and once stored, the data doesn't change, similar to that of an ordinary gate array. The term \"field-programmable\" means the device is programmed by the customer, not the manufacturer. FPGAs and gate arrays are similar but gate arrays can only be configured at the factory during fabrication. \nFPGAs are usually programmed after being soldered down to the circuit board, in a manner similar to that of larger CPLDs. In most larger FPGAs, the configuration is volatile and must be re-loaded into the device whenever power is applied or different functionality is required. Configuration is typically stored in a configuration PROM, EEPROM or flash memory. EEPROM versions may be in-system programmable (typically via JTAG).\nThe difference between FPGAs and CPLDs is that FPGAs are internally based on look-up tables (LUTs), whereas CPLDs form the logic functions with sea-of-gates (e.g. sum of products). CPLDs are meant for simpler designs, while FPGAs are meant for more complex designs. In general, CPLDs are a good choice for wide combinational logic applications, whereas FPGAs are more suitable for large state machines such as microprocessors.\nEPLDs.\nUsing the same technology as EPROMs, EPLDs have a quartz window in the package that allows them to be erased on exposure to UV light.\nUsing the same technology as EEPROMs, EEPLDs can be erased electrically.\nAn erasable programmable logic device (EPLD) is an integrated circuit that comprises an array of PLDs that do not come pre-connected; the connections are programmed electrically by the user. Most GAL and FPGA devices are examples of EPLDs.\nOther variants.\nThese are microprocessor circuits that contain some fixed functions and other functions that can be altered by code running on the processor. Designing self-altering systems requires that engineers learn new methods and that new software tools be developed.\nPLDs are being sold now that contain a microprocessor with a fixed function (the so-called \"core\") surrounded by programmable logic. These devices let designers concentrate on adding new features to designs without having to worry about making the microprocessor work. Also, the fixed-function microprocessor takes less space on the chip than a part of the programmable gate array implementing the same processor, leaving more space for the programmable gate array to contain the designer's specialized circuits.\nHow PLDs retain their configuration.\nA PLD is a combination of a logic device and a memory device. The memory is used to store the pattern that was given to the chip during programming. Most of the methods for storing data in an integrated circuit have been adapted for use in PLDs. These include:\nSilicon antifuses are connections that are made by applying a voltage across a modified area of silicon inside the chip. They are called \"antifuses\" because they work in the opposite way to normal fuses, which begin life as connections until they are broken by an electric current.\nSRAM, or static RAM, is a volatile type of memory, meaning that its contents are lost each time the power is switched off. SRAM-based PLDs therefore have to be programmed every time the circuit is switched on. This is usually done automatically by another part of the circuit.\nAn EPROM memory cell is a MOSFET (metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor, or MOS transistor) that can be switched on by trapping an electric charge permanently on its gate electrode. This is done by a PAL programmer. The charge remains for many years and can only be removed by exposing the chip to strong ultraviolet light in a device called an EPROM eraser.\nFlash memory is non-volatile, retaining its contents even when the power is switched off. It is stored on floating-gate MOSFET memory cells, and can be erased and reprogrammed as required. This makes it useful in PLDs that may be reprogrammed frequently, such as PLDs used in prototypes. Flash memory is a kind of EEPROM that holds information using trapped electric charges similar to EPROM. Consequently, flash memory can hold information for years, but possibly not as many years as EPROM.\nAs of 2005, most CPLDs are electrically programmable and erasable, and non-volatile. This is because they are too small to justify the inconvenience of programming internal SRAM cells every time they start up, and EPROM cells are more expensive due to their ceramic package with a quartz window.\nPLD programming languages.\nMany PAL programming devices accept input in a standard file format, commonly referred to as 'JEDEC files'. They are analogous to software compilers. The languages used as source code for logic compilers are called hardware description languages, or HDLs.\nPALASM, ABEL and CUPL are frequently used for low-complexity devices, while Verilog and VHDL are popular higher-level description languages for more complex devices. The more limited ABEL is often used for historical reasons, but for new designs, VHDL is more popular, even for low-complexity designs.\nFor modern PLD programming languages, design flows, and tools, see FPGA and reconfigurable computing.\nPLD programming devices.\nA device programmer is used to transfer the Boolean logic pattern into the programmable device. In the early days of programmable logic, every PLD manufacturer also produced a specialized device programmer for its family of logic devices. Later, universal device programmers came onto the market that supported several logic device families from different manufacturers. Today's device programmers usually can program common PLDs (mostly PAL/GAL equivalents) from all existing manufacturers. Common file formats used to store the Boolean logic pattern (fuses) are JEDEC, Altera POF (programmable object file), or Xilinx BITstream.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73216", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73216", "title": "AG Weser", "text": "Shipbuilding company\nAktien-Gesellschaft \"Weser\" (abbreviated A.G. \"Weser\") was one of the major German shipbuilding companies, located at the Weser River in Bremen. Founded in 1872 it was finally closed in 1983. All together, A.G. \u201eWeser\" built about 1,400 ships of different types, including many warships. A.G. \u201eWeser\" was the leading company in the Deutsche Schiff- und Maschinenbau AG, a cooperation of eight German shipbuilding companies between 1926 and 1945.\nHistory.\nFounding of A.G. \"Weser\".\nIn 1843, the initial precessor to A.G Weser; \"Eisengiesserei &amp; Maschinenbau-Anstalt Waltjen und Leonhard\" was founded. This company with its premises was situated on an area called \"Stephanikirchenweide\" at the periphery of the ancient town of Bremen. It was an iron-foundry and machine factory with a wide-ranging production volume of iron-made parts as bridges, cranes, floodgates, steam boiler, steam engines etc. In 1846, Mr. Leonhard left the company and the company's name was changed to \"C. Waltjen &amp; Co\". In the same year, the first vessel was built. The first greater ship built was the 1847 the 346 GRT paddle-steamer \"Roland\", which was used as a tug-and-passenger boat. Even 50 years later, this ship was in service on the river Weser. More shipbuilding activities followed including three torpedo-boats for the Kaiserliche Marine in 1871.\nBecause of the increasing importance of the shipbuilding industry some influential Bremen merchants, bankers and politicians decided in 1872 to establish a new and greater company on shares. The production program of this new company named \"Aktien-Gesellschaft \"Weser\"\" was \"construction of ships of all kind and marine engineering\".\nThe company \"Waltjen &amp; Co\". was bought and the owner Carsten Waltjen himself became a member of the new company's board.\nThe new shipyard started shipbuilding with some smaller vessels. The first important order came from the Kaiserliche Marine when several gunboats were built. Besides these warships the construction of ships at A.G. \"Weser\" was mainly for civil use in the following years.\nDue to the growing incoming orders and the enlarged dimensions of ships, it soon became necessary to enlarge the yard facilities and mainly the slipways. In 1901, the company started to lease some terrain at the entrance to the new Bremen ports some miles downstream the Weser at the Bremen suburb \"Gr\u00f6pelingen\". Production and personnel then were gradually shifted from the old yard to the new premises. For the first four slipways and one floating dock, workshops, magazines etc. were established at the new terrain, capable to construct ships of all dimensions and categories. But when it soon became necessary to enlarge the shipyard, additional terrain was bought in the following years.\nBetween the founding of the company in 1872 and 1916, about 125 units of the so-called \"Self-powered Vessels\" were constructed on the wharf, including passenger-and-merchant ships, tug-boats etc. Besides this many small units without propulsion were built as barges, pontoons, floating docks etc. as well as four sailing ships 1875/77. For DDG Hansa of Bremen, the company built the three largest freight steamers constructed up to that time, the 8,315 GRT \"Frankenfels\", \"Schwarzenfels\" and \"Falkenfels\"; these were also the last civilian ships it delivered before World War I.\nDeschimag Period.\nAfter the First World War, A.G. \"Weser\" continued very soon in shipbuilding. In 1926, when shipbuilding became extremely difficult, A.G. \"Weser\" merged with seven other German shipyards to form Deutsche Schiff- und Maschinenbau AG (Deschimag), wherein the now named Deschimag A.G. \"Weser\" took the leading position. Most of the shipyards joining Deschimag closed down, were sold or went bankrupt in the following years. Only A.G. \"Weser\" and Seebeckwerft in Bremerhaven, which was taken over in 1928, survived.\nIn 1928-1929, the passenger-liner Bremen was put into service, built for the shipping company Norddeutscher Lloyd. It was the most famous liner ever built by A.G. \"Weser\" and one of the most famous German civilian ships. After delivery of the \"Bremen\" more than 5,000 of altogether about 12,000 coworkers of the shipyard were set free because of lack of new orders. After the last ship was delivered 1931, for about three years no ship-newbuilding followed, only some repair of ships and construction of engines and marine equipment was done. The first new launched ship was in 1933 the carrier \"Cairo\" for the company \"Norddeutscher Lloyd\". Shortly after that the situation improved with several new orders received, including an increasing amount of warships.\nNaval Shipbuilding.\nA.G. \"Weser\" was one of the great German manufacturers of warships, besides Blohm &amp; Voss, the imperial shipyards in Kiel, Danzig and Wilhelmshaven, which later became Kriegsmarinewerft Wilhelmshaven, and Schichau Shipyard Danzig. This was contrary to the second great Bremen shipyard Bremer Vulkan, which with exception of both World Wars, only produced civilian ships and started warship-building except war-times only in the early 1980s.\nA first important warship-order came from the \"Kaiserliche Marine\", between 1875 and 1884 altogether 29 gunboats were built. By this A.G. \"Weser\" started its career as an important constructor of war ships for the Imperial German Navy first and the Nazi German Kriegsmarine. Altogether A.G. \"Weser\" built 146 units for the Imperial Navy and 196 units for the Kriegsmarine. After the Second World War, A.G. \"Weser\" only built a single warship for the German Navy, in 1979/81 the F122-type frigate \"Niedersachsen\" in collaboration with frigate general contractor \"Bremer Vulkan\".\nThe share of warships from all delivered new constructions came to about 50% in 1909/10 and increased to nearly 100% in 1916 during the First World War. After 1936, it was again about 66% with an increasing share to about 80% in 1938. Construction of warships started in 1936 with the artillery training ship \"Brummer\" for the Kriegsmarine, followed by destroyers and U-boats. The last civilian ships built in 1939 were the merchant ships \"Neidenfels\" for the German company \"D.D.G. Hansa\" and \"Java\" for a shipping company in the Netherlands. The latter was the last civilian ship for many years. After that only warships were constructed, mainly U-boats and some destroyers.\nThe first U-boats constructed were UB I series. Later also UC I, UB II and UC II series were constructed at AG \"Weser\". By 1917 most of the work went into the construction of the UB III. Later three UC III were ordered. but were never finished. During World War I, AG \"Weser\" launched a total of 96 U-boats.\nBecause of intensive construction of warships, A.G. \"Weser\" was often the target of Allied air-raids during the Bombing of Bremen in World War II, mainly in 1944 and 1945. But despite many buildings, workshops, magazines, slipways and docks as well as ships and U-boats under construction were damaged, in most cases production could be continued within some weeks. The estimated reduction of construction capacity at the end of war seemed only less than 30%.\nIn March 1944, the building of the bunker \"Hornisse\" (Eng. Hornet) was started near the shipyard. Well-protected from air attacks, it was intended to produce U-boat sections in. These prefabricated sections were then shipped to the U-boat pen Valentin about 30 km downstream the river Weser. Together with parts from Kriegsmarinewerft Wilhelmshaven and under management of \"Bremer Vulkan\" beginning end of 1945 monthly 3 U-boats would be completed there. Both bunkers had never been finished and U-boats had never been built there. The bunker \"Valentin\" is still existing today and partly used as a memorial to the many prisoners and forced laborers who worked and died there.\nAfter World War II.\nThe Deschimag was dissolved in 1945 after World War II and the company was renamed to the former Aktien-Gesellschaft \"Weser\". With the exception of Seebeckwerft, the dismantling of confiscated production facilities for Soviet Union happened from 1945 to 1948. Most of the production equipment was shipped to Russia and together with the damaged facilities from bombing attacks during the war and the following blasting of the slipways the shipyard was more or less useless after that. Only a restricted production-permission was still possible and allowed by the US military government. While Seebeckwerft received the permission to construct ship's newbuilding in 1949, A.G. \"Weser\" received this permission finally some years later in 1951. The first new built unit was completed in 1952, the 2,650 GRT carrier \"Werratal\".\nA fundamental modernization program was started in 1963. In 1970, the shipyard presented itself in a new modern shape with giant cranes of 500 and 780 tons capacity, which span two slipways for the construction of ships up to 500,000 tons deadweight. Spacious prefabrications workshops with automation equipment and cranes of all sizes were in operation. Ship and engine repairs as well as machinery production and general engineering was performed in well-equipped drydocks and workshops. At this time, A.G. \"Weser\" in Bremen and the affiliated Seebeckwerft in Bremerhaven had around 8,000 workers and office staff employed.\nThe Bremen shipyard A.G. \"Weser\" concentrated their manufacturing program on all kinds of ships up to approx. 400,000 dwt., the Bremerhaven shipyard Seebeckwerft up to approx. 20,000 dwt. Besides ship-newbuilding, ship repairs and conversion as well as construction of engines and industrial equipment was also carried out.\nIn the 1970s, A.G. \"Weser\" concentrated their activities on the building of tankers. But this one-sided orientation led to problems when the tanker-boom came to end. Many tanker-orders were cancelled and the lack of orders for other types of ships caused severe financial problems. A closer cooperation between the Bremen shipyards A.G. \"Weser\" and Bremer Vulkan and the Bremerhaven shipyards \"Seebeckwerft\", Lloydwerft and Schichau-Werft, including a reduction of shipbuilding capacities, could not be realized. As a consequence the shipyard A.G. \"Weser\" closed on December 31, 1983.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73217", "revid": "50097956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73217", "title": "A Vicious Circle", "text": "1996 book by Amanda Craig\nA Vicious Circle is a 1996 satirical novel by Amanda Craig set in the world of publishing. Described as a roman a clef, it was originally withdrawn by publisher Hamish Hamilton when Craig\u2019s ex-boyfriend , David Sexton, threatened to sue. A rewritten version was published by Fourth Estate. \nPlot summary.\nThe novel chronicles the life of Amelia, the only daughter of newspaper tycoon Max de Monde who, after having spoiled Amelia beyond hope while she was still young, abandons her when she becomes pregnant. Amelia decides to marry Mark Crawley, the father of her child, an ambitious young critic intent on shaking off his humble background. Suddenly, the young couple find themselves in desperate need of money and, at first, accommodations. While she stays at home raising their daughter Rose, Amelia metamorphoses from spoiled brat to mature and responsible mother, whereas her husband loses all interest in the housewife he now realizes he has married. Amelia is encouraged to stay on her chosen path by Grace, her cleaning woman\u2014who is also her niece (without either of the women being aware of this), and by Tom Viner, a young doctor who becomes their lodger.\n\"A Vicious Circle\" also follows the life of Mary Quinn. An Irish girl lacking a university education, Mary has a natural writing talent and rises to become a prominent reviewer of new fiction after having been left by her lover of many years, Mark Crawley. Mary makes friends with Adam Sands, a yet unpublished author who keeps his homosexuality a secret from almost everyone including his own mother. When he is dying of an AIDS-related disease, Mary is the only person who remembers and eventually takes care of him.\nWhen the recession of the 1990s hits the country everyone seems to be affected by it. Max de Monde, who has even plundered his daughter's trust fund, spectacularly commits suicide by crashing his helicopter against the ground. Amelia leaves Mark and is planning to raise her daughter as a single parent.\nReception.\nThe novel became, according to \"The Independent\", \"a literary sensation before it was even published\". The \"New York Times\" called it \"a vicious roman a clef\", and Craig has described how her ex-boyfriend, literary critic David Sexton, believed himself to be \"unflatteringly depicted\" in the novel. Sexton threatened to sue, and as a result the book\u2019s publication was cancelled by Hamish Hamilton. A rewritten version was later published by Fourth Estate. On publication of the book, several people from the literary world also \"happily proffered themselves as candidates\" for some of the other characters.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n "}
{"id": "73218", "revid": "1317169392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73218", "title": "Surface weather analysis", "text": "Type of weather map\nSurface weather analysis is a special type of weather map that provides a view of weather elements over a geographical area at a specified time based on information from ground-based weather stations.\nWeather maps are created by plotting or tracing the values of relevant quantities such as sea level pressure, temperature, and cloud cover onto a geographical map to help find synoptic scale features such as weather fronts.\nThe first weather maps in the 19th century were drawn well after the fact to help devise a theory on storm systems. After the advent of the telegraph, simultaneous surface weather observations became possible for the first time, and beginning in the late 1840s, the Smithsonian Institution became the first organization to draw real-time surface analyses. Use of surface analyses began first in the United States, spreading worldwide during the 1870s. Use of the Norwegian cyclone model for frontal analysis began in the late 1910s across Europe, with its use finally spreading to the United States during World War II.\nSurface weather analyses have special symbols that show frontal systems, cloud cover, precipitation, or other important information. For example, an \"H\" may represent high pressure, implying clear skies and relatively warm weather. An \"L\", on the other hand, may represent low pressure, which frequently accompanies precipitation. Various symbols are used not just for frontal zones and other surface boundaries on weather maps, but also to depict the present weather at various locations on the weather map. Areas of precipitation help determine the frontal type and location.\nHistory of surface analysis.\nThe use of weather charts in a modern sense began in the middle portion of the 19th century in order to devise a theory on storm systems. The development of a telegraph network by 1845 made it possible to gather weather information from multiple distant locations quickly enough to preserve its value for real-time applications. The Smithsonian Institution developed its network of observers over much of the central and eastern United States between the 1840s and 1860s. The U.S. Army Signal Corps inherited this network between 1870 and 1874 by an act of Congress, and expanded it to the west coast soon afterwards.\nThe weather data was at first less useful as a result of the different times at which weather observations were made. The first attempts at time standardization took hold in Great Britain by 1855. The entire United States did not finally come under the influence of time zones until 1905, when Detroit finally established standard time. Other countries followed the lead of the United States in taking simultaneous weather observations, starting in 1873. Other countries then began preparing surface analyses. The use of frontal zones on weather maps did not appear until the introduction of the Norwegian cyclone model in the late 1910s, despite Loomis' earlier attempt at a similar notion in 1841. Since the leading edge of air mass changes bore resemblance to the military fronts of World War I, the term \"front\" came into use to represent these lines.\nDespite the introduction of the Norwegian cyclone model just after World War I, the United States did not formally analyze fronts on surface analyses until late 1942, when the WBAN Analysis Center opened in downtown Washington, D.C. The effort to automate map plotting began in the United States in 1969, with the process complete in the 1970s. Hong Kong completed their process of automated surface plotting by 1987. By 1999, computer systems and software had finally become sophisticated enough to allow for the ability to underlay on the same workstation satellite imagery, radar imagery, and model-derived fields such as atmospheric thickness and frontogenesis in combination with surface observations to make for the best possible surface analysis. In the United States, this development was achieved when Intergraph workstations were replaced by n-AWIPS workstations. By 2001, the various surface analyses done within the National Weather Service were combined into the Unified Surface Analysis, which is issued every six hours and combines the analyses of four different centers. Recent advances in both the fields of meteorology and geographic information systems have made it possible to devise finely tailored weather maps. Weather information can quickly be matched to relevant geographical detail. For instance, icing conditions can be mapped onto the road network. This will likely continue to lead to changes in the way surface analyses are created and displayed over the next several years.\nStation model used on weather maps.\nWhen analyzing a weather map, a station model is plotted at each point of observation. Within the station model, the temperature, dewpoint, wind speed and direction, atmospheric pressure, pressure tendency, and ongoing weather are plotted. The circle in the middle represents cloud cover; fraction it is filled in represents the degree of overcast. Outside the United States, temperature and dewpoint are plotted in degrees Celsius. The wind barb points in the direction from which the wind is coming. Each full flag on the wind barb represents of wind, each half flag represents . When winds reach , a filled in triangle is used for each of wind. In the United States, rainfall plotted in the corner of the station model are in inches. The international standard rainfall measurement unit is the millimeter. Once a map has a field of station models plotted, the analyzing isobars (lines of equal pressure), isallobars (lines of equal pressure change), isotherms (lines of equal temperature), and isotachs (lines of equal wind speed) are drawn. The abstract weather symbols were devised to take up the least room possible on weather maps.\nSynoptic scale features.\nA synoptic scale feature is one whose dimensions are large in scale, more than several hundred kilometers in length. Migratory pressure systems and frontal zones exist on this scale.\nPressure centers.\nCenters of surface high- and low-pressure areas that are found within closed isobars on a surface weather analysis are the absolute maxima and minima in the pressure field, and can tell a user in a glance what the general weather is in their vicinity. Weather maps in English-speaking countries will depict their highs as Hs and lows as Ls, while Spanish-speaking countries will depict their highs as As and lows as Bs.\nLow pressure.\nLow-pressure systems, also known as cyclones, are located in minima in the pressure field. Rotation is inward at the surface and counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere as opposed to inward and clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere due to the Coriolis force. Weather is normally unsettled in the vicinity of a cyclone, with increased cloudiness, increased winds, increased temperatures, and upward motion in the atmosphere, which leads to an increased chance of precipitation. Polar lows can form over relatively mild ocean waters when cold air sweeps in from the ice cap. The relatively warmer water leads to upward convection, causing a low to form, and precipitation usually in the form of snow. Tropical cyclones and winter storms are intense varieties of low pressure. Over land, thermal lows are indicative of hot weather during the summer.\nHigh pressure.\nHigh-pressure systems, also known as anticyclones, rotate outward at the surface and clockwise in the northern hemisphere as opposed to outward and counterclockwise in the southern hemisphere. Under surface highs, sinking of the atmosphere slightly warms the air by compression, leading to clearer skies, winds that are lighter, and a reduced chance of precipitation. The descending air is dry, hence less energy is required to raise its temperature. If high pressure persists, air pollution will build up due to pollutants trapped near the surface caused by the subsiding motion associated with the high.\nFronts.\nFronts in meteorology are boundaries between air masses that have different density, air temperature, and humidity. Strictly speaking, the front is marked at the warmer edge of a \"frontal zone\" where the gradient is very large. When a front passes over a point, it is marked by changes in temperature, moisture, wind speed and direction, a minimum of atmospheric pressure, and a change in the cloud pattern, sometimes with precipitation. Cold fronts develop where the cold air mass is advancing, warm fronts where the warm air is advancing, and a stationary front is not moving. Fronts classically wrap around low pressure centers as indicated in the here depicted for the Northern Hemisphere. On a larger scale, the Earth's polar front is a sharpening of the general equator-to-pole temperature gradient, underlying a high-altitude jet stream for reasons of thermal wind balance. Fronts usually travel from west to east, although they can move in a north-south direction or even east to west (a \"backdoor\" front) as airflow wraps around a low pressure center. Frontal zones can be distorted by such geographic features as mountains and large bodies of water.\nCold front.\nA cold front is located at the leading edge of a sharp temperature gradient on an isotherm analysis, often marked by a sharp surface pressure trough. Cold fronts can move up to twice as quickly as warm fronts and produce sharper changes in weather since cold air is denser than warm air and rapidly lifts as well as pushes the warmer air. Cold fronts are typically accompanied by a narrow band of clouds, showers and thunderstorms. On a weather map, the surface position of the cold front is marked with a blue line of triangles (pips) pointing in the direction of travel, at the leading edge of the cooler air mass.\nWarm front.\nWarm fronts mark the position on the Earth's surface where a relatively warm body of air is advancing into colder air. The front is marked on the warm edge of the gradient in isotherms, and lies within a low-pressure trough that tends to be broader and weaker than that of a cold front. Warm fronts move more slowly than cold fronts because cold air is denser, and is only pushed along (not lifted from) the Earth's surface. The warm air mass overrides the cold air mass, so temperature and cloud changes occur at higher altitudes before those at the surface. Clouds ahead of the warm front are mostly stratiform with precipitation that increases gradually as the front approaches. Ahead of a warm front, descending cloud bases will often begin with cirrus and cirrostratus (high-level), then altostratus (mid-level) clouds, and eventually lower in the atmosphere as the front passes through. Fog can precede a warm front when precipitation falls into areas of colder air, but increasing surface temperatures and wind tend to dissipate it after a warm front passes through. Cases with environmental instability can be conducive to thunderstorm development. On weather maps, the surface location of a warm front is marked with a red line of half circles pointing in the direction of travel.\nOccluded front.\nThe classical view of an occluded front is that they are formed when a cold front overtakes a warm front. A more modern view suggests that they form directly during the wrap-up of the baroclinic zone during cyclogenesis, and lengthen due to flow deformation and rotation around the cyclone.\nOccluded fronts are indicated on a weather map by a purple line with alternating half-circles and triangles pointing in direction of travel: that is, with a mixture of warm and cold frontal colors and symbols. Occlusions can be divided into warm vs. cold types. In a cold occlusion, the air mass overtaking the warm front is cooler than the cool air ahead of the warm front, and plows under both air masses. In a warm occlusion, the air mass overtaking the warm front is not as cool as the cold air ahead of the warm front, and rides over the colder air mass while lifting the warm air. Occluded fronts are indicated on a weather map by a purple line with alternating half-circles and triangles pointing in direction of travel.\nOccluded fronts usually form around low-pressure systems in the mature or late stages of their life cycle, but some continue to deepen after occlusion, and some do not form occluded fronts at all. The weather associated with an occluded front includes a variety of cloud and precipitation patterns, including dry slots and banded precipitation. Cold, warm and occluded fronts often meet at the point of occlusion or triple point. \nStationary fronts and shearlines.\nA stationary front is a non-moving boundary between two different air masses. They tend to remain in the same area for long periods of time, sometimes undulating in waves. Often a less-steep temperature gradient continues behind (on the cool side of) the sharp frontal zone with more widely spaced isotherms. A wide variety of weather can be found along a stationary front, characterized more by its prolonged presence than by a specific type. Stationary fronts may dissipate after several days, but can change into a cold or warm front if conditions aloft change, driving one air mass toward the other. Stationary fronts are marked on weather maps with alternating red half-circles and blue spikes pointing in opposite directions, indicating no significant movement.\nAs airmass temperatures equalize, stationary fronts may become smaller in scale, degenerating to a narrow zone where wind direction changes over a short distance, known as a shear line, depicted as a blue line of single alternating dots and dashes.\nMesoscale features.\nMesoscale features are smaller than synoptic scale systems like fronts, but larger than storm-scale systems like thunderstorms. Horizontal dimensions generally range from over ten kilometres to several hundred kilometres.\nDry line.\nThe dry line is the boundary between dry and moist air masses east of mountain ranges with similar orientation to the Rockies, depicted at the leading edge of the dew point, or moisture, gradient. Near the surface, warm moist air that is denser than warmer, dryer air wedges under the drier air in a manner similar to that of a cold front wedging under warmer air. When the warm moist air wedged under the drier mass heats up, it becomes less dense and rises and sometimes forms thunderstorms. At higher altitudes, the warm moist air is less dense than the cooler, drier air and the boundary slope reverses. In the vicinity of the reversal aloft, severe weather is possible, especially when a triple point is formed with a cold front.\nDuring daylight hours, drier air from aloft drifts down to the surface, causing an apparent movement of the dryline eastward. At night, the boundary reverts to the west as there is no longer any solar heating to help mix the lower atmosphere. If enough moisture converges upon the dryline, it can be the focus of afternoon and evening thunderstorms. A dry line is depicted on United States surface analyses as a brown line with scallops, or bumps, facing into the moist sector. Dry lines are one of the few surface fronts where the special shapes along the drawn boundary do not necessarily reflect the boundary's direction of motion.\nOutflow boundaries and squall lines.\nOrganized areas of thunderstorm activity not only reinforce pre-existing frontal zones, but they can outrun cold fronts. This outrunning occurs in a pattern where the upper level jet splits into two streams. The resultant mesoscale convective system (MCS) forms at the point of the upper level split in the wind pattern at the area of the best low-level inflow. The convection then moves east and equatorward into the warm sector, parallel to low-level thickness lines. When the convection is strong and linear or curved, the MCS is called a squall line, with the feature placed at the leading edge where the significant wind shifts and pressure rises. Even weaker and less organized areas of thunderstorms will lead to locally cooler air and higher pressures, and outflow boundaries exist ahead of this type of activity, \"SQLN\" or \"SQUALL LINE\", while outflow boundaries are depicted as troughs with a label of \"OUTFLOW BOUNDARY\" or \"OUTFLOW BNDRY\".\nSea and land breeze fronts.\nSea breeze fronts occur on sunny days when the landmass warms the air above it to a temperature above the water temperature. Similar boundaries form downwind on lakes and rivers during the day, as well as offshore landmasses at night. Since the specific heat of water is so high, there is little diurnal temperature change in bodies of water, even on the sunniest days. The water temperature varies less than . By contrast, the land, with a lower specific heat, can vary several degrees in a matter of hours.\nDuring the afternoon, air pressure decreases over the land as the warmer air rises. The relatively cooler air over the sea rushes in to replace it. The result is a relatively cool onshore wind. This process usually reverses at night where the water temperature is higher relative to the landmass, leading to an offshore land breeze. However, if water temperatures are colder than the land at night, the sea breeze may continue, only somewhat abated. This is typically the case along the California coast, for example.\nIf enough moisture exists, thunderstorms can form along sea breeze fronts that then can send out outflow boundaries. This causes chaotic wind/pressure regimes if the steering flow is weak. Like all other surface features, sea breeze fronts lie inside troughs of low pressure.\nMicroscale features.\nDescending reflectivity core.\nA descending reflectivity core (DRC) is a meteorological phenomenon observed in supercell thunderstorms, characterized by a localized, small-scale area of enhanced radar reflectivity that descends from the echo overhang into the lower levels of the storm.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73219", "revid": "2630", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73219", "title": "Barcelona, Catalonia", "text": ""}
{"id": "73221", "revid": "11249983", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73221", "title": "Order of magnitude \u2013 length", "text": ""}
{"id": "73222", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73222", "title": "Parakeet", "text": "Small to medium-sized species of parrot\n \nA parakeet is any one of many small- to medium-sized species of parrot, in multiple genera, that generally has long tail feathers. Most species belong to the genus \"Pyrrhura\". \nEtymology and naming.\nThe name \"parakeet\" is derived from the French word \"perroquet\", which is reflected in some older spellings that are still sometimes encountered, including paroquet or paraquet. However, in modern French, \"perruche\" is used to refer to parakeets and similar-sized parrots.\nIn American English, the word \"parakeet\" usually refers to the budgerigar, which is one species of parakeet.\nSummary.\nParakeets comprise about 115 species of birds that are seed-eating parrots of small size, slender build, and long, tapering tails. The Australian budgerigar, also known as \"budgie\", \"Melopsittacus undulatus\", is probably the most common parakeet. It was first described by zoologists in 1891. It is the most popular species of parakeet kept as a pet in North America and Europe.\nThe term \"grass parakeet\" (or \"grasskeet\") refers to several small Australian parakeets native to grasslands, such as those in the genus \"Neophema\" and the princess parrot. The Australian rosellas are also parakeets. Many of the smaller, long-tailed species of lories may be referred to as \"lorikeets\". The vernacular name ring-necked parakeet (not to be confused with the Australian ringneck) refers to a species of the genus \"Psittacula\" native to Africa and Asia. It is popular as a pet and has become feral in many cities outside its natural range.\nIn aviculture, the term \"conure\" is used for small to medium-sized parakeets of the genera \"Aratinga\", \"Pyrrhura\", and a few other genera of the tribe Arini, which are mainly endemic to South America. As they are not all from one genus, taxonomists tend to avoid the term. Other South American species commonly called parakeets include the genus \"Brotogeris\" parakeets, the monk parakeet, and lineolated parakeets, although lineolateds have short tails.\nA larger species may be referred to as \"parrot\" or \"parakeet\" interchangeably. For example, \"Alexandrine parrot\" and \"Alexandrine parakeet\" are two common names for the same species, \"Psittacula eupatria\", which is one of the largest species normally referred to as a parakeet.\nMany different species of parakeets are bred and sold commercially as pets, the budgerigar being the third most popular pet in the world, after cats and dogs.\nBreeding.\nParakeets often breed more readily in groups; however, there can be conflicts between breeding pairs and individuals especially if space is limited. The presence of other parakeets encourages a pair to breed, which is why breeding in a group is better. Despite this, many breeders choose to breed in pairs to both avoid conflicts and know offspring's parentage with certainty. Budgerigars lay an average of 4-6 eggs, while other parakeet species may lay an average of 4-6 eggs.\nAmerican population.\nThere is a growing population of introduced monk parakeets in Brooklyn and Queens, although the species have been reported in all five boroughs of New York City. \n Of native species, the green parakeet is still found in southern Texas, while the Carolina parakeet, formerly native to much of the eastern US, went extinct at the beginning of the 20th century.\nEuropean population.\nBelgian population.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], an estimated 10,000 parakeets lived in Brussels, the capital of Belgium. The total made them one of the most populous birds in the city, behind only pigeons and sparrows.\nSpain's parakeet control measures.\nAccording to a 2018 report, Spanish authorities drew up plans to curb the ever-growing population of parakeets, which reached 30,000 in locations such as Malaga.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn December 2019, Steven Le Comber, of Queen Mary University in London, UK, published an analysis in the \"Journal of Zoology\" based on geographic profiling methods. It concluded that the thriving rose-ringed parakeet population in the United Kingdom had grown from numerous small-scale accidental and intentional pet releases. Previous theories had included a pair released by Jimi Hendrix on Carnaby Street and an arrival in 1951 when Humphrey Bogart and Katharine Hepburn visited London with various animals to film \"The African Queen,\" set in the equatorial swamps of east Africa.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73224", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73224", "title": "Hatfield House", "text": "Country house in Hatfield, Hertfordshire, England\nHatfield House is a Grade I listed country house set in a large park, the Great Park, on the eastern side of Hatfield, Hertfordshire, England.\nThe present Jacobean house, a leading example of the prodigy house, was built in 1611 by Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury and Chief Minister to King James I. It is a prime example of Jacobean architecture. The estate includes extensive grounds and surviving parts of an earlier palace. Queen Elizabeth's Oak is said to be the place where Elizabeth I was informed she had become queen. The house is currently the home of Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 7th Marquess of Salisbury. It is open to the public.\nHistory.\nAn earlier building on the site was the Royal Palace of Hatfield. Only part of this still exists, a short distance from the present house. That palace was the childhood home and favourite residence of Queen Elizabeth I. Built in 1497 by the Archbishop of Canterbury (formerly Bishop of Ely), King Henry VII's minister, John Cardinal Morton, it comprised four wings in a square surrounding a central courtyard. The palace was seized by Henry VIII with other church properties. The nearby parish church of St Etheldreda's in Old Hatfield once served the bishop's palace as well as the village. Henry VIII's children, King Edward VI and the future Queen Elizabeth I, spent their youth at Hatfield Palace. His eldest daughter, who later reigned as Queen Mary I, lived there between 1533 and 1536, when she was sent to wait on the then Princess Elizabeth as punishment for refusing to recognise Henry's marriage to Anne Boleyn and his religious reforms.\nIn 1548, when she was only 15 years old, Elizabeth was under suspicion of having illegally agreed to marry Thomas Seymour. The house and her servants were seized by Edward VI's agent, Robert Tyrwhit, and she was interrogated there. She successfully defended her conduct with wit and defiance. Seymour was executed in 1549 for numerous other crimes against the crown. After her two months of imprisonment in the Tower of London by her sister, Queen Mary, Elizabeth returned to Hatfield. The Queen Elizabeth Oak on the grounds of the estate is said to be the location where Elizabeth was told she was queen following Mary's death, but is considered unlikely as Mary died in November. In November 1558, Elizabeth held her first Council of State in the Great Hall.\nHatfield House is a popular tourist attraction because it has so many objects associated with Queen Elizabeth I, including gloves and a pair of silk stockings that are believed to have been the first in England. The library displays a long illuminated parchment roll showing the pedigree of the queen with ancestors back to Adam and Eve. The Marble Hall holds the \"Rainbow Portrait\" of Elizabeth.\nElizabeth's successor, King James I, did not like the palace. It was included in the jointure estate of his wife Anne of Denmark. In 1607, King James gave it to his chief minister, Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury, in exchange for Theobalds, which was the Cecils' family home on the current site of Cedars Park, Broxbourne. Cecil, who liked building, tore down three wings of the royal palace (the back and sides of the square) in 1608 and used the bricks to build the present structure. The richly carved wooden Grand Staircase and the rare stained glass window in the private chapel are among the house's original Jacobean features. Cecil employed Robert Lemynge to supervise the construction, with input from the royal surveyor Simon Basil, and Inigo Jones who visited in October 1609.\nDuring World War II, Hatfield House was the location of the first Civil Resettlement Unit and acted as headquarters for the scheme. CRUs were created to help repatriated British prisoners of war transition back to civilian life and the luxurious setting of Hatfield was considered very beneficial to these men. On 12 July 1945, the king and queen visited the CRU at Hatfield, which generated significant news coverage.\nGardens.\nThe gardens, covering , date from the early 17th century and were laid out by John Tradescant the elder. Tradescant visited Europe and brought back trees and plants that had never previously been grown in England. The gardens included orchards, fountains, scented plants, water parterres, terraces, herb gardens and a foot maze. They were neglected in the 18th century, but restoration began in Victorian times and continues under the present Dowager Marchioness of Salisbury.\nDuring World War I, the grounds were used to test the first British tanks. An area was dug with trenches and craters and covered with barbed-wire to represent no man's land and German trench lines on the Western Front. To commemorate this, the only surviving Mark I tank was sited at Hatfield from 1919 to 1970 before being moved to The Tank Museum, Bovington.\nThe Rhodesian Light Infantry Regimental Association has placed its 'Troopie' memorial statue on the grounds of Hatfield House due to the long association of the Cecil family with Southern Rhodesia. Around its base is a roll of regimental members ('troopies') who fell in the Rhodesian Bush War and several inscriptions, including 'In reconciliation and hope for future peace in Zimbabwe'.\nTours.\nThe State Rooms can be seen in the midweek guided tours and visitors can look around in their own time at weekends. On Friday, the Garden Connoisseur's Day, the house is open for guided tours and pre-booked specialist groups. There are five miles of marked trails.\nFilm credits.\nHatfield House has been used for location filming on a number of film and television productions, including: ' (1984); \"Orlando\" (1992); \"Batman\" (1989); ', ', \"Rise of the Tomb Raider\" and \"Shadow of the Tomb Raider\"; \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" (2005); \"The New World\" (2005); ' (2007); \"Hot Fuzz\" (2007); \"Shakespeare in Love\" (1998); \"Dustbin Baby\"; \"Sherlock Holmes\" (2009); \"Agatha Christie's Marple\" (2010); \"Get Him to the Greek\" (2010); \"Antiques Roadshow\" (2010); \"MasterChef Australia\" (2010); \"Garden Secrets\" (2010); \"Royal Upstairs Downstairs\" (2011); \"My Week with Marilyn\" (2010); \"Paddington\" (2014); \"Mr. Holmes\" (2015); \"Doctor Thorne\"; \"Pride and Prejudice and Zombies\" (2016); \"The Crown\"; \"Breathe\" (2017); \"All the Money in the World\" (2017); \"Trust\";\"The Favourite\" (2018); \"Sucker\" (2019); \"Enola Holmes\"; \"Rebecca\" (2020); \"Bridgerton\" (2020); \"Cromwell\"; \"Henry VIII and His Six Wives\"; \"The Avengers\" (1998); \"V for Vendetta\"; \"Mortdecai\" (2015); and \"Paddington 2\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73227", "revid": "38808760", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73227", "title": "J (programming language)", "text": "Programming language\nThe J programming language, developed in the early 1990s by Kenneth E. Iverson and Roger Hui, is an array programming language based primarily on APL (also by Iverson).\nTo avoid repeating the APL special-character problem, J uses only the basic ASCII character set, resorting to the use of the dot and colon as \"inflections\" to form short words similar to \"digraphs\". Most such \"primary\" (or \"primitive\") J words serve as mathematical symbols, with the dot or colon extending the meaning of the basic characters available. Also, many characters which in other languages often must be paired (such as codice_1 or codice_2) are treated by J as stand-alone words or, when inflected, as single-character roots of multi-character words.\nJ is a very terse array programming language, and is most suited to mathematical and statistical programming, especially when performing operations on matrices. It has also been used in extreme programming and network performance analysis.\nLike John Backus's languages FP and FL, J supports function-level programming via its \"tacit programming\" features.\nUnlike most languages that support object-oriented programming, J's flexible hierarchical namespace scheme (where every name exists in a specific \"locale\") can be effectively used as a framework for both class-based and prototype-based object-oriented programming.\nSince March 2011, J is free and open-source software under the GNU General Public License version 3 (GPLv3). One may also purchase source under a negotiated license.\nExamples.\nJ permits point-free style and function composition. Thus, its programs can be very terse and are considered difficult to read by some programmers.\nThe \"Hello, World!\" program in J is:\n'Hello, World!'\nThis implementation of hello world reflects the traditional use of J \u2013 programs are entered into a J interpreter session, and the results of expressions are displayed. It's also possible to arrange for J scripts to be executed as standalone programs. Here's how this might look on a Unix system:\necho 'Hello, world!'\nexit \"\nHistorically, APL used codice_5 to indicate the fold, so codice_6 was equivalent to codice_7. Meanwhile, division was represented with the mathematical division symbol ().\nBecause ASCII does not include a division symbol \"per se\", J uses % to represent division, as a visual approximation or reminder. (This illustrates something of the mnemonic character of J's tokens, and some of the quandaries imposed by the use of ASCII.)\nDefining a J function named codice_8 to calculate the average of a list of numbers yields:\nThis is a test execution of the function:\n 2.5\nAbove, \"avg\" is defined using a train of three verbs (codice_12, codice_13, and codice_14) termed a \"fork\". Specifically, codice_15 is the same as codice_16 which shows some of the power of J. (Here V0, V1, and V2 denote verbs and Ny denotes a noun.) \nSome examples of using codice_8:\n NB. a random vector\n 46 55 79 52 54 39 60 57 60 94 46 78 13 18 51 92 78 60 90 62\n 59.2\n NB. moving average on periods of size 4\n 58 60 56 51.25 52.5 54 67.75 64.25 69.5 57.75 38.75 40 43.5 59.75 70.25 80 72.5\n NB. a random matrix\n 46 5 29 2 4\n 39 10 7 10 44\n 46 28 13 18 1\n 42 28 10 40 12\n NB. apply avg to each rank 1 subarray (each row) of m\n 17.2 22 21.2 26.4\nRank is a crucial concept in J.\nImplementing quicksort, from the J Dictionary yields:\n sel=: adverb def 'u # ['\n quicksort=: verb define\n if. 1 &gt;: #y do. y\n else.\n (quicksort y &lt;sel e),(y =sel e),quicksort y &gt;sel e=.y{~?#y\n end.\nThe following is an implementation of quicksort demonstrating tacit programming. The latter involves composing functions together and not referring explicitly to any variables. J's support for \"forks\" and \"hooks\" dictates rules on how arguments applied to this function will be applied to its component functions.\n quicksort=: (($:@(&lt;#[), (=#[), $:@(&gt;#[)) ({~ ?@#)) ^: (1&lt;#)\nSorting in J is usually accomplished using the built-in (primitive) verbs codice_18 (sort up) and codice_19 (sort down). User-defined sorts such as quicksort, above, typically are for illustration only.\nThe following example demonstrates the usage of the self-reference verb codice_20 to recursively calculate fibonacci numbers:\n1:`($:@-&amp;2+$:@&lt;:)@.(&gt;&amp;2)\nThis recursion can also be accomplished by referring to the verb by name, although this is of course possible only if the verb is named:\nfibonacci=:1:`(fibonacci@-&amp;2+fibonacci@&lt;:)@.(&gt;&amp;2)\nThe following expression exhibits pi with n digits and demonstrates the extended precision abilities of J:\n NB. set n as the number of digits required\n NB. extended precision 10 to the nth * pi\n 314159265358979323846264338327950288419716939937510\nVerbs and modifiers.\nA program or routine \u2013 something that takes data as input and produces data as output \u2013 is called a \"verb\". J has a rich set of predefined verbs, all of which work on multiple data types automatically: for example, the verb i. searches within arrays of any size to find matches:\n 3 1 4 1 5 9 i. 3 1 NB. find the index of the first occurrence of 3, and of 1\n0 1\n 3 1 4 1 5 9 i: 3 1 NB. find the index of the last occurrence of 3, and of 1\n0 3\nUser programs can be named and used wherever primitives are allowed.\nThe power of J comes largely from its \"modifiers\": symbols that take nouns and verbs as operands and apply the operands in a specified way. For example, the modifier / takes one operand, a verb to its left, and produces a verb that applies that verb between each item of its argument. That is, +/ is a verb, defined as 'apply + between the items of your argument' Thus, the sentence\n +/ 1 2 3 4 5\nproduces the effect of\n 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5\n +/ 1 2 3 4 5\n15\nJ has roughly two dozen of these modifiers. All of them can apply to any verb, even a user-written verb, and users may write their own modifiers. While modifiers are powerful individually, allowing\nsome of the modifiers control the order in which components are executed, allowing modifiers to be combined in any order to produce the unlimited variety of operations needed for practical programming.\nData types and structures.\nJ supports three simple types:\nOf these, numeric has the most variants.\nOne of J's numeric types is the \"bit\". There are two bit values: \"0\", and \"1\". Also, bits can be formed into lists. For example, codice_21 is a list of eight bits. Syntactically, the J parser treats that as one word. (The space character is recognized as a word-forming character between what would otherwise be numeric words.) Lists of arbitrary length are supported.\nFurther, J supports all the usual binary operations on these lists, such as \"and\", \"or\", \"exclusive or\", \"rotate\", \"shift\", \"not\", etc. For example,\n 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 +. 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 NB. or\n 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 0\n 3 |. 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 NB. rotate\n 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1\nJ also supports higher order arrays of bits. They can be formed into two-dimensional, three-dimensional, etc. arrays. The above operations perform equally well on these arrays.\nOther numeric types include integer (e.g., 3, 42), floating point (3.14, 8.8e22), complex (0j1, 2.5j3e88), extended precision integer (12345678901234567890x), and (extended precision) rational fraction (1r2, 3r4). As with bits, these can be formed into lists or arbitrarily dimensioned arrays. As with bits, operations are performed on all numbers in an array.\nLists of bits can be converted to integer using the codice_22 verb. Integers can be converted to lists of bits using the codice_23 verb. (When parsing J, codice_24 (period) and codice_25 (colon) are word-forming characters. They are never tokens alone, unless preceded by whitespace characters.)\nJ also supports the literal (character) type. Literals are enclosed in quotes, for example, codice_26 or codice_27. Lists of literals are also supported using the usual convention of putting multiple characters in quotes, such as codice_28. Typically, individual literals are 8-bits wide (ASCII), but J also supports other literals (Unicode). Numeric and Boolean operations are not supported on literals, but collection-oriented operations (such as rotate) are supported.\nFinally, there is a boxed data type. Typically, data is put in a box using the codice_29 operation (with no left argument; if there's a left argument, this would be the \"less than\" operation). This is analogous to C's codice_30 operation (with no left argument). However, where the result of C's codice_30 has reference semantics, the result of J's codice_29 has value semantics. In other words, codice_29 is a function and it produces a result. The result has 0 dimensions, regardless of the structure of the contained data. From the viewpoint of a J programmer, codice_29 \"puts the data into a box\" and allows working with an array of boxes (it can be assembled with other boxes or more copies can be made of the box).\n &lt;1 0 0 1 0\n |1 0 0 1 0|\nThe only collection type offered by J is the arbitrarily dimensioned array. Most algorithms can be expressed very concisely using operations on these arrays.\nJ's arrays are homogeneously typed, for example the list codice_35 is a list of integers despite codice_36 being a bit. For the most part, these sorts of type issues are transparent to programmers. Only certain specialized operations reveal differences in type. For example, the list codice_37 would be treated exactly the same, by most operations, as the list codice_38.\nJ also supports sparse numeric arrays where non-zero values are stored with their indices. This is an efficient mechanism where relatively few values are non-zero.\nJ also supports objects and classes, but these are an artifact of the way things are named, and are not data types. Instead, boxed literals are used to refer to objects (and classes). J data has value semantics, but objects and classes need reference semantics.\nAnother pseudo-type\u2014associated with name, rather than value\u2014is the memory mapped file.\nDebugging.\nJ has the usual facilities for stopping on error or at specified places within verbs. It also has a unique visual debugger, called http://, that gives a 2-D interactive display of the execution of a single J sentence. Because a single sentence of J performs as much computation as an entire subroutine in lower-level languages, the visual display is quite helpful.\nDocumentation.\nJ's documentation includes a http://, with words in J identified as http://, http://, http://, and so on. Primary words are listed in the http://, in which their respective http:// are indicated using markup. Note that verbs have two forms: monadic (arguments only on the right) and dyadic (arguments on the left and on the right). For example, in 'codice_39' the hyphen is a monadic verb, and in 'codice_40' the hyphen is a dyadic verb. The monadic definition is mostly independent of the dyadic definition, regardless of whether the verb is a primitive verb or a derived verb.\nControl structures.\nJ provides control structures similar to other procedural languages. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73231", "revid": "42117739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73231", "title": "Weather forecasting", "text": "Application of science and technology\nWeather forecasting or weather prediction is the application of science and technology to predict the conditions of the atmosphere for a given location and time. People have attempted to predict the weather informally for thousands of years and formally since the 19th century.\nWeather forecasts are made by collecting quantitative data about the current state of the atmosphere, land, and ocean and using meteorology to project how the atmosphere will change at a given place. Once calculated manually based mainly upon changes in barometric pressure, current weather conditions, and sky conditions or cloud cover, weather forecasting now relies on computer-based models that take many atmospheric factors into account. Human input is still required to pick the best possible model to base the forecast upon, which involves pattern recognition skills, teleconnections, knowledge of model performance, and knowledge of model biases.\nThe inaccuracy of forecasting is due to the chaotic nature of the atmosphere; the massive computational power required to solve the equations that describe the atmosphere, the land, and the ocean, the error involved in measuring the initial conditions, and an incomplete understanding of atmospheric and related processes. Hence, forecasts become less accurate as the difference between the current time and the time for which the forecast is being made (the \"range\" of the forecast) increases. The use of ensembles and model consensus helps narrow the error and provide confidence in the forecast.\nThere is a vast variety of end uses for weather forecasts. Weather warnings are important because they are used to protect lives and property. Forecasts based on temperature and precipitation are important to agriculture, and therefore to traders within commodity markets. Temperature forecasts are used by utility companies to estimate demand over coming days. On an everyday basis, many people use weather forecasts to determine what to wear on a given day. Since outdoor activities are severely curtailed by heavy rain, snow and wind chill, forecasts can be used to plan activities around these events, and to plan ahead and survive them.\nWeather forecasting is a part of the economy. For example, in 2009, the US spent approximately $5.8\u00a0billion on it, producing benefits estimated at six times as much.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nAncient forecasting.\nIn 650\u00a0BC, the Babylonians predicted the weather from cloud patterns as well as astrology. In about 350\u00a0BC, Aristotle described weather patterns in \"Meteorologica\". Later, Theophrastus compiled a book on weather forecasting, called the \"Book of Signs\". Chinese weather prediction lore extends at least as far back as 300\u00a0BC, which was also around the same time ancient Indian astronomers developed weather-prediction methods. In the New Testament, Jesus is quoted as referring to deciphering and understanding local weather patterns, by saying, \"When evening comes, you say, 'It will be fair weather, for the sky is red', and in the morning, 'Today it will be stormy, for the sky is red and overcast.' You know how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but you cannot interpret the signs of the times.\"\nIn 904\u00a0AD, Ibn Wahshiyya's \"Nabatean Agriculture\", translated into Arabic from an earlier Aramaic work, discussed the weather forecasting of atmospheric changes and signs from the planetary astral alterations; signs of rain based on observation of the lunar phases; and weather forecasts based on the movement of winds.\nAncient weather forecasting methods usually relied on observed patterns of events, also termed pattern recognition. For example, it was observed that if the sunset was particularly red, the following day often brought fair weather. This experience accumulated over the generations to produce weather lore. However, not all of these predictions prove reliable, and many of them have since been found not to stand up to rigorous statistical testing.\nModern methods.\nIt was not until the invention of the electric telegraph in 1835 that the modern age of weather forecasting began. Before that, the fastest that distant weather reports could travel was around 160 kilometres per day (100\u00a0mi/d), but was more typically 60\u2013120 kilometres per day (40\u201375\u00a0mi/day) (whether by land or by sea). By the late 1840s, the telegraph allowed reports of weather conditions from a wide area to be received almost instantaneously, allowing forecasts to be made from knowledge of weather conditions further upwind.\nThe two men credited with the birth of forecasting as a science were an officer of the Royal Navy Francis Beaufort and his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Robert FitzRoy. Both were influential men in British naval and governmental circles, and though ridiculed in the press at the time, their work gained scientific credence, was accepted by the Royal Navy, and formed the basis for all of today's weather forecasting knowledge.\nBeaufort developed the Wind Force Scale and Weather Notation coding, which he was to use in his journals for the remainder of his life. He also promoted the development of reliable tide tables around British shores, and with his friend William Whewell, expanded weather record-keeping at 200 British coast guard stations.\nRobert FitzRoy was appointed in 1854 as chief of a new department within the Board of Trade to deal with the collection of weather data at sea as a service to mariners. This was the forerunner of the modern Meteorological Office. All ship captains were tasked with collating data on the weather and computing it, with the use of tested instruments that were loaned for this purpose.\nA storm in October 1859 that caused the loss of the \"Royal Charter\" inspired FitzRoy to develop charts to allow predictions to be made, which he called \"forecasting the weather\", thus coining the term \"weather forecast\". Fifteen land stations were established to use the telegraph to transmit to him daily reports of weather at set times leading to the first gale warning service. His warning service for shipping was initiated in February 1861, with the use of telegraph communications. The first daily weather forecasts were published in \"The Times\" in 1861. In the following year a system was introduced of hoisting storm warning cones at the principal ports when a gale was expected. The \"Weather Book\" which FitzRoy published in 1863 was far in advance of the scientific opinion of the time.\nAs the electric telegraph network expanded, allowing for the more rapid dissemination of warnings, a national observational network was developed, which could then be used to provide synoptic analyses. To shorten detailed weather reports into more affordable telegrams, senders encoded weather information in telegraphic code, such as the one developed by the U.S. Army Signal Corps. Instruments to continuously record variations in meteorological parameters using photography were supplied to the observing stations from Kew Observatory \u2013 these cameras had been invented by Francis Ronalds in 1845 and his barograph had earlier been used by FitzRoy.\nTo convey accurate information, it soon became necessary to have a standard vocabulary describing clouds; this was achieved by means of a series of classifications first achieved by Luke Howard in 1802, and standardized in the \"International Cloud Atlas\" of 1896.\nNumerical prediction.\nIt was not until the 20th century that advances in the understanding of atmospheric physics led to the foundation of modern numerical weather prediction. In 1922, English scientist Lewis Fry Richardson published \"Weather Prediction By Numerical Process\", after finding notes and derivations he worked on as an ambulance driver in World War I. He described therein how small terms in the prognostic fluid dynamics equations governing atmospheric flow could be neglected, and a finite differencing scheme in time and space could be devised, to allow numerical prediction solutions to be found.\nRichardson envisioned a large auditorium of thousands of people performing the calculations and passing them to others. However, the sheer number of calculations required was too large to be completed without the use of computers, and the size of the grid and time steps led to unrealistic results in deepening systems. It was later found, through numerical analysis, that this was due to numerical instability. The first computerised weather forecast was performed by a team composed of American meteorologists Jule Charney, Philip Duncan Thompson, Larry Gates, and Norwegian meteorologist Ragnar Fj\u00f8rtoft, applied mathematician John von Neumann, and ENIAC programmer Klara Dan von Neumann. Practical use of numerical weather prediction began in 1955, spurred by the development of programmable electronic computers.\nBroadcasts.\nThe first ever daily weather forecasts were published in \"The Times\" on August 1, 1861, and the first weather maps were produced later in the same year. In 1911, the Met Office began issuing the first marine weather forecasts via radio transmission. These included gale and storm warnings for areas around Great Britain. In the United States, the first public radio forecasts were made in 1925 by Edward B. \"E.B.\" Rideout, on WEEI, the Edison Electric Illuminating station in Boston. Rideout came from the U.S. Weather Bureau, as did WBZ weather forecaster G. Harold Noyes in 1931.\nThe world's first televised weather forecasts, including the use of weather maps, were experimentally broadcast by the BBC in November 1936. This was brought into practice in 1949, after World War II. George Cowling gave the first weather forecast while being televised in front of the map in 1954. In America, experimental television forecasts were made by James C. Fidler in Cincinnati in either 1940 or 1947 on the DuMont Television Network. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, John Coleman, the first weatherman for the American Broadcasting Company (ABC)'s \"Good Morning America\", pioneered the use of on-screen weather satellite data and computer graphics for television forecasts. In 1982, Coleman partnered with Landmark Communications CEO Frank Batten to launch The Weather Channel (TWC), a 24-hour cable network devoted to national and local weather reports. Some weather channels have started broadcasting on live streaming platforms such as YouTube to reach more viewers.\nNumerical weather prediction.\nThe basic idea of numerical weather prediction is to sample the state of the fluid at a given time and use the equations of fluid dynamics and thermodynamics to estimate the state of the fluid at some time in the future. The main inputs from country-based weather services are surface observations from automated weather stations at ground level over land and from weather buoys at sea. The World Meteorological Organization acts to standardize the instrumentation, observing practices and timing of these observations worldwide. Stations either report hourly in METAR reports, or every six hours in SYNOP reports. Sites launch radiosondes, which rise through the depth of the troposphere and well into the stratosphere. Data from weather satellites are used in areas where traditional data sources are not available. Compared with similar data from radiosondes, the satellite data has the advantage of global coverage, but at a lower accuracy and resolution. Meteorological radar provide information on precipitation location and intensity, which can be used to estimate precipitation accumulations over time. Additionally, if a pulse Doppler weather radar is used then wind speed and direction can be determined. These methods, however, leave an in-situ observational gap in the lower atmosphere (from 100 m to 6\u00a0km above ground level). To reduce this gap, in the late 1990s weather drones started to be considered for obtaining data from those altitudes. Research has been growing significantly since the 2010s, and weather-drone data may in future be added to numerical weather models.\nCommerce provides pilot reports along aircraft routes, and ship reports along shipping routes. Research flights using reconnaissance aircraft fly in and around weather systems of interest such as tropical cyclones. Reconnaissance aircraft are also flown over the open oceans during the cold season into systems that cause significant uncertainty in forecast guidance, or are expected to be of high impact three\u2013seven days into the future over the downstream continent.\nModels are \"initialized\" using this observed data. The irregularly spaced observations are processed by data assimilation and objective analysis methods, which perform quality control and obtain values at locations usable by the model's mathematical algorithms (usually an evenly spaced grid). The data are then used in the model as the starting point for a forecast. Commonly, the set of equations used to predict the physics and dynamics of the atmosphere are called primitive equations. These are initialized from the analysis data and rates of change are determined. The rates of change predict the state of the atmosphere a short time into the future. The equations are then applied to this new atmospheric state to find new rates of change, which predict the atmosphere at a yet further time into the future. This \"time stepping\" procedure is continually repeated until the solution reaches the desired forecast time.\nThe length of the time step chosen within the model is related to the distance between the points on the computational grid, and is chosen to maintain numerical stability. Time steps for global models are on the order of tens of minutes, while time steps for regional models are between one and four minutes. The global models are run at varying times into the future. The Met Office's Unified Model is run six days into the future, the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts model is run out to 10\u00a0days into the future, while the Global Forecast System model run by the Environmental Modeling Center is run 16\u00a0days into the future. The visual output produced by a model solution is known as a prognostic chart, or \"prog\". The raw output is often modified before being presented as the forecast. This can be in the form of statistical techniques to remove known biases in the model, or of adjustment to take into account consensus among other numerical weather forecasts. MOS or model output statistics is a technique used to interpret numerical model output and produce site-specific guidance. This guidance is presented in coded numerical form, and can be obtained for nearly all National Weather Service reporting stations in the United States. As proposed by Edward Lorenz in 1963, long range forecasts, those made at a range of two weeks or more cannot definitively predict the state of the atmosphere, owing to the chaotic nature of the fluid dynamics equations involved. In numerical models, extremely small errors in initial values double roughly every five days for variables such as temperature and wind velocity.\nEssentially, a model is a computer program that produces meteorological information for future times at given locations and altitudes. Within any modern model is a set of equations, known as the primitive equations, used to predict the future state of the atmosphere. These equations\u2014along with the ideal gas law\u2014are used to evolve the density, pressure, and potential temperature scalar fields and the velocity vector field of the atmosphere through time. Additional transport equations for pollutants and other aerosols are included in some primitive-equation mesoscale models as well. The equations used are nonlinear partial differential equations, which are impossible to solve exactly through analytical methods, with the exception of a few idealized cases. Therefore, numerical methods obtain approximate solutions. Different models use different solution methods: some global models use spectral methods for the horizontal dimensions and finite difference methods for the vertical dimension, while regional and other global models usually use finite-difference methods in all three dimensions.\nTechniques.\nPersistence.\nThe simplest method of forecasting the weather, persistence, relies upon today's conditions to forecast tomorrow's. This can be valid when the weather achieves a steady state, such as during the summer season in the tropics. This method strongly depends upon the presence of a stagnant weather pattern. Therefore, when in a fluctuating pattern, it becomes inaccurate. It can be useful in both short- and long-range forecasts.\nBarometer.\nMeasurements of barometric pressure and the pressure tendency (the change of pressure over time) have been used in forecasting since the late 19th century. The larger the change in pressure, especially if more than , the larger the change in weather can be expected. If the pressure drop is rapid, a low pressure system is approaching, and there is a greater chance of rain. Rapid pressure rises are associated with improving weather conditions, such as clearing skies.\nObservation.\nAlong with pressure tendency, the condition of the sky is one of the more important parameters used to forecast weather in mountainous areas. Thickening of cloud cover or the invasion of a higher cloud deck is indicative of rain in the near future. High thin cirrostratus clouds can create halos around the sun or moon, which indicates an approach of a warm front and its associated rain. Morning fog portends fair conditions, as rainy conditions are preceded by wind or clouds that prevent fog formation. The approach of a line of thunderstorms could indicate the approach of a cold front. Cloud-free skies are indicative of fair weather for the near future. A bar can indicate a coming tropical cyclone. The use of sky cover in weather prediction has led to various weather lore over the centuries.\nNowcasting.\nThe forecasting of the weather for the following six hours is often referred to as nowcasting. In this time range it is possible to forecast smaller features such as individual showers and thunderstorms with reasonable accuracy, as well as other features too small to be resolved by a computer model. A human given the latest radar, satellite and observational data will be able to make a better analysis of the small scale features present and so will be able to make a more accurate forecast for the following few hours. However, there are now expert systems using those data and mesoscale numerical model to make better extrapolation, including evolution of those features in time. Accuweather is known for a Minute-Cast, which is a minute-by-minute precipitation forecast for the next two hours.\nAtmospheric model.\nIn the past, human forecasters were responsible for generating the weather forecast based upon available observations. Today, human input is generally confined to choosing a model based on various parameters, such as model biases and performance. Using a consensus of forecast models, as well as ensemble members of the various models, can help reduce forecast error. However, regardless how small the average error becomes with any individual system, large errors within any particular piece of guidance are still possible on any given model run. Humans are required to interpret the model data into weather forecasts that are understandable to the end user. Humans can use knowledge of local effects that may be too small in size to be resolved by the model to add information to the forecast. While increasing accuracy of forecasting models implies that humans may no longer be needed in the forecasting process at some point in the future, there is currently still a need for human intervention.\nAnalog.\nThe analog technique is a complex way of making a forecast, requiring the forecaster to remember a previous weather event that is expected to be mimicked by an upcoming event. What makes it a difficult technique to use is that there is rarely a perfect analog for an event in the future. Some call this type of forecasting pattern recognition. It remains a useful method of observing rainfall over data voids such as oceans, as well as the forecasting of precipitation amounts and distribution in the future. A similar technique is used in medium range forecasting, which is known as teleconnections, when systems in other locations are used to help pin down the location of another system within the surrounding regime. An example of teleconnections are by using El Ni\u00f1o-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) related phenomena.\nArtificial intelligence.\nInitial attempts to use artificial intelligence began in the 2010s. Huawei's Pangu-Weather model, Google's GraphCast, WindBorne's WeatherMesh model, Nvidia's FourCastNet, and the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts' Artificial Intelligence/Integrated Forecasting System, or AIFS all appeared in 2022\u20132023. In 2024, AIFS started to publish real-time forecasts, showing specific skill at predicting hurricane tracks, but lower-performing on the intensity changes of such storms relative to physics-based models.\nSuch models use no physics-based atmosphere modeling or large language models. Instead, they learn purely from data such as the ECMWF re-analysis ERA5. These models typically require far less compute than physics-based models.\nMicrosoft's Aurora system offers global 10-day weather and 5-day air pollution (CO2, NO, NO2, SO2, O3, and particulates) forecasts with claimed accuracy similar to physics-based models, but at orders-of-magnitude lower cost. Aurora was trained on more than a million hours of data from six weather/climate models.\nIn 2024, a group of researchers at Google's DeepMind AI research laboratories published a paper in \"Nature\" to describe their machine-learning model, called GenCast, that is expected to produce more accurate forecasts than the best traditional weather forecasting systems.\nIn a study conducted using the AIFS, Lang et al. (2024) presented 30-day ensemble simulations of the Madden\u2013Julian oscillation.\nCommunicating forecasts to the public.\nMost end users of forecasts are members of the general public. Thunderstorms can create strong winds and dangerous lightning strikes that can lead to deaths, power outages, and widespread hail damage. Heavy snow or rain can bring transportation and commerce to a stand-still, as well as cause flooding in low-lying areas. Excessive heat or cold waves can sicken or kill those with inadequate utilities, and droughts can impact water usage and destroy vegetation.\nSeveral countries employ government agencies to provide forecasts and watches/warnings/advisories to the public to protect life and property and maintain commercial interests. Knowledge of what the end user needs from a weather forecast must be taken into account to present the information in a useful and understandable way. Examples include the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's National Weather Service (NWS) and Environment Canada's Meteorological Service (MSC). Traditionally, newspaper, television, and radio have been the primary outlets for presenting weather forecast information to the public. In addition, some cities had weather beacons. Increasingly, the internet is being used due to the vast amount of specific information that can be found. In all cases, these outlets update their forecasts on a regular basis.\nSevere weather alerts and advisories.\nA major part of modern weather forecasting is the severe weather alerts and advisories that the national weather services issue in the case that severe or hazardous weather is expected. This is done to protect life and property. Some of the most commonly known of severe weather advisories are the severe thunderstorm and tornado warning, as well as the severe thunderstorm and tornado watch. Other forms of these advisories include winter weather, high wind, flood, tropical cyclone, and fog. Severe weather advisories and alerts are broadcast through the media, including radio, using emergency systems as the Emergency Alert System, which break into regular programming.\nLow temperature forecast.\nThe low temperature forecast for the current day is calculated using the lowest temperature found between 7pm that evening through 7am the following morning. So, in short, today's forecasted low is most likely tomorrow's low temperature.\nSpecialist forecasting.\nThere are a number of sectors with their own specific needs for weather forecasts and specialist services are provided to these users as given below:\nAir traffic.\nBecause the aviation industry is especially sensitive to the weather, accurate weather forecasting is essential. Fog or exceptionally low ceilings can prevent many aircraft from landing and taking off. Turbulence and icing are also significant in-flight hazards. Thunderstorms are a problem for all aircraft because of severe turbulence due to their updrafts and outflow boundaries, icing due to the heavy precipitation, as well as large hail, strong winds, and lightning, all of which can cause severe damage to an aircraft in flight. Volcanic ash is also a significant problem for aviation, as aircraft can lose engine power within ash clouds. On a day-to-day basis airliners are routed to take advantage of the jet stream tailwind to improve fuel efficiency. Aircrews are briefed prior to takeoff on the conditions to expect en route and at their destination. Additionally, airports often change which runway is being used to take advantage of a headwind. This reduces the distance required for takeoff, and eliminates potential crosswinds.\nMarine.\nCommercial and recreational use of waterways can be limited significantly by wind direction and speed, wave periodicity and heights, tides, and precipitation. These factors can each influence the safety of marine transit. Consequently, a variety of codes have been established to efficiently transmit detailed marine weather forecasts to vessel pilots via radio, for example the MAFOR (marine forecast). Typical weather forecasts can be received at sea through the use of RTTY, Navtex and Radiofax.\nAgriculture.\nFarmers rely on weather forecasts to decide what work to do on any particular day. For example, drying hay is only feasible in dry weather. Prolonged periods of dryness can ruin cotton, wheat, and corn crops. While corn crops can be ruined by drought, their dried remains can be used as a cattle feed substitute in the form of silage. Frosts and freezes play havoc with crops both during the spring and fall. For example, peach trees in full bloom can have their potential peach crop decimated by a spring freeze. Orange groves can suffer significant damage during frosts and freezes, regardless of their timing.\nForestry.\nForecasting of wind, precipitation and humidity is essential for preventing and controlling wildfires. Indices such as the \"Forest fire weather index\" and the \"Haines Index\", have been developed to predict the areas more at risk of fire from natural or human causes. Conditions for the development of harmful insects can also be predicted by forecasting the weather.\nUtility companies.\nElectricity and gas companies rely on weather forecasts to anticipate demand, which can be strongly affected by the weather. They use the quantity termed the degree day to determine how strong of a use there will be for heating (heating degree day) or cooling (cooling degree day). These quantities are based on a daily average temperature of . Cooler temperatures force heating degree days (one per degree Fahrenheit), while warmer temperatures force cooling degree days. In winter, severe cold weather can cause a surge in demand as people turn up their heating. Similarly, in summer a surge in demand can be linked with the increased use of air conditioning systems in hot weather. By anticipating a surge in demand, utility companies can purchase additional supplies of power or natural gas before the price increases, or in some circumstances, supplies are restricted through the use of brownouts and blackouts.\nOther commercial companies.\nIncreasingly, private companies pay for weather forecasts tailored to their needs so that they can increase their profits or avoid large losses. For example, supermarket chains may change the stocks on their shelves in anticipation of different consumer spending habits in different weather conditions. Weather forecasts can be used to invest in the commodity market, such as futures in oranges, corn, soybeans, and oil.\nMilitary applications.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe British Royal Navy, working with the Met Office, has its own specialist branch of weather observers and forecasters, as part of the Hydrographic and Meteorological (HM) specialisation, who monitor and forecast operational conditions across the globe, to provide accurate and timely weather and oceanographic information to submarines, ships and Fleet Air Arm aircraft.\nA mobile unit in the Royal Air Force, working with the Met Office, forecasts the weather for regions in which British and allied armed forces are deployed. A group based at Camp Bastion used to provide forecasts for the British armed forces in Afghanistan.\nUnited States.\nSimilar to the private sector, military weather forecasters present weather conditions to the war fighter community. Military weather forecasters provide pre-flight and in-flight weather briefs to pilots and provide real time resource protection services for military installations.\nNaval forecasters cover the waters and ship weather forecasts. The United States Navy provides a special service for itself and the rest of the federal government by issuing forecasts for tropical cyclones across the Pacific and Indian Oceans through its Joint Typhoon Warning Center.\nWithin the United States, the 557th Weather Wing provides weather forecasting for the Air Force and the Army. Air Force forecasters cover air operations in both wartime and peacetime and provide Army support; United States Coast Guard marine science technicians provide ship forecasts for ice breakers and various other operations within their realm; and Marine forecasters provide support for ground- and air-based United States Marine Corps operations. All four of the mentioned military branches have their initial enlisted meteorology technical training at Keesler Air Force Base. Military and civilian forecasters actively cooperate in analyzing, creating and critiquing weather forecast products.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73236", "revid": "7077568", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73236", "title": "Operation Torch", "text": "Allied landing operations in French North Africa during World War II\nOperation Torch (8\u201316 November 1942) was an Allied invasion of French North Africa during World War II. Torch was a compromise operation that met the British objective of securing victory in North Africa while allowing American armed forces the opportunity to begin their fight against Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy on a limited scale.\nThe French colonies were aligned with Germany via Vichy France but the loyalties of the population were mixed. Reports indicated that they might support the Allies. The American General Dwight D. Eisenhower, supreme commander of the Allied forces in Mediterranean theater of the war, approved plans for a three-pronged attack on Casablanca (Western), Oran (Centre) and Algiers (Eastern), then a rapid move on Tunis to catch Axis forces in North Africa from the west in conjunction with the British advance from Egypt.\nThe Western Task Force encountered unexpected resistance and bad weather but Casablanca, the principal French Atlantic naval base, was captured after a short siege. The Centre Task Force suffered some damage to its ships when trying to land in shallow water; Oran surrendered after bombardment by British battleships. The Eastern Task Force met less opposition and were able to push inland and compel surrender on the first day.\nThe success of Torch caused Admiral Fran\u00e7ois Darlan, commander of the Vichy French forces, who was in Algiers, to order co-operation with the Allies, in return for being installed as High Commissioner, with many other Vichy officials keeping their jobs. Darlan was assassinated by a monarchist six weeks later and the Free French gradually came to dominate the government.\nBackground.\nAllied strategy.\nWhen the United States entered the Second World War in December 7, British and Americans met at the Arcadia Conference to discuss future strategy. The principle of Europe first was agreed upon, but British and Americans had different views on how to implement it. Americans favoured a direct approach with first a limited landing in 1942 (Operation Sledgehammer), and then a follow-up main thrust in 1943 (Operation Roundup). The British pressed for a less ambitious plan. They realized the build-up of American forces (Operation Bolero) would take time, and there was not enough shipping available for large operations. Winston Churchill proposed to invade North Africa. The head of the United States Army, General George Marshall and the head of the US Navy, Admiral Ernest King strongly opposed that plan, and were inclined to abandon the Germany first strategy if Churchill persisted. But President Franklin D. Roosevelt wanted to support the Russians and as any Pacific operation would be of no help to them, he agreed to the North-African operation. On 14 August 1942 Lt. General Dwight D. Eisenhower was appointed as Commander in Chief Allied expeditionary Force, and he set up his headquarters in London.\nPlanners identified Oran, Algiers and Casablanca as key targets. Ideally there would also be a landing at Tunis to secure Tunisia and facilitate the rapid interdiction of supplies travelling via Tripoli to Erwin Rommel's Afrika Korps forces in Italian Libya. A compromise would be to land at B\u00f4ne in eastern Algeria, some closer to Tunis than Algiers. Limited resources dictated that the Allies could only make three landings and Eisenhower, who believed that any plan must include landings at Oran and Algiers, had two main options: either the western option, to land at Casablanca, Oran and Algiers and then make as rapid a move as possible to Tunis some east of Algiers once the Vichy opposition was suppressed; or the eastern option, to land at Oran, Algiers and B\u00f4ne and then advance overland to Casablanca some west of Oran. He favoured the eastern option because of the advantages it gave to an early capture of Tunis and also because the Atlantic swells off Casablanca presented considerably greater risks to an amphibious landing there than would be encountered in the Mediterranean. The Combined Chiefs of Staff, however, were concerned that should Operation Torch precipitate Spain to abandon neutrality and join the Axis, the Straits of Gibraltar could be closed cutting the entire Allied force's lines of communication. They therefore chose the Casablanca option as the less risky since the forces in Algeria and Tunisia could be supplied overland from Casablanca in the event of closure of the straits.\nThe Morocco landings ruled out the early occupation of Tunisia. But with British forces advancing from Egypt, this would allow the Allies to carry out a pincer operation against Axis forces in North Africa by mid-January 1943.\nIntrigues with Vichy commanders.\nThe Allies believed that the Vichy French Armistice Army would not fight, partly because of information supplied by the American Consul Robert Daniel Murphy in Algiers. The French were former members of the Allies, and US troops were instructed not to fire unless they were fired upon. The Vichy French Navy were expected to be very hostile after the British Attack on Mers-el-K\u00e9bir in June 1940, and the Syria\u2013Lebanon campaign in 1941.\nAllied military strategists needed to consider the political situation in North Africa. The Americans had recognised P\u00e9tain and the Vichy government in 1940, whereas the British did not and had recognised General Charles de Gaulle's French National Committee as a government-in-exile instead. After his backing of British operations against the Vichy French in Dakar and Syria, de Gaulle did not have many supporters in North Africa. Hence the Allies decided to keep de Gaulle and his Free French Forces entirely out of the operation.\nTo gauge the feeling of the Vichy French forces, Murphy was appointed to the American consulate in Algeria. His covert mission was to determine the mood of the French forces and to make contact with elements that might support an Allied invasion. He succeeded in contacting several French officers, including General Charles Mast, the French commander-in-chief in Algiers. These officers were willing to support the Allies but asked for a clandestine conference with a senior Allied general in Algeria. Major General Mark W. Clark, one of Eisenhower's senior commanders, was secretly dispatched to Cherchell in Algeria aboard the British submarine and met with these Vichy French officers on 21 October 1942. Due to the need to maintain secrecy, the French officers were left in the dark about concrete plans, but they gave Clark detailed information about the military situation in Algiers. These officers also asked French General Henri Giraud be moved out of Vichy France to take the lead of the operation.\nEventually the Allies succeeded in slipping Giraud out of Vichy France on HMS \"Seraph\" to Gibraltar, where Eisenhower had his headquarters, intending to offer him the post of commander in chief of French forces in North Africa after the invasion. However, Giraud would take no position lower than commander in chief of all the invading forces. When he was refused, he decided to remain \"a spectator in this affair\".\nForces.\nAllied forces.\nThe Allies organised three amphibious task forces to simultaneously seize the key ports and airports in Morocco and Algeria, targeting Casablanca, Oran and Algiers.\nA Western Task Force (aimed at Casablanca) was composed of American units, with Major General George S. Patton in command and Rear Admiral Henry Kent Hewitt heading the naval operations. This Western Task Force consisted of the U.S. 3rd and 9th Infantry Divisions, and two battalions from the U.S. 2nd Armored Division, 35,000\u00a0troops in a convoy of over 100\u00a0ships. They were transported directly from the United States in the first of a new series of UG convoys providing logistic support for the North African campaign.\nThe Centre Task Force, aimed at Oran, included the U.S. 2nd Battalion 509th Parachute Infantry Regiment, the U.S. 1st Infantry Division, and the U.S. 1st Armored Division, a total of 18,500\u00a0troops. They sailed from the United Kingdom and were commanded by Major General Lloyd Fredendall, the naval forces being commanded by Commodore Thomas Troubridge.\nTorch was, for propaganda purposes, a landing by U.S. forces, supported by British warships and aircraft, under the belief that this would be more palatable to French public opinion, than an Anglo-American invasion. For the same reason, Churchill suggested that British soldiers might wear U.S. Army uniforms, and No. 6 Commando did so. (Fleet Air Arm aircraft did carry US \"star\" roundels during the operation, and two British destroyers flew the Stars and Stripes.) In reality, the Eastern Task Force, aimed at Algiers, was commanded by Lieutenant-General Kenneth Anderson and consisted of a brigade from the British 78th and the U.S. 34th Infantry Divisions, along with two British commando units (No.\u00a01 and No.\u00a06 Commandos), together with the RAF Regiment providing 5 squadrons of infantry and 5 Light anti-aircraft flights, totalling 20,000\u00a0troops. During the landing phase, ground forces were to be commanded by U.S. Major General Charles W. Ryder, Commanding General (CG) of the 34th Division and naval forces were commanded by Royal Navy Vice-Admiral Sir Harold Burrough.\nAerial operations were split into two commands, with Royal Air Force aircraft under Air Marshal Sir William Welsh operating east of Cape Tenez in Algeria, and all United States Army Air Forces aircraft under Major General Jimmy Doolittle, who was under the direct command of Major General Patton, operating west of Cape Tenez.\nVichy French forces.\nThe Vichy French had around 125,000 soldiers in the territories as well as coastal artillery, 210 operational but out-of-date tanks and about 500 aircraft, of which 173 were modern Dewoitine D.520 fighters. These forces included 60,000 troops in Morocco, 15,000 in Tunisia, and 50,000 in Algeria. The bulk of the Vichy French Navy was stationed outside North Africa: three battleships and seven cruisers at Toulon and one battleship and three cruisers at Dakar. In North Africa, at Casablanca the incomplete battleship was used as a coastal battery and there was one cruiser, seven destroyers and eight submarines. At Oran there was a force of four destroyers and nine submarines.\nBattle.\nEastern task force.\nIn the early hours of 8 November, French Resistance fighters staged a coup in the city of Algiers. They seized control of the city, but when no US troops appeared in the morning, they quickly lost control to Vichy French forces. Meanwhile, the American consul Robert Murphy attempted to persuade General Alphonse Juin, the senior French Army officer in North Africa, to side with the Allies and place himself under the command of General Giraud. Murphy was treated to a surprise: Admiral Fran\u00e7ois Darlan, the commander of all French forces, was also in Algiers on a private visit, and Juin insisted on contacting Darlan at once. Murphy was unable to persuade them to side with the Allies right away, and Darlan contacted P\u00e9tain, who instructed him to resist.\nThe invasion commenced with landings on three beaches, two west of Algiers and one east. The landing forces were under the overall command of Major-General Charles W. Ryder, commanding general of the U.S. 34th Infantry Division. The 11th Brigade Group from the British 78th Infantry Division landed on the right-hand beach; the US 168th Regimental Combat Team, from the 34th Infantry Division, supported by 6 Commando and most of 1 Commando, landed on the middle beach; and the US 39th Regimental Combat Team, from the US 9th Infantry Division, supported by the remaining 5 troops from 1 Commando, landed on the left-hand beach. The 36th Brigade Group from the British 78th Infantry Division stood by in floating reserve. Though some landings went to the wrong beaches, this was immaterial because of the lack of French opposition. Only at Cape Matifou a coastal battery opened fire, and in the forenoon some resistance was offered at the fortresses of Cape Matifou, Duperre and L'Empereur. At 06:00 the airfield at Maison Blanche was captured and at 10:00 Hawker Hurricane and Supermarine Spitfire aircraft from Gibraltar started to flow in at the airfield. A second airfield at Blida surrendered the same day to a British plane landing on the airfield.The only fierce fighting took place in the port of Algiers, where in Operation Terminal, the British destroyers and attempted to land a party of US Army Rangers directly onto the dock, to prevent the French destroying the port facilities and scuttling their ships. Heavy artillery fire hit \"Malcolm\" and forced her to abandon the operation, but \"Broke\" was able to disembark 250 Rangers who secured the power station and oil installations. At 9:15 however she too had to recall the Rangers and abandon the operation due to the heavy artillery fire. As a result of the damage received, \"Broke\" foundered the next day in bad weather.\nBy 16:00 the US troops had surrounded Algiers and held the coastal batteries defending the harbour. At 18:40 Juin made an agreement with Ryder to stop the fighting. The next day on 9 November a local cease-fire was negotiated and Darlan authorized the Eastern Task Force to use the harbor of Algiers, but in Oran and Morocco the fighting continued. Giraud arrived the same day in Algiers and at noon on 10 November after negotiations with General Clark, Darlan ordered all hostilities to end and to observe neutrality. On secret orders from P\u00e9tain, on 11 November he ordered the forces in Tunisia to resist a German invasion.\nWestern task force.\nThe Western Task Force landed before daybreak on 8 November 1942, at three points in Morocco: In the South at Safi (Operation Blackstone), in the North at Mehdiya-Port Lyautey (Operation Goalpost) and the main thrust was at the centre in Fedala, close to Casablanca, (Operation Brushwood). Just like in Algiers, there was a failed attempt to neutralize Vichy French command in the morning of 8 November: General B\u00e9thouart was unable to convince Admiral Michelier nor General Nogu\u00e8s to side with the Allies. Instead they ordered the Army and Navy to oppose the invasion. \nAt Safi the objective was to capture the port facilities intact and to land the Western Task Force's medium Sherman tanks, which would be used to reinforce the assault on Casablanca. Two old destroyers, and , were to land an assault party in the harbor, whilst troops landed on the beaches would quickly move to the town. The landings were begun without covering fire, in the hope that the French would not resist at all. However, once French coastal batteries opened fire, Allied warships returned fire. Most of the landings occurred behind schedule, but met no opposition on the beaches. Under cover from fire of the battleship and cruiser , \"Cole\" and \"Bernadou\" landed their troops and the harbor was captured intact. Safi surrendered on the afternoon of 8 November. By 10 November, the landed troops moved northwards to join the siege of Casablanca.\nAt Port-Lyautey, the objective was to secure the port and the airfield, so that aircraft could be flown in from Gibraltar and from aircraft carriers. The landings were delayed because of navigational problems and the slow disembarkation of the troops in their landing ships. The first three waves of troops were landed unopposed on five beaches. The cruiser bombarded coastal batteries at Kasbah Mahdiyya. The next waves came under fire from coastal batteries and Vichy-French aircraft. A first attempt by the old destroyer to bring a raiding party inshore on the Sebou River to the airfield, failed on 8 November. Vichy French reinforcements coming from Rabat were bombarded by the battleship and the cruiser \"Savannah\". A second attempt on 10 November to take the airfield was successful and over the next two days, the escort carrier sent 77 Curtiss P-40 Warhawk to the airfield. With the support of aircraft from the escort carrier , the Kasbah battery was taken and ships could come closer to shore to unload supplies. On 11 November The cease-fire ordered by Darlan halted all hostilities.\nAt Fedala, a small port with a large beach from Casablanca, weather was good but landings were delayed because troopships were not disembarking troops on schedule. The first wave reached shore unopposed at 05:00. Many landing craft were wrecked in the heavy surf or on rocks. At dawn the Vichy French shore batteries opened fire. By 07:30 fire from the cruisers and with their supporting destroyers, had silenced the shore batteries. At 08:00 when Vichy-French aircraft appeared and attacked, one battery reopened fire. Two Vichy-French destroyers arrived from Casablanca at 08:25 and attacked the American destroyers. By 09:05 the Vichy French destroyers had been driven away, but all available Vichy French ships sortied from Casablanca and at 10:00 renewed the attack on the American ships at Fedala. By 11:00 the battle was over, the two American cruisers had either sunk or driven ashore the light cruiser , two flotilla leaders and four destroyers. Only one destroyer escaped back to Casablanca. Fedala surrendered at 14:30 and transport ships could move closer to shore to speed up the unloading. Meanwhile the American Covering force with the battleship had appeared before Casablanca and when coastal batteries opened fire at 07:00, the American ships responded at once and damaged the Vichy-French battleship \"Jean Bart\" with five hits, putting its one operational turret out of action. Of the eleven submarines in port, three were destroyed but the other eight took up attack positions. These submarines attacked \"Massachusetts\"; the aircraft carrier ; and the cruisers \"Brooklyn\" and , but all their torpedoes missed, and six submarines were sunk.\nOn 9 November the small port of Fedala was in use and troops advanced on Casablanca. Despite having lost 55 aircraft the previous day, attacks by Vichy-French aircraft continued all day. On 10 November, \"Jean Bart\" was repaired, but when she opened fire, she was attacked by dive-bombers from the aircraft carrier \"Ranger\" and heavily damaged by two bomb hits. The Americans surrounded the port of Casablanca by 10 November but waited for the arrival of the tanks from Safi to start an all-out attack planned for 11 November at 07:15. Orders from Darlan, broadcast on 10 November, to cease resistance were ignored until 11 November 06:00, the city surrendered an hour before the final assault was due to take place.\nCenter task force.\nThe Center Task Force was split between three beaches, two west of Oran and one east. Landings at the westernmost beach were delayed because of a French convoy which appeared while the minesweepers were clearing a path. Some delay and confusion, and damage to landing ships, was caused by the unexpected shallowness of water and sandbars. On all beaches the landings met no resistance. An airborne assault by the 2nd Battalion, 509th Parachute Infantry Regiment, which flew all the way from England, over Spain, to Oran, to capture the airfields at Tafraoui and La S\u00e9nia failed. Aircraft from three British carriers attacked these airfields in the morning and destroyed seventy airplanes which were armed and ready to take off to attack. In the afternoon the Tafraoui airfield was captured by the quickly advancing troops from the beachheads, and immediately Spitfires were flown in from Gibraltar. The U.S. 1st Ranger Battalion landed east of Oran and quickly captured the shore battery at Arzew.\nAt the same time of the landings, in the early morning of 8 November, an attempt was made to land U.S. infantry by the sloops and at the harbor of Oran, in order to prevent destruction of the port facilities and scuttling of ships. But both sloops were sunk by Vichy-French destroyers in the harbour and the operation failed. The Vichy French naval fleet consisting of one flotilla leader, three destroyers, one minesweeper, six submarines and some smaller vessels, broke out from the harbor and attacked the Allied invasion fleet. Over the next two days all these ships were either sunk or driven ashore, only one submarine escaped to Toulon, after an unsuccessful attack on the cruiser . French batteries and the invasion fleet exchanged fire throughout 8\u20139 November, with French troops defending Oran and the surrounding area stubbornly; bombardment by the British battleship brought about Oran's surrender on 10 November.\nAxis reaction.\nIn the central and eastern Atlantic, U-boats had been drawn away to attack trade convoy SL 125, and troop convoys between the UK and North Africa went largely unnoticed. A Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor detected on 31 October a task force of aircraft carriers and cruisers, and on 2 November a returning U-boat reported a troop ship convoy.\nOn 4 November the Germans became aware of an impending big operation, they anticipated another convoy run to Malta or an amphibious landing in Libya or at Bougie Bay. Seven U-boats of the Atlantic force were ordered to break through the Strait of Gibraltar and go to the North African coast. Nine Mediterranean U-boats were also deployed to the same region. A total of nineteen U-boats were stationed between the Balearic Islands and Algiers, whilst the Italian Navy deployed twenty-one submarines East of Algiers. On 7 November five German submarines made contact with the British invasion forces but all their attacks missed their target. On 8 November most of these U-boats were operating near Bougie and missed the landings at Algiers. When receiving news of the landings, D\u00f6nitz ordered twenty-five of the Atlantic U-boats to move towards the Morocco area and Gibraltar, leaving only ten U-boats in the North Atlantic and bringing the U-boat main offensive against the convoy lanes to the United Kingdom to a virtual standstill. The first wave of nine U-boats to arrive off Morocco ran into a well-prepared defense and achieved little. Only sank three large transports on the anchorage of Fedala, forcing the port to close and ships to divert to Casablanca. The second wave of fourteen U-boats was sent to the area West of Gibraltar, trying to block all traffic in and out the Straits. They sank the escort carrier and the destroyer tender with heavy loss of life. In both theaters of operation, the Mediterranean and Atlantic, the Germans lost eight U-boats, and the Italians two.\nBetween 8 and 14 November German bomber and torpedo aircraft attacked ships along the North African coast. They sank two troop transports, one landing ship, two transport ships and the sloop . The aircraft carrier and the monitor were damaged by bombs.\nAssault on Bougie.\nThere were limited land communications to move quickly from Algiers eastwards to Tunisia. The Allies had planned additional landings at Bougie and Bone in order to speed up that advance, but there were not enough resources available to execute these landings together with the main landings at Oran and Algiers. On 10 November the British 36th Infantry Brigade was boarded on three troop transports which landed unopposed, under the cover of a bombardment force in the harbor of Bougie on 11 November. A further troop transport was to land commandos, RAF personnel and petrol at Djidelli, with the goal to capture the airfield there and provide air cover over Bougie. Due to the heavy surf, this landing was delayed and finally diverted to Bougie and as a consequence air cover was only available from 13 November onward. The Axis air force based in Sardinia and Sicily exploited the lack of air cover between 11 and 13 November to execute heavy attacks on the harbour of Bougie. They sank the empty troop transports , and the landing ship \"Karanja\".\nAftermath.\nPolitical results.\nIt quickly became clear that Giraud lacked the authority to take command of the French forces. He preferred to wait in Gibraltar for the results of the landing. However, Darlan in Algiers had such authority. Eisenhower, with the support of Roosevelt and Churchill, made an agreement with Darlan, recognising him as French \"High Commissioner\" in North Africa. In return, Darlan ordered all French forces in North Africa to cease resistance to the Allies and to cooperate instead. The deal was made on 10 November, and French resistance ceased almost at once. The French troops in North Africa who were not already captured submitted to and eventually joined the Allied forces. Men from French North Africa would see much combat under the Allied banner as part of the French Expeditionary Corps (consisting of 112,000 troops in April 1944) in the Italian campaign, where Maghrebis (mostly Moroccans) made up over 60% of the unit's soldiers.\nThe American press protested, immediately dubbing it the \"Darlan Deal\", pointing out that Roosevelt had made a brazen bargain with Hitler's puppets in France. If a main goal of Torch had originally been the liberation of North Africa, with this deal that had been jettisoned in favour of safe passage through North Africa. When Adolf Hitler learned of Darlan's deal with the Allies, he immediately ordered the occupation of Vichy France.\nThe Eisenhower/Darlan agreement meant that the officials appointed by the Vichy regime would remain in power in North Africa. No role was provided for Free France, which deeply offended De Gaulle. It also offended much of the British and American public, who regarded all Vichy French as Nazi collaborators. Eisenhower insisted that he had no real choice if his forces were to move on against the Axis in Tunisia, rather than fight the French in Algeria and Morocco. On 24 December, Fernand Bonnier de La Chapelle, a French resistance fighter and anti-fascist monarchist, assassinated Darlan. Giraud succeeded Darlan but, like him, replaced few of the Vichy officials. Under pressure from the Allies and De Gaulle's supporters, the French r\u00e9gime shifted, with Vichy officials gradually replaced and its more offensive decrees rescinded.\nMilitary consequences.\nToulon.\nDarlan ordered cease fire in North Africa on 10 November, and the next day the Germans and the Italians invaded Vichy France. One of their goals was to seize the French fleet in Toulon. Darlan invited the French commander of the fleet in Toulon, Jean de Laborde to join the Allies, but instead the French commander ordered the fleet scuttled on 27 November when the Germans entered Toulon.\nTunisia.\nAfter the German and Italian occupation of Vichy France, the French sided with the Allies, providing a third corps (XIX Corps) for the First Army under the command of Anderson. On 9 November, Axis forces started to build up in French Tunisia, unopposed by the local French forces. After consolidating in Algeria, the Allies began the Tunisia Campaign. Elements of the First Army came to within of Tunis before a counterattack at Djedeida thrust them back. Meanwhile, after their victory at El-Alamein, the Eighth Army under Lieutenant-General Bernard Montgomery was pushing German and Italian troops under Erwin Rommel steadily towards Tunisia from the East. In January 1943 they reached South Tunisia where Axis troops made a stand at the Mareth Line. In the west, the US II Corps suffered defeats at the Battle of Sidi Bou Zid on 14\u201315 February and the Battle of Kasserine Pass on 19 February, but Allied reinforcements halted the Axis advance on 22 February. Fredendall was sacked and replaced by George Patton. General Sir Harold Alexander arrived in Tunisia in late February as commander of the new 18th Army Group, which had been created to command the Eighth Army and the Allied forces fighting in Tunisia. The Axis forces attacked eastward at the Battle of Medenine on 6 March but were easily repulsed by the Eighth Army. On 9 March, Rommel left Tunisia to be replaced by J\u00fcrgen von Arnim. The First and Eighth Armies attacked again in April. On 6 May the British took Tunis and American forces reached Bizerte on 7 May. By 13 May, all Axis forces in Tunisia had surrendered.\nLater influence.\nDespite Operation Torch's role in the war and logistical success, it has been largely overlooked in many popular histories of the war and in general cultural influence. \"The Economist\" speculated that this was because French forces were the initial enemies of the landing, making for a difficult fit into the war's overall narrative in general histories. The operation was America's first armed deployment in the Arab world since the Barbary Wars and, according to \"The Economist\", laid the foundations for America's postwar Middle East policy.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73240", "revid": "1308878329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73240", "title": "Holyrood Abbey", "text": "Architectural structure in Edinburgh\nHolyrood Abbey is a ruined abbey of the Canons Regular in Edinburgh, Scotland. The abbey was founded in 1128 by David I of Scotland. During the 15th century, the abbey guesthouse was developed into a royal residence, and after the Scottish Reformation the Palace of Holyroodhouse was expanded further. The abbey church was used as a parish church until the 17th century, and has been ruined since the 18th century. The remaining walls of the abbey lie adjacent to the palace, at the eastern end of Edinburgh's Royal Mile. The site of the abbey is protected as a scheduled monument.\nEtymology of name.\nRood is a word for the cross on which Jesus Christ was crucified; thus the name Holyrood is equivalent to \"Holy Cross\".\nHistory.\nLegend relates that in 1127, while King David I was hunting in the forests to the east of Edinburgh during the Feast of the Cross, he was thrown from his horse after it had been startled by a hart. According to variations of the story, the king was saved from being gored by the charging animal when it was startled either by the miraculous appearance of a holy cross descending from the skies, or by sunlight reflected from a crucifix which suddenly appeared between the hart's antlers while the king attempted to grasp them in self-defence. As an act of thanksgiving for his escape, David I founded Holyrood Abbey on the site in 1128.\nIn the church was preserved, in a golden reliquary, an object said to be a fragment of the True Cross brought by David's mother, St. Margaret, from Waltham Abbey, and known thereafter as the Black Rood of Scotland (the Holyrood (cross)). At the battle of Neville's Cross, in 1346, this precious relic fell into the hands of the English, and it was placed in Durham Cathedral, from where it disappeared at the Reformation.\nThe abbey was originally served by a community of Augustinian Canons Regular from Merton Priory. The layout of the original church at Holyrood, now known only from excavations, probably came from the 1125 church at the priory. In 1177 the papal legate Vivian held council here. In 1189 the nobles and prelates of Scotland met here to discuss raising a ransom for William the Lion.\nThe original abbey church of Holyrood was largely reconstructed between 1195 and 1230. The completed building consisted of a six-bay aisled choir, three-bay transepts with a central tower above, and an eight-bay aisled nave with twin towers at its west front. Some scholars believe the high vaults to be sexpartite (though this is not clearly supported by the 17th century illustrations of the interior). Such a design was probably archaic in that period, and difficult to execute or maintain. Evidence of the construction qualities of the stonemasons has remained on the S aisle vaults, which are set on an almost square plan of 4.4 m (14 feet), but built relatively roughly, with thin flagstones and not much attention to keeping the vertices straight. They were probably plastered, with exposed thin ribs.\nAmong the chief benefactors of Holyrood during the four centuries of its existence as a religious house were Kings David I and II; Robert, Bishop of St. Andrews; and Fergus of Galloway.\nAround the abbey was a five-mile area of sanctuary, taking in much of Holyrood Park, where debtors and those accused of crimes could appeal to the Bailie of Holyroodhouse for protection. Brass sanctuary stones mark the boundary of the sanctuary on the Royal Mile. Those granted sanctuary would be given lodgings in the buildings around the abbey and obtained the nickname 'Abbey Lairds'.\nThe Parliament of Scotland met at the abbey in 1256, 1285, 1327, 1366, 1384, 1389 and 1410. In 1326, Robert the Bruce held parliament here, and there is evidence that Holyrood was being used as a royal residence by 1329. The Treaty of Edinburgh\u2013Northampton (1328), which ended the First War of Scottish Independence, was signed by Robert I in the \"King's Chamber\" at Holyrood in March 1328. The abbey's position close to Edinburgh Castle meant that it was often visited by Scotland's kings, who were lodged in the guest house situated to the west of the abbey cloister. In the mid-15th century, with the emergence of Edinburgh as the main seat of the royal court and the chief city in the kingdom, the Kings of Scots increasingly used the accommodation at Holyrood for secular purposes. James II and his twin brother Alexander, Duke of Rothesay, were born there in October 1430. James was also crowned at Holyrood in 1437 and building works were carried out before his marriage there in 1449.\nBetween 1498 and 1501, James IV constructed a royal palace at Holyrood, adjacent to the abbey cloister. The Abbey refectory was converted into a Great Hall for the Palace, and a new refectory was built to the east for the community . In 1507 and 1508 the dances, masques, and banquets concluding the tournaments of the Wild Knight and the Black Lady were held in the converted refectory.\nA corps of guards were instituted at the end of the 15th century to guard the monarch and enforce law and order within the precincts of the palace and Abbey Sanctuary called the High Constables and Guard of Honour of the Palace of Holyroodhouse.\n16th century onwards.\nRoyal influence over the abbey further increased when in 1538 Robert Stewart, the infant, illegitimate son of James V, was appointed as commendator of Holyrood.\nDuring the War of the Rough Wooing, the invading English armies of the Earl of Hertford inflicted structural damage on Holyrood Abbey in 1544 and 1547. Lead was stripped from the roof, the bells were removed, and the contents of the abbey were plundered. In 1559, during the Scottish Reformation, the abbey suffered further damage when a mob destroyed the altars and looted the rest of the church. With the reformation and the end of monastic services, the east end of the abbey church became redundant. In 1569, Adam Bothwell, the commendator of Holyrood, informed the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland that the east end was in such a state of disrepair that the choir and transept should be demolished. This was done the following year, retaining only the nave, which by then was serving as the parish church of the burgh of Canongate. Between 1570 and 1573 an east gable was erected, closing the east end of the former nave, all but two of the windows in the nave were blocked up, the royal tombs were removed to a new royal burial vault in the south aisle and the old east end was demolished.\nThe abbey was extensively remodelled in 1633 for the coronation of Charles I which was undertaken with full Anglican rites.\nIn 1686, James VII established a Jesuit college within Holyrood Palace. The following year, the Protestant congregation was moved to the new Kirk of the Canongate, and the abbey was converted into a Roman Catholic Chapel Royal and the chapel of the Order of the Thistle. The abbey church was remodelled according to the plans of James Smith, and was fitted with elaborate thrones and stalls for the individual Knights of the Thistle, carved by Grinling Gibbons. However, in 1688, following the Glorious Revolution, the Edinburgh mob broke into the abbey, entered the Chapel Royal and desecrated the royal tombs.\nThe association of the church with these events and the absence of a royal court left the building out of public interest. James Hamilton, 6th Duke of Hamilton commissioned the architect John Douglas and the stonemason James McPherson to replace the ageing timber roof trusses by stone vaults and outer stone slabs, the work being carried out between 1758 and 1760. However, this proved to be a disastrous change. The excessive weight of the stone could not be supported by the walls. The strength of stone vaults depends on the containment of their thrusts, which the decayed flying buttresses could not contain any more, and a small movement (less than 1/30 of the span) can cause severe deformation and collapse. It took six years for the deformation to become alarming. This forced the Barons of the Exchequer (the administrators of the Palace) to close the church on safety grounds in 1766, following inspection by William Mylne.\nOn 2 December 1768 the roof collapsed in two stages, leaving the abbey as it currently stands, a roofless ruin.\nThe restoration of the abbey has been proposed several times since the 18th century \u2013 in 1835 by the architect James Gillespie Graham as a meeting place for the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland and, in 1906, as a chapel for the Knights of the Thistle \u2013 but both proposals were rejected.\nIn July 1829, the ruins of the Holyrood Chapel were visited by Felix Mendelssohn. Holyrood, as Mendelssohn related to his family in a letter, served as inspiration for his \"Scottish Symphony\".\nCoronations.\nHolyrood Abbey was the site of the coronations of James II in 1437, Margaret Tudor in 1503, Mary of Guise in 1540, Anne of Denmark in 1590, and Charles I in 1633.\nWeddings.\nThe abbey was the site of numerous royal weddings. These include:\nBurials.\nThe abbey was the site of many royal funerals and interments, mostly in the east bay of the south aisle, known as the \"Royal Vault\". Royals originally interred here include:\nNon-royal interments/monuments of note include:\nIn art.\nThe abbey ruins are depicted in the 19th-century painting \"The Ruins of Holyrood Chapel\" by the French artist Louis Daguerre.\nIn literature.\nIn March 1825, a moonlit scene entitled 'Ruins of Holyrood Chapel' was put into the Diorama, Regent's Park, London, inspiring the poem 'Holyrood' by Letitia Elizabeth Landon, printed in \"The London Literary Gazette\". Although the article in the \"Gazette\" does not say so specifically, this is presumably the display mentioned in the article on the work by Louis Daguerre above.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73241", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73241", "title": "Mitch Kapor", "text": "American entrepreneur (born 1950)\nMitchell David Kapor ( ; born November 1, 1950) is an American entrepreneur best known for his work as an application developer in the early days of the personal computer software industry, later founding Lotus, where he was instrumental in developing the Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet. He left Lotus in 1986. In 1990 with John Perry Barlow and John Gilmore, he co-founded the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and served as its chairman until 1994. In 2003, he became the founding chair of the Mozilla Foundation, creator of the open source web browser Firefox. Kapor has been an investor in the personal computing industry, and supporter of social causes via Kapor Capital and the Kapor Center. He serves on the board of SMASH, a non-profit founded by his wife, Freada Kapor Klein, to help underrepresented scholars hone their STEM knowledge while building personal networks and skills for careers in tech and the sciences.\nEarly life and education.\nKapor was born to a Jewish family in Brooklyn, New York, and raised in Freeport, New York on Long Island, where he graduated from high school in 1967. He received a B.A. from Yale College in 1971 and studied psychology, linguistics, and computer science in an interdisciplinary major, also attending the Boston-based Beacon College, which had a satellite campus in Washington, D.C. at the time. He began a master's degree at the MIT Sloan School of Management, in 1979 but dropped out and did not finish his master's until 2025. Though he served on the faculty of the MIT Media Lab and the University of California, Berkeley School of Information, in the interm.\nCareer.\nLotus.\nKapor and his business partner Jonathan Sachs founded Lotus in 1982 with backing from Ben Rosen. Lotus' first product was presentation software for the Apple II known as Lotus Executive Briefing System. Kapor founded Lotus after leaving his post as head of development at VisiCorp, the distributors of the VisiCalc spreadsheet, and selling all his rights to VisiPlot and VisiTrend to VisiCorp.\nShortly after Kapor left VisiCorp, he and Sachs produced an integrated spreadsheet and graphics program. Even though IBM and VisiCorp had a collaboration agreement whereby VisiCalc was being shipped simultaneously with the PC, Lotus had a clearly superior product. Lotus released Lotus 1-2-3 on January 26, 1983. Its name referred to the three ways the product could be used: as a spreadsheet, graphics package, and database manager. In practice, the latter two functions were less often used, but 1-2-3 was the most powerful spreadsheet program available.\nLotus was almost immediately successful, becoming the world's third-largest microcomputer software company in 1983 with US$million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024) in sales in its first year, compared to its business plan forecast of $1 million. Jerome Want says:\nUnder founder and CEO Mitch Kapor, Lotus was a company with few rules and fewer internal bureaucratic barriers... Kapor decided that he was no longer suited to running a company, and [in 1986] he replaced himself with Jim Manzi.\nDigital rights activism.\nKapor co-founded the Electronic Frontier Foundation in 1990 and was its chairman until 1994. EFF defends civil liberties in the digital world and works to ensure that rights and freedoms are enhanced and protected as the use of technology grows.\nKapor attended the first Wikimania in 2005.\nInvestments.\nKapor was the founding investor in UUNET, one of the first, and the largest among, early Internet service providers; in RealNetworks, the Internet's first streaming media company; and in Linden Lab, maker of the first successful virtual world, \"Second Life\". He was also founding chair of the Commercial Internet eXchange (CIX).\nIn 2003, he became the founding chair of the Mozilla Foundation, creator of the open source web browser Firefox.\nHe serves on the advisory board of the Sunlight Foundation. In May 2009, after founder Susan P. Crawford joined the Obama administration, Kapor took over chairmanship of OneWebDay\u2014the \"Earth Day for the internet\". In 1996, the Computer History Museum named him a Museum Fellow \"for his development of Lotus 1-2-3, the first major software application for the IBM PC\". He founded the Mitchell Kapor Foundation to support his philanthropic interests in environmental health.\nAs an active angel investor, Kapor participated in the initial rounds of Dropcam, Twilio, Asana, Cleanify and Uber.\nKapor Center and Kapor Capital.\nKapor founded the Kapor Center for Social Impact (the KaporCenter) in 2000 as an institution focused on tech inclusion and social impact. The institution's mission is to invest in social and financial capital in vital non-profit organizations.\nA part of the Kapor Center, Kapor Capital is its venture capital arm, and has operated since 2011. As of 2018, it has made over 160 investments, primarily in information technology seed-stage startups, with a particular focus on diversity.\nSince 2016, the Kapor Center for Social Impact and Kapor Capital have been located in the Uptown neighborhood of Oakland.\nDiversity in technology.\nIn August 2015, Mitch and Freada Kapor announced they would invest $40 million over three years to accelerate their work to make the tech ecosystem more inclusive.\nIn addition to his roles at Kapor Capital and Kapor Center, Mitch currently serves on the board of SMASH, whose mission is to enhance equal opportunity in education and the workplace, and sits on the advisory board of Generation Investment Management, a firm whose vision is to embed sustainability into the mainstream capital markets. Like the two Kapor namesake organizations, SMASH is also located in Uptown Oakland.\nPersonal life.\nHe has a daughter and son with his first wife.\nKapor's second wife is Freada Kapor Klein and resides in Oakland and Healdsburg, California. Both served on the board of trustees of the Summer Science Program from 2004 to 2006. He was a student of the program in 1966.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73242", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73242", "title": "Birthday problem", "text": "Probability of shared birthdays\nIn probability theory, the birthday problem asks for the probability that, in a set of n randomly chosen people, at least two will share the same birthday. The birthday paradox is the counterintuitive fact that only 23 people are needed for that probability to exceed 50%.\nThe birthday paradox is a veridical paradox: it seems wrong at first glance but is, in fact, true. While it may seem surprising that only 23 individuals are required to reach a 50% probability of a shared birthday, this result is made more intuitive by considering that the birthday comparisons will be made between every possible pair of individuals. With 23 individuals, there are \u00a0=\u00a0253 pairs to consider.\nReal-world applications for the birthday problem include a cryptographic attack called the birthday attack, which uses this probabilistic model to reduce the complexity of finding a collision for a hash function, as well as calculating the approximate risk of a hash collision existing within the hashes of a given size of population.\nThe problem is generally attributed to Harold Davenport in about 1927, though he did not publish it at the time. Davenport did not claim to be its discoverer \"because he could not believe that it had not been stated earlier\". The first publication of a version of the birthday problem was by Richard von Mises in 1939.\nCalculating the probability.\nConsider the event A that a group of k people does not have any repeated birthdays, and let the complementary event B be that of a group of k people contains at least two people who share a birthday. Then the probabilities \"P\"(\"A\") and \"P\"(\"B\") of the two events are related by the equation \"P\"(\"B\") \n 1 \u2212 \"P\"(\"A\"). The probability \"P\"(\"A\") can be computed using the perspective of permutations, as follows. Let formula_1 be the total number of ways that k can have distinct birthdays, and let formula_2 be the total number of ways k people can have birthdays arranged, including possibly repeated birthdays. The probability \"P\"(\"A\") is the ratio of these two quantities, formula_1 divided by formula_2. When formula_5, the two counts are given by \nformula_6\nand\nformula_7\ntheir ratio is formula_8, and so \nformula_9\nAnother way the birthday problem can be solved is by asking for an approximate probability that in a group of n people at least two have the same birthday. For simplicity, leap years, twins, selection bias, and seasonal and weekly variations in birth rates are generally disregarded, and instead it is assumed that there are 365 possible birthdays, and that each person's birthday is equally likely to be any of these days, independent of the other people in the group.\nFor independent birthdays, a uniform distribution of birthdays minimizes the probability of two people in a group having the same birthday. Any unevenness increases the likelihood of two people sharing a birthday. However real-world birthdays are not sufficiently uneven to make much change: the real-world group size necessary to have a greater than 50% chance of a shared birthday is 23, as in the theoretical uniform distribution.\nThe goal is to compute \"P\"(\"B\"), the probability that at least two people in the room have the same birthday. However, it is simpler to calculate \"P\"(\"A\"\u2032), the probability that no two people in the room have the same birthday. Then, because \"B\" and \"A\"\u2032 are the only two possibilities and are also mutually exclusive, \"P\"(\"B\") \n 1 \u2212 \"P\"(\"A\"\u2032).\nHere is the calculation of \"P\"(\"B\") for 23 people. Let the 23 people be numbered 1 to 23. The event that all 23 people have different birthdays is the same as the event that person 2 does not have the same birthday as person 1, and that person 3 does not have the same birthday as either person 1 or person 2, and so on, and finally that person 23 does not have the same birthday as any of persons 1 through 22. Let these events be called Event 2, Event 3, and so on. Event 1 is the event of person 1 having a birthday, which occurs with probability 1. This conjunction of events may be computed using conditional probability: the probability of Event 2 is , as person 2 may have any birthday other than the birthday of person 1. Similarly, the probability of Event 3 given that Event 2 occurred is , as person 3 may have any of the birthdays not already taken by persons 1 and 2. This continues until finally the probability of Event 23 given that all preceding events occurred is . Finally, the principle of conditional probability implies that \"P\"(\"A\"\u2032) is equal to the product of these individual probabilities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe terms of equation (1) can be collected to arrive at:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEvaluating equation (2) gives \"P\"(\"A\"\u2032) \u2248 0.492703\nTherefore, \"P\"(\"B\") \u2248 1 \u2212 0.492703 \n 0.507297\u00a0(50.7297%).\nThis process can be generalized to a group of n people, where \"p\"(\"n\") is the probability of at least two of the n people sharing a birthday. It is easier to first calculate the probability \"p\"(\"n\") that all n birthdays are \"different\". According to the pigeonhole principle, \"p\"(\"n\") is zero when \"n\" &gt; 365. When \"n\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a0365:\nformula_10\nwhere ! is the factorial operator, is the binomial coefficient and \"kPr\" denotes permutation.\nThe equation expresses the fact that the first person has no one to share a birthday, the second person cannot have the same birthday as the first , the third cannot have the same birthday as either of the first two , and in general the nth birthday cannot be the same as any of the \"n\" \u2212 1 preceding birthdays.\nThe event of at least two of the n persons having the same birthday is complementary to all n birthdays being different. Therefore, its probability \"p\"(\"n\") is\nformula_11\nThe following table shows the probability for some other values of n (for this table, the existence of leap years is ignored, and each birthday is assumed to be equally likely):\nApproximations.\nThe Taylor series expansion of the exponential function (the constant \"e\" \u2248)\nformula_12\nprovides a first-order approximation for \"e\"\"x\" for formula_13:\nformula_14\nTo apply this approximation to the first expression derived for \"p\"(\"n\"), set \"x\" \n \u2212. Thus,\nformula_15\nThen, replace a with non-negative integers for each term in the formula of \"p\"(\"n\") until \"a\" \n \"n\" \u2212 1, for example, when \"a\" \n 1,\n formula_16\nThe first expression derived for \"p\"(\"n\") can be approximated as\nformula_17\nTherefore,\nformula_18\nAn even coarser approximation is given by\nformula_19\nwhich, as the graph illustrates, is still fairly accurate.\nAccording to the approximation, the same approach can be applied to any number of \"people\" and \"days\". If rather than 365 days there are d, if there are n persons, and if \"n\" \u226a \"d\", then using the same approach as above we achieve the result that if \"p\"(\"n\", \"d\") is the probability that at least two out of n people share the same birthday from a set of d available days, then:\nformula_20\nSimple exponentiation.\nThe probability of any two people not having the same birthday is . In a room containing \"n\" people, there are pairs of people, i.e. events. The probability of no two people sharing the same birthday can be approximated by assuming that these events are independent and hence by multiplying their probability together. Being independent would be equivalent to picking with replacement, any pair of people in the world, not just in a room. In short can be multiplied by itself times, which gives us\nformula_21\nSince this is the probability of no one having the same birthday, then the probability of someone sharing a birthday is\nformula_22\nAnd for the group of 23 people, the probability of sharing is\nformula_23\nPoisson approximation.\nApplying the Poisson approximation for the binomial on the group of 23 people,\nformula_24\nso\nformula_25\nThe result is over 50% as previous descriptions. This approximation is the same as the one above based on the Taylor expansion that uses \"ex\" \u2248 1 + \"x\".\nSquare approximation.\nA good rule of thumb which can be used for mental calculation is the relation\nformula_26\nwhich can also be written as\nformula_27\nwhich works well for probabilities less than or equal to . In these equations, d is the number of days in a year.\nFor instance, to estimate the number of people required for a chance of a shared birthday, we get\nformula_28\nWhich is not too far from the correct answer of 23.\nApproximation of number of people.\nThis can also be approximated using the following formula for the \"number\" of people necessary to have at least a chance of matching:\nformula_29\nThis is a result of the good approximation that an event with probability will have a chance of occurring at least once if it is repeated \"k\" ln 2 times.\n\nProbability table.\nThe lighter fields in this table show the number of hashes needed to achieve the given probability of collision (column) given a hash space of a certain size in bits (row). Using the birthday analogy: the \"hash space size\" resembles the \"available days\", the \"probability of collision\" resembles the \"probability of shared birthday\", and the \"required number of hashed elements\" resembles the \"required number of people in a group\". One could also use this chart to determine the minimum hash size required (given upper bounds on the hashes and probability of error), or the probability of collision (for fixed number of hashes and probability of error).\nFor comparison, to is the uncorrectable bit error rate of a typical hard disk. In theory, 128-bit hash functions, such as MD5, should stay within that range until about documents, even if its possible outputs are many more.\nAn upper bound on the probability and a lower bound on the number of people.\nThe argument below is adapted from an argument of Paul Halmos.\nAs stated above, the probability that no two birthdays coincide is\nformula_30\nAs in earlier paragraphs, interest lies in the smallest n such that \"p\"(\"n\") &gt;; or equivalently, the smallest n such that \"p\"(\"n\") &lt;.\nUsing the inequality 1 \u2212 \"x\" &lt; \"e\"\u2212\"x\" in the above expression we replace 1 \u2212 with \"e\"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2212\"k\"\u2044365. This yields\nformula_31\nTherefore, the expression above is not only an approximation, but also an upper bound of \"p\"(\"n\"). The inequality\nformula_32\nimplies \"p\"(\"n\") &lt;. Solving for n gives\nformula_33\nNow, 730 ln 2 is approximately 505.997, which is barely below 506, the value of \"n\"2 \u2212 \"n\" attained when \"n\" \n 23. Therefore, 23 people suffice. Incidentally, solving \"n\"2 \u2212 \"n\" \n 730 ln 2 for \"n\" gives the approximate formula of Frank H. Mathis cited above.\nThis derivation only shows that \"at most\" 23 people are needed to ensure the chances of a birthday match are at least even; it leaves open the possibility that n is 22 or less could also work.\nGeneralizations.\nArbitrary number of days.\nGiven a year with d days, the generalized birthday problem asks for the minimal number \"n\"(\"d\") such that, in a set of n randomly chosen people, the probability of a birthday coincidence is at least 50%. In other words, \"n\"(\"d\") is the minimal integer n such that\nformula_34\nThe classical birthday problem thus corresponds to determining \"n\"(365). The first 99 values of \"n\"(\"d\") are given here (sequence in the OEIS):\nA similar calculation shows that \"n\"(\"d\") = 23 when d is in the range 341\u2013372.\nA number of bounds and formulas for \"n\"(\"d\") have been published.\nFor any \"d\" \u2265 1, the number \"n\"(\"d\") satisfies\nformula_35\nThese bounds are optimal in the sense that the sequence \"n\"(\"d\") \u2212 \u221a2\"d\" ln 2\ngets arbitrarily close to\nformula_36\nwhile it has\nformula_37\nas its maximum, taken for \"d\" \n 43.\nThe bounds are sufficiently tight to give the exact value of \"n\"(\"d\") in most of the cases. For example, for \"d\" \n 365 these bounds imply that 22.7633 &lt; \"n\"(365) &lt; 23.7736 and 23 is the only integer in that range. In general, it follows from these bounds that \"n\"(\"d\") always equals either\nformula_38\nwhere \u2308 \u00b7 \u2309 denotes the ceiling function.\nThe formula\nformula_39\nholds for 73% of all integers d. The formula\nformula_40\nholds for almost all d, i.e., for a set of integers d with asymptotic density 1.\nThe formula\nformula_41\nholds for all \"d\" \u2264, but it is conjectured that there are infinitely many counterexamples to this formula.\nThe formula\nformula_42\nholds for all \"d\" \u2264, and it is conjectured that this formula holds for all d.\nMore than two people sharing a birthday.\nIt is possible to extend the problem to ask how many people in a group are necessary for there to be a greater than 50% probability that at least 3, 4, 5, etc. of the group share the same birthday.\nThe first few values are as follows: &gt;50% probability of 3 people sharing a birthday - 88 people; &gt;50% probability of 4 people sharing a birthday - 187 people (sequence in the OEIS).\nEveryone shares a birthday.\nThe strong birthday problem asks for the number of people that need to be gathered together before there is a 50% chance that \"everyone\" in the gathering shares their birthday with at least one other person. For d=365 days the answer is 3,064 people.\nThe number of people needed for arbitrary number of days is given by (sequence in the OEIS)\nProbability of a shared birthday (collision).\nThe birthday problem can be generalized as follows:\nGiven n random integers drawn from a discrete uniform distribution with range [1,\"d\"], what is the probability \"p\"(\"n\"; \"d\") that at least two numbers are the same? (\"d\" \n 365 gives the usual birthday problem.)\nThe generic results can be derived using the same arguments given above.\nformula_43\nConversely, if \"n\"(\"p\"; \"d\") denotes the number of random integers drawn from [1,\"d\"] to obtain a probability p that at least two numbers are the same, then\nformula_44\nThe birthday problem in this more generic sense applies to hash functions: the expected number of \"N\"-bit hashes that can be generated before getting a collision is not 2\"N\", but rather only . This is exploited by birthday attacks on cryptographic hash functions and is the reason why a small number of collisions in a hash table are, for all practical purposes, inevitable.\nThe theory behind the birthday problem was used by Zoe Schnabel under the name of capture-recapture statistics to estimate the size of fish population in lakes. The birthday problem and its generalizations are also useful tools for modelling coincidences.\nProbability of a unique collision.\nThe classic birthday problem allows for more than two people to share a particular birthday or for there to be matches on multiple days. The probability that among n people there is exactly one pair of individuals with a matching birthday given d possible days is\n formula_45\nUnlike the standard birthday problem, as n increases the probability reaches a maximum value before decreasing. For example, for \"d\" \n 365, the probability of a unique match has a maximum value of 0.3864 occurring when \"n\" \n 28.\nGeneralization to multiple types of people.\nThe basic problem considers all trials to be of one \"type\". The birthday problem has been generalized to consider an arbitrary number of types. In the simplest extension there are two types of people, say m men and n women, and the problem becomes characterizing the probability of a shared birthday between at least one man and one woman. (Shared birthdays between two men or two women do not count.) The probability of no shared birthdays here is\nformula_46\nwhere \"d\" \n 365 and \"S\"2 are Stirling numbers of the second kind. Consequently, the desired probability is 1 \u2212 \"p\"0.\nThis variation of the birthday problem is interesting because there is not a unique solution for the total number of people \"m\" + \"n\". For example, the usual 50% probability value is realized for both a 32-member group of 16 men and 16 women and a 49-member group of 43 women and 6 men.\nOther birthday problems.\nFirst match.\nA related question is, as people enter a room one at a time, which one is most likely to be the first to have the same birthday as someone already in the room? That is, for what n is \"p\"(\"n\") \u2212 \"p\"(\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01) maximum? The answer is 20\u2014if there is a prize for first match, the best position in line is 20th.\nSame birthday as you.\nIn the birthday problem, neither of the two people is chosen in advance. By contrast, the probability \"q\"(\"n\") that \"at least one other person\" in a room of n other people has the same birthday as a \"particular\" person (for example, you) is given by\n formula_47\nand for general d by\n formula_48\nIn the standard case of \"d\" \n 365, substituting \"n\" \n 23 gives about 6.1%, which is less than 1 chance in 16. For a greater than 50% chance that \"at least\" one other person in a roomful of n people has the same birthday as \"you\", n would need to be at least 253. This number is significantly higher than \n 182.5: the reason is that it is likely that there are some birthday matches among the other people in the room.\nNumber of people with a shared birthday.\nFor any one person in a group of \"n\" people the probability that he or she shares his birthday with someone else is formula_49, as explained above. The expected number of people with a shared (non-unique) birthday can now be calculated easily by multiplying that probability by the number of people (\"n\"), so it is:\n formula_50 \n(This multiplication can be done this way because of the linearity of the expected value of indicator variables). This implies that the expected number of people with a non-shared (unique) birthday is:\n formula_51 \nSimilar formulas can be derived for the expected number of people who share with three, four, etc. other people.\nNumber of people until every birthday is achieved.\nThe expected number of people needed until every birthday is achieved is called the Coupon collector's problem. It can be calculated by \"nHn\", where \"Hn\" is the nth harmonic number. For 365 possible dates (the birthday problem), the answer is 2365.\nNear matches.\nAnother generalization is to ask for the probability of finding at least one pair in a group of n people with birthdays within k calendar days of each other, if there are d equally likely birthdays.\nformula_52\nThe number of people required so that the probability that some pair will have a birthday separated by k days or fewer will be higher than 50% is given in the following table:\nThus in a group of just seven random people, it is more likely than not that two of them will have a birthday within a week of each other.\nNumber of days with a certain number of birthdays.\nNumber of days with at least one birthday.\nThe expected number of different birthdays, i.e. the number of days that are at least one person's birthday, is:\nformula_53\nThis follows from the expected number of days that are no one's birthday:\nformula_54\nwhich follows from the probability that a particular day is no one's birthday, , easily summed because of the linearity of the expected value.\nFor instance, with d = 365, you should expect about 21 different birthdays when there are 22 people, or 46 different birthdays when there are 50 people. When there are 1000 people, there will be around 341 different birthdays (24 unclaimed birthdays).\nNumber of days with at least two birthdays.\nThe above can be generalized from the distribution of the number of people with their birthday on any particular day, which is a Binomial distribution with probability . Multiplying the relevant probability by d will then give the expected number of days. For example, the expected number of days which are shared; i.e. which are at least two (i.e. not zero and not one) people's birthday is:\nformula_55\nNumber of people who repeat a birthday.\nThe probability that the kth integer randomly chosen from [1,\"d\"] will repeat at least one previous choice equals \"q\"(\"k\" \u2212 1; \"d\") above. The expected total number of times a selection will repeat a previous selection as n such integers are chosen equals\nformula_56\nThis can be seen to equal the number of people minus the expected number of different birthdays.\nThe distribution of the random variable reporting the number k of integers to be chosen in order to get exactly c repeats (for a constant c) converges to a chi-distributed random variable as formula_57.\nAverage number of people to get at least one shared birthday.\nIn an alternative formulation of the birthday problem, one asks the \"average\" number of people required to find a pair with the same birthday. If we consider the probability function Pr[n people have at least one shared birthday], this \"average\" is determining the mean of the distribution, as opposed to the customary formulation, which asks for the median. The problem is relevant to several hashing algorithms analyzed by Donald Knuth in his book \"The Art of Computer Programming\". It may be shown that if one samples uniformly, with replacement, from a population of size \"M\", the number of trials required for the first repeated sampling of \"some\" individual has expected value , where\n formula_58\nThe function\n formula_59\nhas been studied by Srinivasa Ramanujan and has asymptotic expansion:\n formula_60\nWith \"M\" = 365 days in a year, the average number of people required to find a pair with the same birthday is \"n\" = 1 + \"Q\"(\"M\") \u2248 24.61659, somewhat more than 23, the number required for a 50% chance. In the best case, two people will suffice; at worst, the maximum possible number of \"M\" + 1 = 366 people is needed; but on average, only 25 people are required\nAn analysis using indicator random variables can provide a simpler but approximate analysis of this problem. For each pair (\"i\", \"j\") for k people in a room, we define the indicator random variable \"Xij\", for formula_61, by\nformula_62\nformula_63\nLet \"X\" be a random variable counting the pairs of individuals with the same birthday.\nformula_64\nformula_65\nFor \"n\" = 365, if \"k\" = 28, the expected number of pairs of individuals with the same birthday is \u00a0\u2248\u00a01.0356. Therefore, we can expect at least one matching pair with at least 28 people.\nIn the 2014 FIFA World Cup, each of the 32 squads had 23 players. An analysis of the official squad lists suggested that 16 squads had pairs of players sharing birthdays, and of these 5 squads had two pairs: Argentina, France, Iran, South Korea and Switzerland each had two pairs, and Australia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Cameroon, Colombia, Honduras, Netherlands, Nigeria, Russia, Spain and USA each with one pair.\nVoracek, Tran and Formann showed that the majority of people markedly overestimate the number of people that is necessary to achieve a given probability of people having the same birthday, and markedly underestimate the probability of people having the same birthday when a specific sample size is given. Further results showed that psychology students and women did better on the task than casino visitors/personnel or men, but were less confident about their estimates.\nReverse problem.\nThe reverse problem is to find, for a fixed probability p,\nthe greatest n for which the probability \"p\"(\"n\") is smaller than the given p, or the smallest n for which the probability \"p\"(\"n\") is greater than the given p.\nTaking the above formula for \"d\"\u00a0\n\u00a0365, one has\nformula_66\nThe following table gives some sample calculations.\nSome values falling outside the bounds have been colored to show that the approximation is not always exact.\nPartition problem.\nA related problem is the partition problem, a variant of the knapsack problem from operations research. Some weights are put on a balance scale; each weight is an integer number of grams randomly chosen between one gram and one million grams (one tonne). The question is whether one can usually (that is, with probability close to 1) transfer the weights between the left and right arms to balance the scale. (In case the sum of all the weights is an odd number of grams, a discrepancy of one gram is allowed.) If there are only two or three weights, the answer is very clearly no; although there are some combinations which work, the majority of randomly selected combinations of three weights do not. If there are very many weights, the answer is clearly yes. The question is, how many are just sufficient? That is, what is the number of weights such that it is equally likely for it to be possible to balance them as it is to be impossible?\nOften, people's intuition is that the answer is above . Most people's intuition is that it is in the thousands or tens of thousands, while others feel it should at least be in the hundreds. The correct answer is 23.\nThe reason is that the correct comparison is to the number of partitions of the weights into left and right. There are 2\"N\" \u2212 1 different partitions for \"N\" weights, and the left sum minus the right sum can be thought of as a new random quantity for each partition. The distribution of the sum of weights is approximately Gaussian, with a peak at \"N\" and width , so that when 2\"N\" \u2212 1 is approximately equal to the transition occurs. 223 \u2212 1 is about 4 million, while the width of the distribution is only 5 million.\nIn fiction.\nArthur C. Clarke's 1961 novel \"A Fall of Moondust\" contains a section where the main characters, trapped underground for an indefinite amount of time, are celebrating a birthday and find themselves discussing the validity of the birthday problem. As stated by a physicist passenger: \"If you have a group of more than twenty-four people, the odds are better than even that two of them have the same birthday.\" Eventually, out of 22 present, it is revealed that two characters share the same birthday, May 23.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73243", "revid": "43272755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73243", "title": "The Dark Knight Returns", "text": "1986 four-issue comic book miniseries by Frank Miller\nThe Dark Knight Returns (alternatively titled Batman: The Dark Knight Returns but originally titled Batman: The Dark Knight) is a 1986 four-issue comic book miniseries starring Batman, written by Frank Miller, illustrated by Miller and Klaus Janson, with color by Lynn Varley, and published by DC Comics. It tells an alternative story of Bruce Wayne who, at 55 years old, returns from a decade of retirement to fight crime while facing opposition from the Gotham City police force and the United States government. The story also features the return of classic foes Two-Face and the Joker, and culminates in a confrontation with Superman, who is now a pawn of the government.\nWhen originally published, the series was simply titled Batman: The Dark Knight, with a different title for each issue (\"The Dark Knight Returns\", \"The Dark Knight Triumphant\", \"Hunt the Dark Knight\", and \"The Dark Knight Falls\"), but when the series was collected into a single volume, the title of the first issue was applied to the entire series. Some of the earliest collected editions also bore the shorter series title. The story introduces Carrie Kelley as the new Robin and the hyper-violent street gang known as the Mutants. In the Pre-\"Flashpoint\" DC Multiverse, the events of \"The Dark Knight Returns\" and its associated titles were designated to occur on Earth-31.\nThe miniseries has since been followed by a number of sequels: \"The Dark Knight Strikes Again\", ', and \"Dark Knight Returns: The Golden Child\". A one-shot prequel, \"Dark Knight Returns: The Last Crusade\", takes place ten years before the original series. Both ' and \"All Star Batman &amp; Robin, the Boy Wonder\", are considered by Miller to be canon. Likewise, \"\" takes place in the \"Dark Knight\" universe.\n\"The Dark Knight Returns\" is widely considered to be one of the greatest and most influential Batman stories ever made, as well as one of the greatest works of comic art in general, and has been noted for helping reintroduce a darker and more mature-oriented version of the character (and superheroes in general) to pop culture during the 1980s. Various elements of the series have since been incorporated into depictions of Batman in other media, while a direct animated adaptation of the story, , was released as a two-part film across 2012 and 2013.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlot.\nPart 1: The Dark Knight Returns.\nIn a dystopian version of 1986, Bruce Wayne, aged 55, has given up the mantle of Batman after the death of Jason Todd 10 years prior. Crime is running rampant throughout Gotham City, much of which is being committed by a gang of juvenile delinquents called \"The Mutants\". After watching news reports about the Mutants' crimes, Wayne decides to return to his role as a vigilante. He stops multiple assaults \u2013 including one on two young girls, Carrie Kelley and her friend Michelle \u2013 and targets the Mutants. Batman's return is reported on the news and stimulates his archenemy, the Joker, to awaken from catatonia at Arkham Asylum.\nWhile foiling an armed robbery, Batman learns that the criminals are working for Harvey Dent. Previously known as Two-Face, Dent underwent extensive therapy and plastic surgery to reenter society before disappearing. Batman informs close-to-retirement Commissioner James \"Jim\" Gordon that Dent may be planning a larger scheme. Soon after, Dent announces his intention to hold Gotham ransom with a bomb. After Batman defeats Dent and his goons, he discovers that Dent's mind has completely warped into his Two-Face persona.\nPart 2: The Dark Knight Triumphant.\nAt the White House, Superman and President Ronald Reagan discuss Batman's actions, with the latter suggesting he may have to be arrested. At Gotham, Kelley, inspired by Batman, buys an imitation Robin costume and searches for him. Batman attacks the Mutants at the city dump with the Batmobile, but the Mutant Leader goads him into a hand-to-hand fight. Batman, due to his age and a decade of physical inactivity, is almost beaten to death. Kelley creates a diversion that allows her and Batman to return to the Batcave, where Wayne's butler Alfred Pennyworth tends to his wounds. Impressed with her bravery, Wayne decides to make Kelley his new protegee. Batman strategically defeats the Mutant Leader in a fight surrounded by the Mutants. Seeing Batman defeat their leader, most of the Mutants disband into smaller gangs. One of these gangs renames itself the \"Sons of the Batman\", using excessive violence against criminals.\nPart 3: Hunt the Dark Knight.\nClark Kent talks with Wayne and is then deployed by Washington to the Latin American country of Corto Maltese, where he fights Soviet combat forces in a conflict that may escalate into World War III.\nGordon's successor as commissioner, Captain Ellen Yindel, declares Batman a wanted criminal for his vigilantism. Meanwhile, Joker manipulates his caretakers to allow him onto a television talk show, where he murders everyone with his trademark toxin and escapes. Batman and Robin (Kelley) track him to a county fair while evading a Gotham police pursuit. Batman fights Joker, vowing to stop him permanently, feeling responsible for every murder the villain has committed. Batman paralyzes Joker but stops short of taking his life. Disappointed with Batman's refusal to kill him, Joker breaks his own neck and dies.\nPart 4: The Dark Knight Falls.\nA citywide manhunt for Batman begins. Elsewhere, Superman diverts a Soviet nuclear warhead which detonates in a desert, nearly killing him in the process, and survives only by absorbing the sun's energy from the plants in a nearby jungle. The United States is hit by an electromagnetic pulse as a result and descends into chaos during the following blackout. In Gotham, Batman and Robin turn the remaining Mutants and Sons of the Batman into a non-lethal vigilante gang, making Gotham the safest city in the country. Embarrassed, the U.S. government orders Superman to take Batman into custody. Superman demands to meet Batman, and Wayne chooses Crime Alley.\nSuperman tries to reason with Batman, but Batman uses his technological inventions to fight him on equal ground. During the battle, Superman compromises Batman's exoframe. However, an aging Oliver Queen manages to shoot Superman with a kryptonite-tipped arrow to weaken him. Standing over the defeated Superman, Batman has a sudden heart attack, apparently dying. Alfred destroys the Batcave and Wayne Manor before suffering a fatal stroke, exposing Batman as Bruce Wayne, whose fortune has disappeared. After Wayne's funeral, it is revealed that his death was staged using an antiarrhythmic agent that suspended his vital life signs. Clark attends the funeral and winks at the disguised Carrie after hearing Wayne's heartbeat. Some time afterward, Bruce Wayne leads Robin, Queen, and the rest of his followers into the caverns beyond the Batcave and prepares to continue his war on crime.\nBackground and creation.\nSince the 1950s, when the Comics Code Authority was established, the character of Batman had drifted from his darker, more serious roots. It was not until the 1970s when the character began to feature in darker stories once again; however, Batman was still commonly associated with the campy theme of the 1960s \"Batman\" TV series, and was regarded more as a father figure to Robin rather than as his original identity as a vigilante.\nIn the early 1980s, DC Comics promoted Batman group editor Dick Giordano to editorial director for the company. Writer-artist Frank Miller was recruited to create \"The Dark Knight Returns\". Giordano said he worked with Miller on the story's plot, and said, \"[t]he version that was finally done was about his fourth or fifth draft. The basic storyline was the same but there were a lot of detours along the way.\"\n\"With Batman, you've got a character that you can describe in just a few seconds: His parents were murdered by criminals; he's warring on crime for the rest of his life,\" Miller explained in the documentary \"Comic Book Confidential.\" \"He was created in 1938, and the character was just ruthless in his methods, terrifying to criminals. Over the years, that got softened and softened, because people started thinking that comics had to be just for kids... and Batman had to be made much nicer. And eventually, no kid could relate to him anymore.\"\nDuring the creation of the series, fellow comics writer/artist John Byrne told Miller, \"Robin must be a girl\", and Miller agreed. Miller said that the comic series' plot was inspired by Dirty Harry, specifically the 1983 film \"Sudden Impact\", in which Dirty Harry returns to crime-fighting after a lengthy convalescence. The series employed a 16-panel grid for its pages. Each page was composed of either a combination of 16 panels, or anywhere between sixteen and one panel per page. Giordano left the project halfway through because of disagreements over production deadlines. Comics historian Les Daniels wrote that Miller's idea of ignoring deadlines was \"the culmination of the quest towards artistic independence\".\nWhile the comic's ending features Batman faking his death and leading up the Sons of Batman to continue with his crusade against crime, symbolizing that Bruce Wayne dies but Batman lives on, this wasn't the original intention. During the MCM London Comic Con 2018, Miller revealed that in his original plans for the ending of \"The Dark Knight Returns\", Batman was going to be gunned down by the police while fighting them, but the story got away from him and changed his mind.\nThe four issues of \"The Dark Knight Returns\" were presented in packaging that included extra pages, square binding, card-stock covers, and glossy paper to highlight the watercolor paintings by colorist Lynn Varley.\nCollected editions.\nThe entire series has been collected in trade paperbacks, hardcovers, an absolute edition, a noir edition, and a deluxe edition.\nReception.\nDespite the cost of the single-issue packaging, \"The Dark Knight Returns\" sold well. Pricing it at $2.95 an issue, DC Comics promoted \"The Dark Knight Returns\" as a \"thought-provoking action story\". \"Time\" said the series' depiction of a \"semi-retired Batman [who] is unsure about his crime-fighting abilities\" was an example of trying to appeal to \"today's skeptical readers\". More than one million comics were printed.\nRetrospectively, the series is today widely considered one of the greatest works in the comic medium. IGN Comics ranked \"The Dark Knight Returns\" first on a list of the 25 greatest Batman graphic novels and called \"The Dark Knight Returns\" \"a true masterpiece of storytelling\" with \"[s]cene after unforgettable scene.\" In 2005, \"Time\" chose the collected edition as one of the 10 best English language graphic novels ever written. Forbidden Planet placed the collected issue at number one on its \"50 Best of the Best Graphic Novels\" list. Writer Matthew K. Manning in the \"1980s\" chapter of \"DC Comics: Year By Year: A Visual Chronicle\" (2010) called the series \"arguably the best Batman story of all time.\" It was placed second in a poll among comic book academics conducted by the Sequart Organization.\nThe series also garnered some negative reviews. In April 2010, Nicolas Slayton from Comics Bulletin ranked \"The Dark Knight Returns\" second in his Tuesday Top Ten feature's Top 10 Overrated Comic Books behind \"Watchmen\". Slayton wrote, \"[t]here is no central plot to the comic, leaving only a forced fight scene between Superman and Batman as an out of place climax to the story.\" \"Gone are the traits that define Batman,\" he said, also citing \"misuse of the central character.\"\nInfluence.\nThe immense popularity of \"The Dark Knight Returns\" served both to return the character of Batman to a central role in pop culture, but also (along with \"Watchmen\") started the era known as the Dark Age of Comic Books (also known as the Modern Age and the Iron Age). The grim, seedy versions of Gotham and Batman updated the character's identity from the campy Adam West version from the 1960s Batman TV series, and proved critically and commercially successful enough that a new wave of \"dark\" superheroes were either created or re-popularized, and preexisting heroes were redesigned or retooled to fit this new trend.\n\"The Dark Knight Returns\" was one of the two comic books, alongside \"Watchmen\", that inspired designer Vincent Connare when he created the Comic Sans font.\nIn 2022, Heritage Auctions sold the original cover art for the first issue of Miller's \"Batman: The Dark Knight Returns\" for $2.4 million, making it the most expensive mainstream American comic book cover art sold publicly.\nSequels, prequels, and spin-offs.\n\"Deadpool/Batman\" (2025).\nAn intercompany crossover one-shot published in September 2025 by Marvel Comics features seven short anthology stories, one featuring Miller's Batman with Old Man Logan. The second one-shot \"Batman/Deadpool\" will be published in November 2025 by DC Comics. \nOther works.\nAccording to Miller, the unfinished series \"All Star Batman &amp; Robin, the Boy Wonder\" can be considered a prequel.\nIn 1994, this version of Batman appeared in the ' crossover event playing a small role. In March 2018, he appeared in a brief cameo in the sixth and final issue of the ' event.\nIn 2018, it was announced that this version of Robin, Carrie Kelley, would receive a spin-off in the form of a young adult graphic novel to be written by Miller with art from Ben Caldwell. In November 2021, when Miller said \"[The Carrie Kelley book] is shaping up great; Ben is just a powder keg of talent. It'd probably be out now but it just keeps growing, due to his enthusiasm and output. I'm already kind of tugging at his sleeve about doing something else after this.\"\nIn 2023, Miller's Batman appeared in Batman #135, which marked the milestone of the 900th issue. He joined forces with various versions of Batman from different media across the multiverse.\nIn other media.\nMerchandise.\nIn 1996, to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the graphic novel, DC released a new hardcover and a later softcover release. These included original rough script text for issue #4 with some sketches by Miller. There was also a limited edition slipcased hardcover that included mini poster prints, collected media reviews, and a sketchbook by Miller. DC Direct released a limited edition statue of Batman and Robin designed by Miller. It was released in full size and then later as a mini-sized statue. DC Direct released a series of Batman action figures based on \"The Dark Knight Returns\" in 2004. It included figures of Batman, Robin, Superman, and The Joker. Later, a Batman and Joker Gift Set was released, including both characters with new color schemes to reflect earlier points in the story, and a 48-page prestige format reprint of \"The Dark Knight Returns\" #1 was also released. An action figure of Batman as he appears in \"The Dark Knight Returns\" was released by Mattel in 2013, as part of their \"Batman Unlimited\" line of action figures.\nIn 2022, Cryptozoic Entertainment released a \"Batman: The Dark Knight Returns\" board game designed specifically for solitaire play. The game uses extensive amounts of art from the graphic novel and follows the story of The Dark Knight Returns, including 4 games mirroring the books as a campaign.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73246", "revid": "50945768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73246", "title": "Battle of Dunkirk", "text": "1940 battle between the Allies and Germany in France\nThe Battle of Dunkirk (french: \"Bataille de Dunkerque\") was fought around the French port of Dunkirk (Dunkerque) during the Second World War, between the Allies and Nazi Germany. As the Allies were losing the Battle of France on the Western Front, the Battle of Dunkirk was the defence and evacuation of British and other Allied forces to Britain from 26 May to 4 June 1940.\nAfter the Phoney War, the Battle of France began in earnest on 10 May 1940. To the east, the German Army Group B invaded the Netherlands and advanced westward. In response, the Supreme Allied Commander, French General Maurice Gamelin, initiated \"Plan D\" and British and French troops entered Belgium to engage the Germans in the Netherlands. French planning for war relied on the Maginot Line fortifications along the German\u2013French border protecting the region of Lorraine but the line did not cover the Belgian border. German forces had already crossed most of the Netherlands before the French forces had arrived. Gamelin instead committed the forces under his command \u2013 three mechanized forces, the French First and Seventh Armies and the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) \u2013 to the River Dyle. On 14 May, German Army Group A burst through the Ardennes and advanced rapidly westward toward Sedan, turning northward to the English Channel, using Erich von Manstein's plan (under the German strategy ), effectively flanking the Allied forces.\nA series of Allied counter-attacks, including the Battle of Arras, failed to sever the German spearhead, which reached the coast on 20 May, separating the BEF near Armenti\u00e8res, the French First Army, and the Belgian Army further to the north from the majority of French troops south of the German penetration. After reaching the Channel, the German forces swung north along the coast, threatening to capture the ports and trap the British and French forces.\nIn one of the most debated decisions of the war, the Germans halted their advance on Dunkirk. What became known as the \"Halt Order\" did not originate with Adolf Hitler. (Colonel-General) Gerd von Rundstedt and Generaloberst G\u00fcnther von Kluge suggested that the German forces around the Dunkirk pocket should cease their advance on the port and consolidate to avoid an Allied breakout. Hitler sanctioned the order on 24 May with the support of the (German high command). The army was to halt for three days, which gave the Allies sufficient time to organise the Dunkirk evacuation and build a defensive line. While more than 330,000 Allied troops were rescued, the British and French sustained heavy casualties and were forced to abandon nearly all their equipment; around 16,000 French and 1,000 British soldiers died during the evacuation. The British Expeditionary Force alone lost some 68,000 soldiers during the French campaign.\nPrelude.\nOn 10 May 1940, Winston Churchill became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. By 26 May, the BEF and the French 1st Army were bottled up in a corridor to the sea, about deep and wide. Most of the British forces were still around Lille, over from Dunkirk, with the French farther south. Two massive German armies flanked them. General Fedor von Bock's Army Group B was to the east, and General Gerd von Rundstedt's Army Group A to the west. Both officers were later promoted to field marshal.\nHalt order.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDuring the following days... it became known that Hitler's decision was mainly influenced by Goering. To the dictator the rapid movement of the Army, whose risks and prospects of success he did not understand because of his lack of military schooling, became almost sinister. He was constantly oppressed by a feeling of anxiety that a reversal loomed...\nHalder, in a letter of July 1957\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe day's entry concludes with the remark: \"The task of Army Group A can be considered to have been completed in the main\"\u2014a view which further explains Rundstedt's reluctance to employ his armoured divisions in the final clearing-up stage of this first phase of the campaign.\n Major L. F. Ellis\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBrauchitsch is angry ... The pocket would have been closed at the coast if only our armour had not been held back. The bad weather has grounded the \"Luftwaffe\" and we must now stand and watch countless thousands of the enemy get away to England right under our noses.\n Franz Halder\n, written in his diary on 30 May\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n General Hans Jeschonnek overheard Hitler explaining his halt before Dunkirk: \"The F\u00fchrer wants to spare the British a humiliating defeat.\" Hitler later explained to a close friend, \"The blood of every single Englishman is too valuable to shed. Our two peoples belong together racially and traditionally. That is and always has been my aim, even if our generals can't grasp it.\"\nKilzer, Louis C., Hitler's Traitor: Martin Bormann and the Defeat of the Reich\nOn 24 May, Hitler visited General von Rundstedt's headquarters at Charleville. The terrain around Dunkirk was thought unsuitable for armour. Von Rundstedt advised him the infantry should attack the British forces at Arras, where the British had proved capable of significant action, while Kleist's armour held the line west and south of Dunkirk to pounce on the Allied forces retreating before Army Group B. Hitler, who was familiar with Flanders' marshes from the First World War, agreed. This order allowed the Germans to consolidate their gains and prepare for a southward advance against the remaining French forces.\n commander Hermann G\u00f6ring asked for the chance to destroy the forces in Dunkirk. The Allied forces' destruction was thus initially assigned to the air force while the German infantry organised in Army Group B. Von Rundstedt later called this \"one of the great turning points of the war\".\nThe true reason for the decision to halt the German armour on 24 May is still debated. One theory is that Von Rundstedt and Hitler agreed to conserve the armour for (\"Case Red\"), an operation to the south. It is possible that the 's closer ties than the army's to the Nazi Party contributed to Hitler's approval of G\u00f6ring's request. Another theory\u2014which few historians have given credence\u2014is that Hitler was still trying to establish diplomatic peace with Britain before Operation Barbarossa (the invasion of the Soviet Union). Although von Rundstedt after the war stated his suspicions that Hitler wanted \"to help the British\", based on alleged praise of the British Empire during a visit to his headquarters, little evidence that Hitler wanted to let the Allies escape exists apart from a self-exculpatory statement by Hitler himself in 1945. The historian Brian Bond wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Few historians now accept the view that Hitler's behaviour was influenced by the desire to let the British off lightly in [the] hope that they would then accept a compromise peace. True, in his political testament dated 26 February 1945 Hitler lamented that Churchill was \"quite unable to appreciate the sporting spirit\" in which he had refrained from annihilating [the] British Expeditionary Force, at Dunkirk, but this hardly squares with the contemporary record. Directive No. 13, issued by the Supreme Headquarters on 24 May called specifically for the annihilation of the French, English and Belgian forces in the pocket, while the \"Luftwaffe\" was ordered to prevent the escape of the English forces across the channel.\nWhatever the reasons for Hitler's decision, the Germans confidently believed the Allied troops were doomed. American journalist William Shirer reported on 25 May, \"German military circles here tonight put it flatly. They said the fate of the great Allied army bottled up in Flanders is sealed.\" BEF commander General Lord Gort , commander-in-chief (C-in-C) of the BEF, agreed, writing to Anthony Eden, \"I must not conceal from you that a great part of the BEF and its equipment will inevitably be lost in the best of circumstances\".\nHitler did not rescind the Halt Order until the evening of 26 May. The three days thus gained gave a vital breathing space to the Royal Navy to arrange the evacuation of the British and Allied troops. About 338,000 men were rescued in about 11 days. Of these some 215,000 were British and 123,000 were French, of whom 102,250 escaped in British ships.\nBattle.\n\"Fight back to the west\".\nOn 26 May, Anthony Eden told Gort that he might need to \"fight back to the west\", and ordered him to prepare plans for the evacuation, but without telling the French or the Belgians. Gort had foreseen the order and preliminary plans were already in hand. The first such plan, for a defence along the Lys Canal, could not be carried out because of German advances on 26 May, with the 2nd and 50th Divisions pinned down, and the 1st, 5th and 48th Divisions under heavy attack. The 2nd Division took heavy casualties trying to keep a corridor open, being reduced to brigade strength, but they succeeded; the 1st, 3rd, 4th and 42nd Divisions escaped along the corridor that day, as did about one-third of the French First Army. As the Allies fell back, they disabled their artillery and vehicles and destroyed their stores.\nOn 27 May, the British fought back to the Dunkirk perimeter line. The Le Paradis massacre took place that day, when the 3rd SS Division \"Totenkopf\" machine-gunned 97 British and French prisoners near the La Bass\u00e9e Canal. The British prisoners were from the 2nd Battalion, Royal Norfolk Regiment, part of the 4th Brigade of the 2nd Division. The SS men lined them up against the wall of a barn and shot them all; only two survived. Meanwhile, the Luftwaffe dropped bombs and leaflets on the Allied armies. The leaflets showed a map of the situation. They read, in English and French: \"British soldiers! Look at the map: it gives your true situation! Your troops are entirely surrounded\u2014stop fighting! Put down your arms!\" To the land- and air-minded Germans, the sea seemed an impassable barrier, so they believed the Allies were surrounded; but the British saw the sea as a route to safety.\nBesides the Luftwaffe's bombs, German heavy artillery (which had just come within range) also fired high-explosive shells into Dunkirk. By this time, over 1,000 civilians in the town had been killed. This bombardment continued until the evacuation was over.\nBattle of Wytschaete.\nGort had sent Lieutenant General Ronald Adam, commanding III Corps, ahead to build the defensive perimeter around Dunkirk; his corps command passed to Lieutenant General Sydney Rigby Wason from the GHQ staff. Lieutenant General Alan Brooke, commanding II Corps, was to conduct a holding action with the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 50th Divisions along the Ypres-Comines canal as far as Yser, while the rest of the BEF fell back. The battle of Wytschaete, over the border in Belgium, was the toughest action Brooke faced in this role.\nOn 26 May, the Germans made a reconnaissance in force against the British position. At mid-day on 27 May, they launched a full-scale attack with three divisions south of Ypres. A confused battle followed, where visibility was low because of forested or urban terrain and communications were poor because the British at that time used no radios below battalion level and the telephone wires had been cut. The Germans used infiltration tactics to get among the British, who were beaten back.\nThe heaviest fighting was in the 5th Division's sector. Still on 27 May, Brooke ordered the 3rd Division commander, Major-General Bernard Montgomery, to extend his division's line to the left, thereby freeing the 10th and 11th Brigades, both of the 4th Division, to join the 5th Division at Messines Ridge. The 10th Brigade arrived first, to find the enemy had advanced so far they were closing on the British field artillery. Between them, the 10th and 11th Brigades cleared the ridge of Germans, and by 28 May they were securely dug in east of Wytschaete.\nThat day, Brooke ordered a counterattack. This was to be spearheaded by two battalions, the 3rd Grenadier Guards and 2nd North Staffordshire Regiment, both of Major-General Harold Alexander's 1st Division. The North Staffords advanced as far as the Leie River, while the Grenadiers reached the canal itself, but could not hold it. The counterattack disrupted the Germans, holding them back a little longer while the BEF retreated.\nAction at Poperinge.\nThe route back from Brooke's position to Dunkirk passed through the town of Poperinge (known to most British sources as \"Poperinghe\"), where there was a bottleneck at a bridge over the Yser canal. Most of the main roads in the area converged on that bridge. On 27 May, the \"Luftwaffe\" bombed the resulting traffic jam thoroughly for two hours, destroying or immobilising about 80 percent of the vehicles. Another \"Luftwaffe\" raid, on the night of 28\u201329 May, was illuminated by flares as well as the light from burning vehicles. The British 44th Division in particular had to abandon many guns and lorries, losing almost all of them between Poperinge and the Mont.\nThe German 6th Panzer Division could probably have destroyed the 44th Division at Poperinge on 29 May, thereby cutting off the 3rd and 50th Divisions as well. The historian and author Julian Thompson calls it \"astonishing\" that they did not, but they were distracted, investing the nearby town of Cassel.\nBelgian surrender.\nGort had ordered Lieutenant General Adam, commanding III Corps, and French General Fagalde to prepare a perimeter defence of Dunkirk. The perimeter was semicircular, with French troops manning the western sector and British troops the eastern. It ran along the Belgian coastline from Nieuwpoort in the east via Veurne, Bulskamp and Bergues to Gravelines in the west. The line was made as strong as possible under the circumstances. On 28 May the Belgian army fighting on the Lys river under the command of King Leopold III surrendered. This left a gap in Gort's eastern flank between the British and the sea. The British were surprised by the Belgian capitulation, despite King Leopold warning them in advance. As a constitutional monarch, Leopold's decision to surrender without consulting the Belgian government led to his condemnation by the Belgian and French Prime Ministers, Hubert Pierlot and Paul Reynaud. Gort sent the battle-worn 3rd, 4th and 50th Divisions into the line to fill the space the Belgians had held.\nDefence of the perimeter.\nWhile they were still moving into position, they ran headlong into the German 256th Division, who were trying to outflank Gort. Armoured cars of the 12th Royal Lancers stopped the Germans at Nieuwpoort itself. A confused battle raged all along the perimeter throughout 28 May. Command and control on the British side disintegrated, and the perimeter was driven slowly inwards toward Dunkirk.\nMeanwhile, Erwin Rommel had surrounded five divisions of the French First Army near Lille. Although completely cut off and heavily outnumbered, the French fought on for four days under General Molini\u00e9 in the Siege of Lille, thereby keeping seven German divisions from the assault on Dunkirk and saving an estimated 100,000 Allied troops. In recognition of the garrison's stubborn defence, German general Kurt Waeger granted them the honours of war, saluting the French troops as they marched past in parade formation with rifles shouldered.\nThe defence of the Dunkirk perimeter held throughout 29\u201330 May, with the Allies falling back by degrees. On 31 May, the Germans nearly broke through at Nieuwpoort. The situation grew so desperate that two British battalion commanders manned a Bren gun, with one colonel firing and the other loading. A few hours later, the 2nd Battalion, Coldstream Guards of the 3rd Division, rushed to reinforce the line near Furnes, where the British troops had been routed. The Guards restored order by shooting some of the fleeing troops and turning others around at bayonet point. The British troops returned to the line and the German assault was beaten back.\nIn the afternoon, the Germans breached the perimeter near the canal at Bulskamp, but the boggy ground on the far side of the canal and sporadic fire from the Durham Light Infantry halted them. As night fell, the Germans massed for another attack at Nieuwpoort. Eighteen RAF bombers found the Germans while they were still assembling and scattered them with an accurate bombing run.\nRetreat to Dunkirk.\nAlso on 31 May, General von K\u00fcchler assumed command of all the German forces at Dunkirk. His plan was simple: launch an all-out attack across the whole front at 11:00 on 1 June. Strangely, von K\u00fcchler ignored a radio intercept telling him the British were abandoning the eastern end of the line to fall back to Dunkirk itself. During the night of 31 May to 1 June, Marcus Ervine-Andrews won the Victoria Cross in the battle when he defended of territory.\nThe morning of 1 June was clear\u2014good flying weather, in contrast to the bad weather that had hindered air operations on 30 and 31 May (there were only two-and-a-half good flying days in the whole operation) Although Churchill had promised the French that the British would cover their escape, on the ground it was the British and mostly the French who held the line whilst the last remaining British and then French soldiers were evacuated. Enduring concentrated German artillery fire and strafing and bombs, the outnumbered French and British stood their ground. On 2 June (the day the last of the British units embarked onto the ships), the French began to fall back slowly, and by 3 June the Germans were about from Dunkirk. The night of 3 June was the last night of evacuations. At 10:20 on 4 June, the Germans hoisted the swastika over the docks from which so many British and French troops had escaped.\nThe resistance of Allied forces, especially the French forces, including the French 12th Motorised Infantry Division from the Fort des Dunes, had bought time for the evacuation of the bulk of the troops. The Wehrmacht captured some 35,000 soldiers, almost all of them French. These men had protected the evacuation until the last moment and were unable to embark. The same fate was reserved for the survivors of the French 12th Motorised Infantry Division (composed in particular of the French 150th Infantry Regiment); they were taken prisoner on the morning of 4 June on the beach of Malo-les-Bains. The flag of this regiment was burnt so as not to fall into enemy hands.\nEvacuation.\nThe War Office made the decision to evacuate British forces on 25 May. In the nine days from 27 May to 4 June 338,226 men escaped, including 139,997 French, Polish, and Belgian troops, together with a small number of Dutch soldiers, aboard 861 vessels (of which 243 were sunk during the operation). B. H. Liddell Hart wrote that Fighter Command lost 106 aircraft over Dunkirk and the \"Luftwaffe\" lost about 135, some of which were shot down by the French Navy and the Royal Navy. MacDonald wrote in 1986 that the British losses were 177 aircraft and German losses 240.\nThe docks at Dunkirk were too badly damaged to be used, but the east and west moles (sea walls protecting the harbour entrance) were intact. Captain William Tennant\u2014in charge of the evacuation\u2014decided to use the beaches and the east mole to land the ships. This highly successful idea hugely increased the number of troops that could be embarked each day, and on 31 May, over 68,000 men were embarked.\nThe last of the British Army left on 3 June, and at 10:50, Tennant signalled Ramsay to say \"Operation completed. Returning to Dover\". Churchill insisted on going back for the French, and the Royal Navy returned on 4 June to rescue as many as possible of the French rearguard. Over 26,000 French soldiers were evacuated on that last day, but between 30,000 and 40,000 more were left behind and captured by the Germans. According to author Sean Longden, between 40,000 and 41,000 British soldiers were taken prisoner. Around 16,000 French soldiers and 1,000 British soldiers died during the evacuation. 90% of Dunkirk was destroyed during the battle.\nAftermath.\nFollowing the events at Dunkirk, the German forces regrouped before commencing operation \"Fall Rot\", a renewed assault southward, starting on 5 June. Although the French soldiers who had been evacuated at Dunkirk returned to France a few hours later to stop the German advance and two fresh British divisions had begun moving to France in an attempt to form a Second BEF, the decision was taken on 14 June to withdraw all the remaining British troops, an evacuation called Operation Aerial. By 25 June, almost 192,000 Allied personnel, 144,000 of them British, had been evacuated through various French ports. Although the French Army fought on, German troops entered Paris on 14 June. The French government was forced to negotiate an armistice at Compi\u00e8gne on 22 June.\nThe loss of materiel on the beaches was enormous. The British Army left enough equipment behind to fit out about eight to ten divisions. Discarded in France were, among other things, huge supplies of ammunition, 880 field guns, 310 guns of large calibre, some 500 anti-aircraft guns, about 850 anti-tank guns, 11,000 machine guns, nearly 700 tanks, 20,000 motorcycles and 45,000 motor cars and lorries. Army equipment available at home was only just sufficient to equip two divisions. The British Army needed months to re-supply properly, and some planned introductions of new equipment were halted while industrial resources concentrated on making good the losses. Officers told troops falling back from Dunkirk to burn or otherwise disable their trucks (so as not to let them benefit the advancing German forces). The shortage of army vehicles after Dunkirk was so severe that the Royal Army Service Corps (RASC) was reduced to retrieving and refurbishing obsolete buses and coaches from British scrapyards to press them into use as troop transports. Some of these antique workhorses were still in use as late as the North African campaign of 1942.\nOn 2 June, the Dean of St Paul's, Walter Matthews, was the first to call the evacuation the \"Miracle of Dunkirk\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;During the following week papers were filled with letters from readers making an obvious association. It was remembered that the Archbishop of Canterbury had announced that the Day of National Prayer might well be a turning point, and it was obvious to many that God had answered the nation's collective prayer with the 'miracle of Dunkirk'. The evidence of God's intervention was clear for those who wished to see it; papers had written of calm seas and the high mist which interfered with the accuracy of German bombers.\u2014\u200a\nA marble memorial to the battle stands at Dunkirk. The French inscription is translated as: \"To the glorious memory of the pilots, mariners, and soldiers of the French and Allied armies who sacrificed themselves in the Battle of Dunkirk, May\u2013June 1940.\" The missing dead of the BEF are commemorated on the Dunkirk Memorial erected by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission.\nA considerable number of British troops remained in France after Dunkirk to the south of the River Somme. These numbered some 140,000 men, mostly logistic support and lines-of-communications troops, but also including the 51st (Highland) Division and the remnants of the 1st Armoured Division. On 2 June, Lieutenant General Brooke was ordered back to France to form a Second BEF together with two further infantry divisions to follow, a project which Brooke believed was doomed to failure. After learning that most of the 51st Division had surrendered, having been cut off at St Valery-en-Caux on the Channel coast, Brooke spoke to Churchill by telephone on 14 June and persuaded him to allow the evacuation of all the remaining British forces in France. In Operation Aerial, 144,171 British, 18,246 French, 24,352 Polish and 1,939 Czech troops were embarked in ships at several major ports along the west coast of France and returned to England, along with much of their equipment. The only major mishap was the sinking of the with the loss of perhaps 6,000 men. The last British troops left France on 25 June, the day the French Armistice came into force.\n\"Dunkirk Spirit\".\nBritish press later exploited the successful evacuation of Dunkirk in 1940, and particularly the role of the \"Dunkirk little ships\", very effectively. Many of them were private vessels such as fishing boats and pleasure cruisers, but commercial vessels such as ferries also contributed to the force, including a number from as far away as the Isle of Man and Glasgow. These smaller vessels\u2014guided by naval craft across the Channel from the Thames Estuary and from Dover\u2014assisted in the official evacuation. Being able to move closer into the beachfront shallows than larger craft, the \"little ships\" acted as shuttles to and from the larger ships, lifting troops who were queuing in the water, many waiting shoulder-deep in water for hours. The term \"Dunkirk Spirit\" refers to the solidarity of the British people in times of adversity.\nDunkirk Medal.\nA commemorative medal was established in 1960 by the French National Association of Veterans of the Fortified Sector of Flanders and Dunkirk on behalf of the town of Dunkirk. The medal was initially awarded only to the French defenders of Dunkirk, but in 1970 the qualification was expanded to include British forces who served in the Dunkirk sector and their rescue forces, including the civilians who volunteered to man the \"little ships\".\nThe design of the bronze medal included the arms of the town of Dunkirk on one side, and \"Dunkerque 1940\" on the reverse side.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73247", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73247", "title": "Geography of Cuba", "text": "Cuba is an island nation in the Caribbean Sea. It comprises an archipelago of islands centred upon the geographic coordinates 21\u00b03N, 80\u00b000W. Cuba is the principal island, surrounded by four main archipelagos: the Colorados, the Sabana-Camag\u00fcey, the Jardines de la Reina and the Canarreos. Cuba's area is with a land area of according to the CIA, which makes it the eighth-largest island country in the world. The main island (Cuba) has of coastline and of land borders\u2014all figures including the U.S. Navy's Guantanamo Bay Naval Base. Its official area is .\nCuba lies west of the North Atlantic Ocean, east of the Gulf of Mexico, south of the Straits of Florida, northwest of the Windward Passage, and northeast of the Yucat\u00e1n Channel. The main island (Cuba), at , makes up most of the land area and is the 17th-largest island in the world by land area.\nThe island is long and across its widest points and across its narrowest points. The largest island outside the main island is the Isla de la Juventud is (Isle of Youth) in the southwest, with an area of .\nThe main island consists mostly of flat to rolling plains. At the southeastern end is the Sierra Maestra, a range of steep mountains whose highest point is the Pico Turquino at .\nHavana is the largest city and capital; other major cities include Santiago de Cuba and Camag\u00fcey. Better-known smaller towns include Baracoa, which was the first Spanish settlement on Cuba, Trinidad, a UNESCO world heritage site, and Bayamo.\nPhysical geography.\nCuba is located west of Haiti across the Windward Passage, south of The Bahamas (Cay Lobos), south of the United States (Key West, Florida), east of Mexico, and north of Jamaica. It was made in three stages.\nCuba is the largest country by land area in the Caribbean. Its main island is the 17th-largest island in the world by land area. The island rises between the Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean. It is bordered on the north by the Straits of Florida, on the northeast by Nicholas Channel and the Old Bahama Channel. The southern part is bounded by the Windward Passage and the Cayman Trench, while the southwest lies in the Caribbean Sea. To the west, it reaches to the Yucat\u00e1n Channel, and the northwest is open to the Gulf of Mexico.\nAbout 4,195 islands, islets and cays make up the country. The southern coast includes such archipelagos as Jardines de la Reina and the Canarreos. The northeastern shore is lined by the Sabana-Camag\u00fcey Archipelago, which includes Jardines del Rey and is composed of approximately 2,517 cays and islands. The Colorados Archipelago is developed on the northwestern coast.\nTerrain.\nCuba's terrain is mostly flat or rolling plains, with rugged hills and mountains in the southeast. The lowest point is the Caribbean Sea at 0\u00a0m (sea level) and the highest point is Pico Turquino at , part of the Sierra Maestra mountain range, located in the southeast of the island.\nOther mountain ranges are Sierra Cristal in the southeast, Escambray Mountains in the center of the island, and Sierra del Rosario in the northwest. White sand beaches (most notably in Varadero), as well as mangroves and marshes can be found in the coastal area. The largest is the Zapata Swamp, with over . A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 675\u00a0km2 of tidal flats in Cuba, making it the 38th-ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.\nCuba has negligible inland water area. The largest natural water mirror is Laguna de Leche at , while the man-made Zaza Reservoir, at , is the largest inland water surface by area in the country.\nClimate.\nMost of Cuba has a tropical savanna climate (\"Aw\" according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification), although areas on the windward slopes of the Sierra Maestra and Sierra del Rosario have either a tropical monsoon climate or a trade-wind tropical rainforest climate, whilst a hot semi-arid climate occurs in the Guant\u00e1namo Bay area because of a rain shadow from the Sierra Maestra. In most areas, the dry season lasts from November to April and the rainy season from May to October.\nThe climate is tropical, though moderated by trade winds. In general (with local variations), there is a drier season from November to April, and a rainier season from May to October. The average temperature is in January and in July.\nClimate change in Cuba is causing an increase in temperature, rising sea levels and shifting precipitation patterns, with an overall decrease in rainfall predicted. These will severely impact industries key to the economy, including agriculture, forestry and tourism. As rainfall is Cuba's only water source, water security is an issue. Warmer temperatures may affect the health of the population, causing an increase in cardiovascular, respiratory and viral diseases. A temperature rise of 2\u00b0C above preindustrial levels can increase the likelihood of extreme hurricane rainfall by three times in Cuba. Cuba's climate mitigation and adaptation plans include renewable energy generation and nature-based solutions, such as restoring mangrove ecosystems.\nCuba lies in the path of hurricanes, and these destructive storms are most common in September and October. The experience of hurricane damage has shaped Cuba's disaster risk reduction policies, contributing to a low mortality rate compared with neighbouring countries. Tornadoes are somewhat rare in Cuba; however, on the evening of 27 January 2019, a very rare strong F4 tornado struck the eastern side of Havana, Cuba's capital city. The tornado caused extensive damage, destroying at least 90 homes, killing four people and injuring 195. By 4 February, the death toll had increased to six, with 11 people still in critical condition.\nMaritime claims.\nCuba makes maritime claims that include a territorial sea of and an exclusive economic zone of with .\nExtreme points.\nExtreme points in Cuba are:\nNatural resources.\nNatural resources include cobalt, nickel, iron ore, copper, salt, timber, silica, oil and petroleum. At one time the whole island was covered with forests, and there are still many cedar (\"Cedrela odorata\"), chechem (\"Metopium brownei\"), mahogany (\"Swietenia mahagoni\"), and other valuable trees. Large areas were cleared to grow more sugarcane, and so few trees remained that timber had to be imported.\nThe most important Cuban mineral economic resource is nickel. Cuba has the second-largest nickel reserves in the world after Russia. Sherritt International, a Canadian energy company, operates a large nickel mining facility in Moa, Cuba. Another leading mineral resource is cobalt, a byproduct of nickel mining operations. Cuba ranks as the fifth-largest producer of refined cobalt in the world.\nCuba has historically been dependent on oil imports. As of 2011, Cuba had proven reserves of a mere of crude oil and 2.5 trillion cubic feet of natural gas, and mostly used oil for power generation. In 2010, Cuba produced 51,000 barrels of crude oil a day (Kb/d) in 2010 in onshore or shallow near-shore development, \"mostly heavy, sour (sulfur-rich) crude that requires advanced refining capacity to process.\" Offshore exploration in the North Cuba Basin had revealed the possibility of an additional of technically recoverable crude oil, 0.9 billion barrels of natural gas liquids, and 9.8 trillion cubic feet of natural gas. As of 2011, Cuba had six offshore petroleum development projects with foreign oil companies Petrovietnam (Vietnam), Petronas (Malaysia), PDVSA (Venezuela), Sonangol (Angola), ONGC (India), Repsol (Spain), and Statoil (Norway).\nSugarcane was historically the most important part of the Cuban economy, and large areas are still dedicated to its cultivation; in 2018, Cuba produced an estimated 1.1\u20131.3 million tonnes of raw sugar. The importance of the sugar harvest has declined, with tourism, tobacco, nickel, and pharmaceuticals surpassing sugar in economic importance.\nExtensive irrigation systems are developed in the south of Sancti Sp\u00edritus Province. Tobacco, used for some of the world's cigars, is grown especially in the Pinar del R\u00edo Province.\nAdministrative subdivisions.\nCuba is divided into 15\u00a0provinces and one special municipality. Provinces are further subdivided into 168\u00a0municipalities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73248", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73248", "title": "Demographics of Cuba", "text": "The demographic characteristics of Cuba are known through census which have been conducted and analyzed by different bureaus since 1774. The National Office of Statistics of and Information of Cuba (ONEI) is doing it since 1953. The most recent census was conducted in September 2012. The population of Cuba at the 2012 census was nearly 11.2 million. It has since declined to an estimated 9.75 million in 2024.\nAlthough not a census, in July 2024, Juan Carlos Alfonso Fraga, deputy head of the ONEI, presented data on Cuba's effective population to the deputies. According to ONEI data, as of December 31, 2023, the effective Cuban population was 10,055,968 people.\nAccording to the 2012 census, the population density at that time was 101 inhabitants per square kilometer, and the overall life expectancy in Cuba was 78 years. The population has always increased from one census to the next in the 20th century, with the exception of the 2012 census, when the count decreased by 10,000. The 2024 data by ONEI seems to corroborate that trend.\nFrom 1740 to 2020 Cuba's birth rate has surpassed its death rate. Cuba is currently in the fourth stage of demographic transition. In terms of age structure, the population is dominated (71.1%) by the 15- to 64-year-old segment. The median age of the population is 39.5, making it the oldest in the Americas, and the gender ratio of the total population is 0.99 males per female.\nPopulation size and structure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2002 census, Cuba's population was 11,177,743, whereas the 2012 census numbered the population at 11,167,325. There was a drop between the 2002 and 2012 censuses which was the first drop in Cuba's population since Cuba's war of independence. This drop was due to low fertility and emigration, as during this time (fiscal years 2003 to 2012), 42,028 Cubans received legal permanent residence in the United States. Consequently, Cuba is also the oldest country in the Americas in terms of median age, due to a high amount of emigration by younger Cubans to the U.S. In the last few years before the end of the wet feet, dry feet policy on January 12, 2017, the number of Cubans moving to the United States significantly outnumbered the natural increase during those years.\nCuban policy responses to its aging population include increases in paid maternity benefits, improving access to daycares, and establishing the Service Network for Non-fertile Couples to provide treatment for infertility.165\nAs of 2025, Cuba has the oldest population in Latin America.8\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 2012)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2013):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021) (Provisional): \n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\ntotal population: 79.64 years. Country comparison to the world: 59th\nmale: 77.29 years\nfemale: 82.14 years (2022 est.)\nRacial groups.\nAncestral origins.\nAccording to the previous censuses, the Chinese were counted as white.\nThe ancestry of Cubans comes from many sources:\nDuring the 18th, 19th and early part of the 20th century, large waves of Spanish immigrants from Canary Islands, Catalonia, Andalusia, Galicia, and Asturias emigrated to Cuba. Between 1820 and 1898, a total of 508,455 people left Spain, and more than 750,000 Spanish immigrants left for Cuba between 1899 and 1930, with many returning to Spain. There are 139,851 Spanish citizens living in Cuba as of 1 January 2018.\nThe Slave trade brought Africans to Cuba during its early history:\nBetween 1842 and 1873, 221,000 African slaves entered Cuba.\nPeople of the Americas:\nOther European people that have contributed include:\nPeople from Asia:\nBetween 1842 and 1873, 124,800 Chinese arrived.\nGenetics.\nAn autosomal study from 2014 has found out the genetic average ancestry in Cuba to be 72% European, 20% African and 8% Native American with different proportions depending on the self-reported ancestry (White, Mulatto or Mestizo, and Black):\nA 1995 study done on the population of Pinar del Rio, found that 50% of the Mt-DNA lineages (female lineages) could be traced back to Europeans, 46% to Africans and 4% to Native Americans. This figure is consistent with both the historical background of the region, and the current demographics of it.\nAccording to another study in 2008, the Native American contribution to present-day Cubans accounted for 33% of the maternal lineages, whereas Africa and Eurasia contributed 45% and 22% of the lineages, respectively. Haplogroup A2 is the main Native American haplogroup in Cuba (21.9% of the total sample), accounting for 67% of the Native American mtDNA gene pool. Regarding Y-chromosome haplogroups (male lineages), 78.8% of the sequences found in Cubans are of West Eurasian origin, 19.7% of African origin and 1.5% of East Asian origin. Among the West Eurasian fraction, the vast majority of individuals belong to West European haplogroup R1b. The African lineages found in Cubans have a Western (haplogroups E1, E2, E1b1a) and Northern (E1b1b-M81) African origin. The \"Berber\" haplogroup E1b1b1b (E-M81), is found at a frequency of 6.1%.\nAccording to Fregel et al. (2009), the fact that autochthonous male North African E-M81 and female U6 lineages from the Canaries have been detected in Cuba and Iberoamerica, demonstrates that Canary Islanders with indigenous ancestors actively participated in the American colonization.\nLanguage.\nSpanish is the official language of Cuba. Of all the regional variations of Spanish, Cuban Spanish is most similar to, and originates largely from, the dialect spoken in the Canary Islands. This is a consequence of Canarian migration, which in the 19th and early 20th century was heavy and continuous. There were also migrations of Galicians and Asturians as well, but they did not impact Cuban Spanish to the same degree.\nMuch of the typical Cuban replacements for standard Spanish vocabulary stems from Canarian lexicon. For example, ' (bus) differs from standard Spanish ' the former originated in the Canaries and is an onomatopoeia stemming from the sound of a Klaxon horn (wah-wah!). An example of Canarian usage for a Spanish word is the verb (\"to fight\"). In standard Spanish the verb would be \"\", while \"fajar\" exists as a non-reflexive verb related to the hemming of a skirt.\nThe second most spoken language of Cuba is Haitian Creole, used mainly by Haitian immigrants and its descendants going back since the late 18th century, of whom fled the Haitian Revolution.\nOther languages of Cuba are Cuban Sign Language, and English is commonly studied as a foreign language.\nThere are also reports of Lucumi, \"Lengua Conga\" (Kongo-based liturgical language of the Palo religion) and Bozal Spanish (an \"African\" socio-dialect of Spanish; now used only in folk religion). Historically, the Ciboney and Classic dialects of Taino and the unattested Guanahatabey were spoken.\nReligion.\nCuba has a multitude of faiths reflecting the island's diverse cultural elements. Catholicism, which was brought to the island by Spanish colonialists at the beginning of the 16th century, is the most prevalent professed faith. After the revolution, Cuba became an officially atheistic state and restricted religious practice. Since the Fourth Cuban Communist Party Congress in 1991, restrictions have been eased and, according to the National Catholic Observer, direct challenges by state institutions to the right to religion have all but disappeared, though the Church still faces restrictions of written and electronic communication, and can only accept donations from state-approved funding sources. The Roman Catholic Church is made up of the Cuban Catholic Bishops' Conference (COCC), led by Jaime Lucas Ortega y Alamino, Cardinal Archbishop of Havana. It has eleven dioceses, 56 orders of nuns and 24 orders of priests. In January 1998, Pope John Paul II paid a historic visit to the island, invited by the Cuban government and Catholic Church.\nAfro-Cuban religions, a blend of native African religions and Roman Catholicism, are widely practiced in Cuba. This diversity derives from West and Central Africans who were transported to Cuba, and in effect reinvented their African religions. They did so by combining them with elements of the Catholic belief system, with a result very similar to Brazil. One of these Afro-Cuban religions is Santeria.\nProtestantism, introduced from the United States in the 18th century, has seen a steady increase in popularity. 300,000 Cubans belong to the island's 54 Protestant denominations. Pentecostalism has grown rapidly in recent years, and the Assemblies of God alone claims a membership of over 167 000 people. The Episcopal Church of Cuba claims 10,000 adherents. Cuba has small communities of Jews, Muslims, Buddhists and members of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n*\n*The Peninsular (May 2007). https://"}
{"id": "73249", "revid": "43520964", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73249", "title": "Politics of Cuba", "text": "Cuba is communist and has had a socialist political system since 1961 based on the \"one state, one party\" principle. Cuba is constitutionally defined as a single-party Marxist\u2013Leninist socialist republic with semi-presidential powers. The present Constitution of Cuba, approved in a referendum on 24 February 2019, also describes the role of the Communist Party of Cuba to be the \"leading force of society and of the state\" and as having the capability of setting national policy, and the first secretary of the Communist Party is the most powerful position in Cuba. The 2019 Constitution of Cuba states it is guided by the examples of Cuban independence hero Jos\u00e9 Mart\u00ed and revolutionary leader Fidel Castro and the ideals of Marx, Engels, and Lenin.\nThe president of Cuba is Miguel D\u00edaz-Canel, who succeeded Ra\u00fal Castro as first secretary of the Communist Party in 2021. Executive power is exercised by the government, which is represented by the Council of Ministers, headed by the prime minister of Cuba. Legislative power is exercised through the unicameral National Assembly of People's Power, which is constituted as the maximum authority of the state. With effect from 10 October 2019, Miguel D\u00edaz-Canel is the president and Manuel Marrero is the prime minister of Cuba. The previous president of the State Council was Ra\u00fal Castro, brother of former leader Fidel Castro; Ra\u00fal Castro remained First Secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba, and commander-in-chief of the Revolutionary Armed Forces until 19 April 2021. Fidel Castro ruled from 1959 to 2006, before illness forced him to hand power to his brother. Esteban Lazo Hern\u00e1ndez is the president of the National Assembly.\nPolitical scientists characterize the political system of Cuba as a single-party authoritarian regime where political opposition is not permitted. There are elections, but they are not considered democratic. According to the V-Dem Democracy Indices, Cuba is the second least democratic country in Latin America. Censorship of information (including limits to internet access) is extensive, and independent journalism is repressed in Cuba; Reporters Without Borders has characterized Cuba as one of the worst countries in the world for press freedom.\nExecutive.\nExecutive power in the Cuban government is exercised by the Council of Ministers.38 From February 1959 until February 2008, Cuba was led by revolutionary leader Fidel Castro, who was head of state, head of government, first secretary of the Communist Party, and commander-in-chief of the Cuban armed forces. The Ministry of Interior is the principal organ of state security and control.\nAccording to the article 94 of the constitution, the first vice president of the Council of State assumes presidential duties upon the illness or death of the president. On July 31, 2006, during the 2006 Cuban transfer of duties, Fidel Castro delegated his duties as president of the Council of State, first secretary of the Communist Party, and the post of commander in chief of the armed forces to first vice president Ra\u00fal Castro. Since 2019, the president of Cuba is also limited to two five year terms.\nLegislature.\nCuba has an elected national legislature, the National Assembly of People's Power (\"Asamblea Nacional del Poder Popular\"),38 which has 612 members, elected every 5 years and holds brief sessions to ratify decisions by the executive branch. The National Assembly convenes twice a year in ordinary periods of sessions. However, it has permanent commissions to look after issues of legislative interest. Among its permanent or temporary commissions are those in charge of issues concerning the economy, sugar industry, industries, transportation and communications, constructions, foreign affairs, public health, defense and interior order. The National Assembly also has permanent departments that oversee the work of the Commissions, Local Assemblies of the People's Power, International Relations, Judicial Affairs and the Administration.\nArticle 88(h) of the Constitution of Cuba, adopted in 1976, provides for citizen proposals of law, prerequisite that the proposal be made by at least 10,000 citizens who are eligible to vote. In 2002 supporters of a movement known as the Varela Project submitted a citizen proposal of law with 11,000 signatures calling for a national referendum on political and economic reforms. The Government response was to collect 8.1 million signatures to request that Cuba's National Assembly enact a constitutional amendment making socialism an unalterable feature of Cuban government.\nCommittees for the Defense of the Revolution.\nThe Committees for the Defense of the Revolution is a network of neighborhood organizations across Cuba of which most Cubans are members. The organizations are designed to put medical, educational or other campaigns into national effect, and to report \"counter-revolutionary\" activity. It is the duty of the CDR officials to know the political activities of each person in their respective blocks.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nSuffrage is automatically afforded to Cuban citizens who have resided in Cuba for at least two years and are at least sixteen years old. Those legally declared \"mentally handicapped\" or who are serving time in prison cannot exercise this right. Cubans who live abroad for personal reasons for more than 24 consecutive months lose their right to vote.156-157 The national elections for the 470 members of the National Assembly of People's Power are held according to this system and the precepts of the 1976 Constitution.\nGeneral elections consist of two phases: municipal elections and elections to ANPP (National Assembly of People's Power, or Parliament). They are usually called in July and are held every five years. After elections are called, Council of State designates members of CEN (National Electoral Commission). The CEN oversees elections, but does not participate in them. It is responsible for surveying and inspecting the election procedure and ensure it conforms with the Constitution and electoral law. The CEN appoints CEP (Provincial Electoral Commission), which in turn appoints CEM (Municipal Electoral Commission). The latter lead formation of electoral commissions at the grassroots. There are roughly 1450 people in each of these \"circunscripci\u00f3ns\".154-156\nFor the purpose of Municipal elections, each \"circunscripci\u00f3n\" is further divided into two to eight areas with the goal of allowing nomination meetings to be very compressed and based on the grassroots. The number of nomination areas is determined by the population in the \"circunscripci\u00f3n\". In rural areas, extension of territory is also taken into consideration. People have the right to participate, nominate and vote only in the area in which they live. Nomination area assembly meetings are normally held in public areas at eight o'clock in the evening on weekdays or during the day on the weekend. Each assembly is presided over by the local electoral commission. Individuals have the right to propose anyone who lives in their \"circunscripci\u00f3n\" as long as the person has indicated they are willing to be nominated. The person nominating must provide a reason for nomination. Others have the right to argue against a nomination. When this is done, a show-of-hands vote is taken and counted by the electoral commission. The person with the most votes becomes the candidate for that nomination area. In order to ensure the law is being followed, members of CEP make surprise visits to nomination meetings.157-159\nOnce candidates have been nominated, the local electoral commission obtains a short biographical profile and a photo from them. These are posted in local public spaces for easy access to voters. This is the only publicity permitted under the electoral law. Voters are expected to read the profiles in order to make their choice. Campaigning is not permitted. Duharte D\u00edaz, professor at University of Havana, is of the opinion that posting profiles is insufficient and that more should be done to present the candidates.\nMunicipal elections are usually held in October. On the day of the vote, held always on a Sunday, voters confirm their voting eligibility by presenting their identification cards and are then handed a ballot with names of candidates nominated in their \"circunscripci\u00f3n\". Voting is secret. To win, a candidate must receive at least 50% plus one of the vote. If this does not happen, the candidate who placed last is eliminated and voting is repeated with remaining candidates.162-163\nCandidates elected in municipal elections carry out their functions on a voluntary basis after their regular work hours. Once municipal assemblies are constituted, they elect their presidents and vice-presidents from among themselves. These individuals are the only ones who are full-time, earning the same salary as they received at their place of work.146-147\nSecond phase, elections to ANPP (Parliament), is different from municipal elections. Up to half of the members of parliament are nominated from individuals elected in municipal election. The rest are nominated by mass organisations. These are Workers' Central Union of Cuba, Federation of Cuban Women, National Association of Small Farmers, Federation of University Students, Federation of Pre-University Students and Committees for the Defense of the Revolution. To propose candidates for elections each of the six mass organisations assembles at all three levels in plenary sessions to propose candidates from the population. The goal is to obtain a pool of potential candidates representing a wide cross-section of the population. Because of this, each of the mass organisations at all three levels (municipal, provincial, national) has the right to propose at least three times the number of candidates needed for each municipality to be represented in the parliament. The proposals are sent to CCN (National Candidacies Commission) which then reduces the list down to the number of seats.\nBefore elections (that usually happen in January), meetings between candidates and workers are held in places of work and in the neighbourhoods. Similarly to municipal elections, the only publicity allowed is a short biography and a photo. Elections happen on a Sunday. Voters are given a ballot with the names of candidates chosen by the CCN to represent their municipality. They can choose to vote for all, some or none of the candidates. To be elected, a candidate must receive at least 50% plus one of the valid votes. If they do not, a new candidate is chosen for the seat and voting repeated.\nState leaders.\nCommunist Party of Cuba.\nThe organization of Cuba's political system reflects the Marxist\u2013Leninist principle of democratic centralism.38\nForeign relations.\nCuba's foreign policy has been scaled back and redirected as a result of economic hardship after the collapse of the Soviet bloc. Without massive Soviet subsidies and its primary trading partner Cuba was comparatively isolated in the 1990s, but has since entered bilateral co-operation with several South American countries, most notably Venezuela and Bolivia. Cuba has normal diplomatic and economic relations with every country in the Western hemisphere except the United States.\nThe United States continues an embargo \"so long as [Cuba] continues to refuse to move toward democratization and greater respect for human rights.\"\nThe European Union accuses Cuba of \"continuing flagrant violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms\", but also \"Reiterates its condemnation of the US embargo on Cuba, and calls for it to be lifted forthwith, as the UN General Assembly has repeatedly demanded.\"\nCuba has developed a growing relationship with the People's Republic of China and Russia. In all, Cuba continues to have formal relations with 160 nations, and provided civilian assistance workers \u2013 principally medical \u2013 in more than 20 nations. More than two million exiles have escaped to foreign countries. Cuba's present Minister of Foreign Affairs is Bruno Rodr\u00edguez Parrilla.\nAuthoritarianism.\nSome political scientists characterize the political system of Cuba as non-democratic and authoritarian, while others challenge this characterization.146-149 It is a single-party state where political opposition is not permitted. The function of the party is different to that in liberal democracies. It does not propose candidates and is not allowed to influence elections.159-160 Candidates are instead nominated directly by citizens with a show of hands in \"circunscripciones\" (very small districts).146-149 Critics challenge whether this is democratic. Censorship of information (including limits to internet access) is extensive, and independent journalism is repressed in Cuba; Reporters Without Borders has characterized Cuba as one of the worst countries in the world for press freedom.\nOfficially, Cuba frames itself as a \"people's democracy\", as opposed to the \"liberal democracy\" of Western states. Cuba thus rejects criticism of its political system as a lack of appreciation for different forms of democracy other than those in capitalist states. It alludes to the grass roots elements in the nomination of candidates at neighborhood level (in the so-called \"circunscripci\u00f3nes\").\nOpposition groups inside and outside the country as well as a summary published by Human Rights Watch and certain foreign governments have described the Cuban political system as undemocratic. On the other hand, Cuba is a member of organisations ALBA and CELAC, that consider themselves democratic. The United States Government has initiated various policy measures ostensibly designed to urge Cuba to undertake political change towards a multi-party electoral system. These plans have been condemned by the Cuban Government, who accuses the United States of meddling in Cuba's affairs.\nHuman rights.\nAccording to Human Rights Watch, Castro constructed a \"repressive machinery\" that continues to deprive Cubans of their basic rights. The Cuban government has been accused of numerous human rights abuses, including torture, arbitrary imprisonment, unfair trials, and extrajudicial executions (a.k.a. \"El Pared\u00f3n\"). Human Rights Watch reports that the government represses nearly all forms of political dissent.\nThe country's first ever transgender municipal delegate was elected in the province of Villa Clara in early 2013. Adela Hern\u00e1ndez is a resident of the town of Caibari\u00e9n and works as a nurse electrocardiogram specialist. In Cuba, delegates are not professional politicians and, therefore, do not receive a government salary.\nIn 2022, the Family Code constitutional amendment passed. This followed hundreds of painstaking assembly discussions within communities and institutions across the island. This Code ensures the protection of rights of adoption, surrogacy, transgender-affirmation, same-sex marriages and the legitimacy of intergenerational households.\nCorruption.\nThe 2012 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index ranked Cuba 58th out of 176 countries, tied with Jordan and Namibia. and has lower levels than most of the other countries in the Caribbean and Central America. In 2006, it was ranked in 112th place, tied with India.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73250", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73250", "title": "Telecommunications in Cuba", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Cuba consists mainly of NTSC analog television, analog radio, telephony, AMPS, D-AMPS, and GSM mobile telephony, and the Internet. Telephone service is provided through ETECSA (Telecommunications Company of Cuba), mobile telephone service is provided through the Cellular Telephone Company of Cuba (CUBACEL) and, previously, Caribbean Cellular (\"Celulares del Caribe\", C-COM - no longer operating). Cuba's main international telecommunications links are through Intersputnik, with limited effectiveness of undersea telephone cables to the Americas, Spain, and possibly Italy due to underdevelopment.\nTelephone.\nCountry code: +53\nInternational call prefix: 00\nTelephones \u2013 main lines in use:\n1.2 million, 72nd in the world, less than 10 per 100 inhabitants (2009).\nTelephones \u2013 mobile cellular: One million mobile phones at the end of 2010 (9 per 100 inhabitants), up from 621,000 in 2009 and 330,000 in 2008, when all Cubans were allowed to buy and use them for the first time. Mobile-cellular telephone service is expensive, which limits subscribership. By the end of 2020, Etecsa announced that they had 6.661 million mobile telephone users of whom 4.421 million had Internet.\nTelephone system:\n95% of telephone switches were digitized by end of 2006. The principal trunk system is coaxial cable; fiber-optic distribution is used in Havana and on Isla de la Juventud; two microwave radio relay installations (one is old, US-built; the other newer, Soviet-built); both analog and digital mobile cellular service established; one international satellite earth station, Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region).\nNew fiber-optic link:\nA new undersea fiber-optic link with Venezuela was scheduled for 2011. In May 2012 there were reports that the cable was operational, but with use restricted to Cuban and Venezuelan government entities. Internet access by the general public still used the slower and more expensive satellite links, until January 2013 when Internet speeds increased.\nRadio.\nRadio broadcast stations:\n6 national radio networks, an international station, and many local radio stations. All state-owned and operated by the Cuban Radio and Television Corporation (ICRT), which manages Radio Rebelde, the largest AM network, and the SW service Radio Habana Cuba. Radio Marti, based in Miami, Florida, and financed by the United States government, transmits Spanish-language radio broadcasts to Cuba.\nRadios:\n3.9 million, 64th out of 188 in the world (1997)\nTelevision.\nTelevision broadcast stations:\nFour national TV networks and many local TV stations. All state-owned and operated by the Cuban Radio and Television Corporation (ICRT). TV Marti, based in Miami, Florida, and financed by the United States government, transmits Spanish language TV broadcasts to Cuba. The American Forces Network (AFN) has a station intended for U.S. military personnel at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base.\nTelevisions:\n2.64 million, 54th out of 185 in the world (1997)\nInternet.\nInternet users: total: 6,353,020 percent of population: 57.15% (July 2018 est.) Ranking 76th in the world for total users.\nInternet service providers (ISPs): Empresa de Telecomunicaciones de Cuba S.A (ETECSA)\nTop-level domain: .cu\nAccess to the Internet was heavily controlled, and all e-mails are closely monitored.\nThe Cuban authorities have called the Internet \"the great disease of 21st century\" due to 'counter-revolutionary' information being available on a number of websites, some of which are official news sites. As a result of computer ownership bans, computer ownership rates were among the world's lowest. However, since buying a computer was legalized in 2007, the ownership of computers in Cuba soared, dramatically increasing the number of Internet users. But, the rates still remained quite low, partially due to the high costs of systems and Internet usage per hour in contrast to the average monthly wage.\nIn 2019, ETECSA began offering Internet connection via Cubacel mobile telephones which was increased with 4G. In March 2021, they announced that 4G had reached every municipality in the country.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73251", "revid": "1318314497", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73251", "title": "Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces", "text": "Military forces of Cuba\nThe Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces (; FAR) are the military forces of Cuba. They include Revolutionary Army, Revolutionary Navy, Revolutionary Air and Air Defense Force, and other paramilitary bodies including the Territorial Troops Militia ( \u2013 MTT), Youth Labor Army ( \u2013 EJT), and the Defense and Production Brigades ( \u2013 BPD), plus the Civil Defense Organization ( \u2013 DCC) and the National Reserves Institution ( \u2013 INRE). All these groups are subordinated to the Ministry of the Revolutionary Armed Forces ( \u2013 MINFAR).\nThe armed forces have long been the most powerful institution in Cuba. The military manages many enterprises in key economic sectors representing about 4% of the Cuban economy. The military has also served as former Cuban Communist Party First Secretary, as well as former President of Cuba, Ra\u00fal Castro's base. In numerous speeches, Ra\u00fal Castro emphasized the military's role as a \"people's partner\".\nHistory.\nThe Cuban Army in its original form was first established in 1868 by Cuban revolutionaries during the Ten Years' War. It joined the Allies in the World War I in April 1917 and supplied sugar to several countries, mainly the United States of America. It was involved in the Battle of the Caribbean during World War II when it was part of the Allies supported by the United States. After the Cuban Revolution overthrew Fulgencio Batista's government, the Cuban Rebel Army under Fidel Castro's leadership was reorganized into the current armed forces of Cuba.\nDuring the Cold War, the Soviet Union granted both military and financial aid to Cuba. From 1966 until the late 1980s, Soviet Government military assistance enabled Cuba to upgrade its military capabilities to number one in Latin America and project power abroad. The first Cuban military mission in Africa was established in Ghana in 1961. Cuba's military forces appeared in Algeria, in 1963, when a military medical brigade came to support the government. In 1966 and 1967 little forces of Cuba landed in Venezuelan coast to support leftist guerilla of the FALN. Since the 1960s, Cuba sent military forces to African and Arab countries \u2013 Syria in 1973, Ethiopia in 1978, Angola from 1975 to 1989, and Nicaragua, El Salvador and reportedly Afghanistan during the 1980s. The tonnage of Soviet military deliveries to Cuba throughout most of the 1980s exceeded deliveries in any year since the military build-up during the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis. According to an Afghan Army defector and the Mujahideen, Cuban forces were present in 1981 during the Soviet\u2013Afghan War and were described as \"big and black and shout very loudly when they fight. Unlike the Russians, they were not afraid to attack us in the open.\"\nIn 1989, the government instituted a clean-up of the armed forces and the Ministry of Interior, convicting army Major General and Hero of the Republic of Cuba Arnaldo Ochoa, Ministry of Interior Colonel Antonio de la Guardia (Tony la Guardia), and Ministry of Interior Brigadier General Patricio de la Guardia on charges of corruption and drug trafficking. This judgment is known in Cuba as \"Causa 1\" (Cause 1). Ochoa and Antonio de la Guardia were executed. Following the executions, the Army was drastically downsized, the Ministry of Interior was moved under the informal control of Revolutionary Armed Forces chief General Ra\u00fal Castro (Fidel Castro's brother), and large numbers of army officers were moved into the Ministry of Interior.\nThe U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency reported in 1998 that the country's paramilitary organizations, the Territorial Militia Troops, the Youth Labor Army, and the Naval Militia had suffered considerable morale and training degradation over the previous seven years but still retained the potential to \"make an enemy invasion costly.\" Cuba also adopted a \"war of the people\" strategy that highlights the defensive nature of its capabilities.\nCuban military power was sharply reduced by the loss of Soviet subsidies following the end of the Cold War, and today the Revolutionary Armed Forces number 39,000 regular troops.\nIn April 2021, longtime Chief of Staff \u00c1lvaro L\u00f3pez Miera took over as the Minister of the Revolutionary Armed Forces.\nRevolutionary Army.\nThe Central Intelligence Agency wrote in May 1979 that when \"the economy took a downturn in 1970, the Castro regime, partly at Soviet urging, reduced its forces by some 60 per cent, eventually freeing more than 150,000 people for full-time civilian employment. All branches of the armed services except the Air Force were affected noticeably. The Air Defence Force shrank from six brigades and 24 occupied SA-2 surface-to-air missile sites to three brigades and 18 sites, leaving eastern Cuba unprotected by surface-to-air missiles. The Navy lost a number of radar surveillance posts, again to the detriment of eastern Cuba. The Army was more than halved in size and reorganised.\" (PA79-10173D)\nIn 1984, according to \"Jane's Military Review\", there were three major geographical commands, Western, Central, and Eastern. There were a reported 130,000 all ranks, and each command was garrisoned by an army comprising a single armored division, a mechanized division, and a corps of three infantry divisions, though the Eastern Command had two corps totaling six divisions. There was also an independent military region, with a single infantry division, which garrisoned the Isle of Youth.\nA U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency assessment in the first half of 1998 said that the army's armor and artillery units were at low readiness levels due to 'severely reduced' training, generally incapable of mounting effective operations above the battalion level, and that equipment was mostly in storage and unavailable at short notice. The same report said that Cuban special operations forces continue to train but on a smaller scale than beforehand, and that while the lack of replacement parts for its existing equipment and the current severe shortage of fuel were increasingly affecting operational capabilities, Cuba remained able to offer considerable resistance to any regional power.\nRevolutionary Air and Air Defence Force.\nThe Cuban Revolutionary Air and Air Defence Force (DAAFAR) was used in the 1980s with the help of the Soviet Union to be able to project power abroad, especially in Africa. During that time Cuba sent jet fighters and transports for deployment in conflict zones such as Angola and Ethiopia.\nIn 1990, Cuba's Air Force was the best equipped in Latin America. In all, the modern Cuban Air Force had approximately 230 fixed-wing aircraft. Although there is no exact figure available, Western analysts estimate that at least 130 (with only 25 operational) of these planes are still in service spread out among the thirteen military airbases on the island.\nIn 1996, fighters from the DAAFAR shot down two Cessna aircraft based in Florida which were incorrectly suspected of dropping leaflets into Cuban airspace. The air force was criticised for not giving the pilots of the aircraft options other than being shot down. One aircraft escaped.\nIn 1998, according to the same DIA report mentioned above, the air force had \"fewer than 24 operational Mikoyan-Gurevich (MiG) fighters; pilot training barely adequate to maintain proficiency; a declining number of fighter sorties, surface-to-air missiles and anti-aircraft guns to respond to attacking air forces.\"\nBy 2007 the International Institute for Strategic Studies assessed the force as 8,000 strong with 41 combat capable aircraft and a further 188 stored. DAAFAR is known now to have acquired another MiG-29 and a few MiG-23s, giving it 58 combat aircraft in active service. These are listed as 6 MiG-29s, 40 MiG-23s, and 12 MiG-21s. IISS also estimated DAAFAR had 12 operational transport aircraft, plus trainers which include 8 L-39C, and helicopters, mainly Mil Mi-8, Mil Mi-17, and Mil Mi-24 Hind. Ra\u00fal Castro ordered in 2010 that all MiG-29 pilots had to have full training, they now have from 200\u2013250 hours of flight annually together with real dogfight training and exercises. Up to 20 MiG-23 units also have this kind of training but the other 16 MiG-23 units spend more time in simulators than real flight. MiG-21 units have limited time in these training exercises and spend more time in simulators and maintain their skills flying with Aerogaviota, the commercial brand of the air force.\nRevolutionary Navy.\nIn 1988, the Cuban Navy boasted 12,000 men, three submarines, two modern guided-missile frigates, one intelligence vessel, and a large number of patrol craft and minesweepers. However, most of the Soviet-made vessels have been decommissioned or sunk to make reefs. By 2007, the Cuban Navy was assessed as being 3,000 strong (including up to 550+ Navy Infantry) by the IISS with six Osa-II missile boats and one . The Cuban Navy also includes a small marine battalion called the \"Desembarco de Granma\". It once numbered 550 men, though its present size is not known.\nAfter the old Soviet submarines were put out of service, Cuba searched for help from North Korea's experience in midget submarines. North Korean defectors claimed to have seen Cubans in mid to late 1990s in a secret submarine base. Years later, a single picture became public of a small black native submarine in Havana harbor. It is rumored to be called 'Delfin' and is to be armed with two torpedoes. Only a single boat is in service and the design appears original, even if influenced both by North Korea and Soviet designs.\nThe Cuban Navy rebuilt one, large ex-Spanish \"Rio Damuji\" fishing boat. \"BP-390\" is now armed with two C-201W missiles, one twin 57\u00a0mm gun mount, two twin 25\u00a0mm gun mounts and on 14.5\u00a0mm machine gun. This vessel is larger than the , and it is used as a helicopter carrier patrol vessel. A second unit (\"BP-391\") was converted and entered service in 2016.\nThe Cuban Navy today operates its own missile systems, the made-in-Cuba Bandera (a copy of the dated Styx Soviet missiles) and Remulgadas anti-ship missile systems, as well as the nationally produced Frontera self-propelled coastal defence multiple rocket launcher. The navy's principal threats are drug smuggling and illegal immigration. The country's geographical position and limited naval presence has enabled traffickers to utilise Cuban territorial waters and airspace.\nThe Cuban Navy's air wing is an ASW helicopter operator only and is equipped with 2 Mi-14 Haze helicopters.\nSpecial Forces.\nThe (), also known formally as the Mobile Brigade of Special Troops (BMTE) is a special forces unit in the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces. It is often identified as Military Unit 4895\nDesembarco de Granma is a small marine battalion with Marines like role.\nParamilitary forces.\nTerritorial Troops Militia.\nThe Territorial Troops Militia is composed exclusively of civilian volunteers, under the command of MINFAR. It reinforced the notion of the popular will to defend the Revolution. In general, the militia is a part-time force with only light arms that are issued only on occasion.\nYouth Labor Army.\nThe Youth Labor Army ( \u2013 EJT) is, by law, a paramilitary organization under the direct control of MINFAR. It was formally established on 3 August 1973 by combining the Centennial Youth Column (CJC) and the Permanent Infantry Divisions (DIP). Cuba's compulsory service laws require all male citizens to serve for three years in the EJT. The formation of the EJT allowed the army to devote itself full time to military matters. The EJT served as a reserve force in its first 20 years. In 1993, it was assigned the responsibility of managing the state farms.\nBorder Troops.\nThe Border Troops of the Republic of Cuba () is a branch that ensures the protection of the state borders and territorial waters. They are subordinate to the Interior Ministry (MININT). The official date of the establishment of this service was on September 23, 1970. In the second half of the 1970s, several agreements were signed, according to which some changes were made to border protection, including a 1976 agreement was signed between Cuba and Mexico on the delimitation of the exclusive economic zone in the sector of the Cuban-Mexican maritime border and a 1977 agreement was signed on the maritime border between Cuba and Haiti. The Border Troops are de facto both a border guard and a coast guard force, and all new officers are commissioned from the Granma Naval Academy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73252", "revid": "48181213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73252", "title": "Frank Miller", "text": "American writer, artist, and film director (born 1957)\nFrank Miller (born January 27, 1957) is an American comic book creator, screenwriter, and director known for his comic book stories and graphic novels such as his run on \"Daredevil\", for which he created the character Elektra, and subsequent \"Daredevil: Born Again\", \"The Dark Knight Returns\", \"\", \"Sin City\", \"Ronin\", and \"300\".\nMiller is noted for combining film noir and manga influences in his comic art creations. He said: \"I realized when I started \"Sin City\" that I found American and English comics to be too wordy, too constipated, and Japanese comics to be too empty. So I was attempting to do a hybrid.\" Miller has received every major comic book industry award, and in 2015 he was inducted into the Will Eisner Award Hall of Fame.\nMiller's feature film work includes writing the scripts for the 1990s science fiction films \"RoboCop 2\" and \"RoboCop 3\", sharing directing duties with Robert Rodriguez on \"Sin City\" and \"\", producing the film \"300\", and directing the film adaptation of \"The Spirit\". \"Sin City\" earned a Palme d'Or nomination.\nEarly life.\nMiller was born in Olney, Maryland, on January 27, 1957, and raised in Montpelier, Vermont, the fifth of seven children of a nurse mother and a carpenter/electrician father. His family was Irish Catholic.\nCareer.\nMiller grew up a comics fan; a letter he wrote to Marvel Comics was published in \"The Cat\" #3 (April 1973). His first published work was at Western Publishing's Gold Key Comics imprint, received at the recommendation of comics artist Neal Adams, to whom a fledgling Miller, after moving to New York City, had shown samples and received much critique and occasional informal lessons. Though no published credits appear, he is tentatively credited with the three-page story \"Royal Feast\" in the licensed TV series comic book \"The Twilight Zone\" #84 (June 1978), by an unknown writer, and is credited with the five-page \"Endless Cloud\", also by an unknown writer, in the following issue (July 1978). By the time of the latter, Miller had his first confirmed credit in writer Wyatt Gwyon's six-page \"Deliver Me From D-Day\", inked by Danny Bulanadi, in \"Weird War Tales\" #64 (June 1978).\nFormer Marvel editor-in-chief Jim Shooter recalled Miller going to DC Comics after having broken in with \"a small job from Western Publishing, I think. Thus emboldened, he went to DC, and after getting savaged by Joe Orlando, got in to see art director Vinnie Colletta, who recognized talent and arranged for him to get a one-page war-comic job.\" The Grand Comics Database does not list this job; there may have been a one-page DC story, or Shooter may have misremembered the page count or have been referring to the two-page story, by writer Roger McKenzie, as \"Slowly, painfully, you dig your way from the cold, choking debris\" in \"Weird War Tales\" #68 (October 1978). Other fledgling work at DC included the six-page \"The Greatest Story Never Told\", by writer Paul Kupperberg, in that same issue, and the five-page \"The Edge of History\", written by Elliot S. Maggin, in \"Unknown Soldier\" #219 (September 1978). His first work for Marvel Comics was penciling the 17-page story \"The Master Assassin of Mars, Part 3\" in \"John Carter, Warlord of Mars\" #18 (November 1978).\nAt Marvel, Miller settled in as a regular fill-in and cover artist, working on a variety of titles. One of these jobs was drawing \"Peter Parker, The Spectacular Spider-Man\" #27\u201328 (February\u2013March 1979), which guest-starred Daredevil. At the time, sales of the \"Daredevil\" title were poor but Miller saw potential in \"a blind protagonist in a purely visual medium\", as he recalled in 2000. Miller went to writer and staffer Jo Duffy (a mentor-figure whom he called his \"guardian angel\" at Marvel) and she passed on his interest to editor-in-chief Jim Shooter to get Miller work on Daredevil's regular title. Shooter agreed and made Miller the new penciller on the title. As Miller recalled in 2008: {\n\"Daredevil\" and the early 1980s.\n\"Daredevil\" #158 (May 1979), Miller's debut on that title, was the finale of an ongoing story written by Roger McKenzie and inked by Klaus Janson. After this issue, Miller became one of Marvel's rising stars. However, sales on \"Daredevil\" did not improve, Marvel's management continued to discuss cancellation, and Miller himself almost quit the series, as he disliked McKenzie's scripts. Miller's fortunes changed with the arrival of Denny O'Neil as editor. Realizing Miller's unhappiness with the series, and impressed by a backup story Miller had written, O'Neil moved McKenzie to another project so that Miller could try writing the series himself. Miller and O'Neil maintained a friendly working relationship throughout his run on the series. With issue #168 (Jan. 1981), Miller took over full duties as writer and penciller. Sales rose so swiftly that Marvel once again began publishing \"Daredevil\" monthly rather than bimonthly just three issues after Miller became its writer.\nIssue #168 saw the first full appearance of the ninja mercenary Elektra\u2014who became a popular character and star in a 2005 motion picture\u2014although her first cover appearance was four months earlier on Miller's cover of \"The Comics Journal\" #58. Miller later wrote and drew a solo Elektra story in \"Bizarre Adventures\" #28 (Oct. 1981). He added a martial arts aspect to Daredevil's fighting skills, and introduced previously unseen characters who had played a major part in the character's youth: Stick, leader of the ninja clan the Chaste, who had been Murdock's sensei after he was blinded and a rival clan called the Hand.\nUnable to handle both writing and penciling \"Daredevil\" on the new monthly schedule, Miller began increasingly relying on Janson for the artwork, sending him looser and looser pencils beginning with #173. By issue #185, Miller had virtually relinquished his role as Daredevil's artist, and he was providing only rough layouts for Janson to both pencil and ink, allowing Miller to focus on the writing.\nMiller's work on Daredevil was characterized by darker themes and stories. This peaked when in #181 (April 1982) he had the assassin Bullseye kill Elektra, and Daredevil subsequently attempt to kill him. Miller finished his \"Daredevil\" run with issue #191 (February 1983), which he cited in a winter 1983 interview as the issue he is most proud of; by this time, he had transformed a second-tier character into one of Marvel's most popular. Additionally, Miller drew a short Batman Christmas story, \"Wanted: Santa Claus \u2013 Dead or Alive\", written by Dennis O'Neil for \"DC Special Series\" #21 (Spring 1980). This was his first professional experience with a character with which, like Daredevil, he became closely associated. At Marvel, O'Neil and Miller collaborated on two issues of \"The Amazing Spider-Man Annual\". The 1980 Annual featured a team-up with Doctor Strange while the 1981 Annual showcased a meeting with the Punisher.\nAs penciller and co-plotter, Miller, together with writer Chris Claremont, produced the miniseries \"Wolverine\" #1\u20134 (Sept.-Dec. 1982), inked by Josef Rubinstein and spinning off from the popular \"X-Men\" title. Miller used this miniseries to expand on Wolverine's character. The series was a critical success and further cemented Miller's place as an industry star. His first creator-owned title was DC Comics' six-issue miniseries \"Ronin\" (1983\u20131984). In 1985, DC Comics named Miller as one of the honorees in the company's 50th-anniversary publication \"Fifty Who Made DC Great\".\nMiller was involved in a few unpublished projects in the early 1980s. A house advertisement for \"Doctor Strange\" appeared in Marvel Comics cover-dated February 1981. It stated \"Watch for the new adventures of Earth's Sorcerer Supreme\u2014as mystically conjured by Roger Stern and Frank Miller!\". Miller's only contribution to the series was the cover for \"Doctor Strange\" #46 (April 1981). Other commitments prevented him from working on the series. Miller and Steve Gerber made a proposal to revamp DC's three biggest characters: Superman, Batman, and Wonder Woman, under a line called \"Metropolis\" and comics titled \"Man of Steel\" or \"The Man of Steel\", \"Dark Knight\" and \"Amazon\". However, this proposal was not accepted.\n\"Batman: The Dark Knight Returns\" and the late 1980s.\nIn 1986, DC Comics released the writer\u2013penciller Miller's \"\", a four-issue miniseries printed in what the publisher called \"prestige format\"\u2014squarebound, rather than stapled; on heavy-stock paper rather than newsprint, and with cardstock rather than glossy-paper covers. It was inked by Klaus Janson and colored by Lynn Varley. The story tells how Batman retired after the death of the second Robin (Jason Todd) and, at age 55, returns to fight crime in a dark and violent future. Miller created a tough, gritty Batman, referring to him as \"The Dark Knight\" based upon his being called the \"Darknight Detective\" in some 1970s portrayals, although the nickname \"Dark Knight\" for Batman dates back to 1940. Released the same year as Alan Moore's and Dave Gibbons' DC miniseries \"Watchmen\", it showcased a new form of more adult-oriented storytelling to both comics fans and a crossover mainstream audience. \"The Dark Knight Returns\" influenced the comic-book industry by heralding a new wave of darker characters. The trade paperback collection proved to be a big seller for DC and remains in print.\nBy this time, Miller had returned as the writer of \"Daredevil\". Following his self-contained story \"Badlands\", penciled by John Buscema, in #219 (June 1985), he co-wrote #226 (Jan. 1986) with departing writer Dennis O'Neil. Then, with artist David Mazzucchelli, he crafted a seven-issue story arc that, like \"The Dark Knight Returns\", similarly redefined and reinvigorated its main character. The storyline, \"Daredevil: Born Again\", in #227\u2013233 (February\u2013August 1986) chronicled the hero's Catholic background and the destruction and rebirth of his real-life identity, Manhattan attorney Matt Murdock, at the hands of Daredevil's nemesis, the crime lord Wilson Fisk, also known as the Kingpin. After completing the \"Born Again\" arc, Frank Miller intended to produce a two-part story with artist Walt Simonson but it was never completed and remains unpublished.\nMiller and artist Bill Sienkiewicz produced the graphic novel \"Daredevil: Love and War\" in 1986. Featuring the character of the Kingpin, it indirectly bridges Miller's first run on \"Daredevil\" and \"Born Again\" by explaining the change in the Kingpin's attitude toward Daredevil. Miller and Sienkiewicz also produced the eight-issue miniseries \"\" for Epic Comics. Set outside regular Marvel continuity, it featured a wild tale of cyborgs and ninjas, while expanding further on Elektra's background. Both of these projects were critically well received. \"Elektra: Assassin\" was praised for its bold storytelling, but neither it nor \"Daredevil: Love and War\" had the influence or reached as many readers as \"Dark Knight Returns\" or \"Born Again\".\nMiller's final major story in this period was in \"Batman\" issues 404\u2013407 in 1987, another collaboration with Mazzucchelli. Titled \"\", this was Miller's version of the origin of Batman in which he retconned many details and adapted the story to fit his \"Dark Knight\" continuity. Proving to be hugely popular, this was as influential as Miller's previous work. A trade paperback released in 1988 remains in print, and is one of DC's best selling books. The story was adapted as an in 2011.\nMiller illustrated the covers for the first twelve issues of First Comics' English-language reprints of Kazuo Koike and Goseki Kojima's \"Lone Wolf and Cub\". This helped bring Japanese manga to a wider Western audience. During this time, Miller (along with Marv Wolfman, Alan Moore, and Howard Chaykin) had been in dispute with DC Comics over a proposed ratings system for comics. Disagreeing with what he saw as censorship, Miller refused to do any further work for DC, and he took his future projects to the independent publisher Dark Horse Comics. From then on Miller was a major supporter of creator rights and became a major voice against censorship in comics.\nThe 1990s: \"Sin City\" and \"300\".\nAfter announcing he intended to release his work only via the independent publisher Dark Horse Comics, Miller completed one final project for Epic Comics, the mature-audience imprint of Marvel Comics. \"Elektra Lives Again\" was a fully painted graphic novel written and drawn by Miller and colored by longtime partner Lynn Varley. Telling the story of the resurrection of Elektra from the dead and Daredevil's quest to find her, as well as showing Miller's will to experiment with new story-telling techniques.\n1990 saw Miller and artist Geof Darrow start work on \"Hard Boiled\", a three-issue miniseries. The title, a mix of violence and satire, was praised for Darrow's highly detailed art and Miller's writing. At the same time, Miller and artist Dave Gibbons produced \"Give Me Liberty\", a four-issue miniseries for Dark Horse. \"Give Me Liberty\" was followed by sequel miniseries and specials expanding on the story of protagonist Martha Washington, an African-American woman in modern and near-future North America, all of which were written by Miller and drawn by Gibbons.\nMiller wrote the scripts for the science fiction films \"RoboCop 2\" and \"RoboCop 3\", about a police cyborg. Neither was critically well received. In 2007, Miller stated that \"There was a lot of interference in the writing process. It wasn't ideal. After working on the two Robocop movies, I really thought that was it for me in the business of film.\" Miller came into contact with the fictional cyborg once more, writing the comic-book miniseries \"RoboCop Versus The Terminator\", with art by Walter Simonson. In 2003, Miller's screenplay for \"RoboCop 2\" was adapted by Steven Grant for Avatar Press's Pulsaar imprint. Illustrated by Juan Jose Ryp, the series is called \"Frank Miller's RoboCop\" and contains plot elements that were divided between \"RoboCop 2\" and \"RoboCop 3\".\nIn 1991, Miller started work on his first \"Sin City\" story. Serialized in \"Dark Horse Presents\" #51\u201362, it proved to be another success, and the story was released in a trade paperback. This first Sin City \"yarn\" was rereleased in 1995 under the name \"The Hard Goodbye\". \"Sin City\" proved to be Miller's main project for much of the remainder of the decade, as Miller told more Sin City stories within this noir world of his creation, in the process helping to revitalize the crime comics genre. \"Sin City\" proved artistically auspicious for Miller and again brought his work to a wider audience without comics. Miller lived in Los Angeles, California in the 1990s, which influenced \"Sin City\". He later lived in the Hell's Kitchen neighborhood of New York City, which was also an influence.\n\"\" was a five issue miniseries published by Marvel Comics in 1993. In this story, Miller and artist John Romita Jr. told Daredevil's origins differently from in the previous comics, and they provided additional detail to his beginnings. Miller also returned to superheroes by writing issue #11 of Todd McFarlane's \"Spawn\", as well as the \"Spawn/Batman\" crossover for Image Comics.\nIn 1994, Miller became one of the founding members of the comic imprint Legend, under which many of his Sin City works were released via Dark Horse Comics. In 1995, Miller and Darrow collaborated again on \"Big Guy and Rusty the Boy Robot\", published as a two-part miniseries by Dark Horse. In 1999, it became an animated series on \"Fox Kids\".\nWritten and illustrated by Miller with painted colors by Varley, \"300\" was a 1998 comic-book miniseries, released as a hardcover collection in 1999, retelling the Battle of Thermopylae and the events leading up to it from the perspective of Leonidas of Sparta. \"300\" was particularly inspired by the 1962 film \"The 300 Spartans\", a movie that Miller watched as a young boy.\n\"Batman: The Dark Knight Strikes Again\" and 2000\u20132019.\nHe was one of the artists on the ' one-shot written by Evan Dorkin published in 2000. Miller moved back to Hell's Kitchen by 2001 and was creating ' as the 9/11 terrorist attacks occurred about four miles from that neighborhood. His differences with DC Comics put aside, he saw the sequel initially released as a three-issue miniseries, and though it sold well, it received a mixed to negative reception. Miller also returned to writing Batman in 2005, taking on the writing duties of \"All Star Batman &amp; Robin, the Boy Wonder\", a series set inside of what Miller describes as the \"Dark Knight Universe,\" and drawn by Jim Lee. \"All Star Batman &amp; Robin, the Boy Wonder\" also received largely negative reviews.\nMiller's previous attitude towards movie adaptations was to change after Robert Rodriguez made a short film based on a story from Miller's \"Sin City\" entitled \"The Customer is Always Right\". Miller was pleased with the result, leading to him and Rodriguez directing a full-length film, \"Sin City\" using Miller's original comics panels as storyboards. The film was released in the U.S. on April 1, 2005. The film's success brought renewed attention to Miller's \"Sin City\" projects. Similarly, a 2006 film adaptation of \"300\", directed by Zack Snyder, brought new attention to Miller's original comic book work. A sequel to the film, \"\", based on Miller's second \"Sin City\" series and co-directed by Miller and Robert Rodriguez, was released in theaters on August 22, 2014.\nIn July 2011, while at San Diego Comic-Con promoting his upcoming graphic novel \"Holy Terror\", in which the protagonist hero fights Al-Qaeda terrorists, Miller made a remark about Islamic terrorism and Islam, saying, \"I was raised Catholic and I could tell you a lot about the Spanish Inquisition, but the mysteries of the Catholic Church elude me. And I could tell you a lot about Al-Qaeda, but the mysteries of Islam elude me too.\"\nIn November 2011, Miller posted remarks pertaining to the Occupy Wall Street movement on his blog, calling it \"nothing but a pack of louts, thieves, and rapists, fed by Woodstock-era nostalgia and putrid false righteousness.\" He said of the movement, \"Wake up, pond scum. America is at war against a ruthless enemy. Maybe, between bouts of self-pity and all the other tasty tidbits of narcissism you've been served up in your sheltered, comfy little worlds, you've heard terms like al-Qaeda and Islamicism.\" Miller's statement was criticised by fellow comic writer Alan Moore. In a 2018 interview, Miller backed away from his comments saying that he \"wasn't thinking clearly\" when he made them and alluded to a very dark time in his life during which they were made.\nOn July 10, 2015, at San Diego Comic-Con, Miller was inducted into the Eisner Awards Hall of Fame. From 2015 to 2017, DC released a nine-issue, bimonthly sequel to \"The Dark Knight Returns\" and \"The Dark Knight Strikes Again\", titled '. Miller co-wrote it with Brian Azzarello, and Andy Kubert and Klaus Janson were the artists. Issue one was the top-selling comic of November 2015, moving an estimated 440,234 copies. In 2016, Miller and Azzarello also co-wrote the graphic novel, \"The Dark Knight Returns: The Last Crusade\" with art by John Romita Jr. and Peter Steigerwald. From April to August 2018, Dark Horse Comics published monthly Miller's five-issue miniseries sequel to \"300\", ', which marked his first work as both writer and artist comics creation since \"Holy Terror\".\nIn 2017 Miller announced he was writing a \"Superman: Year One\" project with artwork by John Romita Jr. The three-issue series was released by DC Black Label from June to October 2019 and received mixed reviews. Simon &amp; Schuster Children's Publishing published his and author Tom Wheeler's young-adult novel \"Cursed\", about the King Arthur legend from the point of view of the Lady of the Lake in October 2019. In December 2019, DC released \"Dark Knight Returns: The Golden Child\", the fifth series in \"The Dark Knight Returns\" universe to mixed reviews. It is written by Miller with artwork by Rafael Grampa.\nThe 2020s.\nIn July 2020, Netflix released a 10-episode series based on \"Cursed\" with Miller and Wheeler serving as both creators and executive producers.\nFrank Miller Presents.\nOn April 28, 2022, it was reported that Miller was launching an American comic book publishing company titled Frank Miller Presents (FMP). Miller will act as the company's president and editor-in-chief, working alongside Dan DiDio as publisher and chief operating officer Silenn Thomas. FMP expects to produce between two and four titles per year, with Miller's initial contributions to include \"Sin City 1858\" and \"Ronin Book Two\". As of November 2023, FMP was focusing its efforts on the \"Ronin\" sequel and \"Pandora\", a fantasy adventure series produced together with The Kubert School that Miller described as \"look[ing] like a children's book, but it's also a dark fairytale\".\n\"Frank Miller: American Genius\".\nThe documentary film \"Frank Miller: American Genius\" premiered on June 6, 2024, at the Angelika Film Center in New York City. The event featured a live introduction with Miller, moderated by author Neil Gaiman. On June 10, the film screened in Cinemark theaters across the U.S for one day only.\nLegal issues.\nIn October 2012, Joanna Gallardo-Mills, who began working for Miller as an executive coordinator in November 2008, filed suit against Miller in Manhattan for discrimination and \"mental anguish\", stating that Miller's former girlfriend, Kimberly Cox, created a hostile work environment for Gallardo-Mills in Miller and Cox's Hell's Kitchen living and work space.\nIn July 2020, producer Stephen L'Heureux, who worked on \"Sin City: A Dame to Kill For\", filed a $25 million defamation and economic interference lawsuit against Miller and fellow producer Silenn Thomas. L'Heureux alleged the pair had repeatedly made, \"false, misleading and defamatory statements\" about L'Heureux's ownership of the developmental rights of \"Sin City\" and \"Hard Boiled\" to Skydance Media CEO David Ellison and other Skydance executives and prevented the creation of a film adaptation of \"Hard Boiled\" and a TV series based on \"Sin City\". Miller's attorney Allen Grodsky denied the allegation stating, \"The claims asserted in Mr. L'Heureux's lawsuit are baseless, and we will be aggressively defending this lawsuit.\"\nPersonal life.\nMiller was married to colorist Lynn Varley from 1986 to 2005. She colored many of his most acclaimed works (from \"Ronin\" in 1984 through \"300\" in 1998) and the backgrounds to the 2006 movie \"300\". Miller has been romantically linked to Kimberly Halliburton Cox, who had a cameo in \"The Spirit\" (2008).\nIn response to claims that his comics are conservative, Miller said, \"I'm not a conservative. I'm a libertarian.\"\nMiller is a recovering alcoholic and states that he used alcohol heavily in his early career to free him from inhibitions and increase his creative output.\nMiller has described himself as an atheist.\nStyle and influence.\nAlthough still conforming to traditional comic book styles, Miller infused his first issue of \"Daredevil\" with his own film noir style. Miller sketched the roofs of New York in an attempt to give his \"Daredevil\" art an authentic feel not commonly seen in superhero comics at the time. One journalist commented:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Daredevil's New York, under Frank's run, became darker and more dangerous than the Spider-Man New York he'd seemingly lived in before. New York City itself, particularly Daredevil's Hell's Kitchen neighborhood, became as much a character as the shadowy crimefighter; the stories often took place on the rooftop level, with water towers, pipes and chimneys jutting out to create a skyline reminiscent of German Expressionism's dramatic edges and shadows.\n\"Ronin\" shows some of the strongest influences of manga and bande dessin\u00e9e on Miller's style, both in the artwork and narrative style. \"Sin City\" was drawn in black and white to emphasize its film noir origins. Miller has said he opposes naturalism in comic art: \"People are attempting to bring a superficial reality to superheroes which is rather stupid. They work best as the flamboyant fantasies they are. I mean, these are characters that are broad and big. I don't need to see sweat patches under Superman's arms. I want to see him fly.\"\nMiller considers the Argentinian comic book artist Alberto Breccia as one of his personal mentors, even declaring that (regarding modernity in comics), \"It all started with Breccia\". In that same regard, Miller's work in \"Sin City\" has been analyzed by South American writers and artists \u2013as well as European critics like \u2013 as being based or inspired in Breccia's groundbreaking style, especially regarding the latter's chiaroscuros and strong use of stark black-and-white technique.\nAppraisal.\n\"Daredevil: Born Again\" and \"The Dark Knight Returns\" were both critical successes and influential on subsequent generations of creators to the point of being considered classics of the medium. ' was also met with praise for its gritty style, while comics including \"Ronin\", \"300\" and \"Sin City\" were also successful, cementing Miller's place as a legend of comic books. However, later material such as ' received mixed reviews. In particular, \"All Star Batman and Robin the Boy Wonder\" was widely considered a sign of Miller's creative decline.\nFellow comic book writer Alan Moore has described Miller's work from \"Sin City\"-onward as homophobic and misogynistic, despite praising his early \"Batman\" and \"Daredevil\" material. Moore previously penned a flattering introduction to an early collected edition of \"The Dark Knight Returns\", and the two have remained friends. Moore has praised Miller's realistic use of minimal dialogue in fight scenes, which \"move very fast, flowing from image to image with the speed of a real-life conflict, unimpeded by the reader having to stop to read a lot of accompanying text\".\nMiller's graphic novel \"Holy Terror\" was accused of being anti-Islamic. Miller later said that he regretted \"Holy Terror\", saying, \"I don't want to wipe out chapters of my own biography. But I'm not capable of that book again.\"\nMiller's film adaptation of \"Sin City\" was well received by audiences and critics. On the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 77% based on 254 reviews, with an average rating of 7.50/10. The website's critical consensus reads: \"Visually groundbreaking and terrifically violent, \"Sin City\" brings the dark world of Frank Miller's graphic novel to vivid life.\" His 2008 adaptation of \"The Spirit\" received generally negative reviews.\nAwards and nominations.\nInkpot Awards\nKirby Awards\nEisner Awards\nHarvey Awards\nEagle Awards\nUK Comic Art Award\nCannes Film Festival\nScream Awards\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73253", "revid": "41888491", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73253", "title": "Scuba", "text": "Scuba, originally SCUBA, often expanded to scuba set, is any \"self-contained underwater breathing apparatus\", a source of breathing gas used for underwater diving which is carried by the diver.\nScuba may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "73254", "revid": "1295713641", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73254", "title": "Top 10 (comics)", "text": "Comic book series\nTop 10 is a superhero comic book limited series published by the America's Best Comics imprint of WildStorm, itself an imprint of DC Comics. Written by Alan Moore and illustrated by Gene Ha and Zander Cannon, the series details the lives and work of the police force of Neopolis, a city in which almost everyone, from the police and criminals to civilians, children and even pets, has super powers and/or colourful costumes. It won the Eisner Award for Best Continuing Series in 2001.\nThe series led to the production of several spin-offs; \"Smax\", which was set directly after the series' conclusion; \"\", which is set in 1949; \"Top Ten: Beyond the Farthest Precinct\", which is set five years after the series' conclusion; and \"Top Ten Season Two\", penned by Zander Cannon.\nOverview.\nThe story revolves around the day-to-day lives of the police officers at the 10th Precinct Police Station and is similar in tone to classic television police dramas like \"Hill Street Blues\", which Moore has described as an influence. The book also addresses a wide range of prejudices and issues, but with a science-fiction twist; monsters, robots and fantasy creatures often face the bigotry and problems faced by real-world human minorities.\nThe series includes several comic-book references and visual \"sight gags\" relating to the genre. For example, a caped street-corner watch-vendor uses a cardboard sign advertising \"signal watches\", and a hot-dog vendor cooks his wares with heat vision. One plotline involves a boy-band called \"Sidekix\" whose hit single is \"Holy Broken Hearts\" (a reference to the catchphrase format of DC Comics character Robin). Likewise, most advertising, signage and graffiti in the \"Top 10\" universe contains references to the world of comic books and superpowers (for example, a clothing store called The Phonebooth, a reference to how Superman in early comics changed his clothes in a phonebooth) and crowd scenes usually feature many characters from sci-fi and comic books.\nThe primary \"Top 10\" series was a 12-issue series between 2000 and 2001. Follow-ups included 2003's 5-issue miniseries spin-off \"Smax\" and 2005's graphic novel \"\". 2005 also saw the publication of \"Top 10: Beyond the Farthest Precinct\", a 5-issue miniseries, written by Paul Di Filippo and illustrated by Jerry Ordway. Another 4-issue series, \"Top 10: Season Two\", was published in 2008\u201309. It was written by Zander Cannon, Kevin Cannon, and Shadi Petosky, with art by Gene Ha. A single issue \"Special\", set two weeks later, was also produced.\nPlot.\nSeason One.\nBook 1 (issues #1\u20137).\nFresh from the academy, Robyn \"Toybox\" Slinger is headed for her first day on the job at Precinct 10, home of Neopolis' finest. Despite a cold reception from her new partner Jeff Smax, Robyn quickly helps with investigating the scene of a homicide in the robot ghetto, Tin Town. The dead man, Stefan \"Saddles\" Graczik, leads the police to a known drug factory, headed by none other than Professor Gromolko, an original architect of the city. When a telepath is brought in to interrogate the evil scientist, the drug peddler shoots himself with Dust Devil's pistol.\nThe next day, Shock-headed Pete and Dust Devil discover the body of a local prostitute with her head severed, indicating the horrific \"Libra\" killer is back. Elsewhere, Detective Synaesthesia gets the idea to use zen taxi driver Blindshot to track down Marta \"Boots\" Wesson, girlfriend and associate of Saddles. Boots reveals that Gromolko had a special delivery for a unique client. At the museum hideout where Boots and Saddles had been staying, a metal canister is found containing some unknown, radioactive drug.\nBack at the station, Hyperdog and Peregrine interview Annette \"Neural 'Nette\" Duvalle, a prostitute who was able to survive an encounter with Libra. She leads Hyperdog and Peregrine, along with Dust Devil, Shock-headed Pete and Jack Phantom, to the sewers near where she encountered her attacker. The police are able to arrest Libra, who is revealed to be former \"science hero\" M'rrgla Qualtz, an alien shapeshifter who assumed her natural form to feed during her metamorphic period.\nBook 2 (issues #8\u201312).\nAfter Qualtz's arrest, several of her former Seven Sentinels teammates come to give her their support, as well as political and legal aid. Even as she professes her innocence, Qualtz continues to use her telepathic powers to try and trick officers into freeing her from captivity. Meanwhile, King Peacock travels to Grand Central, a parallel dimension where the Roman Empire never fell and is filled with countless Roman myth-based creatures. It was here that Saddles was to deliver the drug, but before Peacock can investigate anything, he is drafted into an inter-precinct gladiatorial contest due to a seeming bureaucratic oversight. Though he is victorious, King Peacock despairs that he had to assault and even kill fellow law officers.\nSmax and Toybox are called to the scene of an apparent suicide, only to discover the victim, a sidekick boy band star, was murdered. Back at headquarters, the precinct welcomes Commissioner Ultima, visiting from Grand Central for an inspection. Detective James special senses reveal that Ultima was involved in the drug dealings, likely having King Peacock placed in the competition to keep him from investigating. Ultima goes berserk in resisting arrest, killing Girl One, M'rrgla Qualtz and injuring Toybox before she can be brought down by forcibly giving her the drug and causing her to overdose.\nIn the aftermath of the commissioner's attack, Joe Pi from Precinct 9 is transferred to replace Girl One. Despite the antagonism against Pi, both for the place he occupies and his \"Ferro-American\" heritage, he quickly establishes himself as a capable policeman. After some digging, Peregrine and Jack Phantom discover that Glenn \"Bluejay\" Garland, the murdered pop star, was connected to the Seven Sentinels. He was about to sell his life story just before being killed, and investigation into his and M'rrgla's past with the Seven Sentinels reveals the dark secret behind the group: the Seven Sentinels are not a superhero group, but a pedophile ring, having faked all of their famous battles and used the Young Sentinels (sidekicks) as sexual slaves. M'rrgla's old newsreels even contain clips of Sentinels being \"serviced\".\nThe precinct moves to swiftly arrest all the Sentinels, but their leader, Atoman, is tipped off. Locking himself in his Impregnium shielded lair, Atoman seems to be out of the reach of the law, and Irma Geddon laments that even if he were to be convicted, Atoman's long lifespan would allow him to walk free, even with consecutive murder charges. Joe Pi then talks to Atoman through an intercom and subtly convinces him to kill himself, rather than face trial, be stripped of his powers, and go to prison with revenge-seeking supervillains. As the events of the past few weeks wind down, Smax visits Toybox in the hospital, asking her to accompany him to his home dimension in order to attend a funeral; Hyperdog starts a relationship with Neural 'Nette; and Captain Traynor returns home to his loving partner, former Skyshark pilot, Wulf.\n\"Beyond the Farthest Precinct\".\nFive years after the events of the \"Smax\" mini-series, Precinct 10 is celebrating another year of hard work at their annual labor day picnic. The festivities are broken up by the appearance of a large avatar in the sky, nicknamed the Hell Ditch Pilgrim (after the supernatural crevice it appeared above). The next day, as new officers are paired with veterans, Toybox goes looking for the Rumor, anxious to thank him for rescuing her from Ultima years ago. She however cannot find him, but new officer Hoodoo Priest informs he knows of the Rumor and alludes to his divine role.\nOfficer Joe Pi is reconfigured as a lesser form to investigate a new strain of robot drug that seems connected to the Hell Ditch Pilgrim. After giving Joe Pi his new assignment, Captain Traynor is called to the mayor's office, where he is summarily fired and replaced with the more hawkish Sean Cindercott, who soon initiates a number of sweeping reforms, instituting radio check-ins every quarter-hour, less focus on street-level crime in favor of \"rooting out subversive elements\", no non-essential visitors at the station (meaning loved ones), mandatory overtime with base pay, no contact with the media, and ceasing of routine maintenance of officer's personal equipment. Finally, all officers are asked to sign a ten-page \"loyalty oath\". The officers are polarized by these decisions, with a large number signing a letter of resignation, until Hyperdog convinces them all to stay.\nJoe Pi reports back, after accidentally having experienced the effects of the dark energy capsules firsthand. The \"darkshots\" create a direct mental connection between any cybernetic intelligence and an extra-dimensional entity. The drugs are being created in a federal lab called Project JOOTS, where Irmageddon's husband works. Irma's husband, Ron, explains the basic goal: the scientists are investigating \"superspace\", the underlying region that seems to bind all timelines in the multiverse. In superspace, dark energy is the force that holds the multiverse together, as well as having other properties. A robot worker, named Rikby-2001, has been using dark energy to create and distribute the drug, but he purposefully overdoses and transcends this plane rather than talk.\nAfter the precinct thwarts a minor attack by a group of anarchic \"derridadaists\", they have to deal with the Hell Ditch Pilgrim spreading his influence and destructive insanity through all the entities in Neopolis, including fellow officers. While Cindercott wishes to make a beeline for city hall to protect the mayor, the officers know they have to attack the problem at its source: superspace, but without any means to breach superspace, they cannot fight the Hell Ditch Pilgrim, until the Rumor shows up. He informs Top 10 that Andy \"Airbag\" Soames, who five years ago contracted S.T.O.R.M.S. (Sexually Transmitted Organic Rapid Mutation Syndrome), was so radically altered by the disease as to become a creature capable of entering and controlling superspace. The Rumor says that Toybox is the only one that can harm Soames, because she carries her mother's gift: Pandora's Box. The Rumor helps the officers bridge the gap left by Project JOOTS technology and send Toybox into superspace. When Toybox faces Andy alone, she unleashes all of her toys to protect herself, and then reveals the final thing left in Pandora's Box that can heal Andy Soames desperate mind: Hope. Smax rushes through the makeshift portal to grab his partner, escaping just before the effects backlash throughout superspace.\nA few months after the events of the Hell Ditch Pilgrim case, Hyperdog is Traynor's replacement as Captain of Precinct 10, Robyn Slinger is no longer Toybox, and the fascist Mayor Famaille and Major Cindercott are out of power, casualties of the reality warping by Andy Soames, who now peacefully overlooks Top 10 as they once again celebrate survival and hopeful perseverance in a crazy and confusing beautiful world.\nSeason Two.\nA new officer, Slipstream Phoenix, joins as well as Girl Two, who replaces Girl One. The new commissioner, David Moon Gilbert, enforces stricter regulations to the dismay of some officers. Irma Wornow is suspended for breaking the new regulations. Shock-headed Pete is dismissed after he destroys Joe Pi's body while attacking Slipstream Phoenix.\nThis season was originally intended to include eight issues and two specials. It was canceled in 2009 after four issues and one special, leaving the continuing plotlines unresolved.\nCollected editions.\nThe \"Top 10\" series has so far been collected in:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73257", "revid": "35458884", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73257", "title": "V for Vendetta", "text": "Graphic novel by Alan Moore and David Lloyd\nV for Vendetta is a British graphic novel written by Alan Moore and illustrated by David Lloyd (with additional art by Tony Weare). Initially published between 1982 and 1985 in black and white as an ongoing serial in the British anthology \"Warrior\", its serialisation was completed in 1988\u201389 in a ten-issue colour limited series published by DC Comics in the United States. Subsequent collected editions were typically published under DC's specialised imprint, Vertigo, until that label was shut down in 2018. Since then it has been transferred to DC Black Label. The story depicts a dystopian and post-apocalyptic near-future history version of the United Kingdom in the 1990s, preceded by a nuclear war in the 1980s that devastated most of the rest of the world. The Nordic supremacist, neo-fascist, outwardly Christofascistic, and homophobic fictional \"Norsefire\" political party has exterminated its opponents in concentration camps, and it now rules the country as a police state.\nThe comics follow the story's title character and protagonist, V, an anarchist revolutionary wearing a Guy Fawkes mask, as he begins an elaborate and theatrical revolutionist campaign to kill his former captors and torturers, bring down the fascist state, and convince the people to abandon fascism in favour of anarchy, while inspiring a young woman, Evey Hammond, to be his prot\u00e9g\u00e9e.\nDC Comics had sold more than 500,000 copies of the graphic novel in the United States by 2006. Warner Bros. released a film adaptation of the same name, written and co-produced by the Wachowskis, in 2005. Following the first and second season premieres of \"Gotham\" prequel television series \"Pennyworth\" in 2019 and 2020, showrunners Danny Cannon and Bruno Heller confirmed the series would also serve as a prequel to \"V for Vendetta\", with the series' British Civil War eventually giving way to the Norsefire government and rise of V, and the third season featuring predecessors to V wearing Guy Fawkes masks.\nPublication history.\nThe first episodes of \"V for Vendetta\" appeared in black-and-white between 1982 and 1985 in \"Warrior\", a British anthology comic published by Quality Communications. Editor/publisher Dez Skinn, fearing about the appeal of the strip remarked, \"If I'd have given each character their own title, the failures would have certainly outweighed the successes, with the uncompromising 'V for Vendetta' probably being an early casualty. But with five or six strips an issue, regular [readers] only needed two or three favorites to justify their buying the title.\"\nWhen the publishers cancelled \"Warrior\" in 1985 (with two completed issues unpublished due to the cancellation), several companies attempted to convince Moore and Lloyd to let them publish and complete the story. In 1988, DC Comics published a ten-issue series that reprinted the \"Warrior\" stories in colour, then continued the series to completion. The first new material appeared in issue No. 7, which included the unpublished episodes that would have appeared in \"Warrior\" No. 27 and No. 28. Tony Weare drew one chapter (\"Vincent\") and contributed additional art to two others (\"Valerie\" and \"The Vacation\"); Steve Whitaker and Siobhan Dodds worked as colourists on the entire series.\nCollected editions.\nThe series has appeared collected in paperback () and hardback () form, including Moore's \"Behind the Painted Smile\" essay and two \"interludes\" outside the central continuity. Later collections include reissued paperbacks, published in the US by DC's Vertigo imprint () and in the UK by Titan Books (). A new hardback edition was published in 2005 featuring improved printing and colouring. In August 2009, DC published a slipcased Absolute Edition (), which included newly coloured \"silent art\" pages (full-page panels containing no dialogue) from the series' original run, which had not previously appeared in any previous collected edition.\nBackground.\nDavid Lloyd's paintings for \"V for Vendetta\" in \"Warrior\" first appeared in black and white.\nIn writing \"V for Vendetta\", Moore drew upon a comic strip idea submission that the DC Thomson scriptwriting competition rejected in 1975: \"The Doll\", which involved a transgender terrorist in white face makeup, who fought a totalitarian state during the 1980s.\nYears later, Skinn reportedly invited Moore to create a dark mystery strip with artist David Lloyd. \"V for Vendetta\" was intended to recreate something similar to their popular Marvel UK Night Raven strip in a 1930s noir. They chose against doing historical research and instead set the story in the near future rather than the recent past.\nThen \"V for Vendetta\" emerged, putting the emphasis on \"V\" rather than \"Vendetta\". David Lloyd developed the idea of dressing V as Guy Fawkes after previous designs followed the conventional superhero look. During the preparation of the story, Moore made a list of what he wanted to bring into the plot, which he reproduced in \"Behind the Painted Smile\":\nOrwell. Huxley. Thomas Disch. \"Judge Dredd\". Harlan Ellison's \"\"Repent, Harlequin!\" Said the Ticktockman\", \"Catman\" and \"The Prowler in the City at the Edge of the World\" by the same author. Vincent Price's \"Dr. Phibes\" and \"Theatre of Blood\". David Bowie. \"The Shadow\". \"Night Raven\". \"Batman\". \"Fahrenheit 451\". The writings of the New Worlds school of science fiction. Max Ernst's painting \"Europe After the Rain\". Thomas Pynchon. The atmosphere of British Second World War films. \"The Prisoner\". Robin Hood. Dick Turpin...\nThe influence of such a wide number of references has been thoroughly demonstrated in academic studies, above which dystopian elements stand out, especially the similarity with George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" in several stages of the plot.\nThe political climate of Britain in the early 1980s also influenced the work, with Moore positing that Margaret Thatcher's Conservative government would \"obviously lose the 1983 elections\", and that an incoming Michael Foot-led Labour government, committed to complete nuclear disarmament, would allow the United Kingdom to escape relatively unscathed after a limited nuclear war. However, Moore felt that fascists would quickly subvert a post-nuclear holocaust Britain. V, an anarchist, initially tortures and murders members of the fascist government, but as the story develops, Moore deliberately made V's actions \"very, very morally ambiguous\" with the aim that \"I didn't want to tell people what to think, I just wanted to tell people to think.\" The Guy Fawkes analogy was deliberate, with Moore pointing out in a 2012 interview that Britain has a history of \"making heroes out of criminals or people who in other centuries might have been regarded as terrorists\", desiring a similar ambiguity for a protagonist reviled as a villain by the Britain of his fictional 1990s. \nMoore's scenario remains untested. Addressing historical developments when DC reissued the work, he noted:\nNa\u00efvet\u00e9 can also be detected in my supposition that it would take something as melodramatic as a near-miss nuclear conflict to nudge Britain towards fascism... The simple fact that much of the historical background of the story proceeds from a predicted Conservative defeat in the 1983 General Election should tell you how reliable we were in our roles as Cassandras.\nPlot.\nBook 1: Europe After the Reign.\nOn Guy Fawkes Night in London in 1997, a financially desperate 16-year-old, Evey Hammond, sexually solicits men who are actually members of the state secret police called \"The Finger\". Preparing to rape and kill her, the Fingermen are dispatched by V, a cloaked anarchist wearing a mask, who later remotely detonates explosives at the Palace of Westminster before bringing Evey to his contraband-filled underground lair, the \"Shadow Gallery.\" Evey tells V her life story, which reveals her own past and England's recent history. During a dispute over Poland in the late 1980s, the Soviet Union and the United States, under the presidency of Ted Kennedy, entered a global nuclear war which left continental Europe and Africa uninhabitable. Although Britain itself was not bombed due to the Labour government's decision to remove American nuclear missiles, it faced environmental devastation and famine due to the nuclear winter. After a period of lawlessness in which Evey's mother died, the remaining corporations and fascist groups took over Britain and formed a new totalitarian government, Norsefire. Evey's father, a former socialist, was arrested by the regime.\nMeanwhile, Eric Finch, a veteran detective in charge of the regular police force (\"The Nose\"), begins investigating V's terrorist activities. Finch often communicates with the other top government officials, collectively known as \"The Head.\" These individuals include Derek Almond, who supervises the Finger (and who is both emotionally and physically abusive to his wife), and Adam Susan, the reclusive Leader of Norsefire, who obsessively oversees the government's \"Fate\" computer system. Finch's case thickens when V kidnaps Lewis Prothero, a propaganda-broadcasting radio personality, and drives him into a mental breakdown by forcing him to relive his actions as the commander of a \"resettlement\" camp near Larkhill with his treasured doll collection as inmates. Evey agrees to help V with the next part of his plan (not knowing that it will be an assassination) by disguising herself as a child prostitute to help V infiltrate the residence of Bishop Anthony Lilliman, a paedophile priest, whom V forces to commit suicide by eating a poisoned communion wafer. He prepares to murder Dr. Delia Surridge, a medical researcher who once had a relationship with Finch. Finch suddenly discovers the connection among V's three targets: they all used to work at Larkhill, and warns Almond. That night after confronting Surridge in her bedroom, V kills her with a painless poison; when Almond appears as V is leaving and tries to shoot him (with what turns out to be an unloaded gun), V kills him too. Surridge leaves a diary revealing that V\u2014a former inmate and victim of Surridge's cruel medical experiments\u2014destroyed and fled the camp and is now eliminating the camp's former personnel for what they did. Finch reports these findings to Susan, and suspects that this vendetta may actually be a cover for V, who, he worries, may be plotting an even bigger terrorist attack.\nBook 2: This Vicious Cabaret.\nFour months later, V breaks into Jordan Tower, the home of Norsefire's propaganda department, \"the Mouth\"\u2014led by Roger Dascombe\u2014to broadcast a recorded speech that calls on the people to resist the government. V escapes using an elaborate diversion that results in Dascombe's death. Finch is soon introduced to Peter Creedy, the Finger's new head, who provokes Finch to strike him and thus get sent on forced leave. Evey, who has been returned by V to the outside world, takes shelter at the house of a man named Gordon, who found her on the street. While originally platonic, they eventually build a romantic relationship. Evey and Gordon unknowingly cross paths with Rose Almond, the widow of the recently killed Derek. After Derek's death, Rose had reluctantly begun a relationship with Dascombe. With her husband and lover dead, she is cut off from government benefits and has been forced to get a job performing demoralising burlesque work, increasing her hatred of the unsupportive government.\nWhen a Scottish gangster named Ally Harper murders Gordon, a vengeful Evey tracks Harper to a meeting between him and Creedy, who is buying the support of Harper's thugs in preparation for a coup d'\u00e9tat. From a nearby alley, Evey attempts to shoot Harper but is suddenly abducted and later awakens to find herself in a prison cell. Amidst interrogation, humiliation and torture, Evey finds an old letter hidden in her cell by an inmate named Valerie Page, a film actress who was imprisoned for being a lesbian and subjected to medical experimentation, and who had documented her life story in the letter.\nEvey's interrogator eventually gives her a final choice: collaboration or death; inspired by Valerie's letter, Evey refuses to collaborate and, expecting to be executed, is instead told that she is free. Stunned, Evey learns that her supposed imprisonment has in reality been an elaborate charade constructed by V so that she could experience an ordeal similar to the one that shaped him at Larkhill. He reveals that the letter is not a fake and that Valerie really existed, that she was a Larkhill prisoner who had died in the cell next to his. Evey forgives V, who reveals he had long ago hacked into the government's \"Fate\" computer system and begun emotionally manipulating Adam Susan with mind games. Consequently, Susan, who has formed a bizarre romantic attachment to the computer, begins to descend into madness.\nBook 3: The Land of Do-As-You-Please.\nThe following 5 November (1998), V blows up both the Post Office Tower and Jordan Tower, killing \"the Ear\" leader Brian Etheridge and effectively shutting down three government agencies: the Eye, the Ear, and the Mouth. Creedy's men and Harper's associated street gangs violently suppress the subsequent wave of revolutionary fervor from the public. V notes to Evey that he has not yet achieved what he calls the \"Land of Do-as-You-Please,\" meaning a functional anarchistic society, and considers the current chaotic situation an interim period of \"Land of Take-What-You-Want.\" Finch has been mysteriously absent, and his young assistant, Dominic Stone, one day realises that V has been influencing the \"Fate\" computer all along, which explained V's consistent foresight. In the meantime, Finch travels to the abandoned site of Larkhill near Salisbury Plain, where he takes LSD to conjure up memories of his own devastating past and to put his mind in the role of a prisoner of Larkhill, like V, to help give him an intuitive understanding of V's experiences. Returning to London, Finch suddenly deduces that V's lair is inside the abandoned Victoria Station, which he enters.\nV takes Finch by surprise, resulting in a scuffle that sees Finch shoot V and V wounding Finch with a knife. V claims that he cannot be killed since he is only an idea and that \"ideas are bulletproof\"; regardless, V is indeed mortally wounded and returns to the Shadow Gallery deeper within, dying in Evey's arms. Evey considers unmasking V but decides not to, realising that V is not an identity but a symbol. She then assumes V's identity, donning one of his spare costumes and masks. Finch sees the large amount of blood that V has left in his wake and deduces that he has mortally wounded V. Occurring concurrently to this, Creedy has been pressuring Susan to appear in public, hoping to leave him exposed. Sure enough, as Susan stops to shake hands with Rose during a parade, she shoots him in the head in vengeance for the death of her husband and the life she has had to lead since then. Following Rose's arrest, Creedy assumes emergency leadership of the country, and Finch emerges from the subway proclaiming V's death.\nDue to his LSD-induced epiphany, Finch leaves his position within \"the Nose.\" The power struggle between the remaining leaders results in all of their deaths: Harper betrays and kills Creedy at the behest of Helen Heyer (wife of \"the Eye\" leader Conrad Heyer and who had outbid Creedy for Harper's loyalty), and Harper and Conrad Heyer kill each other during a fight precipitated by Heyer's discovery (via a videotape sent by V) that his wife Helen had had an affair with Harper.\nWith the fate of the top government officials unknown to the public, Stone acts as leader of the police forces deployed to ensure that the riots are contained should V remain alive and make his promised public announcement. Evey, dressed as V, appears on a rooftop to a crowd, announcing the destruction of 10 Downing Street the following day and telling the crowd they must \"...choose what comes next. Lives of your own, or a return to chains\", whereupon a general insurrection begins. Evey destroys 10 Downing Street by blowing up an Underground train containing V's body in the style of an explosive Viking funeral. During the chaos in the streets, she abducts an injured Stone and brings him to the Shadow Gallery, apparently to train him as her successor to make sure people like Susan will never hold power ever again. The comic ends with Finch quietly observing the chaos raging in the city, spurning Helen Heyer's proposal to become her partner and seize power, and walking down an abandoned motorway whose lights have all gone out.\nNorsefire government.\nThe highest-level officials in the Norsefire government form a council known as \"The Head.\" The five individual departments are named after sensory organs or appendages that reference their functions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThemes and motifs.\nThe two conflicting political viewpoints of anarchism and fascism dominate the story.\nMoore stated in an interview that V is designed as an enigma, as Moore \"didn't want to tell people what to think\" but wanted them to consider some extreme events that have recurred throughout history.\nAdaptations.\nFilm.\nIn December 2005 Warner Bros. released a feature-film adaptation of \"V for Vendetta\", directed by James McTeigue from a screenplay by the Wachowskis, with Natalie Portman starring as Evey Hammond and Hugo Weaving appearing as V.\nAlan Moore distanced himself from the film, as he has with other screen adaptations of his works. He ended co-operation with his publisher, DC Comics, after its corporate parent, Warner Bros., failed to retract statements about Moore's supposed endorsement of the movie.\nAfter reading the script, Moore remarked:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The movie] has been turned into a Bush-era parable by people too timid to set a political satire in their own country. ... It's a thwarted and frustrated and largely impotent American liberal fantasy of someone with American liberal values standing up against a state run by neoconservatives \u2013 which is not what the comic \"V for Vendetta\" was about. It was about fascism, it was about anarchy, it was about England.\nHe later added that if the Wachowskis had wanted to protest about what was going on in the United States, then they should have used a political narrative that directly addressed such issues, similar to what Moore had done before with Britain. The film arguably changes the original message by having removed any reference to actual anarchism in the revolutionary actions of V. An interview with producer Joel Silver reveals that he identifies the V of the comics as a clear-cut \"superhero... a masked avenger who pretty much saves the world\", a simplification that goes against Moore's own statements about V's role in the story.\nCo-author and illustrator David Lloyd, by contrast, embraced the adaptation. In an interview with \"Newsarama\" he states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It's a terrific film. The most extraordinary thing about it for me was seeing scenes that I'd worked on and crafted for maximum effect in the book translated to film with the same degree of care and effect. The \"transformation\" scene between Natalie Portman and Hugo Weaving is just great. If you happen to be one of those people who admires the original so much that changes to it will automatically turn you off, then you may dislike the film\u2014but if you enjoyed the original and can accept an adaptation that is different to its source material but equally as powerful, then you'll be as impressed as I was with it.\nSteve Moore (no relation to Alan Moore) wrote a novelisation of the film's screenplay, published in 2006.\nTelevision.\nOn 4 October 2017, it was announced that Channel 4 was developing a television series based on the \"V for Vendetta\" comic book, which ultimately entered development hell. \nOn 29 July 2019, the day following the series premiere of \"Pennyworth\", previously presented ostensibly as solely a direct prequel to Fox series \"Gotham\" (2014\u20132019), series co-showrunner Danny Cannon confirmed that \"Pennyworth\" would also serve as a loose prequel to \"V for Vendetta\", with the British Civil War depicted in the series' first season eventually leading to the formation of the Norsefire government of \"V for Vendetta\", a sentiment echoed by co-showrunner Bruno Heller on 11 December 2020, on the day of the second season premiere, and again on 5 February 2021, in the lead-up to the mid-season premiere. Characters wearing V's Guy Fawkes mask were later introduced in the series' 2022 third season, set five years after the first two seasons.\nIn November 2025, a television series adaptation of the graphic novel was revealed to be in development for HBO, with Pete Jackson writing and DC Studios co-chiefs James Gunn and Peter Safran producing.\nLegacy.\nThe February 1999 issue of \"The Comics Journal\" ran a poll on \"The Top 100 (English-Language) Comics of the Century\": \"V for Vendetta\" reached 83rd place.\nOn 5 November 2019, the BBC News listed \"V for Vendetta\" on its list of the 100 most influential novels.\nCultural impact.\nSince the film adaptation, hundreds of thousands of Guy Fawkes masks from the books and film have been sold every year since the film's release in 2005. Time Warner owns the rights to the image and is paid a fee with the sale of each official mask.\nAnonymous, an online group associated with computer hacking, popularised the mask as a symbol for rebellion by wearing it at protests against governments. It prominently featured in the 2008 Project Chanology protests against the Church of Scientology. Moore described being pleased by the Fawkes mask's appearance at the protests.\nAccording to \"Time\" in 2011, the protesters' adoption of the mask led to it becoming the top-selling mask on Amazon, selling hundreds of thousands a year.\nThe film allegedly inspired some of the Egyptian youth before and during the 2011 Egyptian revolution.\nOn 23 May 2009, protesters dressed up as V and set off a fake barrel of gunpowder outside Parliament while protesting over the issue of British MPs' expenses.\nDuring the Occupy Wall Street and other Occupy protests, the mask appeared internationally as a symbol of popular revolution. Artist David Lloyd stated: \"The Guy Fawkes mask has now become a common brand and a convenient placard to use in protest against tyranny\u2014and I'm happy with people using it, it seems quite unique, an icon of popular culture being used this way.\"\nOn 17 November 2012, police officials in Dubai warned against wearing Guy Fawkes masks painted with the colours of the UAE flag during any celebration associated with the UAE National Day (2 December), declaring such use an illegal act after masks went on sale in online shops for 50 DHS.\nGuy Fawkes masks also made an appearance in the 2014 Hong Kong protests and also in 2019.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73258", "revid": "10941947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73258", "title": "Franco", "text": "Franco may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "73259", "revid": "50687458", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73259", "title": "Order of the Garter", "text": "Order of chivalry founded by Edward III of England\nThe Most Noble Order of the Garter is an order of chivalry founded by King Edward III of England in 1348. The most senior order of knighthood in the British honours system, it is outranked in precedence only by the decorations of the Victoria Cross and the George Cross. The Order of the Garter is dedicated to the image and arms of Saint George, England's patron saint.\nAppointments are at the Sovereign's sole discretion, typically made in recognition of national contribution, service to the Crown, or for distinguished personal service to the Monarch. Membership of the order is limited to the sovereign, the Prince of Wales, and no more than 24 living members, or Companions. The order also includes Supernumerary Knights and Ladies (e.g., members of the British royal family and foreign monarchs).\nThe order's emblem is a garter circlet with the motto (Anglo-Norman for \"shamed be (the person) who thinks evil of it\", in older translations \"evil be to him who thinks of evil\") in gold script. Members of the order wear it on ceremonial occasions.\nHistory.\nKing Edward III founded the Order of the Garter around the time of his claim to the French throne. The traditional year of foundation is usually given as 1348 (when it was formally proclaimed). However, \"The Complete Peerage\", under \"The Founders of the Order of the Garter\", states the order was first instituted on 23 April 1344, listing each founding member as knighted in 1344. The list includes Sir Sanchet D'Abrichecourt, of whom the latest notice (according to the book) is 20 October 1345. Other dates from 1344 to 1351 have also been proposed. The King's wardrobe account shows Garter habits first issued in the autumn of 1348. Also, its original statutes required that each member of the Order already be a knight (what would now be referred to as a knight bachelor) and some of the initial members listed were only knighted that year. Its foundation is likely to have been inspired by the Castilian Order of the Band, established in about 1330.\nList of Founder Knights.\nAt the time of its foundation, the Order consisted of King Edward III, together with 25 Founder Knights, listed in ascending order of stall number in St George's Chapel:\nThey are all depicted by individual portraits in the \"Bruges Garter Book\" compiled c.\u20091431, and now in the British Library.\nLegendary origins.\nVarious legends account for the origin of the Order. The most popular involves the \"Countess of Salisbury\", whose garter is said to have slipped from her leg while she was dancing at a court ball at Calais. When the surrounding courtiers sniggered, the King picked it up and returned it to her, exclaiming, \"\" (\"Shame on him who thinks ill of it\"), which phrase has become the Order's motto. However, the earliest written version of this story dates from the 1460s, and it seems to have been conceived as a retrospective explanation for the adoption of what was then seen as an item of female underclothing as the symbol of a band of knights. In fact, at the time of the Order's establishment in the mid-14th century, garters were predominantly an item of male attire.\nAccording to another legend, King Richard I was inspired in the 12th century by St George the Martyr while fighting in the Crusades to tie garters around the legs of his knights, who subsequently won the battle. King Edward supposedly recalled the event in the 14th century when he founded the Order. This story is recounted in a letter to \"The Annual Register\" in 1774:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Rastel's Chronicle, I. vi. under the life of Edward III is the following curious passage: \"About the 19 yere [\"sic\"] of this kinge, he made a solempne feest at Wyndesore, and a greate justes and turnament, where he devysed, and perfyted substanegally, the order of the knyghtes of the garter; howe be it some afferme that this order began fyrst by kynge Rycharde, Cure de Lyon, at the sege of the citye of Acres; where, in his great necessyte, there were but 26 knyghtes that fyrmely and surely abode by the kynge; where he caused all them to were thonges of blew leyther about theyr legges. And afterwarde they were called the knyghtes of the blew thonge.\" I am obliged for this passage to John Fenn, Esq; a curious and ingenious gentleman of East-Dereham, in Norfolk, who is in possession of the most rare book whence it is taken. Hence some affirm, that the origin of the garter is to be dated from Richard I* and that it owes its pomp and splendor to Edward III.\n *Winstanley, in his \"Life of Edward III\" says that the original book of the institution deduces the invention from King Richard the First.\nThe motto in fact refers to Edward's claim to the French throne, and the Order of the Garter was created to help pursue this claim. The use of the garter as an emblem may have derived from straps used to fasten armour, and may have been chosen because it held overtones of a tight-knit \"band\" or \"bond\" of knightly \"supporters\" of Edward's cause.\nThere is a connection between the Order of the Garter and the Middle English poem \"Sir Gawain and the Green Knight\" (late 14th century).\nThe motto is inscribed, as \"hony soyt qui mal pence\", at the end of the text in the sole surviving manuscript in the British Library, albeit in a later hand. In the poem, a girdle, very similar in its erotic undertones to the garter, plays a prominent role. A rough equivalent of the Order's motto has been identified in Gawain's exclamation \"corsed worth cowarddyse and couetyse bo\u00fee\" ('cursed be both cowardice and coveting', v. 2374). While the author of that poem remains disputed, there seems to be a connection between two of the top candidates and the Order of the Garter, John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster, and Enguerrand de Coucy, seventh Sire de Coucy. De Coucy was married to King Edward III's daughter, Isabella, and was given admittance to the Order of the Garter on their wedding day.\"\nLadies of the Garter.\nSoon after the founding of the order, women were appointed \"Ladies of the Garter\", but some historians argue that they were not appointed companions, as they were not knights. Queen Philippa was the first lady to be appointed in 1358. King Henry VII discontinued the practice in 1488; his mother, Margaret Beaufort, was the last Lady of the Garter before Queen Alexandra.\nExcept for female sovereigns, the next Lady of the Garter named was Queen Alexandra, by her husband King Edward VII. King George V also made his consort, Queen Mary, a Lady of the Garter and King George VI subsequently did the same for his wife, Queen Elizabeth, and his daughter Princess Elizabeth (later Queen Elizabeth II). Throughout the 20th century, women continued to be associated with the Order, but save for foreign female monarchs, they were not made Companions.\nIn 1987, by a statute of Queen Elizabeth II, the installation of \"Ladies Companion of the Garter\" became possible. Unlike previous queens consort, Queen Camilla was named a Royal Lady of the Garter by her mother-in-law, Queen Elizabeth II, when she was still the Duchess of Cornwall.\nIn 2022, Valerie Amos, Baroness Amos, became the first Black Lady Companion of the Order since its foundation. Eliza Manningham-Buller, Baroness Manningham-Buller, became the first Lady Companion to be appointed chancellor of the Order, on 18 June 2024.\nComposition.\nMembers.\nMembership in the Order is strictly limited and includes the Monarch, the Prince of Wales, not more than 24 Companion members, and various supernumerary members. The monarch alone decides who is appointed. The monarch is known as the \"Sovereign of the Garter\", and the Prince of Wales is known as a \"Royal Knight Companion of the Garter\".\nMale members of the Order are titled \"Knights Companion\" and female members are called \"Ladies Companion\". Formerly, the sovereign filled vacancies upon the nomination of the members. Each member would nominate nine candidates, of whom three had to have the rank of earl or higher, three the rank of baron or higher, and three the rank of knight or higher. The sovereign would choose as many nominees as were necessary to fill any vacancies in the order. They were not obliged to choose those who received the most nominations. Candidates were last nominated in 1860, and appointments have since been made by the sovereign acting alone, with no prior nominations. The statutes prescribing the former procedure were not amended, however, until 1953.\nFrom the 18th century, the sovereign made their choices on the advice of the government. In 1946, with the agreement of Prime Minister Clement Attlee and Opposition Leader Winston Churchill, membership of Great Britain's highest ranking orders of chivalry (the Order of the Garter, the Order of the Thistle and the dormant Order of St Patrick) became a personal gift of the Sovereign once again. Thus, the sovereign personally selects Knights and Ladies Companion of the Garter, without political influence. Appointments are typically announced on Saint George's Day (23 April).\nSupernumerary members.\nThe Order includes supernumerary members, whose number do not count towards the limit of 24 companions. Several supernumerary members, known as \"Royal Knights and Ladies of the Garter\", belong to the royal family. These titles were introduced in 1786 by King George III so that his many sons would not curtail the number of non-royal companions. He created the statute of supernumerary members in 1805 so that any descendant of King George II could be installed as such a member. In 1831, this statute was extended again to include all descendants of King George I.\nWith the installation of Emperor Alexander I of Russia in 1813, supernumerary membership was extended to foreign monarchs, who are known as \"Stranger Knights and Ladies of the Garter\". Each such installation originally required the enactment of a statute; however, a 1954 statute authorises the regular admission of Stranger Knights or Ladies without further special enactments.\nDegradation of members.\nThe sovereign may \"degrade\" members who have taken up arms against the Crown. From the late 15th century, there was a formal ceremony of degradation, in which Garter King of Arms, accompanied by the rest of the Heralds, processed to St George's Chapel. While the Garter King read aloud the Instrument of Degradation, a Herald climbed up a ladder and removed the former Knight's banner, crest, helm, and sword, throwing them down into the quire. Then the rest of the Heralds kicked them down the length of the chapel, out of the doors, and into the castle ditch. The last such formal degradation was that of James Butler, 2nd Duke of Ormonde, in 1716.\nDuring the First World War, two Royal Knights and six Stranger Knights, all monarchs or princes of enemy nations and including Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany, and Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria, were struck off the roll of the order, their appointments being annulled in 1915. The banner of King Victor Emmanuel III was removed from the chapel after Italy entered World War II against the United Kingdom and its allies in 1940. The banner of Emperor Hirohito was removed from St George's Chapel when Japan entered World War II in 1941, but that banner and his knighthood were restored by Elizabeth II in 1971, when Hirohito made a state visit to the United Kingdom. The Emperor was particularly pleased by the restoration to the Garter.\nOfficers.\nThe Order has six officers: the Prelate, the Chancellor, the Register, the Garter Principal King of Arms, the Usher, and the Secretary. The offices of Prelate, Register, and Usher were created on the order's establishment; those of Garter Principal King of Arms and Chancellor, in the 15th century; and that of Secretary, in the 20th century.\nWilliam of Edington, Bishop of Winchester, was the first Prelate of the Order, and that office has since been held by his successors at Winchester, traditionally a senior bishopric of the Church of England.\nThe office of Chancellor is now held by one of the companions of the order. For most of its existence, the Bishop of Salisbury has held the office, although laymen held it from 1553 to 1671. In 1837, after boundary changes made Windsor Castle fall in the diocese of Oxford, the Chancellorship was transferred to the Bishop of Oxford. A century later, the Bishop of Salisbury challenged this transfer, on the grounds that the Chancellorship had been attached to his office regardless of the diocese in which the chapel of the order lay; and that, in any event, St George's Chapel, as a Royal Peculiar, was not under diocesan jurisdiction. The office of Chancellor was removed from the Bishop of Oxford (the outgoing bishop, Thomas Strong, had been outspoken in the Edward VIII abdication crisis), and so it was withheld from his successor, Kenneth Kirk, and has since been held by one of the Knights and Ladies Companion.\nThe office of Register has been held by the Dean of Windsor since 1558. The Garter Principal King of Arms is \"ex officio\" the senior officer of the College of Arms (the heraldic authority of England), and is usually appointed from among the other officers of arms at the College. As the title suggests, Garter Principal King of Arms has specific duties as the Order's officer of arms, attending to the companions' coats of arms and banners of arms, which are exhibited in the chapel. The Secretary, who acts as deputy to Garter in the ceremonial aspects of the Order, has since 1952 typically also been selected from the other officers of the College of Arms. The office of Usher is held by the Usher of the Black Rod, who is also the Serjeant-at-Arms of the House of Lords.\nMilitary Knights of Windsor.\nAt the founding of the Order of the Garter, 26 bedesmen called \"poor knights\" were appointed and attached to the Order and its chapel. This number was not always maintained, and by the 17th century, there were only thirteen such knights. King Charles II increased the number to 18 (in large part because of funds allocated from Sir Francis Crane's will) after his coronation in 1660. After the knights objected to being termed \"poor\", King William IV redesignated them in the 19th century as the Military Knights of Windsor.\nThe poor knights were impoverished retired military officers, required to pray daily for the Knights Companion. In return, they received a salary and lodging in Windsor Castle. The knights are no longer necessarily poor, but are still retired military officers. They participate in the Order's processions, escorting the members, and in the chapel services. However, they are not considered members of the Order.\nThe poor knights originally wore red mantles, each of which bore St George's Cross, but did not depict the Garter. Queen Elizabeth I replaced the mantles in the 16th and 17th centuries with blue and purple gowns, but the red mantles returned in the 17th century under King Charles I. When the knights were renamed, the mantles were abandoned. The military knights now wear the old military uniform of an \"army officer on the unattached list\": black trousers with red stripe, a red double-breasted swallow-tailed coat, gold epaulets and brushes, a cocked hat with a plume, and a sword on a white baldric.\nRobes and insignia.\nMembers.\nOrder's ceremonial occasions.\nFor the Order's ceremonial occasions, such as the annual Garter Day, the members wear elaborate vestments and accoutrements, which include:\nUp until the middle part of the 20th century, it was customary to wear Tudor style under-dress, consisting of white silk embroidered doublet, breeches, full hose, white doeskin pumps with satin bows and a sword belt with sword, under the robes. Nowadays, morning dress or a lounge suit is worn, except for coronations when Tudor under-dress is worn by the canopy-bearers.\nOther occasions.\nOn other occasions when decorations are worn, the members wear simpler insignia:\nOn the death of a member, the Lesser George and breast star are returned personally to the sovereign by the former member's nearest male relative, and the other insignia to the Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood, save the riband, mantle and hat.\nOfficers.\nFor ceremonial occasions of the Order, the officers wear the following garments and accessories:\nThe chancellor carries a purse, which is embroidered with the royal arms impaled by the Cross of St George. The purse contains the seal of the Order. Garter Principal King of Arms carries his baton of office. The usher carries their staff of office, the Black Rod.\nChapel.\nSt George's Chapel in Windsor is the mother church of the Order of the Garter and the location of special services in relation to the Order.\nDuring their lifetime, all members of the Order of the Garter are entitled to display their heraldic crests and banners in St George's Chapel. While the Garter stall plates &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt; stay in the chapel permanently, the crests and banners of deceased knights are, following presentation at the High Altar, removed from the chapel. Sometimes they are then given to institutions that were connected with the late knight, or kept privately depending on family wishes. Originally after a knight's death, the crests became the property of Garter King of Arms, and these crests have been the subject of occasional exhibitions in the Earl Marshal's Court at the College of Arms.\nGarter stall plates are small enamelled and engraved brass plates located in St George's Chapel as memorials to Knights of the Garter.\nInvestiture and installation.\nEach June, on Garter Day, the members of the Order, wearing their habits and garter insignia, meet at Windsor Castle. When any new Knights and/or Ladies of the Garter are due for installation, an investiture ceremony is held in the Throne Room of Windsor Castle on the morning of Garter Day. This ceremony is attended by all available Knights and Ladies Companion of the Order, wearing the ceremonial habits and garter insignia, and also by their spouses. The wording of the oath sworn by the new knights at this ceremony and of the Admonitions addressed to them in turn by the prelate and chancellor of the order when the several items of insignia are placed upon them are extremely similar to the traditions of the past.\nAt the investiture ceremony, two senior knights or ladies of the order assist the Sovereign by placing the garter around the left leg of the new knight, or left arm of the new lady, and in the fastening of the riband and Lesser George about the body of the new knight or lady, and in the adjustment of the mantle and the collar. After the investiture ceremony at Windsor is concluded, a state luncheon is held in the Banqueting Room. This is attended by the royal family, by all the Companions of the Order and their spouses, and by the Officers of the Order. After the banquet all the knights and ladies of the order, together with the prelate, chancellor and other officers of the order, in their mantles and ceremonial robes, led by the Military Knights of Windsor, move in procession, watched by a great crowd of spectators, through the castle, down the hill, which is lined with soldiers, to Saint George's Chapel for a worship service, before which the formal installation of the new knights takes place.\nWhile (then just) knights continued to be invested with their ensigns, the formal installation of knights at St George's Chapel ceased in 1805. Installation, along with the annual Garter service, returned in 1948; on the occasion of the order's 600th anniversary.\nPrivileges.\nPrecedence.\nMembers are assigned positions in the order of precedence, coming before all others of knightly rank, and above baronets. The wives, sons, daughters and daughters-in-law of Knights Companion are also assigned precedence. Relatives of Ladies Companion are not, however, assigned any special positions. (Generally, individuals can derive precedence from their fathers or husbands, but not from their wives.) The Chancellor is also assigned precedence, but since 1837 the office has been held by a diocesan bishop of the Church of England or a peer, which have a higher precedence than that bestowed by the Chancellorship.\nKnights Companion prefix \"Sir\" and Ladies Companion prefix \"Lady\" to their forenames. Wives of Knights Companion may prefix \"Lady\" to their surnames, but no corresponding privilege exists for husbands of Ladies Companion. Such forms are not used by royalty, peers, peeresses, or Anglican clergymen, who instead use only the post-nominal letters.\nKnights and Ladies Companion use the post-nominal letters \"KG\" and \"LG\" respectively. When an individual is entitled to use multiple post-nominal letters, those of the Order of the Garter appear before all others, except \"Bt\" or \"Bart\" (Baronet), \"VC\" (Victoria Cross) and \"GC\" (George Cross).\nHeraldry.\nIn their heraldic achievements, members of the Order of the Garter may encircle their escutcheon with the Garter. Knights and Ladies Companion are also entitled to receive heraldic supporters, a privilege granted to few other private individuals. While some families claim supporters by ancient use, and others have been granted them as a special reward, only members of the Royal Family, peers, Knights and Ladies Companion of the Garter, Knights and Ladies of the Thistle, and Knights and Dames Grand Cross of the junior orders of chivalry are automatically entitled to them.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73260", "revid": "41042556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73260", "title": "Asturies", "text": ""}
{"id": "73262", "revid": "63286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73262", "title": "Apple IIe", "text": "Third model in the Apple II series of personal computers\nThe Apple IIe (styled as Apple //e) is the third model in the Apple II series of personal computers produced by Apple Computer. It was released in January 1983 as the successor to the Apple II Plus. The \"e\" in the name stands for \"enhanced\". It is the first Apple II with built-in lowercase, 80-column text support and 64K RAM standard, while reducing the total chip count from previous models by approximately 75%.\nImproved expandability combined with the new features made for an attractive general-purpose machine to first-time computer shoppers. As the last surviving model of the Apple II computer line before discontinuation, and having been manufactured and sold for nearly 11 years with relatively few changes, the IIe was the longest-lived computer in Apple's history.\nHistory.\nApple Computer planned to discontinue the Apple II series after the introduction of the Apple III in 1980; the company intended to clearly establish market segmentation by designing the Apple III to appeal to the business market, leaving the Apple II for home and education users. Management believed that \"once the Apple III was out, the Apple II would stop selling in six months\", cofounder Steve Wozniak later said.\nBy the time IBM released the rival IBM PC in 1981, the Apple II's technology was already four years old. In September 1981 \"InfoWorld\" reported\u2014below the PC's announcement\u2014that Apple was secretly developing three new computers \"to be ready for release within a year\": Lisa, Macintosh, and \"Diana\". Describing the last as a software-compatible Apple II replacement\u2014\"A 6502 machine using custom LSI\" and a simpler motherboard\u2014it said that Diana \"was ready for release months ago\" but decided to improve the design to better compete with the Xerox 820. \"Now it appears that when Diana is ready for release, it will offer features and a price that will make the Apple II uncompetitive\", the magazine wrote.\n\"Apple's plans to phase out the Apple II have also been delayed by complications in the design of the Apple III\", the article also said. \"BYTE\" reported in October 1982 a rumor that the next Apple II would be called the IIe. After the Apple III sold poorly, management decided in 1981 that the further continuation of the Apple II was in the company's best interest. After &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442 years of the Apple II Plus, essentially at a standstill, came the introduction of a new Apple II model\u00a0\u2014 the Apple IIe (codenamed \"Diana\" and \"Super II\"). The Apple IIe was released in January 1983, the successor to the Apple II Plus. The Apple IIe was the first Apple computer with a custom ASIC chip, which reduced much of the old discrete IC-based circuitry to a single chip. This change resulted in reducing the cost and size of the motherboard. Some of the hardware features of the Apple III (e.g. bank-switched memory) were borrowed in the design of the Apple IIe, and some from incorporating the Apple II Plus Language card. The culmination of these changes led to increased sales and greater market share of home, education, and small business use.\nNew features.\nOne of the most notable improvements of the Apple IIe is the addition of a ASCII-equivalent printable character set and keyboard. The most important addition is the ability to input and display lower-case letters. Other keyboard improvements include four-way cursor control and standard editing keys ( and ), two special Apple modifier keys (Open and Solid Apple), and a safe off-to-side relocation of the key. The auto-repeat function (any key held down to repeat same character continuously) is now automatic, no longer requiring the key found on the keyboards of previous models.\nThe machine came standard with 64\u00a0KB RAM, with the equivalent of a built-in Apple Language Card in its circuitry, and had a new special \"Auxiliary slot\" (replacing slot 0, though electronically mapped to slot 3 for compatibility with earlier third-party 80-column cards) for adding more memory via bank-switching RAM cards. Through this slot it also includes built-in support for an 80-column text display on monitors (with the addition of a plug-in 1K memory card, via bank-switching of 40 columns) and could be easily doubled to 128\u00a0KB RAM by alternatively plugging in Apple's Extended 80-Column Text Card. As time progressed, even more memory could be added through third-party cards using the same bank-switching slot or, alternatively, general-purpose slot cards that addressed memory 1 byte at a time (i.e. Slinky RAM cards). A new ROM diagnostic routine could be invoked to test the motherboard for faults and also test its main bank of memory.\nThe Apple IIe lowered production costs and improved reliability by merging the function of several off-the-shelf ICs into single custom chips, reducing total chip count to 31 (previous models used 120 chips). The IIe also switched to using newer single-voltage 64x1 DRAM chips instead of the triple-voltage 16x1 DRAM in the II/II+. For this reason the motherboard design is much cleaner and runs cooler as well, with enough room to add a pin-connector for an (optional) external numeric keypad. Also added was a backport-accessible DE-9 joystick connector, making it far easier for users to add and remove game and input devices (previous models requiring plugging the joystick/paddles directly into a 16-pin DIP socket on the motherboard; the IIe retained this connector for backwards compatibility). Also improved were port openings for expansion cards. Rather than cutout V-shaped slot openings as in the Apple II and II Plus, the IIe has a variety of different-sized openings, with thumb-screw holes, to accommodate mounting interface cards with DB-xx and DE-xx connectors (removable plastic covers filled the cutouts if not used).\nAlthough the lower IC count improved reliability over previous Apple II models, Apple still retained the practice of socketing all ICs so that servicing and replacement could be performed more easily. Later-production IIe models had the RAM soldered to the system board rather than socketed.\nDespite the hardware changes, the IIe maintained a high degree of backwards compatibility with the previous models, allowing most hardware and software from those systems to be used. Apple provided technical information on the IIe to hundreds of developers before its release, and claimed that, as a result, 85 to 90% of Apple II software worked with it.\nReception.\nIIe sold well in 1983 despite the IBM PC's great success. Sales rose in late 1983 and early 1984 despite aging technology as the company cut prices, possibly to reduce inventory before announcing IIc. Customers who visited stores curious about Macintosh, or the new IBM PCjr, often bought IIe instead.\n\"BYTE\" wrote in February 1983 that the IIe was \"like having an Apple II with all the extras built in ... with a variety of exciting new features and capabilities\" for about the same price as the Apple II. It found the computer to be highly compatible with the Apple II and praised the quality of the documentation for developers and beginners. The review concluded, \"Congratulations, Apple Computer, you've produced another winner\". \"InfoWorld\"'s reviewers, Apple II Plus owners for four years, wished that the IIe's price were lower but stated that it \"does give you more for your money, however\". They also found compatibility to be very high, and concluded that \"we are generally pleased with the changes Apple has provided with the IIe\". \"Creative Computing\" said in December 1984 that the IIe and IIc were the best home computers with prices above $500, with the IIe better for those wanting expansion cards, color graphics, and educational and entertainment software. The magazine also chose the IIe as the best educational computer above $1000, citing Apple's strong early commitment to the market and large number of third-party education-related peripherals.\nSpecifications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRevisions.\nIn production from January 1983 to November 1993, the Apple IIe remained relatively unchanged through the years. However, there was one significant motherboard update, a major firmware update and two cosmetically revised machines. These revisions are detailed below.\nRevision A motherboard.\nAt the time of the Apple IIe's introduction, and well into the first few months of production, this motherboard shipped with all units. Graphics modes supported are identical to, and limited to, those of the Apple II Plus before it (Double-Low/Double-High resolution is not supported). This revision logic board is also incompatible with a small number of newer plug-in expansion slot cards. Under a free service upgrade program, Apple advised owners of the revision A to have authorized dealers replace it with the revision B motherboard.\nRevision B motherboard.\nShortly after the \"Revision A\" motherboard's release in 1983, engineers discovered that the bank-switching feature (which used a paralleled 64 KB of RAM on the Extended 80-Column Card or 1 KB to produce 80 columns using bank-switching) could also be used to produce a new graphics mode, Double-High-Resolution, which doubles the horizontal resolution and increases the number of colors from the 6 of standard High-Resolution to 16. In order to support this, some modifications had to be made to the motherboard, which became the Revision B. In addition to supporting Double-High-Resolution and a rarely used Double-Low-Resolution mode (see specifications above) it also added a special video signal accessible in slot 7.\nApple upgraded the motherboard free of charge. In later years Apple labeled newer IIe motherboards with a \"-A\" suffix once again, although in terms of functionality they were Revision B motherboards.\nNew case and keyboard.\nIn 1984, Apple revised the case and keyboard. The original IIe uses a case very similar to the Apple II Plus, painted and with Velcro-type clips to secure the lid with a strip of metal mesh along the edge to eliminate radio frequency interference. The new case is made of dyed plastic mold in a slightly darker beige with a simplified snap-case lid. The other noticeable change is a new keyboard, with more-professional-looking print on darker keycaps (small black lettering, versus large white print). This was the first cosmetic change.\nEnhanced IIe.\nIn March 1985, the company replaced the original machine with a new revision called the Enhanced IIe. It is completely identical to the previous machine except for four chips changed on the motherboard (and a small \"\"Enhanced\" or \"65C02\"\" sticker placed over the keyboard power indicator). The purpose of the update was to make the Apple IIe more compatible with the Apple IIc (released the previous year) and, to a smaller degree, the Apple II Plus. This change involved a new processor, the CMOS-based 65C02 CPU, a new character ROM for the text modes, and two new ROM firmware chips. The 65C02 added more CPU instructions, the new character ROM added 32 special \"MouseText\" characters (which allowed the creation of a GUI-like display in text mode, similar to IBM code page 437), and the new ROM firmware fixed problems and speed issues with 80-column text, introduced the ability to use lowercase in Applesoft BASIC and Monitor, and contained some other smaller improvements (and fixes) in the latter two (including the return of the Mini-Assembler\u2014which had vanished with the introduction of the II Plus firmware).\nAlthough it affected compatibility with a small number of software titles (particularly those that did not follow Apple programming guidelines and rules, used illegal opcodes that were no longer available in the new CMOS-based CPU, or used the alternate 80-column character set that MouseText now occupied) a fair bit of newer software\u00a0\u2014 mostly productivity applications and utilities\u00a0\u2014 required the Enhanced chipset to run at all. An official upgrade kit, consisting of the four replacement chips and an \"Enhanced\" sticker badge, was made available for purchase to owners of the original Apple IIe. An alternative at the time, which some users chose as a cost-cutting measure, was to simply purchase their own 65C02 CPU and create (unlicensed and illegal) duplicates of the updated ROMs using re-rewritable EPROM chips. When Apple phased out the Enhancement kit in the early 1990s, this became the only available method for users looking to upgrade their IIe, and remains so right up until the present day. An Enhanced machine identifies itself with the name \"Apple //e\" on its start-up splash screen (as opposed to the less-specific \"Apple ][\").\nPlatinum IIe.\nIn January 1987 came the final revision of the Apple IIe, often referred to as the Platinum IIe, due to the color change of its case to the light-grey color scheme that Apple dubbed \"Platinum\". Changes to this revision were mostly cosmetic to modernize the look of the machine. Besides the color change, there was a new keyboard layout with built-in numeric keypad. The keyboard was changed to match the layout of the Apple IIGS, with the reset key moved above the ESC and '1' keys, the Open and Solid Apple modifier keys replaced by Command and Option and the power LED relocated above the numeric keypad. Gone were the recessed metal ID badges (showing the Apple logo and name, with \"//e\" beside it) replaced with a simpler \"Apple IIe\" silk screened on the case lid in the Apple Garamond font. A smaller Apple logo badge remained, which was moved to the right side of the case.\nInternally, a (reduced in size) Extended 80-Column Card was factory-installed, making the Platinum IIe come standard with 128\u00a0KB RAM and Double-Hi-Res graphics enabled. The motherboard has a reduced chip count by merging the two system ROM chips into one and using higher-density memory chips so its 64\u00a0KB RAM can be made up of two (64 Kbx4) chips rather than eight (64 Kbx1) chips, bringing the count down to a total of 24 chips. A solder pad location on the motherboard, present since the original IIe, for (optionally) making presses of the \"Shift\" keys detectable in software, is now shorted by default so that the feature is always active. Next, in a move to reduce radio frequency interference when a joystick plugs into the motherboard's game I/O socket, filtering capacitors were added. While this made no difference to the average user, it had the negative effect of lowering the available bandwidth to the socket, which is often used by specialized devices for such purposes as measuring temperature, controlling a robotic device, or even simplistic networking for data transfer to another computer. In such cases, the specialized devices were rendered useless on the Platinum IIe unless the user removed the capacitors from the board.\nThere were no firmware changes present, and functionally the motherboard was otherwise identical to the Enhanced IIe. This final model of the Apple IIe (which was not sold in Europe) was quietly discontinued on November 15, 1993, which (following the discontinuation of the Apple II a year earlier) effectively marked the end of the Apple II family line.\nApple IIe Card for Macintosh.\nIn March 1991, shortly after the release of the Macintosh LC series, Apple released the PDS slot-based Apple IIe Card for the Macintosh. By plugging this card into a Macintosh LC (and later models incorporating an LC PDS slot), through hardware and (some) software emulation, the Macintosh can run most software written for the 8-bit Apple IIe computer. This miniaturized computer on a card was made possible by a chip called the Gemini, which is heavily based on the Mega II, first used in the Apple IIGS computer to emulate the Apple IIe. The Gemini duplicates most of the functions of a standard Apple IIe, minus RAM, ROM, video generation and CPU.\nMany of the built-in Macintosh peripherals can be \"borrowed\" by the card when in Apple II mode (i.e. extra RAM, 3&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442-inch floppy, AppleTalk networking, clock, hard disk). It can run at either standard 1\u00a0MHz speed or an accelerated 1.9\u00a0MHz. As video is emulated using Macintosh QuickDraw routines, it is sometimes unable to keep up with the speed of a real Apple IIe, especially in the case of slower host machines. With a specialized Y-cable, the card can use an actual Apple 5.25, Apple UniDisk 3.5 and Apple II joystick or paddles. The Apple IIe Card is thought of as an Apple II compatibility solution or emulator rather than as an extension of the Apple II line.\nInternational versions.\nRegional differences.\nThe Apple IIe keyboard differed depending on what region of the world it was sold in. Sometimes the differences were very minor, such as extra local language characters and symbols printed on certain keycaps (e.g. French accented characters on the Canadian IIe such as \"\u00e0\", \"\u00e9\", \"\u00e7\", etc., or the British Pound \"\u00a3\" symbol on the UK IIe) while other times the layout and shape of keys greatly differed (e.g. a European IIe). In order to access the local character set and keyboard layout, a user-accessible switch is found on the underside of the keyboard\u00a0\u2014 flipping it will instantly switch the video output and keyboard input from the US character set to the local set. To support this, special double-capacity video and keyboard ROMs are used; in early motherboards they had to reside on a tiny circuit card that plugged into the socket. In some countries these localized IIes also support 50\u00a0Hz PAL video instead of the standard 60\u00a0Hz NTSC video and the different 220/240 volt power of that region. An equivalent of the \"PAL color card\" for the earlier Apple II Europlus model was integrated into the motherboard of these IIes, so that color graphics are available without the addition of a slot card.\nAnother difference with the European IIe, is the Auxiliary slot physically moved in location so it is in line and in front of slot 3, preventing both slots from being used simultaneously for full-sized cards. A few third-party cards are affected by this; some European cards plug into both slots simultaneously and are thus unusable on American IIes, and some American cards do not fit into the case of European IIes because the European location of the Auxiliary slot leaves less room for them.\nEuropean Platinum IIe (hybrid).\nDuring approximately the same time period that the Platinum IIe was being produced (1987), Apple released an alternative machine for the European market. It reused the original Apple IIe case mold and keyboard, but both were redyed in the platinum color scheme\u2014including the metal ID badges which were recolored from dark brown to platinum, blending them into the case lid. Additionally, the sticker over the keyboard power indicator was labeled \"65C02\" rather than \"Enhanced\". Internally it used the same (newer) motherboard found in the Platinum IIe with reduced chip count. Notably absent is the numeric keypad and standardized keyboard layout found on the Platinum IIe.\nThis cosmetic reissue of the classic IIe, with new motherboard and new coloring scheme, was only available in Europe, and therefore also had regional differences mentioned above. It has been rumored that a small number of these machines were made available in the Canadian and US markets, using the standard North American keyboard and motherboard (photographic evidence of this North American variant can be found in some period Apple II magazines). This hybrid platinum model is somewhat rare.\nUpgrades.\nApple IIGS upgrade kit.\nWhen the Apple IIGS computer was introduced in September 1986, Apple announced it would be making an upgrade kit for the IIe. The upgrade cost US$500, plus the trade-in of the user's existing Apple IIe motherboard and baseplate.\nUsers would bring their Apple IIe machines in to an authorized dealership, where the 65C02-based IIe motherboard and lower baseboard of the case were swapped for a 65C816-based Apple II motherboard with a new baseboard. New metal sticker ID badges replaced those on the front of the Apple IIe, rebranding the machine. Retained were the upper half of the IIe case, the keyboard, speaker, and power supply. Original II motherboards (those produced between 1986 and mid-1989) had electrical connections for the IIe power supply and keyboard present, although only about half of the units produced had the physical plug connectors factory-soldered in.\nThe upgrade kit proved unpopular as it did not include a mouse; the keyboard did not mimic all the features of the Apple Desktop Bus keyboard; and some cards designed for the Apple II did not fit in the Apple IIe's slanted case. In the end, most users found they were not saving much, once they had to purchase a 3.5-inch floppy drive, analog RGB monitor, and mouse.\nFor a time, the Western Design Center (the company that designed the 16-bit 65C816 processor used in the Apple II) also sold a 16-bit 65C802 processor that was a drop-in, pin-compatible replacement for the 65C02 that made the full 16-bit 65C816 instruction set available to the IIe, but using the same 8-bit data bus as the 65C02; however, this upgrade was insufficient, by itself, to allow II software to run, as II software additionally required the II's firmware and specialized hardware.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73266", "revid": "5957417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73266", "title": "Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Auguste Bartholdi", "text": "French sculptor and painter (1834\u20131904)\nFr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Auguste Bartholdi ( , ; 2 August 1834 \u2013 4 October 1904) was a French sculptor and painter. He is best known for designing \"Liberty Enlightening the World\", commonly known as the Statue of Liberty.\nEarly life and education.\nBartholdi was born in Colmar, France, on 2 August 1834. He was born to a family of Alsatian Protestant heritage, with his family name adopted from Barthold. His parents were Jean Charles Bartholdi (1791\u20131836) and Augusta Charlotte Bartholdi (n\u00e9e\u00a0Beysser; 1801\u20131891). Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Auguste Bartholdi was the youngest of their four children, and one of only two to survive infancy, along with the oldest brother, Jean-Charles, who became a lawyer and editor.\nBartholdi's father, a property owner and counselor to the prefecture, died when Bartholdi was two years old. Afterwards, Bartholdi moved with his mother and his older brother Jean-Charles to Paris, where another branch of their family resided. With the family often returning to spend long periods of time in Colmar, the family maintained ownership and visited their house in Alsace, which later became the Bartholdi Museum in 1922. While in Colmar, Bartholdi took drawing lessons from Martin Rossbach. In Paris, he studied sculpture with Antoine \u00c9tex. He also studied architecture under Henri Labrouste and Eug\u00e8ne-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc.\nBartholdi attended the Lyc\u00e9e Louis-le-Grand in Paris and received a baccalaur\u00e9at in 1852. He then went on to study architecture at the \u00c9cole nationale sup\u00e9rieure des Beaux-Arts as well as painting under Ary Scheffer in his studio in the Rue Chaptal, now the Mus\u00e9e de la Vie Romantique. Later, Bartholdi turned his attention to sculpture, which afterward exclusively occupied him and his life.\nCareer.\nEarly sculptures and work in Colmar.\nIn 1853, Bartholdi submitted a Good Samaritan-themed sculptural group to the Paris Salon of 1853. The statue was later recreated in bronze. Within two years of his Salon debut, Bartholdi was commissioned by his hometown of Colmar to sculpt a bronze memorial of Jean Rapp, a Napoleonic General. In 1855 and 1856, Bartholdi traveled in Yemen and Egypt with travel companions such as Jean-L\u00e9on G\u00e9r\u00f4me and other \"orientalist\" painters. The trip sparked Bartholdi's interest in colossal sculpture.\nIn 1869, Bartholdi returned to Egypt to propose a new lighthouse to be built at the entrance of the Suez Canal, which was newly completed. The lighthouse, which was to be called \"Egypt Carrying the Light to Asia\" and shaped as a massive, draped figure holding a torch, was not commissioned. Both the khedive and Lesseps declined the proposed statue from Bartholdi, citing the high cost. The Port Said Lighthouse was built instead, by Fran\u00e7ois Coignet in 1869.\nThe war and Statue of Liberty.\nBartholdi served in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 as a squadron leader of the National Guard, and as a liaison officer to Italian General Giuseppe Garibaldi, representing the French government and the Army of the Vosges. As an officer, he took part in the defense of Colmar from Germany. Distraught over his region's defeat, over the following years he constructed a number of monuments celebrating French heroism in the defense against Germany. Among these projects was the \"Lion of Belfort\", which he started working on in 1871, not finishing the massive sandstone statue until 1880.\nIn 1871, he made his first trip to the United States, where he pitched the idea of a massive statue gifted from the French to the Americans in honor of the centennial of American independence. The idea, which had first been broached to him in 1865 by his friend \u00c9douard Ren\u00e9 de Laboulaye, resulted in the Statue of Liberty in New York Harbor. After years of work and fundraising, the statue was inaugurated in 1886. During this period, Bartholdi also sculpted monuments for other American cities, such as the Bartholdi Fountain in Washington, D.C., completed in 1878.\nLater years.\nIn 1875, he joined the Freemasons Lodge Alsace-Lorraine in Paris. In 1876, Bartholdi was one of the French commissioners in 1876 to the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition. There he exhibited bronze statues of \"The Young Vine-Grower\", \"G\u00e9nie Fun\u00e8bre\", \"Peace\" and \"Genius in the Grasp of Misery\", receiving a bronze medal for the latter. His 1878 statue \"Gribeauval\" became the property of the French state.\nA prolific creator of statues, monuments, and portraits, Bartholdi exhibited at the Paris Salons until the year of his death in 1904. He also remained active with diverse mediums, including oil painting, watercolor, photography, and drawing, and received the rank of Commander of the Legion of Honor in 1886. Bartholdi died of tuberculosis at age 70 in Paris on 4 October 1904. \nPersonal life.\nIn 1876, he married Jeanne-Emile Baheux in Providence, Rhode Island. In 1893, Bartholdi and his wife visited the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago, where his \"Washington and Lafayette\" sculptural group was exhibited. Throughout his life Bartholdi maintained his childhood family home in Colmar; in 1922, it was made into the Mus\u00e9e Bartholdi.\nMajor projects.\nThe Statue of Liberty (\"Liberty Enlightening the World\").\nThe work for which Bartholdi is most famous is \"Liberty Enlightening the World\", better known as the Statue of Liberty. Soon after the establishment of the French Third Republic, the project of building some suitable memorial to show the fraternal feeling existing between the republics of the United States and France was suggested, and in 1874 the Union Franco-Am\u00e9ricaine (Franco-American Union) was established by Edouard de Laboulaye.\nBartholdi's hometown in Alsace had just passed into German control in the Franco-Prussian War. These troubles in his ancestral home of Alsace are purported to have further influenced Bartholdi's own great interest in independence, liberty, and self-determination. Bartholdi subsequently joined the Union Franco-Am\u00e9ricaine, among whose members were Laboulaye, Paul de R\u00e9musat, William Waddington, Henri Martin, Ferdinand Marie de Lesseps, Jean-Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, comte de Rochambeau, Oscar Gilbert Lafayette, Fran\u00e7ois Charles Lorraine, and Louis Fran\u00e7ois Lorraine.\nBartholdi broached the idea of a massive statue, and once its design was approved, the Union Franco-Am\u00e9ricaine raised more than 1 million francs throughout France for its building. In 1879, Bartholdi was awarded design patent https:// for the Statue of Liberty. On 4 July 1880, the statue was formally delivered to the American minister in Paris, the event being celebrated by a great banquet. In 1886, the structure was officially presented as the joint gift of the French and American people, and installed on Bedloe's Island in New York Harbor. Originally, it arrived with chains presented in the left hand leading down to the feet, which was to represent the liberty of the United States from slavery. It was also originally the colour of copper to represent as such. The United States made a deal with Bartholdi that if the chains were to be removed from the upper part of the body, they could stay at the feet, but they, too, must be hidden. It was also rumoured in France that the face of the Statue of Liberty was modeled after Bartholdi's mother. The statue is , and the top of the torch is at an elevation of from mean low-water mark. It was the largest work of its kind that had been completed up to that time.\nWorks in Colmar.\nBartholdi's hometown Colmar (modern political administrative region of Grand Est) has a number of statues and monuments by the sculptor, as well as a museum founded in 1922 in the house in which he was born, at 30 Rue des Marchands.\nOther major works.\nBartholdi's other major works include a variety of statues at Clermont-Ferrand; in Paris, and in other places. Notable works include:\nIn popular culture.\n\"The Statue of Liberty\" is a 1985 documentary film by Ken Burns which focuses on the statue's history and its impact on society.\nBartholdi's life and creation of \"Liberty Enlightening the World\" are also featured in the 2019 documentary film, \"Liberty: Mother of Exiles\".\nIn the youtube series \"The Monument Mythos\", various episodes in the first season document his life and works.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "73267", "revid": "30861941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73267", "title": "422 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 422 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Tribunate of Capitolinus, Mugillanus and Merenda (or, less frequently, year 332 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 422 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nDrama.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73269", "revid": "36188177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73269", "title": "423 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 423 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Atratinus and Ambustus (or, less frequently, year 331 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 423 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nDrama.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFrey, Wendy, and Diane Hart. \"History Alive!\" Palo Alto, CA: TCI, 2004. Print."}
{"id": "73270", "revid": "7523308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73270", "title": "428 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 428 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cossus and Cincinnatus or Cincinnatus and Atratinus (or, less frequently, year 326 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 428 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\nBy topic.\nLiterature.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73271", "revid": "32860082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73271", "title": "Scheldt", "text": "River in France, Belgium and the Netherlands\nThe Scheldt ( ; ; ) is a river that flows through northern France, western Belgium, and the southwestern part of the Netherlands, with its mouth at the North Sea. Its name is derived from an adjective corresponding to Old English (\"shallow\"), Modern English \"shoal\", Low German , West Frisian , and obsolete Swedish (\"thin\").\nCourse.\nThe headwaters of the Scheldt are in Gouy, in the Aisne department of northern France. It flows north through Cambrai and Valenciennes, and enters Belgium near Tournai. Ghent developed at the confluence of the Lys, one of its main tributaries, and the Scheldt, which then turns east. Near Antwerp, the largest city on its banks, the Scheldt flows west into the Netherlands toward the North Sea.\nOriginally there were two branches from that point: the Oosterschelde (Eastern Scheldt); and the Westerschelde (Western Scheldt). In the 19th century, however, the Dutch built a dyke that cuts the river off from its eastern (northern) branch and connects Zuid-Beveland with the mainland (North Brabant). Today the river continues into the Westerschelde estuary only, passing Terneuzen to reach the North Sea between Breskens in Zeelandic Flanders and Vlissingen (Flushing) on Walcheren.\nThe Scheldt is an important waterway, and has been made navigable from its mouth up to Cambrai. Above Cambrai, the Canal de Saint-Quentin follows its course. The port of Antwerp, the second-largest in Europe, developed on its banks. Several canals (including the Scheldt-Rhine Canal connecting Antwerp to Rotterdam, the Albert Canal connecting it to Li\u00e8ge and the Brussel-Scheldt, Brussels and Brussels-Charleroi canals connecting it to Charleroi via Brussels) connect the Scheldt with the basins of the Rhine, Meuse, and Seine rivers, and with the industrial areas around Brussels, Li\u00e8ge, Lille, Dunkirk, and Mons.\nThe Scheldt flows through the following departments of France, provinces of Belgium, provinces of the Netherlands, and towns:\nHistory.\n \nThe Scheldt estuary has always had considerable commercial and strategic importance. Called \"Scaldis\" in Roman times, it was important for the shipping lanes to Roman Britain. Nehalennia was venerated at its mouth. The Franks took control over the region about the year 260 and at first interfered with the Roman supply routes as pirates. Later they became allies of the Romans. With the various divisions of the Frankish Empire in the 9th\u00a0century, the Scheldt eventually became the border between the Western and Eastern parts of the Empire, which later became France and the Holy Roman Empire.\nThis status quo remained intact, at least on paper, until 1528, but by then, both the County of Flanders on the western bank and Zeeland and the Duchy of Brabant on the east were part of the Habsburg possessions of the Seventeen Provinces. Antwerp was the most prominent harbour in Western Europe. After this city fell back under Spanish control in 1585, the Dutch Republic took control of Zeelandic Flanders, a strip of land on the left bank, and closed the Scheldt for shipping. That shifted the trade to the ports of Amsterdam and Middelburg and seriously crippled Antwerp, an important and traumatic element in the history of relations between the Netherlands and what was to become Belgium.\nAccess to the river was the subject of the brief Kettle War of 1784, and during the French Revolution shortly afterwards, the river was reopened in 1792. Once Belgium had claimed its independence from the Netherlands in 1830, the treaty of the Scheldt determined that the river should remain accessible to ships heading for Belgian ports. Nevertheless, the Dutch government would demand a toll from passing vessels until 16 July 1863.\n\"The Question of the Scheldt\", a study providing \"a history of the international legal arrangements governing the Western Scheldt\", was prepared for the use of British negotiators at the Treaty of Versailles in 1919.\nIn the Second World War, the Scheldt estuary once again became a contested area. Despite Allied control of Antwerp, German forces still occupied fortified positions in September 1944 throughout the Scheldt estuary west and north, preventing any Allied shipping from reaching the port. In the Battle of the Scheldt, the Canadian First Army successfully cleared the area, allowing supply convoys direct access to the port of Antwerp by November 1944.\nNavigation.\nCanalisation from Cambrai down to Valenciennes was completed in 1788. Napoleon saw the benefits of linking Paris to Belgium and accelerated completion of the Canal de Saint-Quentin to the south. The locks were deepened and doubled, as coal became the essential commodity of the industrial revolution. Upgrading downstream from Bouchain was started in the 1960s in both France and Flanders, but the waterway is still not fully compliant with European standards. All the locks on the high-capacity section are being doubled by European Class Vb size locks, , as part of the overall European Seine-Scheldt waterway project. The Pont des Trous, a listed fortified bridge in Tournai that has already been substantially modified, will again be raised to provide the necessary dimensions, including an air draught of .\nThe 13\u00a0km section between Cambrai (connection with Canal de Saint-Quentin) and Hordain (connection with Canal de la Sens\u00e9e) is only navigable for small ships (p\u00e9niche) and has 5 locks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73272", "revid": "42412221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73272", "title": "Schelde", "text": ""}
{"id": "73273", "revid": "638100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73273", "title": "Waterloo, Ontario", "text": "City in Ontario, Canada\nWaterloo is a city in the Canadian province of Ontario. It is one of three cities in the Regional Municipality of Waterloo (formerly Waterloo County). Waterloo is situated about west-southwest of Toronto, but it is not considered to be part of the Greater Toronto Area (GTA). Due to the close proximity of the city of Kitchener to Waterloo, the two together are often referred to as \"Kitchener\u2013Waterloo\", \"K-W\", or \"The Twin Cities\". Nearby Cambridge, Ontario is also sometimes grouped in, creating KWC or \"Tri-cities\".\nWhile several unsuccessful attempts to combine the municipalities of Kitchener and Waterloo have been made, following the 1973 establishment of the Region of Waterloo, less motivation to do so existed, and as a result, Waterloo remains an independent city. At the time of the 2021 census, the population of Waterloo was 121,436.\nHistory.\nIndigenous peoples and settlement.\nIndigenous peoples such as the Iroquois, Anishinaabe and Chonnonton lived in the area.\nAfter the end of the American Revolution, Joseph Brant, a Mohawk war chief, wanted Frederick Haldimand to give the Mohawk of the Six Nations a tract of land surrounding the Grand River, in return for their loyalty to the British in the war. Haldimand was the governor of Upper Canada at the time. Haldimand's 1784 \"Haldimand Proclamation\" granted the land \"six miles deep from either side of the [Grand River] beginning at Lake Erie and extending in that proportion to the very head of the said river.\" Haldimand, who had previously ordered for potential mill sites to be identified in the region, decreed in 1788 that mill sites would be included in the grant (which would not have been included otherwise). In 1796, Richard Beasley purchased Block Number 2 of the grant from Joseph Brant (on behalf of the Six Nations) with a mortgage held by the Six Nations. Block 2, sized at 94,012 acres, was situated in the District of Gore. To meet his mortgage obligations, Beasley had to sell portions of the land to settlers. This was counter to the original mortgage agreement, but subsequent changes to the agreement were made to permit land sales.\nMennonites from Pennsylvania counties Lancaster and Montgomery were the first wave of immigrants to the area. In the year 1800 alone, Beasley sold over 14,000 acres to Mennonite settlers. A group of 26 Mennonites from Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, pooled their resources into the German Company of Pennsylvania, which was then represented by Daniel Erb and Samuel Bricker. The company purchased all the unsold land from Beasley in 1803, resulting in a discharge of the mortgage held by the Six Nations. This discharge allowed Beasley to clear his obligation with the Six Nations, and allowed the settlers to have deeds to their purchased land. The payment to Beasley, in cash, arrived from Pennsylvania in kegs, carried in a wagon surrounded by armed guards.\nMany of the pioneers who arrived from Pennsylvania after November 1803 bought land in a 60,000-acre tract of Block 2 from the German Company of Pennsylvania. The tract included almost two-thirds of Block 2. Many of the first farms were least 400 acres in size.\nDevelopment (19th century).\nThe Mennonites divided the land into smaller lots; two lots owned by Abraham Erb\u2014who is often called the founder of the Village of Waterloo\u2014became the central core of Waterloo. Erb had come to the area in 1806 from Pennsylvania. He had bought from the German Company Tract and settled where there was enough water power to operate mills. He founded a sawmill in 1808 and grist mill in 1816; they saw business flourish. Other early settlers of what would become Waterloo included Samuel and Elia Schneider, who arrived in 1816. Until about 1820, settlements such as this were quite small. Erb also built what is now known as the Erb-Kumpf House in c. 1812, making it likely one of the oldest homes in Waterloo.\nThe first school in what is now the City of Waterloo was built on land donated by Erb; the log building was constructed in 1820. A larger school house of stone was built in 1842 and was replaced with a brick school building in 1852. Over the decades, the log building was moved, eventually to Waterloo Park, where it still stands. The German spoken in Waterloo County is based upon the 18th century Pennsylvania Dutch dialect. In turn, the Pennsylvania Dutch dialect is based upon the dialect of German spoken in southwestern Germany.\nIn 1816, the new Waterloo Township was officially incorporated while being named after Waterloo, Belgium, the site of the Battle of Waterloo (1815), which had ended the Napoleonic Wars in Europe. After that war, the new township became a popular destination for German immigrants. By the 1840s, German settlers had overtaken the Mennonites as the dominant segment of the population. Many Germans settled in the small hamlet to the southeast of Waterloo. In their honour, the village was named Berlin in 1833 (renamed to Kitchener in 1916). The first Catholic family to arrive were the Spetz family from Alsace who came in 1828.\nBy 1831, Waterloo had a small post office in the King and Erb Street area, operated by Daniel Snyder, some 11 years before one would open in neighbouring Berlin. The \"Smith's Canadian Gazetteer\" of 1846 states that the Township of Waterloo (smaller than Waterloo County) consisted primarily of Pennsylvanian Mennonites and immigrants directly from Germany who had brought money with them. At the time, many did not speak English. There were eight grist and twenty sawmills in the township. In 1841, the population count was 4,424. In 1846 the village of Waterloo had a population of 200, \"mostly Germans\". There was a grist mill and a sawmill and some tradesmen. By comparison, Berlin (Kitchener) had a population of about 400, also \"mostly German\", and more tradesmen than the village of Waterloo.\nBerlin was chosen as the site of the seat for the County of Waterloo in 1853. By 1869, the population was 2,000. Waterloo was incorporated as a village in 1857 and became the Town of Waterloo in 1876. The Kitchener Public Utilities Commission began providing streetcar service in the region in 1888. In the 19th century, Waterloo was dominated by people of German origin with 76% of Waterloo residents in the 1911 census listing their family origins as being in Germany.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nThe Galt, Preston and Hespeler electric railway (later called the Grand River Railway) connected to Waterloo in 1911 and ended service in 1931. The Kitchener Public Utilities Commission stopped providing streetcar service in 1947, and were replaced by electric trolley coaches. Waterloo was incorporated as the City of Waterloo in 1948. The trolley coaches ended service in 1973. In 1911, a plan was mooted to pave King street. William Snider who owned the town square, did not want to pay the higher taxes, which would refused from paving King Street. Snider offered to deed the town square to town, which instead demanded he pay the higher taxes. Snider sold the town square to the Molson Bank, which up a Beaux Arts style bank on the site of the town square in 1914. In 1929, the H.V. McKay company of Australia proposed to open a factory for \"one, man, self-propelled combine harvesters\". The town provided the land for the factory from the Canada Barrels and Kegs and fixed the tax assessment at $25, 000 per year for the next 10 years in exchange for the factory being built.&gt; In 1911, Waterloo Lutheran seminary, which later became Wilfrid Laurier University, was opened. On 5 May 1916, a group of soldiers sacked the German Acadian Club in Waterloo. In October 1918, Spanish flu reached Waterloo. Over 2,000 people were \"down with the malady\". By November 1918, the Waterloo Chronicle reported that \"twice as many had died from the influenza as had been killed in action in four years of war\".\nThe presence of the University of Waterloo in the city caused technological and innovative companies to base in Waterloo, especially companies specializing in computing and software. For example, Research in Motion (now BlackBerry Limited), which developed BlackBerry, was started by Mike Lazaridis and Doug Fregin in 1984. In 1965, the University of Waterloo was the second-largest private sector employer. The construction of the buildings for the University of Waterloo made the unemployment rate very low in the 1960s. By 1971, the population of Waterloo had grown 424% since 1945. Kitchener was a working class city while Waterloo was a middle class city. In 1981, the average annual household income in Kitchener was $26, 279 and in Waterloo was $31,224. In 1950, Waterloo had 55 factories that employed 2, 572 people, in 1970 had 79 factories that employed 5,483 workers, and in 1980 there were 132 factories that employed 7,314 workers. The founding of the universities led to the north-eastern area becoming developed as the new housing subdivisions were built while the area around Weber declined. The architecture of Waterloo changed from a more traditional Victorian architecture style to favouring a more streamlined look, incorporating elements from architectural styles such as Postmodern architecture, which ultimately led to a movement to preserve Waterloo's historical core. A 1994 issue of the \"Financial Post\" mentioned Waterloo-based companies MKS, WATCOM, and Open Text in a list of the top 100 independent software companies in Canada. In 1960, a study revealed 50% of the buying by Waterloo consumers was done in Kitchener, leading to the city to develop a retail district.\nIn the 1980s, Waterloo came to have the character of a \"post-industrial city\". Mennonite farmers continued to come to Waterloo in their horse-powered buggies for shopping while the middle class people drove out to eat and drink at the numerous pubs and hotels out in the countryside.\nIn June 2011, the Waterloo Region council approved the Ion: a light rail transit line connecting Conestoga Mall in north Waterloo and Fairview Park Mall in south Kitchener. Construction on the Ion began in August 2014. In 2016, two sections of a corduroy road were unearthed. One was in the King Street area of the business district and the second was discovered near the Conestoga Mall. The road was probably built by Mennonites using technology acquired in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, between the late 1790s and 1816. The log road was buried in about 1840 and a new road built on top of it. A historian explained that the road had been built for access to the mill but was also \"one of the first roads cut through (the woods) so people could start settling the area\". Ion service began in 2019 and experienced a daily ridership of 25,000 in November 2020.\nGeography.\nWaterloo's city centre is near the intersection of King and Erb streets. The city centre was once along Albert Street, near the Marsland Centre and the Waterloo Public Library. The town hall, fire hall, and farmers' market were located there. Amidst some controversy, all were demolished between 1965 and 1969.\nHistorically, Waterloo's swamp land near where the village was first developed caused problems for development. To mitigate these issues, sand was taken from nearby areas to raise the land; buildings were built on foundations of oak planks; and King Street was originally built as a corduroy road.\nWaterways.\nThe Grand River flows southward along the city's east side. Its most significant tributary within the city is Laurel Creek, whose source lies just to the west of the city limits and its mouth just to the east, and crosses much of the city's central areas, including the University of Waterloo lands and Waterloo Park; it flows under the uptown area in a culvert. In the city's west end, the Waterloo Moraine provides over 300,000 people in the region with drinking water. Much of the gently hilly Waterloo Moraine underlies existing developed areas. Ongoing urban growth, mostly low-density residential suburbs (in accordance with requests by land developers), will cover increasing amounts of the remaining undeveloped portions of the Waterloo Moraine.\nClimate.\nWaterloo has a humid continental climate of the warm summer subtype (\"Dfb\" under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification) with warm, humid summers and cold winters. Compared to other parts of Canada, Waterloo has fairly moderate weather. Winter temperatures usually occur between mid-December and mid-March, while summer temperatures generally occur between mid-May and late September. It is not uncommon for temperatures to exceed 30\u00a0\u00b0C (86\u00a0\u00b0F) several times each summer. Waterloo has approximately 140 frost-free days per year.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2021 Canadian census conducted by Statistics Canada, Waterloo has a population of , a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , the city has a population density of . As of 2021, the median age is 36.0 years old, as compared to 37.7 in 2016. Waterloo's median age is 13% lower than Ontario's median age, which is 41.6 years old.\nAt the census metropolitan area (CMA) level in the 2021 census, the Kitchener\u2013Cambridge\u2013Waterloo CMA had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nEthnicity.\nThe most common ethnic or cultural origins reported in Waterloo in 2021 were German (17.9%), English (17.0%), Scottish (14.6%), Irish (14.3%), Canadian (10.2%), Chinese (8.9%), Indian (6.4%), French (6.0%), British Isles (4.1%), Polish (4.1%), Dutch (3.9%), Italian (3.3%), and Ukrainian (2.4%). Indigenous people made up 1.3% of the population, mostly First Nations (0.7%) and M\u00e9tis (0.5%). Ethnocultural backgrounds in the city included European (63.7%), South Asian (10.7%), Chinese (9.2%), Black (3.1%), Arab (2.7%), Latin American (1.9%), West Asian (1.7%), Southeast Asian (1.4%), Korean (1.4), and Filipino (1.0%).\nReligion.\nIn 2021, 45.8% of the population identified as Christian, with Catholics (17.9%) making up the largest denomination, followed by United Church (3.3%), Lutheran (3.2%), Anglican (2.8%), Orthodox (2.4%), and other denominations. 37.7% of the population reported no religious affiliation. Others identified as Muslim (8.1%), Hindu (4.7%), Sikh (1.2%), Buddhist (1.1%), and with other religions.\nLanguage.\nEnglish was the mother tongue of 64.6% of the population in 2021. This was followed by Mandarin (6.2%), Arabic (2.2%), German (1.5%), Spanish (1.5%), Hindi (1.3%), Punjabi (1.2%), Korean (1.1%), Iranian Persian (1.0%), Urdu (1.0%), Serbo-Croatian (1.0%), Cantonese (0.9%), and French (0.9%). Of the official languages, 98.2% of the population reported knowing English and 8.8% French.\nEconomy.\nAccording to the 2016 Canadian Census, Waterloo has a median household income (after tax) of $72,239. This is significantly higher than the national median of $61,348. The unemployment rate in Waterloo (6.9%) is lower than the national rate of 7.7%. The median value of a dwelling in Waterloo ($399,997) is higher than the national median of $341,556. The Intelligent Community Forum named Waterloo the Top Intelligent Community of 2007.\nWaterloo has a strong knowledge and service-based economy with significant insurance and high-tech sectors as well as two universities. The city's largest employers are Sun Life Financial, the University of Waterloo, Manulife Financial, BlackBerry, Sandvine and Wilfrid Laurier University.\nInsurance.\nBefore it became known for technology, Waterloo was sometimes referred to as \"the Hartford of Canada\" because of the many insurance companies based in the area. Insurance companies founded in Waterloo include:\nTechnology.\nThe city is part of Canada's Technology Triangle (CTT), a joint economic development initiative of Waterloo, Kitchener, Cambridge and the Region of Waterloo that markets the region internationally. Despite its name, CTT does not focus exclusively on promoting technology industries, but on all aspects of economic development.\nWaterloo has a strong technology sector with hundreds of high-tech firms. The dominant technology company in the city is BlackBerry, makers of the BlackBerry, which has its headquarters in the city and owns several office buildings near the University of Waterloo's main campus.\nNotable Waterloo-based high-tech companies include:\nMany other high-tech companies, with headquarters elsewhere, take advantage of the concentration of high-tech employees in the Waterloo area, and have research and development centres there. Shopify, SAP, Google, Oracle, Intel, McAfee, NCR Corporation, Electronic Arts and Agfa are among the large, international technology companies with development offices in Waterloo.\nEducation and research.\nWaterloo is home to two major universities, the University of Waterloo and Wilfrid Laurier University.\nThe city is also home to three well-known think tanks \u2013 the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, an advanced centre for the study of foundational, theoretical physics and award-winning educational outreach in science; the Institute for Quantum Computing, based at the University of Waterloo, which carries out innovative research in the computer, engineering, mathematical and physical sciences; and the Centre for International Governance Innovation, an independent, nonpartisan think tank that addresses international governance challenges.\nDistilling and brewing.\nBreweries and distilleries had been a significant industry in the Waterloo area until 1993 when a Labatt-owned brewery was shut down. The Brick Brewing Company operated in Waterloo but is now based in Kitchener. Waterloo was the original home of distiller Seagram (also the home town of many descendants of J.P. Seagram), which closed its Waterloo plant in 1992. Of the remaining Seagram buildings, one became home of the Centre for International Governance Innovation (CIGI), while others were converted into condominiums.\nOther.\nThe city encourages location filming of movies and TV series and many have taken advantage of Waterloo locations. Examples include \"Downsizing\" (released in 2017), \"The Demolisher\" (2015) and \"\" (2015).\nArts and culture.\nKitchener\u2013Waterloo Oktoberfest is a nine-day Oktoberfest celebration held in both Kitchener and Waterloo. It is the second largest Oktoberfest celebration in the world, and the largest outside of Germany. In 2013, CBC reported that the festival receives over 700,000 annual visitors, has 1,780 volunteers, was broadcast to 1.8 million national television viewers, and generated an estimated $21 million of economic activity. Tri-Pride is a non-profit LGBT pride festival held annually during Pride Month in the \"tri-cities\" of Cambridge, Kitchener and Waterloo.\nThe Kitchener\u2013Waterloo Symphony is located in Kitchener. According to their website, they perform over 222 concerts annually to an audience of over 90,000, both in the concert hall and across the Waterloo Region. The Waterloo Busker Carnival is a busking festival held annually in August in Waterloo public square. Admission is free, and the festival has been operating since 1989. The Rainbow Reels Queer and Trans Film Festival is an annual LBGT film festival which screens at Princess Twin Cinemas in Uptown Waterloo.\nInactive or past.\nThe Waterloo Festival for Animated Cinema was an annual film festival dedicated to feature-length animation films. It was held from 2001 to 2013. The International Olympiad in Informatics, a competitive programming competition for secondary school students, was held in Waterloo in 2010.\nAttractions.\nWaterloo's local tourist attractions and areas of interest include: the Canadian Clay and Glass Gallery, the Waterloo Central Railway, the City of Waterloo Museum, a statue of monkeys entitled \"Banana\", the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, the St. Jacobs Farmers' Market (although the market is just outside city limits), University of Waterloo's Earth Sciences Museum, and Conestoga Mall.\nRecreation.\nWaterloo's parks and recreation facilities mainly comprise Waterloo Park, Bechtel Park, Laurel Creek Conservation Area, the Waterloo Memorial Recreation Complex, RIM Park, and over of mixed-use trails.\nParks.\nCreated in 1890, Waterloo Park is an urban park in Uptown Waterloo which includes an animal farm, sports fields, and a splash pad. It is the oldest park in the city; the mixed-use Laurel Trail and the rapid transit Ion line both run through the park. Bechtel Park is located in eastern Waterloo, and houses a dog park, three soccer fields, a field house, and more. Laurel Creek Conservation Area is in western Waterloo\u2014north-west of University of Waterloo's Environmental Reserve\u2014and houses 122 campsites, of trails, and facilities for canoeing, swimming, windsurfing, cycling, and sailing.\nThe Waterloo Memorial Recreation Complex, then described as the \"largest and most expensive project in the city's history\", opened in 1993. It includes an arena seating 3,500, swimming and banquet facilities, and an indoor track. RIM Park, originally called Millennium Park, opened in September 2001. Its features include outdoor soccer fields, ice rinks, baseball diamonds, basketball courts, meeting rooms and more. RIM Park is in proximity to the Walter Bean Grand River Trail, Grey Silo Golf Course, and Waterloo Public Library's Eastside Branch. There are a number of small playgrounds, woodlots, and recreation facilities around Waterloo which are not mentioned above due to their size.\nMixed-use trails.\nTrails for walking, hiking, and biking play an important part in Waterloo's recreational infrastructure. Waterloo had of trails by 2007, as compared to of trails in 1987. The Iron Horse Trail, connecting Waterloo and Kitchener, opened in 1997. Then-mayor Joan McKinnon brought upon the connection of the Trans Canada Trail into the Waterloo Region, which ran from the Iron Horse Trail to Waterloo's northern boundary.\nThe Walter Bean Grand River Trail, announced in 1999, served to create an accessible trail along the Grand River. \"Waterloo: An Illustrated History, 1857\u20132007\" states, \"[the trail] was particularly needed in Waterloo as the river's geographic location on the edge of the city meant that, unlike so many other Canadian cities, the river had not historically played a central role in the community.\"\nSports.\nIn July 2002, Waterloo, along with Kitchener, hosted the Ontario Summer Games. The following sports teams are based in Waterloo: Waterloo Wildfire (National Ringette League), Waterloo Siskins (Greater Ontario Junior Hockey League), Waterloo United (League One Ontario), Wilfrid Laurier Golden Hawks, and Waterloo Warriors. \nGovernment.\nWaterloo was part of Waterloo County until 1973 when a restructuring created the Regional Municipality of Waterloo, which consists of the cities of Waterloo, Kitchener, and Cambridge, and the townships of Woolwich, Wilmot, Wellesley, and North Dumfries. The Region handles many services, including paramedic services, policing, waste management, recreation, planning, roads and social services. The Waterloo Award, established in 1997, is the highest civic honour a person can receive from the City of Waterloo.\nWaterloo City Council consists of a mayor and seven councillors, each representing a ward. The number of wards was increased from five to seven in the November 2006 elections. As of 2022, the mayor of Waterloo is Dorothy McCabe, elected in October 2022. The current Waterloo councillors are as follows, as of 2022, listed by ascending ward number: Sandra Hanmer (Southwest Ward), Royce Bodaly (Northwest Ward), Hans Roach (Lakeshore Ward), Diane Freeman (Northeast Ward), Jen Vasic (Southeast Ward), Mary Lou Roe (Central-Columbia Ward), and Julie Wright (Uptown Ward).\nIn politics, Waterloo is within the federal electoral district of Waterloo, and within the provincial electoral district also named Waterloo.\nTransportation.\nRoads.\nThe controlled-access Highway 85, part of the larger Conestoga Parkway, is the only provincial highway that runs through Waterloo. To the north, the divided freeway ends at the city limit, and the road becomes Waterloo Regional Road 85, which accesses St. Jacobs and Elmira, before ending in Elmira. To the south, Highway 85 becomes Highway 7 within Kitchener, before diverging into eastbound Highway 8 (to Cambridge, Highway 401 interchange, and Hamilton) and westbound Highway 7/8 (to New Hamburg, Stratford, and Goderich). Highway 85 has 5 interchanges within Waterloo, from north to south, with the regional road number in brackets: King Street (15), Northfield Drive (50), King Street (15), University Avenue (57), and Bridgeport Road (9).\nPublic transport.\nPublic transport throughout the Waterloo Region is provided by Grand River Transit (GRT), which provides service for various bus routes and the Ion rapid transit line. The Ion is a light rail line providing service to 19 stations, from Conestoga station (Conestoga Mall in Waterloo) to Fairway station (Fairview Park Mall in Kitchener). The line connects downtown Kitchener and uptown Waterloo. GRT operates local and express bus routes within Waterloo, with connections to Kitchener. Waterloo is served by GO buses which stop at the University of Waterloo and Wilfrid Laurier University, with destinations of Square One City Centre Terminal, Milton GO Station, and York University.\nIntercity rail.\nWaterloo is not currently served by any regularly scheduled passenger rail service. The nearby Kitchener station is accessible from Waterloo through buses or a transfer from Ion's Kitchener Central Station. Kitchener station is serviced by the Kitchener line and the Corridor, operated by GO Transit and Via Rail respectively. Both services are infrequent. On weekdays, the commuter rail GO trains run eastbound (to Toronto) nine times per day, and westbound eight times per day. No Kitchener line trains are run on the weekends. Including weekends, Via Rail operates one train per day, both westbound and eastbound.\nThe non-profit tourist railway Waterloo Central Railway is a revival of the Waterloo-St. Jacobs Railway. It departs from the St. Jacobs Farmers Market and runs trains at 10 am, 12 pm, and 2 pm from April to November. The Waterloo Station continues to operate as a Visitor &amp; Heritage Information Centre.\nAir.\nThe Region of Waterloo International Airport in nearby Breslau serves Waterloo and the surrounding region, although it is not heavily served by scheduled airlines. Most air travellers use Toronto's Lester B. Pearson International Airport or John C. Munro Hamilton International Airport. As of 2022, the Region of Waterloo International Airport has year round flights to Calgary, Canc\u00fan, Charlottetown, Deer Lake, Edmonton, Halifax, Kelowna, Vancouver, and Winnipeg. The airport has seasonal flights to Montreal and Ottawa. As of 2022, the airport's airlines are Flair Airlines, Pivot Airlines, and WestJet.\nServices.\nHealth care.\nThere are no hospitals in Waterloo, but neighbouring Kitchener has Grand River Hospital (which has a secondary site, the Freeport Campus) and St. Mary's General Hospital. Both were ranked highly for safety in a national comparison study in 2017\u20132018, but would benefit from reduced wait times. Long-term care beds are provided at numerous facilities. Grand River Hospital has a capacity of 574 beds; the Freeport location was merged into it in April 1995. St. Mary's General Hospital is a 150-bed adult acute-care facility and includes the Regional Cardiac Care Centre with two cardiovascular operating rooms, an eight-bed cardiovascular intensive care unit and 45 inpatient beds.\nRegion of Waterloo Paramedic Services and Waterloo Fire Rescue respond to medical emergencies within the city of Waterloo. Region of Waterloo Paramedic Services may transport patients to either Grand River Hospital or St. Mary's General Hospital emergency departments, depending on proximity, anticipated wait times and the type of emergency.\nFamily doctors are often in short supply and a source of great concern among residents. Recruiting efforts over the previous 15 years achieved some success as of September 2018, but needed to be continued.\nLibraries.\nThe Waterloo Public Library was founded in 1888. As of 2022, the library has 4 branches (in order of opening): the Main Branch, the Albert McCormick Branch, the John M. Harper Branch and the Eastside Branch. The Eastside Branch, opened May 7, 2022, is the newest branch built. The $10-million library is built into the existing RIM Park Manulife Sportsplex and has around 35,000 books.\nFire protection.\nFire protection and rescue services are provided by Waterloo Fire Rescue, a service of the City of Waterloo. As of 2020, there are four active fire stations in Waterloo. Waterloo Fire Rescue responds to fires, medical emergencies, car accidents and chemical incidents. (Region of Waterloo Paramedic Services also responds to medical emergencies.) When the two-tier regional government system was implemented in the early 1970s, police service was moved to the regional government, but fire service remained at the local municipality (city or township) level. From time to time, the media and interested parties raise the question of whether this service should remain at the city level, or whether there might be cost savings or service improvements if the various fire services were merged into regional fire service. A 2019 newspaper article stated that \"there would likely be no cost savings, but service would improve under [a] regionalized system,\" in the view of some former fire chiefs.\nPolicing.\nWaterloo Regional Police Service, the seventh-largest police service in the province of Ontario, provides general police service in the city of Waterloo. The Waterloo Regional Police North Division is located at 45 Columbia Street East, Waterloo. Waterloo Regional Police also serve the municipalities of Kitchener and Cambridge and the Townships of Wellesley, Wilmot, Woolwich and North Dumfries. City of Waterloo bylaws controlling matters such as parking, weeds and noise are enforced by city bylaw enforcement officers. The two universities each have special constables who are first responders to all emergencies at their respective university campuses. Special Constables may lay charges and/or make arrests under the same legal authority as police officers. As of 2019, University of Waterloo Police Service had twenty-four Special Constables. Wilfrid Laurier University also has a Special Constable Service.\nThe Ontario Provincial Police patrols provincial highways. Two homicides were reported in the Waterloo Region in 2021, neither of which was in the city of Waterloo.\nEducation.\nThe Waterloo Region District School Board is the region's public school board. As of 2022, in Waterloo, they run 21 elementary schools (see List of Waterloo Region, Ontario schools) and three secondary schools, which are Bluevale Collegiate Institute, Laurel Heights Secondary School, and Waterloo Collegiate Institute. The Waterloo Catholic District School Board is the region's catholic school board. As of 2022, in Waterloo, they run 8 elementary schools and one secondary school, which is St. David Catholic Secondary School. There are a number of private and other schools not associated with the above boards, but there are no secondary schools in Waterloo unassociated with the boards.\nWaterloo is home to the following universities and colleges: the University of Waterloo, Wilfrid Laurier University, St. Jerome's University, St. Paul's University College, Conrad Grebel University College, Renison University College, and Conestoga College (based in Kitchener but has a Waterloo campus). The University of Waterloo is a public research university that saw 37,884 students in 2022. The university has the largest post-secondary co-op program in the world and ranked 151\u2013200 in the world and 7\u20138 in Canada in the 2021 Academic Ranking of World Universities. Wilfrid Laurier University saw about 20,000 students in 2022, including its campuses in Brantford and Milton.\nMedia.\nThe \"Waterloo Region Record\" is a daily newspaper that covers the Region of Waterloo, while the \"Waterloo Chronicle\" covers the city; both are published by Metroland Media Group. There are a number of FM radio stations that reach Waterloo, (see Media in Waterloo Region#Radio) although CKMS-FM is the only to broadcast out of the city. CKGL (570 News) is the only AM radio station broadcasting from the Region. CKCO-DT (CTV Kitchener) is the only television station that broadcasts from the Region.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73274", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73274", "title": "Magnitude Comparison", "text": ""}
{"id": "73276", "revid": "50875682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73276", "title": "University of Waterloo", "text": "Public university in Ontario, Canada\nThe University of Waterloo (UWaterloo, UW, or Waterloo) is a public research university located in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada. The main campus is on of land adjacent to uptown Waterloo and Waterloo Park. The university also operates three satellite campuses and four affiliated university colleges. The university offers academic programs administered by six faculties and thirteen faculty-based schools. Waterloo operates the largest post-secondary co-operative education program in the world, with over 20,000 undergraduate students enrolled in the university's co-op program. Waterloo is a member of the U15, a group of research-intensive universities in Canada.\nThe institution originates from the Waterloo College Associate Faculties, established on 4 April 1956; a semi-autonomous entity of Waterloo College, which was an affiliate of the University of Western Ontario. This entity formally separated from Waterloo College and was incorporated as a university with the passage of the \"University of Waterloo Act\" by the Legislative Assembly of Ontario in 1959. It was established to fill the need to train engineers and technicians for Canada's growing postwar economy. It grew substantially over the next decade, adding a faculty of arts in 1960, and the College of Optometry of Ontario (now the School of Optometry and Vision Science), which moved from Toronto in 1967.\nThe university is a co-educational institution, with approximately 36,000 undergraduate and 6,200 postgraduate students enrolled there in 2020. Alumni of the university include a number of award winners, government officials, and business leaders. Waterloo's varsity teams, known as the Waterloo Warriors, compete in the Ontario University Athletics conference of the U Sports.\nHistory.\nTwentieth century.\nThe University of Waterloo traces its origins to Waterloo College (present-day Wilfrid Laurier University), the academic outgrowth of Waterloo Lutheran Seminary, which was affiliated with the University of Western Ontario since 1925. When Gerald Hagey assumed the presidency of Waterloo College in 1953, he made it his priority to procure the funds necessary to expand the institution. While the main source of income for higher education in Ontario at the time was the provincial government, the Ontario government made it clear it would not contribute to denominational colleges and universities.\nHagey soon became aware of the steps undertaken by McMaster University to make itself eligible for some provincial funding by establishing Hamilton College as a separate, non-denominational college affiliated with the university. Following that method, Waterloo College established the Waterloo College Associate Faculties on 4 April 1956, as a non-denominational board affiliated with the college. The academic structure of the Associated Faculties was originally focused on co-operative education in the applied sciences\u2014largely built around the proposals of Ira Needles. Needles proposed a different approach towards education, including both studies in the classroom and training in industry that would eventually become the basis of the university's co-operative education program. While the plan was initially opposed by the Engineering Institute of Canada and other Canadian universities, notably the University of Western Ontario, the Associated Faculties admitted its first students in July 1957.\nOn 25 January 1958, the Associated Faculties announced the purchase of over of land west of Waterloo College. By the end of the same year, the Associated Faculties opened its first building on the site, the Chemical Engineering Building.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The greatest product which we will realize from our electronic era is the better educated race. This applies to all fields \u2013 not just the field of science.\"\n \u2014 Ira Needles, 1956\nIn 1959, the Legislative Assembly of Ontario passed an act that formally split the Associated Faculties from Waterloo College, and re-established it as the University of Waterloo. The governance was modeled on the University of Toronto Act of 1906, which established a bicameral system of university government consisting of a senate, responsible for academic policy, and a board of governors exercising exclusive control over financial policy and having formal authority in all other matters. The president, appointed by the board, was to act as the institution's chief executive officer and act as a liaison between the two groups.\nThe legislative act was the result of a great deal of negotiation between Waterloo College, Waterloo College Associated Faculties, and St. Jerome's College, another denominational college in the City of Waterloo. While the agreements sought to safeguard the two denominational colleges, they also aimed at federating them with the newly established University of Waterloo. Due to disagreements with Waterloo College, the college was not formally federated with the new university. The dispute centred on a controversially worded section of the \"University of Waterloo Act, 1959\", in which the college interpreted certain sections as a guarantee it would become the Faculty of Art for the new university. This was something the Associated Faculties were not prepared to accept. As a result of the controversy, Waterloo College's entire Department of Mathematics broke from the college to join the newly established University of Waterloo, later joined by professors from the Economic, German, Modern Languages, and Russian departments. Despite this controversy, until 1960 Hagey hoped for a last-minute compromise between Waterloo College and the university. Ultimately, however, the university created its own Faculty of Arts in 1960. It later established the first Faculty of Mathematics in North America on 1 January 1967. In 1967, the world's first department of kinesiology was created. The present legislative act which defines how the university should be governed, the \"University of Waterloo Act, 1972\" was passed on 10 May 1972.\nA coat of arms has been in use by the university since 1961. The coat of arms was officially registered with the Lord Lyon King of Arms in 1987 and with the Canadian Heraldic Authority in 2001.\nIn February 1995, the former president of the university, James Downey, signed the Tri-University Group (TUG) agreement between Wilfrid Laurier University, and the University of Guelph. Signed in a period of fiscal constraint, and when ageing library systems required replacing, the TUG agreement sought to integrate the library collections and services of the three universities.\nTwenty-first century.\nIn 2001, the university announced it would develop the Waterloo Research and Technology Park in the north campus. The park was planned to house many of the high-tech industries in the area, and is supported by the university, the Regional Municipality of Waterloo, the provincial and federal governments, and Canada's Technology Triangle. The aim was to provide businesses with access to the university's faculty, co-operative education students, and alumni, as well as the university's infrastructure and resources. Groundbreaking was on 25 June 2002, with the first completed building, the Sybase campus building, opening on 26 November 2004. In 2010, the Waterloo Research and Tech Park was renamed as the David Johnston Research and Technology Park, after David Johnston, the 28th Governor General of Canada and former president of the university.\nFrom 2009 to 2012, the university managed four undergraduate programs in Dubai. The university worked in partnership with the Higher Colleges of Technology, the largest post-secondary institution in the United Arab Emirates. Discussions regarding the partnership emerged in 2004, and the Dubai campus was officially opened in September 2009. Through the partnership, the university offered undergraduate degrees in chemical engineering, civil engineering, financial analysis and risk management, and information technology management. The programs offered in Dubai took place in facilities provided by the Higher Colleges of Technology. On 30 October 2012, the university's Board of Governors decided to close the university's extension in Dubai.\nOn 29 June 2023, one professor and two students of UW were stabbed during a gender studies class. The perpetrator, a UW graduate, was charged with three counts of aggravated assault; four counts of assault with a weapon; two counts of possessing a weapon for a dangerous purpose; and mischief under $5,000. Investigators of the Waterloo Regional Police service believe it was a hate-motivated incident related to gender expression and gender identity. The perpetrator pleaded guilty to four counts on June 3, 2024: two counts of aggravated assault and one each of assault causing bodily harm and assault with a weapon.\nCampus.\nThe university's main campus lies within the city of Waterloo, Ontario. It sits on the traditional territory of the Neutral, Anishnaabeg, and Haudenosaunee peoples that is part of the Haldimand Tract, land promised to the Six Nations that includes six miles on each side of the Grand River. It is bordered by Waterloo Park to the south, Wilfrid Laurier University to the southeast, residential neighbourhoods to the northeast, east and west, and the Laurel Creek Conservation Area to the northwest. Three numbered roads also intersect the main campus: University Avenue West, Columbia Street West, and Westmount Road North. While the main campus is , the majority of the teaching facilities are centred on a ring road in its southern portion.\nThe oldest building on campus is the Graduate House, originally a farmhouse dating back to the 19th century. The oldest building which was erected for the university is the Douglas Wright Engineering Building, which was erected in 1958. A large majority of the university's buildings, and its ring road, were constructed during the 1960s. The university's main campus is divided into three major areas: South Campus, North Campus and Northwest Campus. South Campus is the academic core of the university, while North Campus holds the Research and Technology Park. Northwest Campus is the least developed area of the main campus, made up primarily of farm fields and an environmental reserve, which divides it from North Campus.\nIn addition, the university owns several other properties in Cambridge, Huntsville, Kitchener, and Stratford, Ontario. The Ion rapid transit system provides a transit connection between the main campus, and several off-campus facilities, including the university's start-up incubator program in Kitchener. \nLibraries and museums.\nThe university has four libraries, housing a total of more than 1.4 million books, as well as electronic resources including e-books, serial titles, and databases. Three libraries are on campus: the Dana Porter Library, housing material relating to arts, humanities and social science; the Davis Centre Library, housing material for engineering, mathematics and science; and the Witer Learning Resource Centre, housing material for the School of Optometry and Vision Science. The fourth library, the Musagetes Architecture Library, is in Cambridge, alongside the university's School of Architecture. The libraries of the university's affiliated colleges are also considered a part of the university's library system. Doris E. Lewis was the first University Librarian. The university's library system is also a member of the TriUniversity Group, a partnership between the University of Guelph, the University of Waterloo and Wilfrid Laurier University that provides students and researchers at all three universities with access to all of the collections and services. The group also operates the TUG Annex, a repository for less-used library resources from the three universities.\nUniversity of Waterloo also operates the Earth Sciences Museum, on campus in the Centre for Environmental Information Technology. It is mainly used as an earth-science teaching museum for local schools and natural-science interest groups in southern Ontario. The main exhibits cover the Great Lakes, rocks and minerals, dinosaurs and ice age mammals. The museum's fossil exhibit includes a complete cast of an \"Albertosaurus\" and an authentic skeleton of a cave bear. The museum also houses an interactive mining simulation tunnel which aims to teach sustainable mining practices. Also owned and operated by the university is the Museum of Vision Science, located in the university's School of Optometry building. The university had previously operated the Elliott Avedon Museum and Archive of Games, created by the Department of Recreation and Leisure Studies and previously managed by the university's Faculty of Applied Health Sciences. Due to a lack of specific academic interest, in 2009, the decision was made to close the museum and transfer the collection elsewhere.\nHousing and student facilities.\nThe university has eight student residences: the Minota Hagey Residence, UW Place, Village 1 (the university's first residence), Ron Eydt Village, Mackenzie King Village, Columbia Lake North and South, and Claudette Millar Hall. In addition to the eight main campus residences, students may also apply to live at any of the university's affiliated college residences. The first residence built was Village 1, completed in 1966. Ron Eydt Village was still known as Village 2 in 1995 but had been renamed by 2000. The largest residential village at the university is UW Place, which houses 1,300 first-year students and 350 upper-year students, while the smallest residence is the Minota Hagey Residence, which houses 70 students and is almost exclusively for upper-year students. In September 2010, 24.9 percent of the undergraduate population lived on campus, including 71.1 percent of first-year students. \nThe Student Life Centre is the centre of student governance. In 2017 ground broke on a joint 63,000 square foot expansion of the Student Life Centre and Physical Activities Complex. Built to the west of Burt Matthews Hall Green the expansion will connect all three floors with the Red North corner of the PAC providing social, fitness, study, multi-faith, dining, and bookable spaces for students. The project was initially projected to complete in Fall 2018; and was completed in September 2021.\nOff-campus facilities.\nThe university has several satellite campuses and facilities throughout Southern Ontario. The closest off-campus facilities are adjacent to the campus, with the university acquiring land and five buildings from BlackBerry Ltd in December 2013. As of February 2014, the university uses three of the buildings, and leases the other two to BlackBerry Ltd.\nThe Centre for Extended Learning in Kitchener, Ontario is a facility that is owned and managed by the university. The centre provides pre-university courses, part-time studies, online learning and professional development courses. In addition to the Centre for Extended Learning, Kitchener also holds the university's School of Pharmacy. The pharmacy building was designed by Siamak Hariri, and was completed in December 2008. While the School of Pharmacy acts as the anchor institution of this campus, other students and faculty of the university's Faculty of Applied Health Sciences also use the facilities. McMaster University's medical school makes use of the campus as its base for its Waterloo Regional Campus, with 56 of the medical school's students admitted at the regional campus in 2012. Wilfrid Laurier University's School of Social Work also uses some of the facilities available on the campus.\nThe university also operates the Stratford School of Interaction Design and Business in Stratford, Ontario. The focus for the Stratford campus is on education in digital arts and media. The idea for the Stratford campus first took shape when the City of Stratford and the university signed a memorandum in October 2006. It officially opened in September 2010. In November 2009, the university also signed a memorandum of understanding with the University of Western Ontario regarding academic initiatives at the Stratford Campus. The campus also hosted the first four Canada 3.0 forums before its move to Toronto in 2012.\nThe university's School of Architecture uses a campus in Cambridge, Ontario, on the west bank of the Grand River. The architecture campus was the idea of the Cambridge Consortium, a group of Cambridge business owners, who spearheaded the school's fundraising drive to cover a portion of the $27 million cost of creating the new campus. The school, along with its faculty and students, was moved to the new campus in September 2004. Since 1979, the School of Architecture has also operated an architecture studio in Rome, Italy in the Trastevere neighbourhood. The opportunity to work at the Trastevere studio is offered to fourth-year architecture students.\nAnother facility which is owned and managed by the university is the Waterloo Summit Centre for the Environment, in Huntsville, Ontario. It is a year-round research and teaching centre, which regularly hosts post-secondary student field courses and professional development programs, and also serves as a university outreach facility for the whole region. Close to Algonquin and Arrowhead Provincial Park, the centre's facilities are used for research in ecological restoration and conservation.\nSustainability.\nSustainability initiatives are divided between several departmental offices at the university, with the university's plant operations charged with their implementation. Prior to 2005, the management of sustainability efforts was conducted by the university's waste management coordinator. The university's sustainability initiatives are solely institution-specific, as it has not signed any national or international sustainability declaration. However, the university, along with the other members from the Council of Ontario Universities, signed a pledge in 2009 known as \"Ontario Universities Committed to a Greener World\", with the objective of transforming its campus into a model of environmental responsibility.\nThe university's School of Environment, Enterprise and Development placed first in Canada in the Corporate Knights 2011 ranking for undergraduate business programs incorporating sustainability. The university campus received a C+ grade from the Sustainable Endowments Institute on its College Sustainability Report Card for 2011. In 2021, the University of Waterloo was ranked 99th in the world, and 15th in Canada in \"Times Higher Education\" University Impact Rankings, a ranking that evaluated 1,115 universities from 94 countries/regions against the United Nations\u2019 Sustainable Development Goals. A dramatic drop from 2020's ranking of 16th in the world.\nWaterloo's Institute for Nanotechnology is Canada's largest nanotechnology institute committed to the UN Sustainable Development Goals.\nAdministration.\nThe university operates under a bicameral system of a board of governors and a senate, as legislated by the University of Waterloo Act, 1972. The Board of Governors has responsibility for the university's properties, affairs, and income. The University of Waterloo Act calls for only 36 members, each of whom must hold Canadian citizenship. However, the number of members in the board for the 2013\u20132014 academic year is 40. The Board has five \"ex officio\" members, including the university's chancellor and president, and the mayors of Kitchener and Waterloo. The other 32 members of the board are either elected or appointed by the various members of the university community, including alumni, faculty, and student body.\nThe senate establishes the educational policies of the university and makes recommendations to the board of governors in the management of the institution. The senate has 24 \"ex officio\" positions, including the university's president and chancellor, the vice-presidents, the senior dean of each faculty, the presidents of the undergraduate, graduate, and faculty associations, and the presidents and principals of the university's associated colleges. The senate's 61 other members are appointed or elected by various communities of the university including the faculty of the university, its associated colleges, the student body, and alumni.\nThe president, appointed by the board of governors, acts as the university's chief executive officer with the senate's approval, administers the affairs of the university, and acts on behalf of the board with respect to the operational management and control of the university. The president is the chair of the senate and a member of the board. The president also holds the position of vice-chancellor, assuming the duties of the chancellor during his absences or a temporary vacancy in the office. The chancellor is elected by the members of the senate for a three-year term, although eligible for renewal. The chancellor's primary duty is to preside at all convocations and present candidates for honorary degrees to the senate. Jagdeep Singh Bachher has been the chancellor since 1 July 2024. He succeeded Dominic Barton, who held the position since 27 October 2018. In March 2011, Feridun Hamdullahpur was announced as the sixth president of the university, having been interim president since October 2010.\nOn November 17, 2020, Vivek Goel was announced as the seventh president of the university. His five-year term began on July 1, 2021.\nAffiliated institutions.\nThe university also includes three semi-autonomous affiliated colleges and a federated university. Conrad Grebel University College is a Mennonite university college that was chartered in 1961 and is religiously affiliated with the Mennonite Church Eastern Canada. Renison University College is an Anglican university college chartered in 1959; it entered an affiliation with the University of Waterloo in 1960 and is religiously affiliated with the Anglican Church of Canada. St. Jerome's University is a Roman Catholic university, founded in 1865, which entered into a federation with the University of Waterloo shortly after the provincial government granted it university status in 1959. United College is a university college founded by members of the United Church of Canada in 1962. However, United now operates independently from the United Church, without any formal or legal relationship.\nFinances.\nThe university completed the 2014\u20132015 academic year with revenues of $936.240 million and expenses of $906.730 million, yielding a surplus of $29.510 million. Grants and contracts make up the largest source of revenue for the university, totaling $392.357 million, followed by academic fees at $357.889 million. Salaries make up nearly half of the university's expenses, at $439.973 million. As of 30 April 2015, the university's endowment is valued at $335.731 million.\nAcademics.\nWaterloo is a publicly funded research university, and a member of the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada. It functions on a term-based system, with fall, winter and spring terms. Undergraduate programs comprise the majority of the school's enrolment, made up of 24,377 full-time and part-time undergraduate students. The university conferred 5,741 bachelor's degrees and first professional degrees, 1,605 master's degrees, 332 doctoral degrees, during the 2016\u20132017 academic school year. The university is organized into six faculties, which operate a combined total of thirteen schools and over fifty academic departments.\nFinancial aid available to students includes the Ontario Student Assistance Program and Canada Student Loans and Grants through the federal and provincial governments. The financial aid provided may come in the form of loans, grants, bursaries, scholarships, fellowships, debt reduction, interest relief, and work programs.\nThe university has also partnered with other institutions for the purposes of jointly operating a graduate program. The Balsillie School of International Affairs (BSIA) is a graduate school and research centre operated in partnership with the Centre for International Governance Innovation and Wilfrid Laurier University. The Perimeter's Scholar International program is another graduate program operated in partnership with the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, in which its graduates receive a Master of Science from the University of Waterloo. The university also offers its students the opportunity to earn credits towards their degree while studying abroad through student exchange and international internship programs. The university has exchange agreements with over 100 institutions outside Canada.\nCo-operative education.\nThe university operates the largest post-secondary co-operative education (co-op) program in the world with over 20,000 undergraduate students. For co-op students, each term acts as either a study term or a work term depending on their co-op sequencing, typically for the entire length of their degree. Co-op work terms are mandatory for all undergraduate engineering programs, as well as several arts and mathematics programs. Engineering students are required to complete five out their six scheduled work terms to graduate from their program, while students from other faculties typically need to complete four work terms. Engineering students alternate between school and work terms, completing a total of eight study terms and six work terms in the span of four and two-thirds years. However, some programs have unique co-op streams where consecutive school and work terms are scheduled near the end of the program, giving the students the opportunity to apply for eight-month positions.\nStudents are responsible for securing their work placement for each of their co-op terms. This includes applying for positions and attending interviews during their study terms. Scheduling conflicts between interviews and exams are actively avoided but still possible, in which case one or the other are rescheduled, with the examination taking precedence. In order for the student to receive their co-op credit, their work term must meet a number of conditions. This includes being full-time, that it is related to the student's field of study, that it lasts for the full 16-week duration, and that it is compensated with at least the minimum wage in the location of work. Exceptions can be made for some of these conditions; for example, first work terms often do not have to be related to the student's field of study, especially if the student has had difficulty securing a position.\nAt the end of the work term, the employer submits a performance evaluation for the student which is presented to the student's future employers during their next application stage. As of 2018,[ [update]] the university reports that its co-op students earn an average of CA$ per work term when working in Canada. However, co-op earnings vary greatly depending on field of study, how many work terms the student has already completed, and where the work term takes place. The university's highest earning undergraduate co-op students in 2018 were mathematics undergraduates (including computer science and computing and financial management) on their sixth work term and were working in the United States, who made an average of US$28,600 (C$38,000) per four-month work term. Several programs where co-op is mandatory report high levels of employment from their graduation, with 98 percent of graduates from the Accounting and Financial Management, Math/CPA, Biotech/CPA, and Master of Accounting programs reporting that they found employment within six months after graduating. In the same year, the graduates of the university's Master of Taxation co-op program reported that 100 percent of its students secured full-time employment prior to graduating.\nRankings and reputation.\nThe 2024 QS World University Rankings ranked the university 115th in the world and fifth in Canada. The 2024 Times Higher Education World University Rankings placed Waterloo 158 in the world and 7 in Canada, and between 126 and 150 in its 2023 World Reputation Rankings. In the \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" 2022\u201323 ranking, the university placed 191st in the world, and eighth in Canada, tied with the University of Ottawa. In the 2022 Academic Ranking of World Universities, the university ranked 151\u2013200 in the world and 7\u20138 in Canada.\nIn terms of national rankings, \"Maclean's\" 2023 university rankings ranked Waterloo third in the magazine's comprehensive university category. The university also placed second in \"Maclean's\" 2023 reputational survey of Canadian universities.\nThe university also placed in a number of rankings that evaluated a graduate's employment prospects. In QS's 2022 graduate employability ranking, Waterloo ranked 24th in the world, and second in Canada. In the Times Higher Education 2022 graduate employability ranking, Waterloo was ranked 191st in the world, and ninth in Canada. In an employability survey published by \"The New York Times\" in October 2011, when CEOs and chairpersons were asked to select the top universities which they recruited from, the university placed 108th in the world, and seventh in Canada. In 2014, a study from Riviera Partners found that the University of Waterloo had the third-most hired undergraduate candidates in Silicon Valley. In 2016, Startup Compass found that University of Waterloo alumni were the second-most frequently hired in small and medium-sized companies in Silicon Valley. Dr. Steven Woods, engineering director at Google in Canada, said in 2013 that \"the University of Waterloo is one of Google's largest three or four recruiting universities year-over-year [worldwide], along with MIT and Carnegie Mellon.\" In 2014, \"Business Insider\" found via LinkedIn data that the University of Waterloo has the fourth-most alumni working at Facebook, and the third-most alumni working at Amazon.\nResearch.\nThe University of Waterloo is a member of the U15, a group that represents 15 Canadian research universities. In 2018, Research Infosource ranked Waterloo 12th on their list of top 50 Canadian research universities, with a sponsored research income (external sources of funding) of $189.333 million in 2017. In the same year, the university's faculty averaged a sponsored research income of $163,100, while graduate students averaged a sponsored research income of $34,700. Research funds comes from private, and public sources. In 2019, the university has received over C$15 million in research funding from Huawei.\nWaterloo's research performance has been noted several bibliometric university rankings, which uses citation analysis to evaluates the impact a university has on academic publications. In 2019, the Performance Ranking of Scientific Papers for World Universities ranked Waterloo 242nd in the world, and 10th in Canada. The University Ranking by Academic Performance 2018\u201319 rankings placed the university 191st in the world, and 10th in Canada.The university operates and manages 41 research centres and institutes, including the Centre for Applied Cryptographic Research, the Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology, the Centre for Education in Mathematics and Computing, the Institute for Quantum Computing, and the Centre for Theoretical Neuroscience. Official recognition and designation of all centres and institutes requires the approval of the university's Senate. On 6 April 2018, the University of Waterloo announced the launching of its Artificial Intelligence Institute.\nThe university has undertaken several research partnerships with other institutions. In 2007, the Balsillie School of International Affairs (BSIA) was established as a graduate school and research centre in partnership with the University of Waterloo. BSIA operates three research centres relating to public governance and public policy. In 2016, Facebook hardware development division announced a partnership with Waterloo, along with 16 other post-secondary institutions, as Facebook explores new revenue streams in virtual reality, cybersecurity, and other areas of research. In 2019, Microsoft announced a partnership with Waterloo's Artificial Intelligence Institute worth $115 million over five years as part of Microsoft's broader AI For Good Initiative. Waterloo's Artificial Intelligence Institute is an interdisciplinary initiative involving the researchers from faculties of arts, engineering, mathematics, and computer science.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic, researchers at the Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology worked in collaboration with SiO2 Innovation Labs to develop a coating that kills the virus upon impact. The antiviral coating could be applied to all personal protective equipment and high-touch surfaces. This research was supported by both the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and Mitacs. The school also received a $499,935 grant from the Public Health Agency of Canada's Immunization Partnership Fund to engage health care professionals and community leaders to combat COVID-19 misinformation and increase acceptance of COVID-19 vaccines.\nAdmission.\nThe requirements for admission differ between students from Ontario, students from other provinces in Canada, and international students, due to the lack of uniformity in marking schemes. The minimum averages required for these programs are determined each year based on the number and qualification of applicants and the number of available spaces. As of 2021, the secondary school average for first year, full-time students at the University of Waterloo was at 92.7 percent. In 2023, 65 percent of new students at Waterloo had a high school average equal to or greater than 90 percent, and 33.2 percent had an average equal to or greater than 95 percent.\nIn the case of admission into the Engineering and Math faculties, there is a large weighting given to the applicant's supplementary application, extracurricular involvement, adjustment factors for individual high schools, and an admissions video interview. Thus, it is possible to receive an offer with an average much lower than the mean admission average. The retention rate of the university's first-time, full-time first-year students in 2022 was 93.6 percent.\nStudent life.\nOrganizations.\nThe university's two main student unions are the Waterloo Undergraduate Student Association (WUSA) for undergraduate students, and the Graduate Student Association (GSA) for graduate students. Founded in 1967 as the Federation of Students, WUSA operates four businesses, twelve student services, oversees over 200 accredited student clubs; in addition to operating other student programs and events. Among the WUSA student groups is the Glow Centre for Sexual and Gender Diversity, Canada's oldest, continually running university-based 2SLGBTQ+ group.\nEach of the university's faculties has a student society which represent and provide services for the students in their respective faculties. Services include online exam banks, resume critiques, and technical skills workshops. Some student societies also operate a student deal discount program and one to two shops selling coffee and food at low prices. Each faculty also operates a student-run endowment fund, which fund student design teams, laboratory upgrades, and services for their respective student societies.\nGreek Life.\nAs of January 2015, neither the university administration nor the two main student unions recognize fraternities or sororities. Fraternities and Sororities at the University of Waterloo, though not formally sanctioned by the institution, constitute a facet of campus life.\nJournalism.\nThe three main student publications on campus are \"Imprint\", the university's official student newspaper, \"mathNEWS\", the Math Society's free-form publication, and \"The Iron Warrior\", the Engineering Society's newspaper. \"Imprint\" replaced \"The Chevron\" as the official student newspaper in 1979, and publishes a monthly print magazine along with regular online content. \"mathNEWS\" and \"The Iron Warrior\" publish biweekly in print and online throughout the year.\nThe university formerly included a student-funded campus radio station, CKMS-FM. The student union withdrew financial support for the stations' operations in 2008 following several referendums, and CKMS transitioned to a community radio model.\nmathNEWS.\n\"mathNEWS\" is the freeform student publication of the undergraduate mathematics students of the University of Waterloo as represented by MathSoc (the Mathematics Society of the University of Waterloo). Labeling itself as \"Waterloo's Bastion of Erudite Thought\", mathNEWS is published biweekly, with occasional deviations and special editions. The paper is varied in its content, with think pieces, local updates, and exercises in creative writing, usually through a humorous lens. Though it has a cult following, the paper gained worldwide attention in February 2024 after publishing an article exposing the usage of facial recognition in on-campus vending machines.\n\"mathNEWS\" has been in publication since January 25, 1973, when it was published on a weekly basis, and was technically a club under MathSoc. On February 14, 1975, it switched to a biweekly publication schedule, which it maintains as of April 1, 2024.\nAthletics.\nThe university's sports teams are known as the Waterloo Warriors. They participate in the Canadian Interuniversity Sports' Ontario University Athletics conference for most varsity sports. Varsity teams include badminton, baseball, basketball, cross country, curling, field hockey, figure skating, Canadian football, golf, hockey, Nordic skiing, rugby, soccer, squash, swimming, track and field, tennis and volleyball. The athletics program at the university dates back to 1957, when students of Waterloo College Associate Faculties participated in the sports program of Waterloo College. The university had its own independent team when the Associate Faculties officially became the University of Waterloo. The university's varsity teams and the university's recreational sports programs are operated and managed by the Department of Athletics and Recreational Activity.\nThe university has a number of athletic facilities open to varsity teams and other students. Seating 5,400 people, Warrior Field is the university's largest stadium by seating capacity; and is used as the home field for the varsity field hockey and football teams, and hosts the university's recreational flag football and soccer activities. Prior to the completion of Warrior Field in 2008, the university's varsity teams used Seagram Stadium as their home stadium. Seagram Stadium was built by the university's predecessor, Waterloo College Associate Faculties, and remained under the ownership of the university until 1974, when it was sold to the City of Waterloo. However, the university continued to use Seagram Stadium until 2008.\nOther facilities include the Physical Activity Complex, which houses two gymnasiums, beach volleyball courts, squash rooms, and a swimming pool, and is also home to the university's varsity badminton, basketball, squash, swimming and volleyball teams. The Columbia Ice Field was constructed in 1983 and houses the university's hockey team home rink, with a seating capacity of 700. The Ice Field has been expanded twice, in 1990 and 2003, and now includes three gyms and a number of fitness centres. Including the football field, the university manages seven outdoor playing fields, with Fields 1 and 2 reserved for the varsity soccer and rugby teams, while portions of Field 3 are used as a baseball field. The rest of the fields are used by the university's recreational sports programs.\nEntrepreneurship.\nThe University of Waterloo operates a startup incubator for its students, faculty, and alumni called the Velocity program. With no fees or equity, it is the largest free startup incubator in the world. It offers office space for up to 120 startup companies, as well as a wet laboratory, assembly space, workshop, and prototyping lab. The program also provides business mentorship to its resident companies and to Waterloo students as well as partnerships with researchers at the university's main campus. Velocity provides some students and startups with grants, previously valued from C$5,000 to C$25,000. As of 2019, the $25,000 grant was removed and companies in Velocity may now pitch their ideas to instead receive C$50,000 in funding, with equity stakes from investors. Companies that emerged from the Velocity program include Maluuba.\nIn addition to the resources provided by Velocity, alumni regularly receive funding for their startups from United States accelerators. Companies Waterloo alumni have founded with the aid of Silicon Valley accelerator Y Combinator include Pebble and Bufferbox. Y Combinator founder Paul Graham and president Sam Altman have both noted the University of Waterloo has stood out to them more than any other school during Y Combinator applications.\nIn 2017, \"Pitchbook Data\" ranked the University of Waterloo's undergraduate program fourth for schools that have the greatest number of alumni who have founded unicorn startups. As of the same year, Waterloo students and alumni have raised a cumulative US$3.662 billion in venture capital. The current unicorn startups from Waterloo are Wish, Instacart, Kik Messenger, Pivotal Software, and Storm8.\nTraditions.\nSome traditions at the University of Waterloo include the University of Waterloo Aphrodite Project, an annual student-run matchmaking event where thousands of students complete a psychology questionnaire and get matched with their most ideal date on campus.\nInsignia and other representations.\nThe University of Waterloo's coat of arms has been used as a symbol of the institution since 1961, with the coat of arms also being used in the logo of the university, and its academic faculties and departments. The university's colours are black, gold, and white, and may be found on the university's coat of arms.\nThe school also maintains official colours to represent the academic faculties of the university. They consist of pink for the Faculty of Math, purple for the Faculty of Engineering, blue for the Faculty of Science, teal for the Faculty of Health, green for the Faculty of Environment, orange for the Faculty of Arts, and red for other schools and satellite campuses operated by the university. Other objects have also been used to represent the faculties of the university. For example, mathematics students have used pink ties to represent their faculty since 1968, when a pink tie was placed on the exterior of the Mathematics &amp; Computer Building during the building's opening, while engineering students use a pipe wrench made by Ridgid as their mascot since 1968. A copy of the statue of \"Porcellino\" at the university's Modern Languages Building is also used as a mascot for the Faculty of Arts. The statue was donated to the university in 1978, and was placed at the Modern Languages Building. Other mascots that represent the university's faculties include a blue dinosaur for the Faculty of Science, a kangaroo for the Faculty of Health, and a banana for the Faculty of Environment.\nCoat of arms.\nThe university's coat of arms was first used by the university in October 1961, but was only officially granted by the Lord Lyon King of Arms in August 1987. It was not registered with the Canadian Heraldic Authority until 15 February 2001. Four variations of the coat of arms existed. The first was used from 1961 to 1996, when the second bright-yellow shield using slightly different shaped lions was introduced. The yellow background was dulled in 2000, and finally, the original lions were reintroduced in 2010 in conjunction with the attempt to replace the use of the coat of arms with a futuristic \"W\" logo. The new logo was eventually rejected after student opposition.\nThe red-on-gold lions on the university's arms were adopted from those of Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington, who defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo. The City of Waterloo was named after an area just south of Brussels, Belgium, where the battle occurred. The chevron on the arms was taken from the arms of Herbert Kitchener, 1st Earl Kitchener, Field Marshal with the British Army during World War I. The black and white pattern used on the chevron was based on the colours of Prussia, as homage to the German heritage of the area. The City of Kitchener was originally known as Berlin, but was renamed after Earl Kitchener in 1916 during World War I.\nMotto and songs.\nThe university's Latin motto is \"Concordia cum veritate\", translated as \"In Harmony with Truth\". It was introduced along with the university coat of arms in October 1961.\nA number of songs are commonly played and sung at various events such as commencement, convocation, and athletic contests. The main song of the university is known as the \"Black and White and Gold\". The words were written by K. D. Fryer and H. F. Davis, while the music was composed by Alfred Kunz.\nNotable alumni and faculty.\nOver 221,000 people have graduated from the university, and now reside in over 150 countries. Waterloo graduates have accumulated a number of awards, such as George Elliott Clarke, recipient of the Governor General's Award; William Reeves, recipient of an Academy Award, and a number of Rhodes Scholarships. Two members of the university have received the Nobel Prize. In 1999, Robert Mundell was awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for his work in monetary dynamics and optimum currency areas. In 2018, university faculty member Donna Strickland was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for her work in laser physics. Other notable awards and positions bestowed on people affiliated with the university includes two Canada Excellence Research Chair laureates, five Killam Prize winners, 74 Canada Research Chairs, and 83 Fellows to the Royal Society of Canada.\nA number of business leaders have worked or studied at Waterloo. Examples include David I. McKay, president and CEO of the Royal Bank of Canada, Kevin O\u2019Leary, founder of SoftKey, John Baker, founder of Desire2Learn, David Cheriton, co-founder and chief scientist of Arista Networks, Mike Lazaridis, co-founder and former co-CEO of Research in Motion (now BlackBerry Ltd), Prem Watsa, chairman of Fairfax Financial and a former chancellor of the university, Steven Woods, co-founder of NeoEdge Networks and Quack.com and co-founders of Waterloo Maple, Keith Geddes and Gaston Gonnet. Gonnet was also the co-founder of OpenText Corporation. Several faculty members and students have also gained local and national prominence in government. David Johnston, the former president of Waterloo, served as the 28th Governor General of Canada from 2010 to 2017.\nA number of the university's faculty and students have also gained prominence in the field of computing sciences. Examples include QNX operating systems co-creators Gordon Bell and Dan Dodge, Rasmus Lerdorf, the creator of the PHP scripting language, Matei Zaharia, the creator of Apache Spark, Gordon Cormack, the co-creator of the Dynamic Markov compression algorithm, Ric Holt, co-creator of several programming languages, most notably Turing, Jack Edmonds, a computer scientist, and developer of the Blossom algorithm, and the Edmonds' algorithm, Vitalik Buterin, the founder of Ethereum, and William Thomas Tutte, a World War II codebreaker who cracked the Nazi high command's Lorenz Cypher.\nGraduates from the university have also risen to prominence in other fields. Heather Moyse, a graduate from the kinesiology program, is a prominent Canadian athlete and two-time Olympic bobsleigh gold medalist. Moyse has represented Canada in international bobsleigh, rugby and track cycling competitions. Graduate of the Rhetoric and Professional Writing program, Rupi Kaur is a Canadian poet, writer, illustrator. Her book of poetry, Milk and Honey, has spent over a year on \"The New York Times\"' bestsellers list, reaching No. 1 in January 2017. George Elliott Clarke, who served as the Poet Laureate of Toronto from 2012 to 2015 and as the 2016\u20132017 Canadian Parliamentary Poet Laureate, graduated with an English degree.\nOn 2 October 2018, Donna Strickland, an associate professor at the Physics and Astronomy Department, was awarded the Nobel Prize in physics. Strickland is the third woman to have ever been awarded the prize in physics. This was the first Nobel prize for a member of the university's faculty. Strickland was honoured for being half of the team to discover chirped pulse amplification, a technique that underpins today's short-pulse, high-intensity lasers. \"Scientific American\" explained the practical aspects of the invention as it applies in the most noteworthy application: it allows for \"ultrabrief, ultrasharp beams can be used to make extremely precise cuts, so their technique is now used in laser machining and enables doctors to perform millions of corrective\" laser eye surgeries.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73277", "revid": "1319989928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73277", "title": "Island of Montreal", "text": "Island in Quebec, Canada\nThe Island of Montreal (, ) is an island in southwestern Quebec, Canada, which is the site of a number of municipalities, including most of the city of Montreal, and is the most populous island in Canada as well as the world's most populous freshwater island. It is the main island of the Hochelaga Archipelago at the confluence of the Saint Lawrence and Ottawa rivers.\nName.\nThe first French name for the island was \"l'ille de Vilmenon\", noted by Samuel de Champlain in a 1616 map, and derived from the sieur de Vilmenon, a patron of the founders of Quebec at the court of Louis XIII. However, by 1632 Champlain referred to the \"Isle de Mont-real\" in another map. The island derived its name from Mount Royal (French \"Mont Royal\", then pronounced ), and gradually spread its name to the town, which had originally been called Ville-Marie.\nIn Kanien\u2019k\u00e9ha, the island is called Tiohti\u00e0:ke tsi ionhw\u00e9ntsare ('broken in two', referring to the Lachine Rapids to the island's southwest) or Otsir\u00e0:ke (meaning 'on the fire'). In Ojibwe, the land is called Mooniyaang, named for the first stop in the great Anishinaabe migration from Dawnland (the Maritimes) to the Great Lakes.\nPhysical geography.\nThe island is approximately long and wide at its widest point, and has a shoreline of . It is the second largest island in the Saint Lawrence River, after Anticosti Island in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence. The Island of Montreal is the largest island in the Hochelaga Archipelago, which is formed by the confluence of the Ottawa and St. Lawrence rivers.\nNear the Ottawa shore at the western end of island, the Ottawa River widens into Lac des Deux-Montagnes. A natural watercourse there, between the island and \u00cele Perrot, has been improved by the island's Sainte-Anne-de-Bellevue Canal. These waterways, connecting Lac des Deux-Montagnes with Lake Saint-Louis, constitute one of the places where the Ottawa flows into the St. Lawrence.\nNorth of the island's western end, Lac des Deux-Montagnes flows into Rivi\u00e8re des Prairies, still part of the Ottawa. The Prairies separates the island from the other major part of the Hochelaga Archipelago including \u00cele Bizard and \u00cele J\u00e9sus. After coursing about , the Prairie, at the northeastern tip of the island, joins the St. Lawrence.\nThe St. Lawrence coast of the island faces a variable waterway. In the southwest, the St. Lawrence River widens into Lake Saint-Louis as it approaches the island. Around a southern point near the center of the island, the St. Lawrence narrows into the Lachine Rapids, then widens into the Bassin de La Prairie past that southern point, and narrows again at the Montreal neighborhood of Cite Du Havre before flowing towards Quebec City and the Atlantic Ocean. The Lachine Canal on the island bypasses this complex part of the river. Neighboring islands in the St. Lawrence include Saint Helen's Island, Notre Dame Island, and Nuns' Island.\nThe topography of the island has been significantly altered by human activity, as evidenced by historical maps that name a lake St. Pierre in the island. This lake, and several other watercourses, have been drained or covered over as the city developed, while areas on the island's shores have been reclaimed and extended. The southwest of the island is separated by the Lachine Canal between Lachine and Montreal's Old Port; this portion of the island is partially divided further by the Canal de l'Aqueduc, running roughly parallel to the Lachine Canal, beginning in the borough of LaSalle and continuing between the boroughs of Le Sud-Ouest and Verdun.\nMost of the bedrock of the island consists of Chazy limestone, with some Utica shale. At the centre of the island stand the three peaks of Mount Royal, a volcanic intrusion (not an extinct volcano, contrary to popular belief). This short mountain (elevation is a member of, and gives its name to, the Monteregian Hills.\nHuman geography.\nThe island of Montreal is the major component of the territory of the city of Montreal, along with \u00cele Bizard, Saint Helen's Island, Notre Dame Island, Nuns' Island, and some 69 smaller islands. With a population of 2,014,221 inhabitants (22% of the population of Qu\u00e9bec), it is by far the most populous island in Canada. It is also the 6th most populous island of the Americas and the 37th most populated island on Earth. In addition, it is the world's most populous island surrounded by fresh water. Montreal and the other municipalities on the island compose the administrative region of Montr\u00e9al. The area of the Urban agglomeration of Montreal, which includes the Island of Montreal and several other smaller islands, is .).\nThe crossings which connect the island to its surroundings are some of the busiest bridges in the country and the world. The Champlain Bridge and the Jacques Cartier Bridge together accommodate 101 million vehicle crossings a year.\nMunicipalities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransportation.\nThe island of Montreal is a hub for the Qu\u00e9bec autoroute system, and is served by Qu\u00e9bec autoroutes A-10 (known as the Bonaventure Expressway on the island of Montreal), A-15 (aka the Decarie Expressway south of the A-40 and the Laurentian autoroute to the north of it), A-13 (aka autoroute Chomedey), A-20, A-25, A-40 (part of the Trans-Canada Highway system, and known as \"The Metropolitan\" or simply \"The Met\" in its elevated mid-town section), A-520, and R-136 (aka the Ville-Marie autoroute). Many of these autoroutes are frequently congested at rush hour. However, in recent years, the government has acknowledged this problem and is working on long-term solutions to alleviate the congestion. One such example is the extension of Quebec Autoroute 30 on Montreal's south shore, which will serve as a bypass. Today's existing highways have been planned in the 1960s as part of a grid like transport system.\nNotably, turning right on red on the island is prohibited, and signage at entry points to the island indicates as such.\nPolitics.\nProvincial riding.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNote.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73281", "revid": "2496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73281", "title": "Postsurrealism", "text": ""}
{"id": "73282", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73282", "title": "Time Zone", "text": ""}
{"id": "73284", "revid": "8087765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73284", "title": "Post-surrealism", "text": "Post-surrealism is a movement that arose in Southern California in 1934 when Helen Lundeberg and Lorser Feitelson wrote a manifesto explaining their desire to use art to convey the relationship between the perceptual and the conceptual.\nSometimes this term is used to refer to art movement related to or influenced by surrealism, which occurred after a so-called period of \"historical surrealism\". According to an article on the website \"acearchive.org\", some surrealists have claimed that the term is unnecessary, because surrealism continues to the present day.\nModern-day surrealist activity is sometimes called \"post surrealism\" by advocates of the idea that surrealism is \"dead\".\nHistory.\nBoth Lundeberg and Feitelson participated in a showing of art for the Los Angeles Art Association on Wilshire Boulevard in 1954. Along with Stephen Longstreet and Elise Cavanna, the artists whose paintings were presented were known collectively as \"Functionists West\". Feitelson and Cavanna showed only non-objective works. Both artists employed flat-colored and near geometrical shapes.\nPost-Surrealism was an American spin on the European-born art movement of the 20th Century. Beginning in the 1930s, artists searched for a style that would differentiate themselves from the dreamlike surrealism of Europe and more sub-conscious, earlier movements of Romanticism and Modernism. This new form of \"Americana Dream\" art began in Los Angeles, California. The cities' fanciful, other-worldly architecture and extravagant city-scape provided ample inspiration for burgeoning artists. Other cities such as San Francisco, New York, and Dallas became hotbeds for these creators.\nWhile exhibiting in California in 1934, Lorser Feitelson and Helen Lundberg displayed their work under the name post-surrealism. For the first time, artists were able to separate themselves through their own name, and even formed a Surrealism group which boasted such great artists as Philip Guston, Reuben Kadish, Knud Merrild, and Grace Clements.\nAs a social movement as well as art, the works being created at this time reflected the prevalent issues throughout the country. Undoubtedly, the war was a major factor in the surrealism movement. Although the works which focused on these events were surrealist, they are now classified as Social-surrealism. Dal\u00ed influenced many social surrealists, including O. Louis Guglielmi, James Guy, Walter Quirt and David Smith, whose techniques can be seen in all of the aforementioned artists' works.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "73285", "revid": "120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73285", "title": "Fu-Manchu", "text": ""}
{"id": "73286", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73286", "title": "Type 1 font", "text": ""}
{"id": "73288", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73288", "title": "Montreal metro", "text": ""}
{"id": "73293", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73293", "title": "Steve Cokely", "text": "American activist (1952\u20132012)\nSteve Cokely (June 17, 1952 \u2013 April 11, 2012) was an American political researcher and lecturer who lectured nationally on political and economic issues, especially to the Black American community.\nOverview.\nCokely lectured at many college campuses nationally, and was also known for his conspiracy theories involving a Black Male elite organization known as the Sigma Pi Phi and, along with Mauricelm-Lei Millere, the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. by the hands of Rev. Jesse Jackson and the CIA.\nChicago and anti-semitism charges.\nCokely was assistant to the special committee on rules under Chicago Mayor Harold Washington. He gained notoriety when he served as special assistant to Eugene Sawyer, who became mayor after Washington's death in 1987.\nCokely was criticized for teaching that Jewish doctors were using the AIDS virus in an attempted genocide against Africans. His comments created a nationally publicized controversy in 1988, and he was dismissed from his position as aide to Sawyer.\nWhen, in 1990, Illinois Governor James Thompson signed an agreement to open an Israeli Aircraft Industries plant in Rockford, Cokely was an outspoken opponent. He argued that Black leaders in Illinois should oppose Israeli war industries because of their for the apartheid system in South Africa.\n\"Our Roots Run Deep\" appearance.\nCokely gained the national spotlight again in 1996 after he was scheduled to speak at \"Our Roots Run Deep\", a Black History Month lecture series in New York City hosted by the Warner Music Group. Also scheduled were Al Sharpton, Jimmy Castor, Hannibal Lokumbe, Dick Gregory, Conrad Tillard, and Mauricelm-Lei Millere, both prominent Nation of Islam members. The Jewish Defense Organization objected, organizing a call-in campaign to Warner Brothers and threatening a boycott. The Anti-Defamation League and the \"New York Post\" also objected to Cokely (as well as Sharpton and Tillard/Muhammad) speaking at the event. Warner removed Cokely, Millere, and Tillard without issuing a press release.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73295", "revid": "23001976", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73295", "title": "Burleigh Grimes", "text": "American baseball player and manager (1893\u20131985)\nBurleigh Arland Grimes (August 18, 1893 \u2013 December 6, 1985) was an American professional baseball player and manager, and the last pitcher officially permitted to throw the spitball. Grimes made the most of this advantage, as well as his unshaven, menacing presence on the mound, which earned him the nickname \"Ol' Stubblebeard.\" In his career, Grimes won 270 games, with 190 of them occurring in the 1920s, the most for all pitchers in the decade. He pitched in the World Series four times in his nineteen-season career and was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1964. A decade earlier, he had been inducted into the Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame.\nEarly life.\nBorn in Emerald, Wisconsin, Grimes was the first child of Cecil \"Nick\" Grimes, a farmer and former day laborer, and Ruth Tuttle, the daughter of a former Wisconsin legislator. Having previously played baseball for several local teams, Nick Grimes managed the Clear Lake Yellow Jackets and taught his son how to play the game early in life. Burleigh Grimes also participated in boxing as a child.\nGrimes threw and batted right-handed, and was listed as tall and . He made his professional debut in 1912 for the Eau Claire Commissioners of the Minnesota\u2013Wisconsin League. From almost the beginning of his career, he threw a spitball, using slippery elm to alter the baseball's face. He played in Ottumwa, Iowa, in 1913 for the Ottumwa Packers in the Central Association.\nMLB career.\nGrimes played for the Pittsburgh Pirates in 1916 and 1917. In 1917, he lost 13 straight decisions. Before the 1918 season, he was sent to the Brooklyn Dodgers in a multiplayer trade. When the spitball was banned in 1920, he was named as one of 17 established pitchers who were allowed to continue to throw the pitch. According to \"Baseball Digest\", the Phillies were able to hit him because they knew when he was throwing the spitter.\nHe then pitched for the New York Giants (1927), the Pirates again (1928\u20131929), the Boston Braves (1930) and the St. Louis Cardinals (1930-1931). With the Pirates in 1928, he posted a 25\u201314 record, posting the most wins, complete games, shutouts, and innings pitched of any NL pitcher. In the 1931 World Series, despite suffering a dislocated vertebra before Game 7, Grimes pitched &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;8+1\u20443 innings, earning the final win in the Cardinals' series victory. He was traded to the Chicago Cubs before the 1932 season in exchange for Hack Wilson and Bud Teachout. He returned to the Cardinals in 1933 and 1934, then moved to the Pirates (1934) and the New York Yankees (1934). Grimes was nicknamed \"Ol' Stubblebeard\", related to his habit of not shaving on days in which he was going to pitch.\nGrimes was a very good hitting pitcher in his major league career, posting a .248 batting average (380-for-1535) with 157 runs, 62 doubles, 11 triples, 2 home runs and 168 RBI. He also drew 69 bases on balls. He had nine seasons with 10 or more RBIs, with a high of 16 in 1920 and 1928. In four World Series appearances (1920, 1930\u20131932) he hit .316 (6-for-19) with 1 run and 2 RBI.\nAt the time of his retirement, he was the last player who was legally allowed to throw a spitball, as he was one of 17 spitballers permitted to throw the pitch after it was otherwise outlawed in 1920. Baseball historian Frank Russo called him \"baseball's most aggressive spitballer\". Grimes had acquired a lasting field reputation for his temperament. He was known for wanting to win in any way possible. Prior to a game against the Giants late in 1924, Grimes organized a team meeting and said, \"Anyone who doesn't want to play today's game to win, let me know right now.\" Then, on his first pitch, he knocked down a Giant. He is listed in the \"Baseball Hall of Shame\" series for having thrown a ball at the batter in the on-deck circle. The only two batters Grimes apparently could not intimidate were Hall of Famers Frankie Frisch and Paul Waner. If Grimes threw a close pitch to them, the batters usually followed it up with a hard-hit line drive. Grimes's friends and supporters note that he was consistently a kind man when off the diamond. Others claim he showed a greedy attitude to many people who 'got on his bad side.' He would speak mainly only to his best friend Ivy Olson in the dugout, and would pitch only to a man named Mathias Schroeder before games. Schroeder's identity was not well known among many Dodger players, as many say he was just 'a nice guy from the neighborhood.' Dodger manager Wilbert Robinson did not get along well with Grimes, using a clubhouse attendant to tell Grimes when he pitched so that he could talk to Grimes as little as possible.\nGrimes had a total of 36 Major League teammates who would later be elected to the Hall of Fame. No other Hall of Famer had more Hall of Fame teammates.\nPost-playing career.\nGrimes moved to the minor leagues in 1935 as a player-manager for the Bloomington Bloomers of the Illinois\u2013Indiana\u2013Iowa League. He started 21 games for the team, recording a 2.34 ERA and a 10\u20135 record. He did not pitch again after that season, moving on to manage the Louisville Colonels of the American Association.\nGrimes was the manager of the Dodgers in 1937\u201338. He followed Casey Stengel's term as Dodgers manager. He compiled a two-year record of 131-171 (.434), with his teams finishing sixth and seventh respectively in the National League. Babe Ruth was one of Grimes's coaches. Leo Durocher was the team's shortstop in 1937 and a coach in 1938. When Grimes was fired by general manager Larry MacPhail after the 1938 season, Durocher was hired to replace him. MacPhail said the team's morale had not been right for a long period of time.\nGrimes remained in baseball for many years as a minor league manager and a scout. He scouted for the Yankees, Athletics, and Orioles.\nHe managed the Toronto Maple Leafs of the International League from 1942 to 1944, and again in 1952 and 1953, winning the pennant in 1943.\nAs a scout with the Baltimore Orioles, Grimes discovered Jim Palmer and Dave McNally.\nGrimes also assisted in managing the Independence Yankees in Independence, Kansas in 1948 and 1949, where Mickey Mantle started his professional career in 1949.\nLater life.\nGrimes was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1964.\nGrimes died following a protracted battle with cancer at age 92 on December 6, 1985, in Clear Lake, Wisconsin. His wife Lillian survived him. He is buried in the Clear Lake Cemetery.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73297", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73297", "title": "Roller skate", "text": ""}
{"id": "73298", "revid": "14356485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73298", "title": "Tobacco smoking", "text": "Practice of burning tobacco and breathing the resulting smoke\nTobacco smoking is the practice of burning tobacco and ingesting the resulting smoke. The smoke may be inhaled, as is done with cigarettes, or released from the mouth, as is done with pipes and cigars. The practice is believed to have begun as early as 5000\u20133000 BC in Mesoamerica and South America. Tobacco was introduced to Eurasia in the late 17th century by European colonists, where it followed common trade routes. The practice encountered criticism from its first import into the Western world onward but embedded itself in certain strata of several societies before becoming widespread upon the introduction of automated cigarette-rolling apparatus.\nSmoking is the most common method of consuming tobacco, and tobacco is the most common substance smoked. The agricultural product is often mixed with additives and then combusted. The resulting smoke, which contains various active substances, the most significant of which is the addictive psychostimulant drug nicotine (a compound naturally found in tobacco), is absorbed through the alveoli in the lungs or the oral mucosa. Many substances in cigarette smoke, chiefly nicotine, trigger chemical reactions in nerve endings, which heighten heart rate, alertness and reaction time, among other things. Dopamine and endorphins are released, which are often associated with pleasure, leading to addiction.\nGerman scientists identified a link between smoking and lung cancer in the late 1920s, leading to the first anti-smoking campaign in modern history, albeit one truncated by the collapse of Nazi Germany at the end of World War II. In 1950, British researchers demonstrated a clear relationship between smoking and cancer. Evidence continued to mount in the 1960s, which prompted political action against the practice. Rates of consumption since 1965 in the developed world have either peaked or declined. However, they continue to climb in the developing world. As of 2008 to 2010, tobacco is used by about 49% of men and 11% of women aged 15 or older in fourteen low-income and middle-income countries (Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Egypt, India, Mexico, Philippines, Russia, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay, and Vietnam), with about 80% of this usage in the form of smoking. The gender gap tends to be less pronounced in lower age groups. According to the World Health Organization, 8 million annual deaths are caused by tobacco smoking.\nMany smokers begin during adolescence or early adulthood. A 2009 study of first smoking experiences of seventh-grade students found out that the most common factor leading students to smoke is cigarette advertisements. Smoking by parents, siblings, and friends also encourages students to smoke. During the early stages, a combination of perceived pleasure acting as positive reinforcement and desire to respond to social peer pressure may offset the unpleasant symptoms of initial use, which typically include nausea and coughing. After an individual has smoked for some years, the avoidance of nicotine withdrawal symptoms and negative reinforcement become the key motivations to continue.\nHistory.\nUse in ancient cultures.\nOne archeological find raises the possibility of tobacco-smoking in the area of present-day Nevada about 12,000 years ago.\nSystematic tobacco use dates back to as early as 5000\u20133000 BC when the agricultural product began to be cultivated in Mesoamerica and South America; consumption later came to involve burning the plant substance, either by accident or with the intent of exploring other means of consumption. The practice worked its way into shamanistic rituals. Many ancient civilizations \u2013 such as the Babylonians, the Indians, and the Chinese \u2013 burned incense during religious rituals. Smoking in the Americas probably had its origins in the incense-burning ceremonies of shamans but was later adopted for pleasure or as a social tool. The smoking of tobacco and various hallucinogenic drugs was used to achieve trances and to come into contact with the spirit world. Also, to stimulate respiration, tobacco-smoke enemas were used.\nEastern North American tribes would carry large amounts of tobacco in pouches as a readily accepted trade item and would often smoke it in ceremonial pipes, either in sacred ceremonies or to seal bargains. Adults as well as children enjoyed the practice. It was believed that tobacco was a gift from the Creator and that the exhaled tobacco smoke was capable of carrying one's thoughts and prayers to the Great Spirit.\nApart from smoking, tobacco was used as medicine. As a pain killer, it was used for earache and toothache and occasionally as a poultice. Desert Indians regarded smoking as a cure for colds, especially if the tobacco was mixed with the leaves of the small Desert sage, \"Salvia dorrii\", or the root of Indian balsam or cough root, \"Leptotaenia multifida\", the addition of which was thought to be particularly good for asthma and tuberculosis.\nPopularization.\nIn 1612, six years after the settlement of Jamestown, Virginia, John Rolfe was credited as the first settler to successfully raise tobacco as a cash crop. The demand quickly grew as tobacco, referred to as \"brown gold\", revived the Virginia joint stock company from its failed gold expeditions. To meet demands from the Old World, tobacco was grown in succession, quickly depleting the soil. This became a motivator to settle west into the unknown continent, and likewise an expansion of tobacco production.\nFrenchman Jean Nicot (from whose name the word nicotine is derived) introduced tobacco to France in 1560, and tobacco then spread to England. The first report of a smoking Englishman is of a sailor in Bristol in 1556, seen \"emitting smoke from his nostrils\". Like tea, coffee, and opium, tobacco was just one of many intoxicants that were originally used as a form of medicine. Tobacco was introduced around 1600 by French merchants in what today is modern-day Gambia and Senegal. At the same time, caravans from Morocco brought tobacco to the areas around Timbuktu, and the Portuguese brought the commodity (and the plant) to southern Africa, establishing the popularity of tobacco throughout all of Africa by the 1650s.\nSoon after its introduction to the Old World, tobacco came under frequent criticism from state and religious leaders. James VI and I, King of Scotland and England, produced the treatise \"A Counterblaste to Tobacco\" in 1604, and also introduced excise duty on the product. Murad IV, sultan of the Ottoman Empire, 1623\u201340, was among the first to attempt a smoking ban by claiming it was a threat to public morals and health. The Chongzhen Emperor of China issued an edict banning smoking two years before his death and the overthrow of the Ming dynasty. Later, the Manchu rulers of the Qing dynasty would proclaim smoking \"a more heinous crime than that even of neglecting archery\". In Edo period Japan, some of the earliest tobacco plantations were scorned by the shogunate as being a threat to the military economy by letting valuable farmland go to waste for the use of a recreational drug instead of being used to plant food crops.\nReligious leaders have often been prominent among those who considered smoking immoral or outright blasphemous. In 1634, the Patriarch of Moscow forbade the sale of tobacco, and sentenced men and women who flouted the ban to have their nostrils slit and their backs flayed. Pope Urban VIII likewise condemned smoking in holy places in a papal bull of 1624. Despite some concerted efforts, restrictions and bans were largely ignored. When James I of England, a staunch smoking opponent and the author of \"A Counterblaste to Tobacco\", tried to curb the new trend by enforcing a 4000% tax increase on tobacco in 1604 it was unsuccessful, as suggested by the presence of around 7,000 tobacco outlets in London by the early 17th century. From this point on, for some centuries, several administrations withdrew from efforts at discouragement and instead turned the tobacco trade and cultivation into sometimes lucrative government monopolies.\nBy the mid-17th century, most major civilizations had been introduced to tobacco smoking and, in many cases, had already assimilated it into the native culture, despite some continued attempts on the part of rulers to eliminate the practice with penalties or fines. Tobacco, both product and plant, followed the major trade routes to major ports and markets, and then into the hinterlands. The English language term \"smoking\" appears to have entered currency in the late 18th century, before which less abbreviated descriptions of the practice such as \"drinking smoke\" were also in use.\nGrowth in the US remained stable until the American Civil War in the 1860s when the primary agricultural workforce shifted from slavery to sharecropping. This, along with a change in demand, accompanied the industrialization of cigarette production as craftsman James Bonsack created a machine in 1881 to partially automate their manufacture.\nSocial attitudes and public health.\nIn 1912 and 1932 in Germany, anti-smoking groups, often associated with anti-liquor groups, first published advocacy against the consumption of tobacco in the journal \"Der Tabakgegner\" (The Tobacco Opponent). In 1929, Fritz Lickint of Dresden, Germany, published a paper containing formal statistical evidence of a lung cancer\u2013tobacco link. During the Great Depression, Adolf Hitler condemned his earlier smoking habit as a waste of money, and later with stronger assertions. This movement was further strengthened with Nazi reproductive policy as women who smoked were viewed as unsuitable to be wives and mothers in a German family. In the 20th century, smoking was common. Social events like the smoke night promoted the habit.\nThe anti-tobacco movement in Nazi Germany did not reach across enemy lines during the Second World War, as anti-smoking groups quickly lost popular support. By the end of the Second World War, American cigarette manufacturers quickly reentered the German black market. Illegal smuggling of tobacco became prevalent, and leaders of the Nazi anti-smoking campaign were silenced. As part of the Marshall Plan, the United States shipped free tobacco to Germany; with 24,000 tons in 1948 and 69,000\u00a0tons in 1949. Per capita yearly cigarette consumption in post-war Germany steadily rose from 460 in 1950 to 1,523 in 1963. By the end of the 20th century, anti-smoking campaigns in Germany were unable to exceed the effectiveness of the Nazi-era climax in the years 1939\u201341 and German tobacco health research was described by Robert N. Proctor as \"muted\".\nIn 1950, Richard Doll published research in the \"British Medical Journal\" showing a close link between smoking and lung cancer. Beginning in December 1952, the magazine \"Reader's Digest\" published \"Cancer by the Carton\", a series of articles that linked smoking with lung cancer.\nIn 1954, the British Doctors Study, a prospective study of some 40 thousand doctors for about 2.5 years, confirmed the suggestion, based on which the government issued advice that smoking and lung cancer rates were related. In January 1964, the United States Surgeon General's Report on Smoking and Health likewise began suggesting the relationship between smoking and cancer.\nAs scientific evidence mounted in the 1980s, tobacco companies claimed contributory negligence as the adverse health effects were previously unknown or lacked substantial credibility. Health authorities sided with these claims up until 1998, from which they reversed their position. The Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement, originally between the four largest US tobacco companies and the attorneys general of 46 states, restricted certain types of tobacco advertisement and required payments for health compensation, which later amounted to the largest civil settlement in United States history.\nSocial campaigns have been instituted in many places to discourage smoking, such as Canada's National Non-Smoking Week.\nFrom 1965 to 2006, rates of smoking in the United States declined from 42% to 20.8%. The majority of those who quit were professional, affluent men. Although the per-capita number of smokers decreased, the average number of cigarettes consumed per person per day increased from 22 in 1954 to 30 in 1978. This paradoxical event suggests that those who quit smoking smoked less, while those who continued to smoke moved to smoke more light cigarettes. The trend has been paralleled by many industrialized nations as rates have either leveled-off or declined. In the developing world, however, tobacco consumption continued to rise at 3.4% in 2002. In Africa, smoking is in most areas considered to be modern, and many of the strong adverse opinions that prevail in the West receive much less attention. In 2008, Russia (70.2%), Indonesia (65.3%), Belarus (63.6%), Ukraine (63.3%), Laos (62.5%), Greece (62.4%), Jordan (61.7%), Tonga (61.1%), China (60.8%), and North Korea (59.5%) were ranked the first by adjusted prevalence estimate of the percent of male population smoking tobacco.\nAs of 2025, Bangladesh, India, and Nepal are on track to achieve at least a 30% relative reduction in tobacco use, according to the WHO global report on trends in prevalence of tobacco use 2000\u20132024. The WHO South-East Asia Region has shown the fastest progress globally, already meeting the global reduction target by 2021 through strong policies, taxation, and cessation initiatives. Despite this success, over 322 million adults in the region continue to use tobacco, underscoring the need for continued regulation and public health action.\nConsumption.\nMethods.\nTobacco is an agricultural product processed from the fresh leaves of plants in the genus \"Nicotiana\". The genus contains several species, of which \"Nicotiana tabacum\" is the most commonly grown. \"Nicotiana rustica\" follows second, containing higher concentrations of nicotine. The leaves are harvested and cured to allow the slow oxidation and degradation of carotenoids in tobacco leaves. This produces certain compounds in the tobacco leaves, which can be attributed to sweet hay, tea, rose oil, or fruity aromatic flavors. Before packaging, the tobacco is often combined with other additives to increase the addictive potency, shift the product's pH, or improve the effects of smoke by making it more palatable. In the United States, these additives are regulated to 599 substances. The product is then processed, packaged, and shipped to consumer markets.\nCommon methods of consuming tobacco include the following:\nPhysiology.\nThe active substances in tobacco, especially cigarettes, are administered by burning the leaves and inhaling the vaporized gas that results. This quickly and effectively delivers substances into the bloodstream by absorption through the alveoli in the lungs. The lungs contain some 300 million alveoli, which amounts to a surface area of over 70\u00a0m2 (about the size of a tennis court). This method is not completely efficient as not all of the smoke will be inhaled, and some amount of the active substances will be lost in the process of combustion, pyrolysis. Pipe and Cigar smoke are not inhaled because of their high alkalinity, which is irritating to the trachea and lungs. However, because of its higher alkalinity (pH 8.5) compared to cigarette smoke (pH 5.3), non-ionized nicotine is more readily absorbed through the mucous membranes in the mouth. Nicotine absorption from cigar and pipe, however, is much less than that from cigarette smoke. Nicotine and cocaine activate similar patterns of neurons, which supports the existence of common substrates among these drugs.\nThe absorbed nicotine mimics nicotinic acetylcholine, which when bound to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors prevents the reuptake of acetylcholine thereby increasing that neurotransmitter in those areas of the body. These nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are located in the central nervous system and at the nerve-muscle junction of skeletal muscles; whose activity increases heart rate, alertness, and faster reaction times. Nicotine acetylcholine stimulation is not directly addictive. However, since dopamine-releasing neurons are abundant on nicotine receptors, dopamine is released; and, in the nucleus accumbens, dopamine is associated with motivation causing reinforcing behavior. Dopamine increase, in the prefrontal cortex, may also increase working memory.\nWhen tobacco is smoked, most of the nicotine is pyrolyzed. However, a dose sufficient to cause mild somatic dependency and mild to strong psychological dependency remains. There is also a formation of harmane (an MAO inhibitor) from the acetaldehyde in tobacco smoke. This may play a role in nicotine addiction by facilitating a dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens as a response to nicotine stimuli. Using rat studies, withdrawal after repeated exposure to nicotine results in less responsive nucleus accumbens cells, which produce dopamine responsible for reinforcement.\nDemographics.\nAs of 2000, smoking was practiced by around 1.22\u00a0billion people. At current rates of 'smoker replacement' and market growth, this may reach around 1.9\u00a0billion in 2025.\nSmoking may be up to five times more prevalent among men than women in some communities, although the gender gap usually declines with younger age. In some developed countries smoking rates for men have peaked and begun to decline, while for women they continue to climb.\nAs of 2002, about twenty percent of young teenagers (13\u201315) smoked worldwide. 80,000 to 100,000 children begin smoking every day, roughly half of whom live in Asia. Half of those who start smoking in adolescent years are projected to go on to smoke for 15 to 20 years. As of 2019 in the United States, roughly 800,000 high school students smoke.\nThe World Health Organization (WHO) states that \"Much of the disease burden and premature mortality attributable to tobacco use disproportionately affect the poor\". Of the 1.22\u00a0billion smokers, 1\u00a0billion of them live in developing or transitional economies. Smoking rates have leveled off or declined in the developed world. In the developing world, however, tobacco consumption is rising by 3.4% per year as of 2002.\nThe WHO in 2004 projected 58.8\u00a0million deaths to occur globally, from which 5.4\u00a0million are tobacco-attributed, and 4.9\u00a0million as of 2007. As of 2002, 70% of the deaths are in developing countries. As of 2017, smoking causes one in ten deaths worldwide, with half of those deaths in the US, China, India and Russia.\nPsychology.\nTakeup.\nMost smokers begin smoking during adolescence or early adulthood. Some studies also show that smoking can be linked to various mental health complications. Smoking has elements of risk-taking and rebellion, which often appeal to young people. The presence of peers who smoke and media featuring high-status models smoking may also encourage smoking. Because teenagers are influenced more by their peers than by adults , attempts by parents, schools, and health professionals at preventing people from trying cigarettes are often unsuccessful.\nChildren with smoking parents are more likely to smoke than children with non-smoking parents. Children of parents who smoke are less likely to quit smoking. One study found that parental smoking cessation was associated with less adolescent smoking, except when the other parent currently smoked. A current study tested the relation of adolescent smoking to rules regulating where adults are allowed to smoke in the home. Results showed that restrictive home smoking policies were associated with a lower likelihood of trying smoking for both middle and high school students.\nBehavioural research generally indicates that teenagers begin their smoking habits due to peer pressure and cultural influence portrayed by friends. However, one study found that direct pressure to smoke cigarettes played a less significant part in adolescent smoking, with adolescents also reporting low levels of both normative and direct pressure to smoke cigarettes. Mere exposure to tobacco retailers may motivate smoking behaviour in adults. A similar study suggested that individuals may play a more active role in starting to smoke than has previously been thought and that social processes other than peer pressure also need to be taken into account. Another study's results indicated that peer pressure was significantly associated with smoking behavior across all age and gender cohorts, but that intrapersonal factors were significantly more important to the smoking behavior of 12- to 13-year-old girls than same-age boys. Within the 14- to 15-year-old age group, one peer pressure variable emerged as a significantly more important predictor of girls' than boys' smoking. It is debated whether peer pressure or self-selection is a greater cause of adolescent smoking.\nPsychologist Hans Eysenck (who was later questioned for implausible results\n and unsafe publications) developed a personality profile for the typical smoker. Extraversion is the trait that is most associated with smoking, and smokers tend to be sociable, impulsive, risk-taking, and excitement-seeking individuals.\nPersistence.\nThe reasons given by some smokers for this activity have been categorized as \"addictive smoking\", \"pleasure from smoking\", \"tension reduction/relaxation\", \"social smoking\", \"stimulation\", \"habit/automatism\", and \"handling\". There are gender differences in how much each of these reasons contributes, with females more likely than males to cite \"tension reduction/relaxation\", \"stimulation\" and \"social smoking\".\nSome smokers argue that the depressant effect of smoking allows them to calm their nerves, often allowing for increased concentration. However, according to the Imperial College London, \"Nicotine seems to provide both a stimulant and a depressant effect, and the effect it has at any time is likely determined by the mood of the user, the environment, and the circumstances of use. Studies have suggested that low doses have a depressant effect, while higher doses have a stimulant effect.\"\nPatterns.\nSeveral studies have established that cigarette sales and smoking follow distinct time-related patterns. For example, cigarette sales in the United States of America have been shown to follow a strongly seasonal pattern, with the high months being the summer months and the low months being the winter months.\nSimilarly, smoking has been shown to follow distinct circadian patterns during the waking day, with the high point usually occurring shortly after waking in the morning and shortly before going to sleep at night.\nEffects.\nHealth.\nTobacco smoking is the leading cause of preventable death and a global public health concern. There are 1.3 billion tobacco users in the world, as per latest data from WHO. One person dies every six seconds from a tobacco related disease.\nTobacco use leads most commonly to diseases affecting the heart and lungs, with smoking being a major risk factor for heart attacks, strokes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), and emphysema. \nSmoking tobacco causes various types and subtypes of cancers (particularly lung cancer, cancers of the oropharynx, larynx, and mouth, esophageal and pancreatic cancer). Using tobacco, especially together with alcohol, is a major risk factor for head and neck cancer. 72% of head and neck cancer cases are caused by using both alcohol and tobacco. This rises to 89% when looking specifically at laryngeal cancer.\nCigarette smoking increases the risk of Crohn's disease as well as the severity of the course of the disease. It is also the number one cause of bladder cancer. Cigarette smoking has also been associated with sarcopenia, the age-related loss of muscle mass and strength. The smoke from tobacco elicits carcinogenic effects on the tissues of the body that are exposed to the smoke. Regular cigar smoking is known to carry serious health risks, including increased risk of developing various types and subtypes of cancers, respiratory diseases, cardiovascular diseases, cerebrovascular diseases, periodontal diseases, teeth decay and loss, and malignant diseases.\nTobacco smoke is a complex mixture of over 7,000 toxic chemicals, 98 of which are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and 69 of which are known to be carcinogenic. The most important chemicals causing cancer are those that produce DNA damage, since such damage appears to be the primary underlying cause of cancer. The most carcinogenic compounds in cigarette smoke are acrolein, formaldehyde, acrylonitrile, 1,3-butadiene, acetaldehyde, ethylene oxide, and isoprene. In addition to the aforementioned toxic chemicals, flavored tobacco contains flavorings which upon heating release toxic chemicals and carcinogens such as carbon monoxide (CO), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), furans, phenols, aldehydes (such as acrolein), and acids, in addition to nitrogenous carcinogens, alcohols, and heavy metals, all of which are dangerous to human health. A comparison of 13 common hookah flavors found that melon flavors are the most dangerous, with their smoke containing four classes of hazards in high concentrations.\nThe World Health Organization estimates that tobacco caused 8\u00a0million deaths in 2004 and 100 million deaths over the 20th century. Similarly, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention describes tobacco use as \"the single most important preventable risk to human health in developed countries and an important cause of premature death worldwide.\" Although 70% of smokers state their intention to quit, only 3\u20135% are successful.\nThe probabilities of death from lung cancer before age 75 in the United Kingdom are 0.2% for men who never smoked (0.4% for women), 5.5% for male former smokers (2.6% in women), 15.9% for current male smokers (9.5% for women) and 24.4% for male \"heavy smokers\" defined as smoking more than 25 cigarettes per day (18.5% for women). Tobacco smoke can combine with other carcinogens present within the environment to produce elevated degrees of lung cancer.\nThe risk of lung cancer decreases almost from the first day someone quits smoking, and it drops by 50% after 10 years of smoking cessation. Healthy cells that have escaped mutations grow and replace the damaged ones in the lungs. In the research dated December 2019, 40% of cells in former smokers resembled those of individuals who had never smoked.\nRates of smoking have generally leveled off or declined in the developed world. Smoking rates in the United States have dropped by half from 1965 to 2006, from 42% to 20.8% in adults. In the developing world, tobacco consumption is rising by 3.4% per year.\nSmoking alters the transcriptome of the lung parenchyma; the expression levels of a panel of seven genes (KMO, CD1A, SPINK5, TREM2, CYBB, DNASE2B, FGG) are increased in the lung tissue of smokers.\nPassive smoking is the inhalation of tobacco smoke by individuals who are not actively smoking. This smoke is known as second-hand smoke (SHS) or environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) when the burning end is present, and third-hand smoke after the burning end has been extinguished. Because of its negative implications, exposure to SHS has played a central role in the regulation of tobacco products. Six hundred thousand deaths were attributed to SHS in 2004. It has also been known to produce skin conditions such as freckles and dryness.\nSmokers are at greater risk of developing psychotic disorder. Tobacco has also been described an anaphrodisiac due to its propensity for causing erectile dysfunction. There is a correlation between tobacco smoking and a reduced risk of Parkinson's disease.\nEconomic.\nIn countries where there is a universally funded healthcare system, the government covers the cost of medical care for smokers who become ill through smoking in the form of increased taxes. Two broad debating positions exist on this front, the \"pro-smoking\" argument suggests that heavy smokers generally do not live long enough to develop the costly and chronic illnesses that affect the elderly, reducing society's healthcare burden, and the \"anti-smoking\" argument suggests that the healthcare burden is increased because smokers get chronic illnesses younger and at a higher rate than the general population. Data on both positions has been contested. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention published research in 2002 claiming that the cost of each pack of cigarettes sold in the United States was more than $7 in medical care and lost productivity. The cost may be higher, with another study putting it as high as $41 per pack, most of which however is on the individual and his/her family. This is how one author of that study puts it when he explains the very low cost for others: \"The reason the number is low is that for private pensions, Social Security, and Medicare \u2014 the biggest factors in calculating costs to society \u2014 smoking actually saves money. Smokers die at a younger age and don't draw on the funds they've paid into those systems.\" Other research demonstrates that premature death caused by smoking may redistribute Social Security income in unexpected ways that affect behavior and reduce the economic well-being of smokers and their dependents. To further support this, whatever the rate of smoking consumption is per day, smokers have a greater lifetime medical cost on average compared to a non-smoker by an estimated $6000. Between the cost for lost productivity and health care expenditures combined, cigarette smoking costs at least 193\u00a0billion dollars (Research also shows that smokers earn less money than nonsmokers). As for secondhand smoke, the cost is over 10\u00a0billion dollars.\nBy contrast, some non-scientific studies, including one conducted by Philip Morris in the Czech Republic called \"Public Finance Balance of Smoking in the Czech Republic\" and another by the Cato Institute, support the opposite position. Philip Morris has explicitly apologized for the former study, saying: \"The funding and public release of this study, which, among other things, detailed purported cost savings to the Czech Republic due to premature deaths of smokers, exhibited terrible judgment as well as a complete and unacceptable disregard of basic human values. For one of our tobacco companies to commission this study was not just a terrible mistake; it was wrong. All of us at Philip Morris, no matter where we work, are extremely sorry for this. No one benefits from the very real, serious, and significant diseases caused by smoking.\"\nBetween 1970 and 1995, per-capita cigarette consumption in poorer developing countries increased by 67 percent, while it dropped by 10 percent in the richer developed world. Eighty percent of smokers now live in less developed countries. By 2030, the World Health Organization (WHO) forecasts that 10 million people a year will die of smoking-related illness, making it the single biggest cause of death worldwide, with the largest increase being among women. WHO forecasts the 21st century's death rate from smoking to be ten times the 20th century's rate (\"Washingtonian\" magazine, December 2007).\nThe tobacco industry is one of the largest global enterprises. The six largest tobacco companies earned a combined profit of $35.1\u00a0billion (Jha et al., 2014) in 2010.\nSocial.\nFamous smokers of the past used cigarettes or pipes as part of their image, such as Jean-Paul Sartre's Gauloises-brand cigarettes; Albert Einstein's, Douglas MacArthur's, Bertrand Russell's, and Bing Crosby's pipes; or the news broadcaster Edward R. Murrow's cigarette. Writers in particular seem to be known for smoking, for example, Cornell Professor Richard Klein's book \"Cigarettes are Sublime\" for the analysis, by this professor of French literature, of the role smoking plays in 19th and 20th century letters. The popular author Kurt Vonnegut addressed his cigarette addiction in his novels. British Prime Minister Harold Wilson was well known for smoking a pipe in public as was Winston Churchill for his cigars. Sherlock Holmes, the fictional detective created by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, smoked a pipe, cigarettes, and cigars. The DC Vertigo comic book character John Constantine, created by Alan Moore, is synonymous with smoking, so much so that the first storyline by \"Preacher\" creator Garth Ennis centered around John Constantine contracting lung cancer. Professional wrestler James Fullington, while in character as \"The Sandman\", is a chronic smoker to appear \"tough\".\nThe problem of smoking at home is challenging for women in many cultures (especially Arab cultures), where it may not be acceptable for a woman to ask her husband not to smoke at home or in the presence of her children. Studies have shown that pollution levels for smoking areas indoors are higher than levels found on busy roadways, in closed motor garages, and during firestorms. Furthermore, smoke can spread from one room to another, even if doors to the smoking area are closed.\nThe ceremonial smoking of tobacco and praying with a sacred pipe is a prominent part of the religious ceremonies of several Native American Nations. \"Sema\", the Anishinaabe word for tobacco, is grown for ceremonial use and is considered the ultimate sacred plant since its smoke is believed to carry prayers to the spirits. In most major religions, however, tobacco smoking is not specifically prohibited, although it may be discouraged as an immoral habit. Before the health risks of smoking were identified through controlled studies, smoking was considered an immoral habit by certain Christian preachers and social reformers. The founder of the Latter Day Saint movement, Joseph Smith, recorded that on 27 February 1833, he received a revelation which discouraged tobacco use. This \"Word of Wisdom\" was later accepted as a commandment, and faithful Latter-day Saints abstain completely from tobacco. Jehovah's Witnesses base their stand against smoking on the Bible's command to \"clean ourselves of every defilement of flesh\" (2 Corinthians 7:1). The Jewish Rabbi Yisrael Meir Kagan (1838\u20131933) was one of the first Jewish authorities to speak out on smoking. In Ahmadiyya Islam, smoking is highly discouraged, although not forbidden. During the month of fasting however, it is forbidden to smoke tobacco. In the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, smoking tobacco is discouraged though not forbidden.\nPublic policy.\nOn 27 February 2005, the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control took effect. The FCTC is the world's first public health treaty. Countries that sign on as parties agree to a set of common goals, minimum standards for tobacco control policy, and to cooperate in dealing with cross-border challenges such as cigarette smuggling. Currently, the WHO declares that 4\u00a0billion people will be covered by the treaty, which includes 168 signatories. Among other steps, signatories are to put together legislation that will eliminate secondhand smoke in indoor workplaces, public transport, indoor public places and, as appropriate, other public places.\nTaxation.\nMany governments have introduced excise taxes on cigarettes to reduce the consumption of cigarettes, alongside generating tax revenue. The World Health Organization finds that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The structure of tobacco excise taxes varies considerably across countries, with lower income countries more likely to rely more on \"ad valorem\" excises and higher income countries more likely to rely more on specific excise taxes, while many countries at all income levels use a mix of specific and \"ad valorem\" excises.\nTobacco excise tax systems are quite complex in several countries, where different tax rates are applied based on prices, and product characteristics such as the presence/absence of a filter or length, packaging, weight, tobacco content, and/or production or sales volume. These complex systems are difficult to administer, create opportunities for tax avoidance, and are less effective from a public health perspective.\nGlobally, cigarette excise taxes account for less than 45 percent of cigarette prices, on average, while all taxes applied to cigarettes account for just over half of the price. Higher-income countries levy higher taxes on tobacco products, and these taxes account for a greater share of the price, with both the absolute tax and share of price accounted for by tax falling as country incomes fall.\nIn 2002, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said that each pack of cigarettes sold in the United States costs the nation more than $7 in medical care and lost productivity, around $3400 per year per smoker. Another study by a team of health economists finds that the combined price paid by their families and society is about $41 per pack of cigarettes.\nSubstantial scientific evidence confirms that higher cigarette prices result in lower overall cigarette consumption. Most studies indicate that a 10% price increase reduces cigarette consumption by 3% to 5%. Youth, minorities, and low-income smokers are two to three times more likely to quit or smoke less than other smokers in response to price increases. While smoking is sometimes given as an example of an inelastic good, it is elastic in poorer and middle-wealth nations, and even in wealthier nations price increases do affect consumption, if not at the same rate as more elastic goods. That is to say, a large rise in price will only result in a small decrease in consumption.\nMany nations have implemented some form of tobacco taxation. As of 1997, Denmark had the highest cigarette tax burden of $4.02 per pack. Taiwan only had a tax burden of $0.62 per pack. The federal government of the United States charges $1.01 per pack.\nCigarette taxes vary widely from state to state in the United States. For example, Missouri has a cigarette tax of only 17 cents per pack, the nation's lowest, while New York has the highest cigarette tax in the U.S.: $4.35 per pack. In Alabama, Illinois, Missouri, New York City, Tennessee, and Virginia, counties and cities may impose an additional limited tax on the price of cigarettes. Sales taxes are also levied on tobacco products in most jurisdictions.\nIn the United Kingdom, as of \u00a02023,[ [update]] a packet of 20 cigarettes has a tax added of 16.5% of the retail price plus \u00a35.89. The UK has a significant black market for tobacco, and it has been estimated by the tobacco industry that 27% of cigarette and 68% of handrolling tobacco consumption is non-UK duty paid (NUKDP).\nIn Australia, total taxes account for 62.5% of the final price of a packet of cigarettes (2011 figures). These taxes include federal excise or customs duty and Goods and Services Tax.\nRestrictions.\nIn June 1967, the US Federal Communications Commission ruled that programs broadcast on a television station that discussed smoking and health were insufficient to offset the effects of paid advertisements that were broadcast for five to ten minutes each day. In April 1970, the US Congress passed the Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act banning the advertising of cigarettes on television and radio starting on 2 January 1971.\nThe Tobacco Advertising Prohibition Act 1992 expressly prohibited almost all forms of Tobacco advertising in Australia, including the sponsorship of sporting or other cultural events by cigarette brands.\nAll tobacco advertising and sponsorship on television has been banned within the European Union since 1991 under the Television Without Frontiers Directive (1989). This ban was extended by the Tobacco Advertising Directive, which took effect in July 2005 to cover other forms of media such as the internet, print media, and radio. The directive does not include advertising in cinemas and on billboards or using merchandising \u2013 or tobacco sponsorship of cultural and sporting events that are purely local, with participants coming from only one Member State as these fall outside the jurisdiction of the European Commission. However, most member states have transposed the directive with national laws that are wider in scope than the directive and cover local advertising. A 2008 European Commission report concluded that the directive had been successfully transposed into national law in all EU member states and that these laws were well implemented.\nSome countries also impose legal requirements on the packaging of tobacco products. For example, in the countries of the European Union, Turkey, Australia and South Africa, cigarette packs must be prominently labeled with the health risks associated with smoking. Canada, Australia, Thailand, Iceland and Brazil have also imposed labels upon cigarette packs warning smokers of the effects, and they include graphic images of the potential health effects of smoking. Cards are also inserted into cigarette packs in Canada. There are sixteen of them, and only one comes in a pack. They explain different methods of quitting smoking. Also, in the United Kingdom, there have been many graphic NHS advertisements, one showing a cigarette filled with fatty deposits as if the cigarette is symbolizing the artery of a smoker.\nSome countries have also banned advertisements at the point of sale. The United Kingdom and Ireland have limited the advertisement of tobacco at retailers. This includes storing of cigarettes behind a covered shelf not visible to the public. They do, however, allow some limited advertising at retailers. Norway has a complete ban on point-of-sale advertising. This includes smoking products and accessories. Implementing these policies can be challenging; all of these countries experienced resistance and challenges from the tobacco industry. The World Health Organization recommends the complete ban of all types of advertisement or product placement, including at vending machines, at airports and on internet shops selling tobacco. The evidence is as yet unclear as to the effect of such bans. \u00a0\nMany countries have a smoking age. In many countries, including the United States, most European Union member states, New Zealand, Canada, South Africa, Israel, India, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica and Australia, it is illegal to sell tobacco products to minors and in the Netherlands, Austria, Belgium, Denmark and South Africa it is illegal to sell tobacco products to people under the age of 18. On 1 September 2007 the minimum age to buy tobacco products in Germany rose from 16 to 18, as well as in the United Kingdom where on 1 October 2007 it rose from 16 to 18. Underlying such laws is the belief that people should make an informed decision regarding the risks of tobacco use. These laws have lax enforcement in some nations and states. In China, Turkey, and many other countries, a child has little problem buying tobacco products because they are often told to go to the store to buy tobacco for their parents.\nSeveral countries such as Ireland, Latvia, Estonia, the Netherlands, Finland, Norway, Canada, Australia, Sweden, Portugal, Singapore, Italy, Indonesia, India, Lithuania, Chile, Spain, Iceland, United Kingdom, Slovenia, T\u00fcrkiye and Malta have legislated against smoking in public places, often including bars and restaurants. Restaurateurs have been permitted in some jurisdictions to build designated smoking areas (or to prohibit smoking). In the United States, many states prohibit smoking in restaurants, and some also prohibit smoking in bars. In provinces of Canada, smoking is illegal in indoor workplaces and public places, including bars and restaurants. As of 31 March 2008, Canada has introduced a smoke-free law in all public places, as well as within 10 meters of an entrance to any public place. In Australia, smoke-free laws vary from state to state. In New Zealand and Brazil, smoking is restricted in enclosed public places, including bars, restaurants, and pubs. Hong Kong restricted smoking on 1 January 2007 in the workplace, public spaces such as restaurants, karaoke rooms, buildings, and public parks (bars that do not admit minors were exempt until 2009). In Romania, smoking is illegal in trains, metro stations, public institutions (except where designated, usually outside), and public transport. In Germany, in addition to smoking bans in public buildings and transport, an anti-smoking ordinance for bars and restaurants was implemented in late 2007. A study by the University of Hamburg (Ahlfeldt and Maennig 2010) demonstrates that the smoking ban had, if any, only short-run effects on bar and restaurant revenues. In the medium and long run, no negative effect was measurable. The results suggest either that consumption in bars and restaurants is not affected by smoking bans in the long run or that negative revenue effects from smokers are compensated by increasing revenues from non-smokers.\nIgnition safety.\nAn indirect public health problem posed by cigarettes is that of accidental fires, usually linked with consumption of alcohol. Enhanced combustion using nitrates was traditionally used, but cigarette manufacturers have been silent on this subject, claiming at first that a safe cigarette was technically impossible, then that it could only be achieved by modifying the paper. Roll-your-own cigarettes contain no additives and are fire-safe. Numerous fire safe cigarette designs have been proposed, some by tobacco companies themselves, which would extinguish a cigarette left unattended for more than a minute or two, thereby reducing the risk of fire. Among American tobacco companies, some have resisted this idea, while others have embraced it. RJ Reynolds was a leader in making prototypes of these cigarettes in 1983 and will make all of their U.S. market cigarettes fire-safe by 2010. Phillip Morris is not in active support of it. Lorillard (purchased by RJ Reynolds), the US' 3rd-largest tobacco company, seems to be ambivalent.\nHealth warnings.\nIndividual cigarettes in Canada now carry warnings such as \"poison in every puff\" and \"cigarettes cause impotence\" in what the government says is an effort to make it \"virtually impossible to avoid health warnings altogether\".\nGateway drug theory.\nThe relationship between tobacco and other drug use has been well-established, however, the nature of this association remains unclear. The two main theories are the phenotypic causation (gateway) model and the correlated liabilities model. The causation model argues that smoking is a primary influence on future drug use, while the correlated liabilities model argues that smoking and other drug use are predicated on genetic or environmental factors. One study published by the NIH found that tobacco use may be linked to cocaine addiction and marijuana use. The study stated that 90% of adults who used cocaine had smoked cigarettes before (this was for people ages 18\u201334). This study could support the gateway drug theory.\nCessation.\nQuitting smoking often involves advice from physicians or social workers, cold turkey, nicotine replacement therapy, contingent vouchers, antidepressants, vaping, hypnosis, self-help (mindfulness meditation), and support groups.\nIn the United States, about 70% of smokers would like to quit smoking, and 50% report having attempted to do so in the past year. Without support, 1% of smokers will successfully quit smoking each year. Physician advice to quit smoking increases the rate to 3% per year. Adding first\u2010line smoking cessation medications (and some behavioral help), increased quit rates to around 20% of smokers in a year. For cessation of smoking, public participation in health campaigns are important. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73299", "revid": "40125427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73299", "title": "Illinois Institute of Technology", "text": "Private university in Chicago, Illinois, U.S.\nIllinois Institute of Technology (Illinois Tech, or formerly IIT) is a private research university in Chicago, Illinois, United States. Tracing its history to 1890, the present name was adopted upon the merger of the Armour Institute and Lewis Institute in 1940. The university has programs in architecture, business, communications, design, engineering, industrial technology, information technology, law, psychology, and science. It is classified among \"R2: Doctoral Universities \u2013 High research activity\".\nThe university's historic roots are in several 19th-century engineering and professional education institutions in the United States. In the mid 20th century, it became closely associated with trends in modernist architecture through the work of its Dean of Architecture Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, who designed its campus. The Institute of Design, Chicago-Kent College of Law, and Midwest College of Engineering were also merged into Illinois Tech.\nHistory.\nThe Sermon and The Institute.\nIn 1890, when advanced education was often reserved for society's elite, Chicago minister Frank Wakely Gunsaulus delivered what came to be known as the \"Million Dollar Sermon.\" From the pulpit of his South Side church, near the site Illinois Institute of Technology now occupies, Gunsaulus said that with a million dollars he could build a school where students can learn to think in practical and not theoretical terms; where they could be taught to \"learn by doing.\"\nInspired by Gunsaulus' vision, Philip Danforth Armour, Sr. (1832\u20131901) gave $1 million to found the Armour Institute\u2014and Armour, his wife, Malvina Belle Ogden Armour (1842\u20131927) and their son J. (Jonathan) Ogden Armour (1863\u20131927) continued to support the university in its early years. Armour claimed it was his best paying investment. When Armour Institute opened in 1893, it offered professional courses in engineering, chemistry, architecture and library science.\nIllinois Tech was created in 1940 by the merger of Armour Institute and Lewis Institute. Located on the west side of Chicago, Lewis Institute, established in 1895 by the estate of hardware merchant and investor Allen C. Lewis, offered liberal arts as well as science and engineering courses for both men and women. At separate meetings held by their respective boards on October 26, 1939, the trustees of Armour and Lewis voted to merge the two colleges. A Cook County circuit court decision handed down on April 23, 1940, solidified the merger of the two schools into the Illinois Institute of Technology.\nMergers and changes.\nThe Institute of Design (ID), founded in Chicago by L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Moholy-Nagy in 1937, merged with Illinois Tech in 1949.\nChicago-Kent College of Law, founded in 1887, became part of the university in 1969, making Illinois Institute of Technology one of the few technology-based universities with a law school.\nAlso in 1969, the Stuart School of Management and Finance\u2014now known as the Stuart School of Business \u2013 was established thanks to a gift from the estate of Lewis Institute alumnus and Chicago financier Harold Leonard Stuart. The program became the Stuart School of Business in 1999.\nThe Midwest College of Engineering, founded in 1967, joined the university in 1986, giving Illinois Tech a presence in west suburban Wheaton with what is today known as the Rice Campus.\nIn December 2006, the University Technology Park at Illinois Institute of Technology, an incubator and life sciences/tech start-up facility, was started in existing research buildings located on the south end of Mies Campus. As of April\u00a02014[ [update]], University Tech Park at Illinois Institute of Technology is home to many companies.\nToday, Illinois Tech is a private, PhD-granting university with programs in engineering, science, human sciences, applied technology, architecture, business, design, and law. It is one of 23 institutions in the Association of Independent Technological Universities (AITU).\nGrowth and expansion.\nIllinois Tech continued to expand after the merger. As one of the first American universities to host a Navy V-12 program during World War II the school saw a large increase in students and expanded the Armour campus beyond its original . Two years before the merger, German architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe joined the then Armour Institute of Technology to head both Armour's and the Art Institute of Chicago's architecture program. The Art Institute would later separate and form its own program. Mies was given the task of designing a completely new campus, and the result was a spacious, open, campus set in contrast to the busy, crowded urban neighborhood around it. The first Mies-designed buildings were completed in the mid-1940s, and construction on what is considered the \"Mies Campus\" continued until the early 1970s.\nEngineering and research also saw great growth and expansion from the post-war period until the early 1970s. Illinois Tech experienced its greatest period of growth from 1952 to 1973 under President John T. Rettaliata, a fluid dynamicist whose research accomplishments included work on early development of the jet engine and a seat on the National Aeronautics and Space Council. This period saw Illinois Tech as the largest engineering school in the United States, as stated in a feature in the September 1953 issue of \"Popular Science\" magazine. Illinois Tech housed many research organizations: IIT Research Institute (formerly Armour Research Foundation and birthplace of magnetic recording wire and tape as well as audio and video cassettes), the Institute of Gas Technology, and the American Association of Railroads, among others.\nThree colleges merged with Illinois Tech after the 1940 Armour/Lewis merger: Institute of Design in 1949, Chicago-Kent College of Law in 1969, and Midwest College of Engineering in 1986. Illinois Tech's Stuart School of Business was founded by a gift from Lewis Institute alumnus Harold Leonard Stuart in 1969, and joined Chicago-Kent at Illinois Tech's Downtown Campus in 1992; it phased out its undergraduate program (becoming graduate-only) after spring 1995. (An undergraduate business program focusing on technology and entrepreneurship was launched in fall 2004 and was for a while administratively separate from the Stuart School. It is now part of the school, but remains on Main Campus.) The Institute of Design, once housed on the Mies Campus in S.R. Crown Hall, also phased out its undergraduate programs and moved downtown in the early 1990s.\nAlthough not used in official communication, the nickname \"Illinois Tech\" has long been a favorite of students, inspiring the name of the student newspaper; (renamed in 1928 from \"Armour Tech News\" to \"TechNews\"), and the former mascot of the university's collegiate sports teams, the Techawks. During the 1950s and 1960s, the nickname was actually more prevalent than \"IIT.\" This was reflected by the Chicago Transit Authority's Green Line rapid transit station at 35th and State being named \"Tech-35th\", but has since been changed to \"35th-Bronzeville-IIT.\" In the 2010s, school administrators began a move to reintroduce the \"Illinois Tech\" nickname, to decrease confusion with the Indian Institutes of Technology that share the IIT abbreviation and with ITT Technical Institute whose abbreviation is similar.\nIn June 2020 Illinois Tech launched the College of Computing and the revamped Lewis College of Science and Letters. The College of Computing houses the computer science, applied mathematics, and information technology and management departments, as well as the industrial technology and management program. The revamped Lewis College added the biology, chemistry, food science and nutrition, and physics departments to the remaining humanities, psychology, and social science departments. With the launch of the College of Computing and revamped Lewis College of Science and Letters, the School of Applied Technology and College of Science were dissolved.\nToday.\nIn 1994 the National Commission on IIT considered leaving Mies Campus and moving to the Chicago suburbs. The Chicago Housing Authority had erected massive public-housing developments in the area starting in 1941, and by 1990 the campus was encircled by high-rise housing projects rife with crime. The closest high-rise, Stateway Gardens, was located just south of the Illinois Tech campus boundary, the last building of which was demolished in 2006. But the Dearborn Homes to the immediate north of campus still remain. The 1990s and 2000s saw a redevelopment of Stateway Gardens into a new, mixed-income neighborhood dubbed Park Boulevard; the completion of the new central station of the Chicago Police Department a block east of the campus; and major commercial development at Roosevelt Road, just north of the campus, and residential development as close as Michigan Avenue on the east boundary of the school.\nBolstered by a $120\u00a0million gift in the mid-1990s from Illinois Tech alumnus Robert Pritzker, former chairman of IIT's board of trustees, and Robert Galvin, former chairman of the board and former Motorola executive, the university has benefited from a revitalization. The first new buildings on Mies Campus since the early 1970s were finished in 2003\u2014Rem Koolhaas's McCormick Tribune Campus Center and Helmut Jahn's State Street Village. S. R. Crown Hall, a National Historic Landmark, was renovated in 2005, and the renovation of Wishnick Hall was completed in 2007. Undergraduate enrollment has breached 3,000. To further boost their focus on biotechnology and the melding of business and technology, University Technology Park at Illinois Tech, an expansive research park, has been developed by remodeling former Institute of Gas Technology and research buildings on the south end of Mies Campus.\nCampuses.\nIllinois Institute of Technology has five campuses in the Chicago area. The main campus is located at 10 West 35th Street in Chicago's Bronzeville neighborhood and houses all undergraduate programs and many graduate programs. There are also campuses in the Chicago Loop, the Fulton Market in central Chicago, and the suburbs of Bedford Park and Wheaton.\nThe Main Campus includes many buildings designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, the director of the architecture program at Illinois Tech from 1938 to 1958. A portion of the 120-acre campus was entered onto the National Register of Historic Places in 2005. \nThe 10-story Downtown Campus at 565 West Adams Street, designed by Gerald Horn of Holabird &amp; Root and built by Illinois Tech in 1992, was home to Illinois Tech's Chicago-Kent College of Law and Institute of Design (ID), as well as the downtown campus for the Stuart School of Business. The Downtown Campus was renamed the Conviser Law Center in early 2020. The Institute of Design has relocated to the Ed Kaplan Family Institute for Innovation and Tech Entrepreneurship on the Mies Campus.\nIIT's Fulton Market campus opened in 2023 at 400 North Aberdeen Street. This campus contains a life science lab.\nThe 19-acre Daniel F. and Ada L. Rice Campus in west suburban Wheaton, designed by Solomon Cordwell Buenz &amp; Associates, Inc. for Illinois Tech and dedicated in 1990, offers graduate programs, upper-level undergraduate courses, and continuing professional education.\nThe five-acre Moffett Campus in southwest suburban Bedford Park was designed in 1947 by Schmidt, Garden, and Erickson and was donated to Illinois Tech by CPC International Inc. in 1988. It houses the Institute for Food Safety and Health (IFSH), which includes the National Center for Food Safety and Technology, a unique consortium of government, industry, and academic partners.\nMain campus.\nThe Illinois Tech main campus, known as Mies Campus, is centered around 33rd and State Streets, approximately south of the Chicago Loop in the historic Bronzeville neighborhood on the South Side of Chicago, The main campus covers 22 blocks roughly bounded by 30th Street to the north, Michigan Avenue to the east, 35th Street to the south, and the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad (now Metra's Rock Island District) tracks to the west. Illinois Tech supports the Historic Bronzeville area by sponsoring non-for-profits such as The Renaissance Collaborative. VanderCook College of Music shares Illinois Tech's Main Campus: VanderCook College of Music and offers cross-registration for Illinois Tech students.\nMies's master plan for the Illinois Tech campus was one of the most ambitious projects that he ever conceived, and the campus, with 20 of his works, is the greatest concentration of his buildings in the world. The layout of the campus departs radically from \"traditional college quadrangles and limestone buildings\". The materials are inspired by the factories and warehouses of Chicago's South Side and \"embod[y] 20th century methods and materials: steel and concrete frames with curtain walls of brick and glass.\" The campus was landscaped by Mies's close colleague at Illinois Tech, Alfred Caldwell, whose plan reinforced Mies's design with \"landscaping planted in a free-flowing manner, which in its interaction with the pristine qualities of the architecture, introduce[d] a poetic aspect.\"\nOn the west side of Mies Campus are three red brick buildings that were original to Armour Institute, built between 1891 and 1901.5 In 1938, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe began his 20-year tenure as director of IIT's School of Architecture.335 The university was on the verge of building a brand new campus, to be one of the nation's first federally funded urban renewal projects. Mies was given carte blanche in the large commission, and the university grew fast enough during and after World War II to allow much of the new plan to be realized. From 1943 to 1958, as many as 22 Mies buildings rose across campus.7 \nMies retired in 1958, and Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill (SOM) and Schmidt, Garden and Erikson took over as the campus architects.5 SOM architect Walter Netsch designed two buildings, including the new library that Mies had wished to create, while SOM's Myron Goldsmith designed four buildings. Schmidt, Garden &amp; Erikson designed four buildings for the IIT Research Institute during the 1960s. The new campus center, designed by Rem Koolhaas, and a new state-of-the-art residence hall designed by Helmut Jahn, State Street Village, opened in 2003. These were the first new buildings built on the Main Campus in 32 years. Illinois Tech opened its first new academic building in nearly 40 years in October 2018, when it dedicated the Ed Kaplan Family Institute for Innovation and Tech Entrepreneurship.\nNotable buildings.\nS. R. Crown Hall, erected in 1956, has been cited as one of Mies's greatest architectural achievements. To provide for a flexible, columnless interior, he suspended the roof from four steel girders supported by eight exterior columns spaced 60 feet apart. A $15\u00a0million renovation, completed in August 2005, modernized the structure while preserving its design. Additional improvements were completed in 2013.\nState Street Village (SSV), a student residence hall designed by Murphy/Jahn architects on the southeast corner of 33rd and State Streets just south of the campus center, was completed in July 2003. Helmut Jahn, who studied architecture at Illinois Tech under Mies van der Rohe in the late 1960s, is responsible for the innovative design of the residence hall. The structure is composed of three separate five-story buildings, joined by exterior glass walls that muffle noise from passing trains on the adjacent \"L\" tracks. SSV houses 367 students in apartment-style and suite-style units.\nThe McCormick Tribune Campus Center (MTCC) at 33rd and State Streets opened in September 2003. Designed by Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas, the campus center arranges various areas around diagonal pathways, resembling interior streets, that are extensions of the paths students use to cross the campus. The design includes a concrete and stainless steel tube that encloses a 530-foot stretch of the Green Line tracks, passing directly over the one-story campus center building. The tube dampens the sound of trains overhead as students enjoy food courts, student organization offices, retail shops, a recreational facility and campus events.\nThe newest addition to the Mies Campus came from Chicago architect, and College of Architecture professor John Ronan, who was selected to design the Ed Kaplan Family Institute for Innovation and Tech Entrepreneurship. Ronan's building, the first new academic building in more than 40 years, was completed in 2018. In 2019, the Kaplan Center won the American Institute of Architects Chicago Chapter' s highest architectural design award.\nSustainability.\nIn 2010, Illinois Tech received the Princeton Review's highest sustainability rating among universities in Illinois, tied with the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign.\nAcademics.\nIllinois Tech is divided into five colleges (College of Computing, Armour College of Engineering, Lewis College of Science and Letters, College of Architecture, Chicago-Kent College of Law), the Institute of Design, one school (Stuart School of Business), and a number of research centers, some of which provide academic programs independent of the other academic units. While many maintain undergraduate programs, some only offer graduate or certificate programs.\nIn 2003 Illinois Tech administrators split the former Armour College of Engineering and Science into two colleges known as the Armour College of Engineering and the College of Science and Letters. The Armour College of Engineering is composed of five departments: the Department of Biomedical Engineering, the Department of Biological and Chemical Engineering, the Department of Civil, Architectural and Environmental Engineering, the Department of Mechanical, Materials and Aerospace Engineering, and the Department of Computer and Electrical Engineering.\nIn 2013, Illinois Tech administrators reorganized the College of Science and Letters and Institute of Psychology, forming the College of Science (Department of Applied Mathematics, the Department of Biology, the Department of Chemistry, the Department of Physics, the Department of Computer Science, and the Department of Mathematics and Science Education), and the Lewis College of Human Sciences (the Department of Humanities, the Department of Psychology, and the Department of Social Sciences).\nThe Institute of Design was founded in 1937 as the New Bauhaus: Chicago School of Design by L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Moholy-Nagy. It became known as the Institute of Design in 1944 and later joined Illinois Institute of Technology in 1949.\nIllinois Tech also contains the College of Architecture. This college began in 1895 when trustees of Armour Institute and Art Institute merged the architectural programs of both schools to form the Chicago School of Architecture of Armour Institute.\nThe School of Applied Technology was founded as the Center for Professional Development in 2001 to provide technology oriented education for working professionals. In December 2009 Illinois Tech announced the formation of the School of Applied Technology, composed of undergraduate and graduate degree programs in Industrial Technology and Management (INTM) and Information Technology and Management (ITM), as well as non-credit Professional Learning Programs (PLP). These programs were all formerly part of the Center for Professional Development. Professional Learning Programs offers noncredit continuing education courses and certificates, corporate training, a Professional Engineering Exam Review program, international programs including English as a Second Language instruction, short courses and seminars ranging from a few hours to several days in length. In 2014 the Department of Food Science and Nutrition was formally launched within the School of Applied Technology, formed from degree programs originating within Illinois Tech's Institute for Food Safety and Health (IFSH). The School of Applied Technology was dissolved in June 2020; its departments and programs remained, split between the new College of Computing and Lewis College of Science and Letters.\nChicago-Kent College of Law began in 1886 with law clerks receiving tutorials from Appellate Judge Joseph M. Bailey to prepare for the newly instated Illinois Bar Examination. By 1888 these evening sessions developed into formal classes and the Chicago College of Law was established. It was not until 1969 that the school was incorporated into Illinois Institute of Technology.\nWith a bequest from Illinois Tech alumnus and financier Harold Leonard Stuart the Stuart School of Business was established in 1969. In addition to the M.B.A. and PhD, Stuart offers specialized programs in Finance, Mathematical Finance (provided in conjunction with the Illinois Tech Department of Applied Mathematics), Environmental Management and Sustainability (provided in conjunction with the Chicago-Kent College of Law and Department of Civic, Architectural, and Environmental Engineering), Marketing Analytics, and Public Administration. The PhD program in Management Science offers specializations in Finance and Analytics.\nIllinois Tech also offers many dual admission programs including programs in medicine, optometry, pharmacy, law, and business.\nStudent life.\nThere are numerous student organizations available on campus, including religious groups, academic groups, and student activity groups.\nThree of Illinois Tech's major student organizations serve the entire student body: the Student Government Association (SGA), the Student Union Board (UB), and \"TechNews\". SGA is the governing student body and acts as a liaison between university administration and the student body, serves as a forum to express student opinion, and provides certain services to student organizations such as official recognition and distribution of funds. Union Board serves as the main event programming group and plans more than 180 on- and off-campus events for students annually. Founded in 1938 UB is responsible for the emergence of the school spirit and booster group Scarlet Fever. \"TechNews\" is the campus paper and serves as a news outlet for campus interests and as another outlet for student opinion in both a weekly paper edition and online format; it has existed since at least the 1930s.\nIllinois Tech hosts a campus radio station, WIIT, with a radio studio in The McCormick Tribune Campus Center. WIIT was originally an AM radio station through the 1960s, using the name WIIT Radio 64. It was simulcast on AM 640 and stereo FM 88.9 by the end of January 1972. The station was forced to change its callsign to WOUI in 1972 because WIIT was similar to WAIT (AM). After the WAIT callsign was dropped, the IIT station eventually returned to its original call letters, WIIT, on February 23, 2001.\nIn September 2007 the university opened a nine-hole disc golf course that weaves around the academic buildings on Mies Campus and is the first disc golf course to appear within the Chicago city limits.\nIn anticipation of the opening of The McCormick Tribune Campus Center, the on-campus pub and bowling alley known as \"The Bog\" ceased operations in 2003. However, in response to students, faculty, and staff who missed the former campus hangout, The Bog reopened in February 2007 and offers bowling, billiards, table tennis, and video games. The Bog is also home to the campus bar, which serves beer and wine, and hosts weekly events such as comedians, live bands, or karaoke nights on its stage.\nIn fall 2007, the third generation of a cappella groups was formed, The TechTonics, a coed group of students. Within a year the organization expanded and now includes an all-male group, the Crown Joules, and an all-female group, the X-Chromotones. IIT A Cappella performs a variety of shows on campus as well as off campus and in the midwest. They also perform shows at the end of each semester.\nIllinois Institute of Technology Mies (Main) Campus has seven Illinois Tech fraternities (and one VanderCook College of Music fraternity) and three sororities. Fraternities Pi Kappa Phi, Delta Tau Delta, Alpha Sigma Phi, Phi Kappa Sigma, Sigma Phi Epsilon and Triangle Fraternity and sororities Kappa Phi Delta, and Alpha Sigma Alpha have chapter houses on The Quad. The Omega Delta fraternity does not.\nAthletics.\nThe Illinois Tech (IIT) athletic teams are called the Scarlet Hawks. The university is a member of the Division III level of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), primarily competing in the Northern Athletics Collegiate Conference (NACC) since the 2018\u201319 academic year; coinciding with the program's acceptance as a full NCAA Division III member. The Scarlet Hawks previously competed in the Division I level of the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA), primarily competing in the Chicagoland Collegiate Athletic Conference (CCAC) until after the 2012\u201313 season, as well as a member of the United States Collegiate Athletic Association (USCAA), until the athletic program completed the transition to NCAA Division III after the 2017\u201318 season (which competed during five seasons as an NCAA D-III Independent during its provisional member status from 2013\u201314 to 2017\u201318).\nIllinois Tech competes in 19 intercollegiate varsity sports: Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, lacrosse, soccer, swimming &amp; diving, tennis, track &amp; field (indoor and outdoor) and volleyball; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, lacrosse, soccer, swimming &amp; diving, tennis, track &amp; field (indoor and outdoor) and volleyball. Illinois Tech also has a cricket team as a part of non-varsity sports level that competes in Division II of the Midwest Cricket Conference.\nBasketball.\nIllinois Tech discontinued its men's and women's basketball programs after the 2008\u201309 season, but re-instated them beginning with the 2012\u201313 season. The men's basketball team played in its first USCAA Division I Championship in March 2017. Although the team lost to Concordia Alabama, the Scarlet Hawks finished the season at 22\u20136.\nTrack and field.\nIllinois Tech's oldest athletics program is track and field, with the Armour Institute team starting in 1893. The Lewis Institute team dominated the early 1900s with Olympic athletes like William Hogenson, Louis Wilkins, George M. Varnell, Harlan Page and Charles Dvorak. The latter would go on to become the first Track coach for Armour in 1905. The track program was boosted during World War II with the V-12 Navy program led by Norman Hankins, who would go on to be a 3-time NCAA All-American. In the early 1950's the team was captained by pole vaulter and future psychologist Irving Gottesman. The track program was disbanded after 1963 and was brought back as a club team in 2004 and as a varsity team in 2011. The team has produced 25 NCAA or NAIA National Qualifiers since inception.\nNotable faculty.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73302", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73302", "title": "Humphrey Davey", "text": ""}
{"id": "73303", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73303", "title": "Bedford, Virginia", "text": "Bedford is an incorporated town and former independent city located within Bedford County in the U.S. state of Virginia. It serves as the county seat of Bedford County. As of the 2020 census, the population was 6,657. It is part of the Lynchburg metropolitan area.\nBedford County surrounds the town and has the Blue Ridge Mountains to the north, Smith Mountain Lake to the south, Lynchburg to the east, and Roanoke to the west.\nHistory.\nBedford was originally known as Liberty, \"named after the Colonial victory over Cornwallis at Yorktown.\" Founded as a village in 1782, Liberty became Bedford County's seat of government, replacing New London which had become part of the newly formed Campbell County. Liberty became a town in 1839 and in 1890 changed its name to Bedford City. In 1912, Bedford reverted to town status, it resumed city status in 1968, and once more it reverted to a town in 2013.\nIn November 1923, the town was the site of an accidental mass poisoning in which nine men were killed after drinking apple cider served at the Elks National Home. A local farmer had produced the drink and stored in a barrel that had been used to hold a pesticide.\nBedford is home to the National D-Day Memorial (despite the \"National\" in its name, the memorial is owned and operated by a non-governmental, non-profit, education foundation). The United States Congress warranted that this memorial would be the nation's D-Day Memorial and President Bill Clinton authorized this effort in September 1996. President George W. Bush dedicated this memorial as the nation's D-Day memorial on June 6, 2001. Bedford lost more residents per capita in the Normandy landings than any other American community at almost 0.7%. Nineteen of the thirty-four Virginia National Guard soldiers from Bedford who were in Company A, 116th Infantry Regiment, 29th Infantry Division were killed on D-Day, and four more died during the rest of the Normandy campaign, two of them from other 116th companies. With a 1944 population of about 3,200, proportionally this community suffered the nation's most severe D-Day losses; explaining the location of the memorial.\nBedford was designated as an independent city in 1968, but remained the county seat of Bedford County. Its status as an independent city was ended on July 1, 2013, returning to a town within Bedford County.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (0.3%) is water.\nBedford sits at the foot of the Peaks of Otter.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAt the 2020 census there were 6,657 people in the town. There were 3,163 housing units. The racial makeup of the city was 74.4% White, 16.8% Black or African American, 0.2% American Indian, 0.7% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 1.2% from other races, and 6.7% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.9%.\n2000 census.\nAt the 2000 census there were 6,299 people in 2,519 households, including 1,592 families, in the then city. The population density was . There were 2,702 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 75.33% White, 22.38% Black or African American, 0.24% Native American, 0.57% Asian, 0.08% Pacific Islander, 0.24% from other races, and 1.16% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.89%.\nOf the 2,519 households, 27.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.0% were married couples living together, 17.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.8% were non-families. 33.0% of households were one person, and 15.7% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 2.87.\nIn the city the population was spread out, with 21.6% under the age of 18, 7.2% from 18 to 24, 27.8% from 25 to 44, 20.7% from 45 to 64, and 22.6% 65 or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.4 males.\nThe median household income was $29,792 and the median family income was $35,023. Males had a median income of $31,668 versus $18,065 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,423. About 11.4% of families and 12.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.4% of those under age 18 and 11.1% of those age 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the town's 2022 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, the top employers in the town are:\nEducation.\nBedford is served by Bedford County Public Schools. Public school students residing in Bedford are zoned to attend Bedford Elementary School, Liberty Middle School, and Liberty High School.\nWhen Bedford was an independent city, a \"Bedford City Public Schools\" school district existed. In 1959 Bedford town began to contract to the county school system. In 1984 there were plans to re-establish a separate municipal school system.\nCentral Virginia Community College operates a branch campus in Bedford.\nClimate.\nThe climate in this area is characterized by mild, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the K\u00f6ppen Climate Classification system, Bedford has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated \"Cfa\" on climate maps.\nTransportation.\nU.S. Route 221 runs through the town; and U.S. Route 460 circumvents the main part of town. State routes 43 and 122 converge onto the town.\nUntil the late 1960s, there were three different Southern Railway/Norfolk &amp; Western Railroad trains operating daily at Bedford station.\nAmtrak service to Roanoke travels through, but there were plans to build a new station stop in Bedford.\nInternational links.\nBedford has a Friendship Treaty with:\nBedford maintains relationships with 11 communities on the Normandy Coast of France. One sister city, Tr\u00e9vi\u00e8res, France, sent Bedford an exact replica of its own World War I memorial statue. The face of the statue was damaged in World War II by artillery fire from US forces retaking the town. The Bedford statue also bears these wounds and is erected on the grounds of the National D-Day Memorial.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73305", "revid": "123229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73305", "title": "Csar", "text": ""}
{"id": "73306", "revid": "170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73306", "title": "US Secretary Of State", "text": ""}
{"id": "73308", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73308", "title": "Marxist-Leninist", "text": ""}
