{"id": "73309", "revid": "1319567150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73309", "title": "Edinburgh Castle", "text": "Historic castle in Edinburgh, Scotland\nEdinburgh Castle () is a historic castle in Edinburgh, Scotland. It stands on Castle Rock, which has been occupied by humans since at least the Iron Age. There has been a royal castle on the rock since the reign of Malcolm III in the 11th century, and the castle continued to be a royal residence until 1633. From the 15th century, the castle's residential role declined, and by the 17th century it was principally used as a military garrison. Its importance as a part of Scotland's national heritage was recognised increasingly from the early 19th century onwards, and various restoration programmes have been carried out over the past century and a half.\nEdinburgh Castle has played a prominent role in Scottish history, and has served variously as a royal residence, an arsenal, a treasury, a national archive, a mint, a prison, a military fortress, and the home of the Honours of Scotland \u2013 the Scottish regalia. As one of the most important strongholds in the Kingdom of Scotland, the castle was involved in many historical conflicts from the Wars of Scottish Independence in the 14th century to the Jacobite rising of 1745. Research undertaken in 2014 identified 26 sieges in its 1,100-year history, giving it a claim to having been \"the most besieged place in Great Britain and one of the most attacked in the world\". Few of the present buildings pre-date the Lang Siege of 1573, when the medieval defences were largely destroyed by artillery bombardment. The most notable exceptions are St Margaret's Chapel from the early 12th century, which is regarded as the oldest building in Edinburgh, the Royal Palace, and the early 16th-century Great Hall. The castle is the site of the Scottish National War Memorial and the National War Museum. The British Army is still responsible for some parts of the castle, although its presence is now largely ceremonial and administrative. The castle is the regimental headquarters of the Royal Regiment of Scotland and the Royal Scots Dragoon Guards and houses their regimental museums, along with that of the Royal Scots.\nThe castle, in the care of Historic Environment Scotland, is Scotland's most (and the United Kingdom's second most) visited paid tourist attraction, with over 2.2\u00a0million visitors in 2019 and over 70 percent of leisure visitors to Edinburgh visiting the castle. As the backdrop to the Royal Edinburgh Military Tattoo during the annual Edinburgh Festival, the castle has become a recognisable symbol of Edinburgh in particular and of Scotland as a whole.\nHistory.\nPre-history of the Castle Rock.\nGeology.\nThe castle stands upon the plug of an extinct volcano, which is estimated to have risen about 350 million years ago during the lower Carboniferous period. The Castle Rock is the remains of a volcanic pipe, which cut through the surrounding sedimentary rock before cooling to form very hard dolerite, a type of basalt. Subsequent glacial erosion was resisted by the dolerite, which protected the softer rock to the east, leaving a crag and tail formation.\nThe summit of the Castle Rock is above sea level, with rocky cliffs to the south, west, and north, rising to a height of above the surrounding landscape. This means that the only readily accessible route to the castle lies to the east, where the ridge slopes more gently. The defensive advantage of such a site is self-evident, but the geology of the rock also presents difficulties, since basalt is extremely impermeable. Providing water to the Upper Ward of the castle was problematic, and despite the sinking of a deep well, the water supply often ran out during drought or siege, including during the Lang Siege in 1573.\nEarliest habitation.\nAn archaeological investigation has yet to establish when the Castle Rock was first used for human habitation. There is no record of any Roman interest in the location during General Agricola's invasion of northern Britain near the end of the 1st century AD. Ptolemy's map of the 2nd century AD shows a settlement in the territory of the Votadini named \"Alauna\", meaning \"rock place\", making this possibly the earliest known name for the Castle Rock. This could, however, refer to another of the tribe's hill forts in the area. The \"Orygynale Cronykil\" of Andrew of Wyntoun (c. 1350 \u2013 c. 1423), an early source for Scottish history, names \"Ebrawce\" (Ebraucus), a legendary King of the Britons, as having \"byggyd [built] Edynburgh\". According to the earlier chronicler, Geoffrey of Monmouth (c. 1100 \u2013 c. 1155), Ebraucus had fifty children by his twenty wives, and was the founder of \"Kaerebrauc\" (York), \"Alclud\" (Dumbarton) and the \"Maidens' Castle\". The 16th-century English writer John Stow (c. 1525 \u2013 1605), credited Ebraucus with building \"the Castell of Maidens called Edenbrough\" in 989 BC. The name \"Maidens' Castle\" ( or \"\") occurs frequently up until the 16th century. It appears in charters of David I (r. 1124\u20131153) and his successors in the Kingdom of Scotland, although the reason for it is not known. William Camden's survey of Britain, \"Britannia\" (1607), records that \"the Britans called [it] Castle Myned Agned [winged rock], the Scots, the Maidens Castle and the Virgins Castle, of certaine young maidens of the Picts roiall bloud who were kept there in old time\". According to the 17th-century antiquarian Father Richard Hay, the \"maidens\" were a group of nuns, who were ejected from the castle and replaced by canons, considered \"fitter to live among soldiers\". However, this story was considered \"apocryphal\" by the 19th-century antiquarian Daniel Wilson and has been ignored by historians since. The name may have been derived from a \"Cult of the Nine Maidens\" type of legend. Arthurian legends suggest that the site once held a shrine to Morgain la Fee, one of nine sisters. Later, St Monenna, said to be one of nine companions, reputedly invested a church at Edinburgh, as well as at Dumbarton and other places. Similar names are shared by many other Iron Age hillforts and may have simply described a castle that had never been taken by force or derived from an earlier Brittonic name like \"mag dun\".\nAn archaeological excavation in the early 1990s uncovered evidence of the site having been settled during the late Bronze Age or early Iron Age, potentially making Castle Rock the longest continuously occupied site in Scotland. However, the extent of the finds was not particularly significant and insufficient to draw any certain conclusions about the precise nature or scale of this earliest known phase of occupation.\nThe archaeological evidence is more reliable concerning the Iron Age. Traditionally, it had been supposed that the tribes of central Scotland had made little or no use of the Castle Rock. Excavations at nearby Dunsapie Hill, Duddingston, Inveresk and Traprain Law had revealed relatively large settlements and it was supposed that these sites had been chosen in preference to the Castle Rock. However, the excavation in the 1990s pointed to the probable existence of an enclosed hillfort on the rock, although only the fringes of the site were excavated. House fragments revealed were similar to Iron Age dwellings previously found in Northumbria.\nThe 1990s dig revealed clear signs of habitation from the 1st and 2nd centuries AD, consistent with Ptolemy's reference to \"Alauna\". Signs of occupation included some Roman material, including pottery, bronzes and brooches, implying a possible trading relationship between the Votadini and the Romans beginning with Agricola's northern campaign in AD 82, and continuing through to the establishment of the Antonine Wall around AD 140. The nature of the settlement in this period is inconclusive, but Driscoll and Yeoman suggest it may have been a broch, similar to the one at Edin's Hall near Duns in the Scottish Borders.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nThe castle does not re-appear in contemporary historical records from the time of Ptolemy until around AD 600. Then, in the epic Welsh poem \"Y Gododdin\" there is a reference to Din Eidyn, \"the stronghold of Eidyn\". This has been generally assumed to refer to the Castle Rock. The poem tells of the Gododdin King Mynyddog Mwynfawr, and his band of warriors, who, after a year of feasting in their fortress, set out to do battle with the Angles at \"Catreath\" (possibly Catterick) in Yorkshire. Despite performing glorious deeds of valour and bravery, the poem relates that the Gododdin were massacred.\nThe Irish annals record that in 638, after the events related in \"Y Gododdin\", \"Etin\" was besieged by the Angles under Oswald of Northumbria, and the Gododdin were defeated. The territory around Edinburgh then became part of the Kingdom of Northumbria, which was itself absorbed by England in the 10th century. Lothian became part of Scotland, during the reign of Indulf (r.954\u2013962).\nThe archaeological evidence for the period in question is based entirely on the analysis of middens (domestic refuse heaps), with no evidence of structures. Few conclusions can therefore be derived about the status of the settlement during this period, although the midden deposits show no clear break since Roman times.\nHigh Middle Ages.\nThe first documentary reference to a castle at Edinburgh is John of Fordun's account of the death of King Malcolm III (1031\u20131093). Fordun describes his widow, the future Saint Margaret, as residing at the \"Castle of Maidens\" when she is brought news of his death in November 1093. Fordun's account goes on to relate how Margaret died of grief within days, and how Malcolm's brother Donald Bane laid siege to the castle. However, Fordun's chronicle was not written until the later 14th century, and the near-contemporary account of the life of St Margaret by Bishop Turgot makes no mention of a castle. During the reigns of Malcolm III and his sons, Edinburgh Castle became one of the most significant royal centres in Scotland. Malcolm's son King Edgar died here in 1107.\nMalcolm's youngest son, King David I (r.1124\u20131153), developed Edinburgh as a seat of royal power principally through his administrative reforms (termed by some modern scholars the Davidian Revolution). Between 1139 and 1150, David held an assembly of nobles and churchmen, a precursor to the parliament of Scotland, at the castle. Any buildings or defences would probably have been of timber, although two stone buildings are documented as having existed in the 12th century. Of these, St. Margaret's Chapel remains at the summit of the rock. The second was a church, dedicated to St. Mary, which stood on the site of the Scottish National War Memorial. Given that the southern part of the Upper Ward (where Crown Square is now sited) was not suited to be built upon until the construction of the vaults in the 15th century, it seems probable that any earlier buildings would have been located towards the northern part of the rock; that is around the area where St. Margaret's Chapel stands. This has been suggested that the chapel is the last remnant of a square, stone keep, which would have formed the bulk of the 12th-century fortification. The structure may have been similar to the keep of Carlisle Castle, which David I began after 1135.\nDavid's successor King Malcolm IV (r.1153\u20131165) reportedly stayed at Edinburgh more than at any other location. But in 1174, King William \"the Lion\" (r.1165\u20131214) was captured by the English at the Battle of Alnwick. He was forced to sign the Treaty of Falaise to secure his release, in return for surrendering Edinburgh Castle, along with the castles of Berwick, Roxburgh and Stirling, to the English King, Henry II. The castle was occupied by the English for twelve years, until 1186, when it was returned to William as the dowry of his English bride, Ermengarde de Beaumont, who had been chosen for him by King Henry. By the end of the 12th century, Edinburgh Castle was established as the main repository of Scotland's official state papers.\nWars of Scottish Independence.\nA century later, in 1286, on the death of King Alexander III, the throne of Scotland became vacant. Edward I of England was appointed to adjudicate the competing claims for the Scottish crown, but used the opportunity to attempt to establish himself as the feudal overlord of Scotland. During the negotiations, Edward stayed briefly at Edinburgh Castle and may have received homage there from the Scottish nobles.\nIn March 1296, Edward I invaded Scotland, unleashing the First War of Scottish Independence. Edinburgh Castle soon came under English control, surrendering after a three-day-long bombardment. Following the siege, Edward had many Scottish legal records and royal treasures moved from the castle to England. A large garrison numbering 325 men was installed in 1300. Edward also brought to Scotland his master builders of the Welsh castles, including Thomas de Houghton and Master Walter of Hereford, both of whom travelled from Wales to Edinburgh. After the death of Edward I in 1307, however, England's control over Scotland weakened. On 14 March 1314, a surprise night attack by Thomas Randolph, 1st Earl of Moray recaptured the castle. John Barbour's narrative poem \"The Brus\" relates how a party of thirty hand-picked men was guided by one William Francis, a member of the garrison who knew of a route along the north face of the Castle Rock and a place where the wall might be scaled. Making the difficult ascent, Randolph's men scaled the wall, surprised the garrison and took control. Robert the Bruce immediately ordered the slighting of the castle to prevent its re-occupation by the English. Four months later, his army secured victory at the Battle of Bannockburn.\nAfter Bruce's death in 1329, Edward III of England determined to renew the attempted subjugation of Scotland and supported the claim of Edward Balliol, son of the former King John Balliol, over that of Bruce's young son David II. Edward invaded in 1333, marking the start of the Second War of Scottish Independence, and the English forces reoccupied and refortified Edinburgh Castle in 1335, holding it until 1341. This time, the Scottish assault was led by William Douglas, Lord of Liddesdale. Douglas's party disguised themselves as merchants from Leith bringing supplies to the garrison. Driving a cart into the entrance, they halted it there to prevent the gates from closing. A larger force hidden nearby rushed to join them and the castle was retaken. The 100 English men of the garrison were all killed.\nDavid's Tower and the 15th century.\nThe 1357 Treaty of Berwick brought the Wars of Independence to a close. David II resumed his rule and set about rebuilding Edinburgh Castle which became his principal seat of government. David's Tower was begun around 1367, and was incomplete when David died at the castle in 1371. It was completed by his successor, Robert II, in the 1370s. The tower stood on the site of the present Half Moon Battery connected by a section of curtain wall to the smaller Constable's Tower, a round tower built between 1375 and 1379 where the Portcullis Gate now stands.\nIn the early 15th century, another English invasion, this time under Henry IV, reached Edinburgh Castle and began a siege, but eventually withdrew due to lack of supplies. At least by 1436\u20131437, Sir William Crichton was Keeper or Governor of Edinburgh Castle, and soon after became Chancellor of Scotland. In an attempt to gain the regency of Scotland, Crichton sought to break the power of the Douglases, the principal noble family in the kingdom. The 16-year-old William Douglas, 6th Earl of Douglas, and his younger brother David were summoned to Edinburgh Castle in November 1440. After the so-called \"Black Dinner\" had taken place in David's Tower, both boys were summarily executed on trumped-up charges in the presence of the 10-year-old King James II (r.1437\u20131460). Douglas' supporters subsequently besieged the castle, inflicting damage. Construction continued throughout this period, with the area now known as Crown Square being laid out over vaults in the 1430s. Royal apartments were built, forming the nucleus of the later palace block, and a Great Hall was in existence by 1458. In 1464, access to the castle was improved when the current approach road up the north-east side of the rock was created to allow easier movement of the royal artillery train in and out of the area now known as the Upper Ward.\nIn 1479, Alexander Stewart, Duke of Albany, was imprisoned in David's Tower for plotting against his brother, King James III (r.1460\u20131488). He escaped by getting his guards drunk, and then lowering himself from a window on a rope. The duke fled to France, then England, where he allied himself with King Edward IV. In 1482, Albany marched into Scotland with Richard, Duke of Gloucester (later King Richard III), and an English army. James III was trapped in the castle from 22 July to 29 September 1482 until he successfully negotiated a settlement.\nDuring the 15th century, the castle was increasingly used as an arsenal and armaments factory. The first known purchase of a gun was in 1384, and the \"great bombard\" Mons Meg was delivered to Edinburgh in 1457. The first recorded mention of an armoury for the manufacture of guns occurs in 1474, and by 1498 the master gunner Robert Borthwick was casting bronze guns at Edinburgh. By 1511 Edinburgh was the principal foundry in Scotland, supplanting Stirling Castle, with Scottish and European smiths working under Borthwick, who by 1512 was appointed \"master melter of the king's guns\". Their output included guns for the Scottish flagship, the \"Great Michael\", and the \"Seven Sisters\", a set of cannons captured by the English at Flodden in 1513. Sir Thomas Howard, England's Lord Admiral, admired their graceful shape and brilliant finish, declaring them the most beautiful [cannon] for their size and length that he had ever seen. From 1510 Dutch craftsmen were also producing hand culverins, an early firearm. After Flodden, Borthwick continued his work, producing an unknown number of guns, but none have survived. He was succeeded by French smiths, who began manufacturing hagbuts (another type of firearm) in the 1550s, and by 1541 the castle had a stock of 413.\nMeanwhile, the royal family began to stay more frequently at the Abbey of Holyrood, about from the castle. Around the end of the fifteenth century, King James IV (r.1488\u20131513) built the Palace of Holyroodhouse, by the abbey, as his principal Edinburgh residence and the castle's role as a royal home subsequently declined. James IV did, however, construct the Great Hall, which was completed in the early 16th century, and the castle featured in his tournaments of the Wild Knight and the Black Lady. His daughter Margaret Stewart was lodged in the castle with her servant Ellen More.\n16th century and the Lang Siege.\nJames IV was killed in battle at Flodden Field, on 9 September 1513. Expecting the English to press their advantage, the Scots hastily constructed a town wall around Edinburgh and augmented the castle's defences. Robert Borthwick and a Frenchman, Antoine d'Arces, were involved in designing new artillery defences and fortifications in 1514, though it appears from lack of evidence that little of the planned work was carried out. Three years later, King James V (r.1513\u20131542), still only five years old, was brought to the castle for safety. Upon his death 25 years later, the crown passed to his week-old daughter, Mary, Queen of Scots. English invasions followed, as King Henry VIII attempted to force a dynastic marriage on Scotland. When the English burnt Edinburgh in May 1544 the gunner Andrew Mansioun firing from the castle destroyed an English cannon placed to bombard the forework. In 1547 disaffected members of the garrison who resented Regent Arran came to Norham Castle and offered to let the English in.\nRefortification in 1548 included an earthen angle-bastion, known as the Spur, of the type known as \"trace italienne\", one of the earliest examples in Britain. Brunstane Castle the home of the traitor Alexander Crichton was demolished to provide building materials. The Spur may have been designed by Migliorino Ubaldini, an Italian engineer from the court of Henry II of France, and was said to have the arms of France carved on it. James V's widow, Mary of Guise, acted as regent from 1554 until her death at the castle in 1560.\nThe following year, the Catholic Mary, Queen of Scots, returned from France to begin her reign, which was marred by crises and quarrels among the powerful Protestant Scottish nobility. In 1565, the Queen made an unpopular marriage with Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley. On 19 June 1566 in a small room of the Palace at Edinburgh Castle, she gave birth to their son James, who would later be King of both Scotland and England. Mary made plans to repair the castle and make it somewhat fairer than it had been. Mary's reign was, however, brought to an abrupt end. Three months after the murder of Darnley at Kirk o' Field in 1567, she married James Hepburn, 4th Earl of Bothwell, one of the chief murder suspects. A large proportion of the nobility rebelled, resulting ultimately in the imprisonment and forced abdication of Mary at Lochleven Castle. She escaped and fled to England, but some of the nobility remained faithful to her cause. Edinburgh Castle was initially handed by its captain, James Balfour, to the Regent Moray, who had forced Mary's abdication and now held power in the name of the infant King James VI. Shortly after the Battle of Langside, in May 1568, Moray appointed Sir William Kirkcaldy of Grange Keeper of the Castle.\nGrange was a trusted lieutenant of the Regent, but after Moray's murder in January 1570 his allegiance to the King's cause began to waver. Intermittent civil war continued between the supporters of the two monarchs, and in April 1571 Dumbarton Castle fell to \"the King's men\". Under the influence of William Maitland of Lethington, Mary's secretary, Grange changed sides, occupying the town and castle of Edinburgh for Queen Mary, and against the new regent, the Earl of Lennox. The stand-off which followed was not resolved until two years later, and became known as the \"Lang Siege\", from the Scots word for \"long\". Hostilities began in May, with a month-long siege of the town, and a second short siege in October. Blockades and skirmishing continued meanwhile, and Grange continued to refortify the castle. The King's party appealed to Elizabeth I of England for assistance, as they lacked the artillery and money required to reduce the castle, and feared that Grange would receive aid from France and the Duke of Alba in the Spanish Netherlands. Elizabeth sent ambassadors to negotiate, and in July 1572 a truce was agreed and the blockade lifted. The town was effectively surrendered to the King's party, with Grange confined to the castle.\nThe truce expired on 1 January 1573, and Grange began bombarding the town. His supplies of powder and shot, however, were running low, and despite having 40 cannons available, there were only seven gunners in the garrison. The King's forces, now with the Earl of Morton in charge as regent, were making headway with plans for a siege. Trenches were dug to surround the castle, and St Margaret's Well was poisoned. By February, all Queen Mary's other supporters had surrendered to the Regent, but Grange resolved to resist despite water shortages within the castle. The garrison continued to bombard the town, killing a number of citizens. They also made sorties to set fires, burning 100 houses in the town and then firing on anyone attempting to put out the flames.\nIn April, a force of around 1,000 English troops, led by Sir William Drury, arrived in Edinburgh. They were followed by 27 cannons from Berwick-upon-Tweed, including one that had been cast within Edinburgh Castle and captured by the English at Flodden. The English troops built an artillery emplacement on Castle Hill, immediately facing the east walls of the castle, and five others to the north, west and south. By 17 May these batteries were ready, and the bombardment began. Over the next 12 days, the gunners dispatched around 3,000 shots at the castle. On 22 May, the south wall of David's Tower collapsed, and the next day the Constable's Tower also fell. The debris blocked the castle entrance, as well as the Fore Well, although this had already run dry. On 26 May, the English attacked and captured the Spur, the outer fortification of the castle, which had been isolated by the collapse. The following day Grange emerged from the castle by a ladder after calling for a ceasefire to allow negotiations for a surrender to take place. When it was made clear that he would not be allowed to go free even if he ended the siege, Grange resolved to continue the resistance, but the garrison threatened to mutiny. He therefore arranged for Drury and his men to enter the castle on 28 May, preferring to surrender to the English rather than the Regent Morton. Edinburgh Castle was handed over to George Douglas of Parkhead, the Regent's brother, and the garrison was allowed to go free. In contrast, Kirkcaldy of Grange, his brother James and two jewellers, James Mossman and James Cokke, who had been minting coins in Mary's name inside the castle, were hanged at the Cross in Edinburgh on 3 August.\nNova Scotia and Civil War.\nMuch of the castle was subsequently rebuilt by Regent Morton, including the Spur, the new Half Moon Battery and the Portcullis Gate. Some of these works were supervised by William MacDowall, the master of work who fifteen years earlier had repaired David's Tower. The Half Moon Battery, while impressive in size, is considered by historians to have been an ineffective and outdated artillery fortification. This may have been due to a shortage of resources, although the battery's position obscuring the ancient David's Tower and enhancing the prominence of the palace block, has been seen as a significant decision.\nThe battered palace block remained unused, particularly after James VI departed to become King of England in 1603. James had repairs carried out in 1584, and in 1615\u20131616 more extensive repairs were carried out in preparation for his return visit to Scotland. The mason William Wallace and master of works James Murray introduced an early Scottish example of the double-pile block. The principal external features were the three, three-storey oriel windows on the east fa\u00e7ade, facing the town and emphasising that this was a palace rather than just a place of defence. During his visit in 1617, James held court in the refurbished palace block, but still preferred to sleep at Holyrood.\nIn 1621, King James granted Sir William Alexander the land in North America between New England and Newfoundland, as \"Nova Scotia\" (\"New Scotland\"). To promote the settlement and plantation of the new territory, the Baronetage of Nova Scotia was created in 1624. Under Scots law, baronets had to \"take sasine\" by symbolically receiving the earth and stone of the land of which they were baronet. To make this possible, since Nova Scotia was so distant, the King declared that sasine could be taken either in the new province or alternatively \"at the castle of Edinburgh as the most eminent and principal place of Scotland.\"\nJames' successor, King Charles I, visited Edinburgh Castle only once, hosting a feast in the Great Hall and staying the night before his Scottish coronation in 1633. This was the last occasion that a reigning monarch resided in the castle. In 1639, in response to Charles' attempts to impose Episcopacy on the Scottish Church, civil war broke out between the King's forces and the Presbyterian Covenanters. The Covenanters, led by Alexander Leslie, captured Edinburgh Castle after a short siege, although it was restored to Charles after the Peace of Berwick in June the same year. The peace was short-lived, however, and the following year the Covenanters took the castle again, this time after a three-month siege, during which the garrison ran out of supplies. The Spur was badly damaged and was demolished in the 1640s. The Royalist commander James Graham, 1st Marquis of Montrose, was imprisoned here after his capture in 1650.\nIn May 1650, the Covenanters signed the Treaty of Breda, allying themselves with the exiled Charles II against the English Parliamentarians, who had executed his father the previous year. In response to the Scots proclaiming Charles King, Oliver Cromwell launched an invasion of Scotland, defeating the Covenanter army at Dunbar in September. Edinburgh Castle was taken after a three-month siege, which caused further damage. The Governor of the Castle, Colonel Walter Dundas, surrendered to Cromwell despite having enough supplies to hold out, allegedly from a desire to change sides.\nGarrison fortress: Jacobites and prisoners of war.\nAfter his Restoration in 1660, Charles II opted to maintain a full-time standing army based on Cromwell's New Model Army. From this time until 1923, a garrison was continuously maintained at the castle. The medieval royal castle was transformed into a garrison fortress, but continued to see military and political action. The Marquis of Argyll was imprisoned here in 1661, when King Charles II settled old scores with his enemies following his return to the throne. Twenty years later, Argyll's son, the 9th Earl of Argyll, was also imprisoned in the castle for religious Nonconformism in the reign of King James VII. He escaped by disguising himself as his sister's footman, but was recaptured and returned to the castle after his failed rebellion to oust James from the throne in 1685.\nJames VII was deposed and exiled by the Glorious Revolution of 1688, which installed William of Orange as King of England. Not long after, in early 1689, the Estates of Scotland, after convening to accept William formally as their new king, demanded that Duke of Gordon, Governor of the Castle, surrender the fortress. Gordon, who had been appointed by James VII as a fellow Catholic, refused. In March 1689, the castle was blockaded by 7,000 troops against a garrison of 160 men, further weakened by religious disputes. On 18 March, Viscount Dundee, intent on raising a rebellion in the Highlands, climbed up the western side of the Castle Rock to urge Gordon to hold the castle against the new King. Gordon agreed, but during the ensuing siege he refused to fire upon the town, while the besiegers inflicted little damage on the castle. Despite Dundee's initial successes in the north, Gordon eventually surrendered on 14 June, due to dwindling supplies and having lost 70 men during the three-month siege.\nThe castle was almost taken in the first Jacobite rising in support of James Stuart, the \"Old Pretender\", in 1715. On 8 September, just two days after the rising began, a party of around 100 Jacobite Highlanders, led by Lord Drummond, attempted to scale the walls with the assistance of members of the garrison. However, the rope ladder lowered by the castle sentries was too short, and the alarm was raised after a change of the watch. The Jacobites fled, while the deserters within the castle were hanged or flogged. In 1728, General Wade reported that the castle's defences were decayed and inadequate, and a major strengthening of the fortifications was carried out throughout the 1720s and 1730s. This was the period when most of the artillery defences and bastions on the north and west sides of the castle were built. These were designed by military engineer Captain John Romer, and built by the architect William Adam. They include the Argyle Battery, Mills Mount Battery, the Low Defences and the Western Defences.\nThe last military action at the castle took place during the second Jacobite rising of 1745. The Jacobite army, under Charles Edward Stuart (\"Bonnie Prince Charlie\"), captured Edinburgh without a fight in September 1745, but the castle remained in the hands of its ageing Deputy Governor, General George Preston, who refused to surrender. After their victory over the government army at Prestonpans on 21 September, the Jacobites attempted to blockade the castle. Preston's response was to bombard Jacobite positions within the town. After several buildings had been demolished and four people killed, Charles called off the blockade. The Jacobites themselves had no heavy guns with which to respond, and by November they had marched into England, leaving Edinburgh to the castle garrison.\nOver the next century, the castle vaults were used to hold prisoners of war during several conflicts, including the Seven Years' War (1756\u20131763), the American War of Independence (1775\u20131783) and the Napoleonic Wars (1803\u20131815). During this time, several new buildings were erected within the castle, including powder magazines, stores, the Governor's House (1742), and the New Barracks (1796\u20131799).\n19th century to the present.\nA mass prison break in 1811, in which 49 prisoners of war escaped via a hole in the south wall, persuaded the authorities that the castle vaults were no longer suitable as a prison. This use ceased in 1814 and the castle began gradually to assume a different role as a national monument. In 1818, Sir Walter Scott was given permission to search the castle for the Crown of Scotland, believed lost after the union of Scotland and England in 1707. Breaking into a sealed room, now known as the Crown Room, and unlocking a chest within, he rediscovered the Honours of Scotland, which were then put on public display with an entry charge of one shilling. In 1822, King George IV made a visit to Edinburgh, becoming the first reigning monarch to visit the castle since Charles II in 1651. In 1829, the cannon Mons Meg was returned from the Tower of London, where it had been taken as part of the process of disarming Scotland after \"the '45\", and the palace began to be opened up to visitors during the 1830s. St Margaret's Chapel was \"rediscovered\" in 1845, having been used as a store for many years. Works in the 1880s, funded by the Edinburgh publisher William Nelson and carried out by Hippolyte Blanc, saw the Argyle Tower built over the Portcullis Gate and the Great Hall restored after years of use as a barracks. A new Gatehouse was built in 1888. During the 19th century, several schemes were put forward for rebuilding the whole castle as a Scottish baronial style \"ch\u00e2teau\". Work began in 1858, but was soon abandoned, and only the hospital building was eventually remodelled in 1897. Following the death of Prince Albert in 1861, the architect David Bryce put forward a proposal for a keep as a memorial, but Queen Victoria objected and the scheme was not pursued.\nIn 1905, responsibility for the castle was transferred from the War Office to the Office of Works, although the garrison remained until 1923, when the troops moved to Redford Barracks in south-west Edinburgh. The castle was again used as a prison during the First World War, when \"Red Clydesider\" David Kirkwood was confined in the military prison block, and during the Second World War, when downed German \"Luftwaffe\" pilots were captured. The position of Governor of Edinburgh Castle, vacant since 1876, was revived in 1935 as an honorary title for the General Officer Commanding in Scotland, the first holder being Lieutenant-General Sir Archibald Cameron of Lochiel. The castle passed into the care of Historic Scotland when it was established in 1991, and was designated a Scheduled Ancient Monument in 1993. The buildings and structures of the castle are further protected by 24 separate listings, including 13 at category A, the highest level of protection for a historic building in Scotland, and special care was taken when installing 31\u00a0kW solar panels on the roof of the War Memorial, obscured by its parapet. The Old and New Towns of Edinburgh, a World Heritage Site inscribed by UNESCO in 1995, is described as \"dominated by a medieval fortress\".\nDescription.\nEdinburgh Castle is located at the top of the Royal Mile, at the west end of Edinburgh's Old Town. The volcanic Castle Rock offers a naturally defended position, with sheer cliffs to north and south, and a steep ascent from the west. The only easy approach is from the town to the east, and the castle's defences are situated accordingly, with a series of gates protecting the route to the summit of the Castle Rock.\nOuter defences.\nIn front of the castle is a long sloping forecourt known as the Esplanade. Originally the Spur, a 16th-century hornwork, was located here. The present Esplanade was laid out as a parade ground in 1753, and extended in 1845. It is upon this Esplanade that the Edinburgh Military Tattoo takes place annually. From the Esplanade the Half Moon Battery is prominent, with the Royal Palace to its left.\nThe Gatehouse at the head of the Esplanade was built as an architecturally cosmetic addition to the castle in 1888. Statues of Robert the Bruce by Thomas Clapperton and William Wallace by Alexander Carrick were added in 1929, and the Latin motto \"Nemo me impune lacessit\" is inscribed above the gate. The dry ditch in front of the entrance was completed in its present form in 1742. Within the Gatehouse are offices, and to the north is the most recent addition to the castle; the ticket office, completed in 2008 to a design by Gareth Hoskins Architects. The road, built by James III in 1464 for the transport of cannon, leads upward and around to the north of the Half Moon Battery and the Forewall Battery, to the Portcullis Gate. In 1990, an alternative access was opened by digging a tunnel from the north of the esplanade to the north-west part of the castle, separating visitor traffic from service traffic.\nPortcullis Gate and Argyle Tower.\nThe Portcullis Gate was begun by the Regent Morton after the Lang Siege of 1571\u201373 to replace the round Constable's Tower, which was destroyed in the siege. In 1584 the upper parts of the Gatehouse were completed by William Schaw, and these were further modified in 1750. In 1886\u20131887 this plain building was replaced with a Scots Baronial tower, designed by the architect Hippolyte Blanc, although the original Portcullis Gate remains below. The new structure was named the Argyle Tower, from the fact that the 9th Earl of Argyll had been held here prior to his execution in 1685. Described as \"restoration in an extreme form\", the rebuilding of the Argyle Tower was the first in a series of works funded by the publisher William Nelson.\nJust inside the gate is the Argyle Battery overlooking Princes Street, with Mills Mount Battery, the location of the One O'Clock Gun, to the west. Below these is the Low Defence, while at the base of the rock is the ruined Wellhouse Tower, built in 1362 to guard St. Margaret's Well. This natural spring provided an important secondary source of water for the castle, the water being lifted up by a crane mounted on a platform known as the Crane Bastion.\nMilitary buildings.\nThe areas to the north and west of the Argyle Tower are largely occupied by military buildings erected after the castle became a major garrison in the early 18th century. Adjacent to Mills Mount are the 18th-century cart sheds, now tea rooms. The Governor's House to the south was built in 1742 as accommodation for the Governor, Storekeeper, and Master Gunner, and was used until the post of Governor became vacant in the later 19th century; it was then used by nurses of the castle hospital. Today, it functions as an officers' mess, and as the office of the Governor since the restoration of the post in 1936.\nSouth of the Governor's House is the New Barracks, completed in 1799 to house 600 soldiers, and replacing the outdated accommodation in the Great Hall. They now house the Regimental Headquarters of the Royal Regiment of Scotland and the Regimental Headquarters of the Royal Scots Dragoon Guards (Carabiniers and Greys) as well as the Royal Scots Dragoon Guards Museum. The latter was opened in 1995 by the regiment's Colonel, Queen Elizabeth II. Also nearby, in the former Royal Scots drill hall, constructed in 1900, is the Regimental Museum of the Royal Scots (The Royal Regiment). The military prison was built in 1842 as a detention block for the castle garrison and was extended in the 1880s. It was last used in 1923, when the garrison moved to the city's Redford Barracks.\nNational War Museum of Scotland.\nWest of the Governor's House, a store for munitions was built in 1747\u201348 and later extended to form a courtyard, in which the main gunpowder magazine also stood. In 1897 the area was remodelled as a military hospital, formerly housed in the Great Hall. The building to the south of this courtyard is now the National War Museum of Scotland, which forms part of the National Museums of Scotland. It was formerly known as the Scottish United Services Museum, and, prior to this, the Scottish Naval and Military Museum, when it was located in the Queen Anne Building. It covers Scotland's military history over the past 400 years, and includes a wide range of military artefacts, such as uniforms, medals and weapons. The exhibits also illustrate the history and causes behind the many wars in which Scottish soldiers have been involved. Beside the museum is Butts Battery, named after the archery butts (targets) formerly placed here. Below it are the Western Defences, where a postern, named the West Sally Port, gives access to the western slope of the rock.\nUpper Ward.\nThe Upper Ward or Citadel occupies the highest part of the Castle Rock, and is entered via the late 17th-century Foog's Gate. The origin of this name is unknown, although it was formerly known as the Foggy Gate, which may relate to the dense sea-fogs, known as haars, which commonly affect Edinburgh. Adjacent to the gates are the large cisterns built to reduce the castle's dependency on well water and a former fire station, now used as a shop. The summit of the rock is occupied by St Margaret's Chapel and 15th-century siege gun Mons Meg. On a ledge below this area is a small 19th-century Dogs' Cemetery for the burial of the soldiers' regimental mascots. Besides this, the Lang Stair leads down to the Argyle Battery, past a section of a medieval bastion, and gives access to the upper storey of the Argyle Tower. The eastern end of the Upper Ward is occupied by the Forewall and Half Moon Batteries, with Crown Square to the south.\nSt. Margaret's Chapel.\nThe oldest building in the castle and in Edinburgh is the small St. Margaret's Chapel. One of the few 12th-century structures surviving in any Scottish castle, it dates from the reign of King David I (r.1124\u20131153), who built it as a private chapel for the royal family and dedicated it to his mother, Saint Margaret of Scotland, who died in the castle in 1093. It survived the slighting of 1314, when the castle's defences were destroyed on the orders of Robert the Bruce, and was used as a gunpowder store from the 16th century when the present roof was built. In 1845, it was \"discovered\" by the antiquary Daniel Wilson, while in use as part of the larger garrison chapel, and was restored in 1851\u20131852. The chapel is still used for religious ceremonies, such as weddings. \nMons Meg.\nThe 15th-century siege gun or bombard known as Mons Meg is displayed on a terrace in front of St. Margaret's Chapel. It was constructed in the Flanders on the orders of Philip III, Duke of Burgundy, in 1449, and given as a gift to King James II, the husband of his niece, in 1457. The gun rests on a reconstructed carriage, the details of which were copied from an old stone relief that can be seen inside the tunnel of the Gatehouse at the castle entrance. Some of Meg's large gun stones, weighing around each, are displayed alongside it. On 3 July 1558, it was fired in salute to celebrate the marriage of Mary, Queen of Scots, to the French dauphin, Fran\u00e7ois II. The royal Treasurer's Accounts of the time record a payment to soldiers for retrieving one of her stones from Wardie Muir near the Firth of Forth, fully from the castle. The gun has been defunct since its barrel burst while firing a salute to greet the Duke of Albany, the future King James VII and II, on his arrival in Edinburgh on 30 October 1681.\nHalf Moon Battery and David's Tower.\nThe Half Moon Battery, which remains a prominent feature on the east side of the castle, was built as part of the reconstruction works supervised by the Regent Morton, and was erected between 1573 and 1588. The Forewall to the north was built between 1689 and 1695 to link the Half Moon to the Portcullis Tower, although part of the original wall of 1540 was incorporated into it. The Half Moon Battery was built around and over the ruins of David's Tower, two storeys of which survive beneath, with windows facing out onto the interior wall of the battery. David's Tower was built on an L-plan, the main block being , with a wing measuring to the west. The entrance was via a pointed-arched doorway in the inner angle, although in the 16th century this was filled in to make the tower a solid rectangle. Prior to the Lang Siege, the tower was recorded as being high, and the remaining portions stand up to from the rock.\nThe tower was rediscovered during routine maintenance work in 1912, and excavations below the Half Moon Battery revealed the extent of the surviving buildings. Several rooms are accessible to the public, although the lower parts are generally closed. Outside the tower, but within the battery, is a three-storey room, where large portions of the exterior wall of the tower are still visible, showing shattered masonry caused by the bombardment of 1573. Beside the tower, a section of the former curtain wall was discovered, with a gun loop which overlooked High Street: a recess was made in the outer battery wall to reveal this gun loop. In 1912\u20131913 the adjacent Fore Well was cleared and surveyed and was found to be deep, mostly hewn through the rock below the castle.\nCrown Square.\nCrown Square, also known as Palace Yard, was laid out in the 15th century, during the reign of King James III, as the principal courtyard of the castle. The foundations were formed by the construction of a series of large stone vaults built onto the uneven Castle Rock in the 1430s. These vaults were used as a state prison until the 19th century, although more important prisoners were held in the main parts of the castle. The square is formed by the Royal Palace to the east, the Great Hall to the south, the Queen Anne Building to the west, and the National War Memorial to the north.\nRoyal Palace.\nThe Royal Palace comprises the former royal apartments, which were the residence of the later Stewart monarchs. It was begun in the mid-15th century, during the reign of James IV, and it originally communicated with David's Tower. The building was extensively remodelled for the visit of James VI to the castle in 1617, when state apartments for the King and Queen were built. On the ground floor is the Laich (low) Hall, now called the King's Dining Room, and a small room, known as the Birth Chamber or Mary Room, where James VI was born to Mary, Queen of Scots, on 19 June 1566. The commemorative painted ceiling and other decorations were added in 1617. On the first floor is the vaulted Crown Room, built in 1615 to house the Honours of Scotland: the crown, the sceptre and the sword of state. The Stone of Scone, upon which the monarchs of Scotland were traditionally crowned, has been kept in the Crown Room since its return to Scotland in 1996. To the south of the palace is the Register House, built in the 1540s to accommodate state archives.\nGreat Hall.\nThe Great Hall measures , and was the chief place of state assembly in the castle, although there is no evidence that the Parliament of Scotland ever met here, as is sometimes reported. Historians have disagreed over its dating, although it is usually ascribed to the reign of King James IV, and is thought to have been completed in the early years of the 16th century. The decorative carved stone corbels supporting the roof have Renaissance detailing, which has been compared to works at Blois, France, of around 1515, indicating that the arts in Scotland were relatively advanced at this time. It is one of only two medieval halls in Scotland with an original hammerbeam roof.\nFollowing Oliver Cromwell's seizure of the castle in 1650, the Great Hall was converted into a barracks for his troops; and in 1737 it was subdivided into three storeys to house 312 soldiers. Following the construction of the New Barracks in the 1790s, it became a military hospital until 1897. It was then restored by Hippolyte Blanc in line with contemporary ideas of medieval architecture. The Great Hall is still occasionally used for ceremonial occasions, and has been used as a venue on Hogmanay for BBC Scotland's \"Hogmanay Live\" programme. To the south of the hall is a section of curtain wall from the 14th century with a parapet of later date.\nQueen Anne Building.\nIn the 16th century, this area housed the kitchens serving the adjacent Great Hall, and was later the site of the Royal Gunhouse. The present building was named after Queen Anne and was built during the attempted Jacobite invasion by the Old Pretender in 1708. It was designed by Captain Theodore Dury, military engineer for Scotland, who also designed Dury's Battery, named in his honour, on the south side of the castle in 1713. The Queen Anne Building provided accommodation for Staff Officers, but after the departure of the Army it was remodelled in the 1920s as the Naval and Military Museum, to complement the newly opened Scottish National War Memorial. The museum later moved to the former hospital in the western part of the castle, and the building now houses a function suite and an education centre.\nScottish National War Memorial.\nThe Scottish National War Memorial occupies a converted barrack block on the north side of Crown Square. It stands on the site of the medieval St. Mary's Church which was rebuilt in 1366, and was converted into an armoury in 1540. It was demolished in 1755, and the masonry reused to build a new North Barrack Block on the site. Proposals for a Scottish National War Memorial were put forward in 1917, during the First World War, and the architect Sir Robert Lorimer was appointed in 1919. Construction began in 1923, and the memorial was formally opened on 14 July 1927 by the Prince of Wales. The exterior is decorated with gargoyles and sculpture, while the interior contains monuments to individual regiments. The stained-glass windows are by Douglas Strachan.\nThe memorial commemorates Scottish soldiers, and those serving with Scottish regiments, who died in the two world wars and in more recent conflicts. Upon the altar within the Shrine, placed upon the highest point of the Castle Rock, is a sealed casket containing Rolls of Honour which list over 147,000 names of those soldiers killed in the First World War. After the Second World War, another 50,000 names were inscribed on Rolls of Honour held within the Hall, and further names continue to be added there. The memorial is maintained by a charitable trust.\nPresent use.\nEdinburgh Castle is in the ownership of the Scottish Ministers as heads of the devolved Scottish Government. The castle is run and administered, for the most part, by Historic Environment Scotland, an executive agency of the Scottish Government, although the Army remains responsible for some areas, including the New Barracks block and the military museums. Both Historic Environment Scotland and the Army share use of the Guardroom immediately inside the castle entrance.\nTourist attraction.\nHistoric Environment Scotland undertakes the dual tasks of operating the castle as a commercially viable tourist attraction, while simultaneously bearing responsibility for conservation of the site. Edinburgh Castle remains the most popular paid visitor attraction in Scotland, with over 2.2\u00a0million visitors in 2019. Historic Environment Scotland maintains a number of facilities within the castle, including two caf\u00e9s/restaurants, several shops, and numerous historical displays. An educational centre in the Queen Anne Building runs events for schools and educational groups, and employs re-enactors in costume and with period weaponry.\nMilitary role.\nDirect administration of the castle by the War Office came to an end in 1905, and in 1923 the Army formally moved to the city's new Redford Barracks. Nevertheless, the castle continues to have a strong connection with the Army, and is one of the few ancient castles in Britain that still has a military garrison, albeit for largely ceremonial and administrative purposes. Public duties performed by the garrison include guarding the Honours of Scotland, and armed sentries stand watch at the Gatehouse outside opening hours. The post of Governor of Edinburgh Castle is now a ceremonial post. The New Barracks contain both the Governor's House, which serves as the Officers' Mess, and the Regimental Headquarters of the Royal Regiment of Scotland. The Army retains responsibility for these and for the Royal Scots Museum and Royal Scots Dragoon Guards Museum.\nMilitary tattoo.\nA series of performances known as the Edinburgh Military Tattoo (since 2010 the Royal Edinburgh Military Tattoo) takes place on the Esplanade each year during August. The basis of each performance is a parade of the massed pipes and drums of the Scottish regiments, and since its inception in 1950 the tattoo has developed a complex format that includes a variety of performers invited from around the world, although still with a largely military focus. The climax of the evening is the lone piper on the castle battlements, playing a pibroch in memory of dead comrades-in-arms, followed by massed bands joining in a medley of traditional Scottish tunes. The tattoo attracts an annual audience of around 217,000 people, and is broadcast in some 30 countries to a television audience estimated at 100\u00a0million.\nOne O'Clock Gun.\nThe One O'Clock Gun is a time signal, fired every day at precisely one p.m., excepting Sunday, Good Friday and Christmas Day. The 'Time Gun' was established in 1861 as a time signal for ships in the harbour of Leith and the Firth of Forth, away. It complemented the 'Time Ball', which was installed on the Nelson Monument in 1852, but was useless as a visual signal in foggy weather. Because sound travels relatively slowly (approximately ), a map was produced in 1861 to show the actual time when the sound of the gun would be heard at various locations across Edinburgh.\nThe original gun was an 18-pound muzzle-loading cannon, which needed four men to load, and was fired from the Half Moon Battery. This was replaced in 1913 by a 32-pound breech-loader, and in May 1952 by a 25-pound Howitzer. The present One O'Clock Gun is an L118 Light Gun, brought into service on 30 November 2001.\nOn Sunday 2 April 1916, at an unknown time of day, the One O'Clock Gun was fired in vain at a German Zeppelin during an air raid, the gun's only known use in war.\nThe gun is now fired from Mill's Mount Battery, on the north face of the castle, by the District Gunner from the 105th Regiment Royal Artillery. Although the gun is no longer required for its original purpose, the ceremony has become a popular tourist attraction. The longest-serving District Gunner, Staff Sergeant Thomas McKay MBE, nicknamed \"Tam the Gun\", fired the One O'Clock Gun from 1979 until his retirement in January 2005. McKay helped establish the One O'Clock Gun Association, which opened a small exhibition at Mill's Mount, and published a book entitled \"What Time Does Edinburgh's One O'clock Gun Fire?\" In 2006 Sergeant Jamie Shannon, nicknamed \"Shannon the Cannon\", became the 29th District Gunner, and in 2006 Bombardier Allison Jones became the first woman to fire the gun.\nSymbol of Edinburgh.\nThe castle has become a recognisable symbol of Edinburgh, and of Scotland. It appears, in stylised form, on the coats of arms of the City of Edinburgh Council and the University of Edinburgh. It also features on the badge of No. 603 (City of Edinburgh) Squadron which was based at RAF Turnhouse (now Edinburgh Airport) during Second World War. Images of the castle are used as a logo by organisations including Edinburgh Rugby, the \"Edinburgh Evening News\", Hibernian F.C. and the Edinburgh Marathon. It also appears on the \"Castle series\" of Royal Mail postage stamps, and has been represented on various issues of banknotes issued by Scottish clearing banks. In the 1960s the castle was illustrated on \u00a35 notes issued by the National Commercial Bank of Scotland, and since 1987 it has featured on the reverse of \u00a31 notes issued by the Royal Bank of Scotland. Since 2009 the castle, as part of Edinburgh's World Heritage Site, has appeared on \u00a310 notes issued by the Clydesdale Bank. The castle is a focal point for annual fireworks displays which mark Edinburgh's Hogmanay (new year) celebrations, and the end of the Edinburgh Festival in the summer.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73310", "revid": "11874933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73310", "title": "Livermore", "text": "Livermore may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "73311", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73311", "title": "Falmouth, Cornwall", "text": "Town in Cornwall, England\nFalmouth ( ; ) is a town, civil parish and port on the River Fal on the south coast of Cornwall, England, United Kingdom.\nFalmouth was founded in 1613 by the Killigrew family on a site near the existing Pendennis Castle. It developed as a port on the Carrick Roads harbour, overshadowing the earlier town of Penryn. In the 19th century after the arrival of the railways, tourism became important to its economy. In modern times, both industries maintain a presence in Falmouth and the town is also home to the National Maritime Museum Cornwall, a campus of Falmouth University and Falmouth Art Gallery. At the 2021 census the parish had a population of 24,032.\nEtymology.\nThe name Falmouth is of English origin, a reference to the town's situation on the mouth of the River Fal. The Cornish language name, \"Aberfala\" or \"Aberfal\", is of identical meaning.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nIn 1540, Henry VIII built Pendennis Castle in Falmouth to defend Carrick Roads. The main town of the district was then at Penryn. A late-16th century map shows 'Arweneck' manor house with some ordinary dwellings at 'Smithick, alias Pennycomequick' near today's Market Strand. Pennycomequick is an Anglicisation of the Celtic 'head of the creek'; there is still a Pennycomequick district in Plymouth.\nIn the late 16th century, under threat from the Spanish Armada, the defences at Pendennis were strengthened by the building of angled ramparts. During the Civil War, Pendennis Castle was the second to last fort to surrender to the Parliamentary Army.\nSir John Killigrew created the town of Falmouth shortly after 1613.\nAfter the Civil War, Sir Peter Killigrew received royal patronage when he gave land for the building of the Church of King Charles the Martyr, dedicated to Charles I, \"the Martyr\".\nThe seal of Falmouth was blazoned as \"An eagle displayed with two heads and on each wing with a tower\" (based on the arms of Killigrew). The arms of the borough of Falmouth were \"Arg[ent]. a double-headed eagle displayed Sa[ble]. each wing charged with a tower Or. in base issuant from the water barry wavy a rock also Sa. thereon surmounting the tail of the eagle a staff also proper flying therefrom a pennant Gu[les]\".\nBeing the nearest large harbour to the entrance of the English Channel, two Royal Navy squadrons were permanently stationed here. In the 1790s one was under the command of Sir Edward Pellew (later Viscount Exmouth) and the other under the command of Sir John Borlase Warren. Each squadron consisted of five frigates, with either 32 or 44 guns. Pellew's flagship was HMS \"Indefatigable\" and Warren's HMS \"R\u00e9volutionnaire\". At the time of the French Revolutionary Wars, battle ships and small vessels were continually arriving with war prizes taken from the French ships and prisoners of war. Near Penryn, at Tregellick and Roscrow, were two large camps for the French prisoners.\nThe Old Town Hall in the High Street was completed in 1710. The corporation moved to a new town hall on The Moor, now the Palacio Lounge, in 1866.\nThe Falmouth Packet Service operated out of Falmouth for over 160 years between 1689 and 1851. Its purpose was to carry mail to and from Britain's growing empire. At the end of the 18th century, there were thirty to forty, small, full rigged, three-masted ships. The crews were hand picked and both officers and men often made large fortunes from the private contraband trade they took part in, while under the protection of being a Government ship, free from customs and excise searches and therefore payment of duty. Captain John Bullock worked in the Packet Service and built Penmere Manor in 1825.\n19th and 20th centuries.\nIn 1805 news of Britain's victory and Admiral Nelson's death at Trafalgar reached Falmouth from the schooner \"Pickle\" and was taken to London by post chaise. On 2 October 1836 anchored at Falmouth at the end of her noted survey voyage around the world. That evening, Charles Darwin left the ship and took the Mail coach to his family home at The Mount, Shrewsbury. The ship stayed a few days and Captain Robert FitzRoy visited the Fox family at nearby Penjerrick Gardens. Darwin's shipmate Sulivan later made his home in the nearby waterside village of Flushing, then home to many naval officers.\nIn 1839 Falmouth was the scene of a gold dust robbery when \u00a347,600 worth of gold dust from Brazil was stolen on arrival at the port.\nThe Falmouth Docks were developed from 1858, and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution (RNLI) opened Falmouth Lifeboat Station nearby in 1867. The present building dates from 1993 and also houses HM Coastguard. The RNLI operates two lifeboats from Falmouth: \"Richard Cox Scott\", a all-weather boat, and B-916 \"Robina Nixon Chard\", an Atlantic 85 inshore lifeboat.\nNear the town centre is Kimberley Park, named after the Earl of Kimberley who leased the park's land to the borough of Falmouth. Today the park has exotic and ornate plants and trees.\nFalmouth was connected to Plymouth and the rest of the United Kingdom by electric telegraph on 30 August 1857. The telegraph office was adjoining the Custom House and Globe Hotel. In 1869 the telegraph office moved to the new Falmouth Post Office on Church Street.\nA telephone trunk line to Falmouth was opened in January 1899. It was noted in Lake's Falmouth Packet and Cornwall Advertiser of 14 January 1899 that \"the tariff for conversations carried on over any distance is too high to suggest the use of the telephone for anything except urgent business\". The exchange was over the Post Office on The Moor.\nThe Cornwall Railway reached Falmouth on 24 August 1863. The railway brought new prosperity to Falmouth, as it made it easy for tourists to reach the town. It also allowed the swift transport of the goods recently disembarked from the ships in the port. The town now has three railway stations. Falmouth Docks railway station is the original terminus and is close to Pendennis Castle and Castle beach. Falmouth Town railway station was opened on 7 December 1970 and is convenient for the National Maritime Museum Cornwall, the waterfront, Gyllyngvase beach and town centre.\nPenmere railway station opened on 1 July 1925 towards the north of Falmouth and within easy walking distance of the top of The Moor. All three stations are served by regular trains from Truro on the Maritime Line. Penmere Station was renovated in the late 1990s, using the original sign and materials.\nThe town saw a total eclipse of the Sun at 11:11\u00a0a.m. on 11 August 1999. This eclipse lasted just over two minutes at Falmouth, the longest duration in the United Kingdom.\nSecond World War.\nDuring World War II, 31 people were killed in Falmouth by German bombing. An anti-submarine net was laid from Pendennis to St Mawes, to prevent enemy U-boats entering the harbour.\nIt was the launching point for the St Nazaire Raid in 1942. Between 1943 and 1944, Falmouth was a base for American troops preparing for the D-Day invasions. Many of the troops involved embarked from Falmouth harbour and the surrounding rivers and creeks. There are commemorative plaques at Turnaware Point, Falmouth Watersports marina, Tolverne and Trebah gardens. The United States Navy had a large base in Falmouth harbour as well.\nPost War.\nThe , a cargo vessel that had sailed from Hamburg on 21 December 1951, ran into a storm on the Western Approaches to the English Channel. A crack appeared on her deck and the cargo shifted. A number of vessels went to her aid including the tug \"Turmoil\" which was stationed in Falmouth, but they found it initially impossible to take the \"Flying Enterprise\" in tow. The ship was finally taken in tow on 5 January 1952 by the \"Turmoil\" when she was some from Falmouth. It took several days to reach port. On 10 January the tow line parted when the ship was still from Falmouth. Two other tugs joined the battle to save the ship and cargo, but the \"Flying Enterprise\" finally sank later that day. Captain Carlsen and the tug's mate Kenneth Dancy, the only crew members still on board, were picked up by \"Turmoil\" and taken to Falmouth to a hero's welcome.\nGovernance.\nThere are two tiers of local government covering Falmouth, at parish (town) and unitary authority level: Falmouth Town Council and Cornwall Council. The town council has its offices at the Old Post Office on The Moor, and meets at the adjoining Municipal Building (built 1896), which also houses the town's library and an art gallery.\nFor elections to Cornwall Council, there are four electoral divisions with Falmouth in their names: Falmouth Arwenack, Falmouth Boslowick, Falmouth Penwerris, Falmouth Smithick, and Falmouth Tescobeads and Budock (the latter also covers the parish of Budock). Each division elects one councillor.\nAdministrative history.\nFalmouth historically formed part of the ancient parish of Budock in the Kerrier Hundred of Cornwall. The town was incorporated as a borough by a charter from Charles II dated 5 October 1661. Three years later, in 1664, a new parish of Falmouth was also created from part of Budock. The borough only covered the core of the nascent town, comprising of land around High Street, Market Street and Church Street, whereas the parish also covered surrounding rural areas ceded from Budock. The borough was reformed to become a municipal borough in 1836 under the Municipal Corporations Act 1835, which standardised how most boroughs operated across the country.\nThe urban area increasingly grew beyond the borough boundaries, and in 1864 the part of Falmouth parish outside the borough was made a local government district administered by an elected local board. After 1864 there was therefore a borough council responsible for the central part of the town and a separate local board responsible for the suburbs. Parish responsibilities under the poor laws were also administered separately for the borough and the remainder of Falmouth parish outside the borough. As such these two areas became separate civil parishes called Falmouth Borough and Falmouth in 1866, when the legal definition of 'parish' was changed to be the areas used for administering the poor laws.\nBy 1892, it was estimated that the borough only contained a third of the population of the urban area. The borough was therefore extended in 1892 to take in Falmouth parish (the local board of which was abolished) plus parts of Budock parish, including Pendennis Castle south of the town and the area around Greenbank Quay north of the town. Civil parish boundaries were not automatically changed by the borough's extension in 1892. The parishes within the borough were subsequently united into a single parish of Falmouth matching the borough in 1920. The borough was enlarged again in 1934, taking in further areas west of the town.\nThe borough of Falmouth was abolished in 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972, when the area became part of the Carrick district. A successor parish called Falmouth was created at the same time, covering the area of the abolished borough. As part of the 1974 reforms, parish councils were given the right to declare their parishes to be a town, allowing them to take the title of town council and giving the title of mayor to the council's chairperson. The new parish council for Falmouth exercised this right, taking the name Falmouth Town Council.\nCarrick district was abolished in 2009. Cornwall County Council then took on district-level functions, making it a unitary authority, and was renamed Cornwall Council.\nEconomy, industry and tourism.\nWhile Falmouth's maritime activity has much declined from its heyday, the docks are still a major contributor to the town's economy. It is the largest port in Cornwall. Falmouth remains a cargo port and the bunkering of vessels and the transfer of cargoes also keep the port's facilities busy. The port is popular with cruise ship operators.\nFurther up the sheltered reaches of the Fal there are often several ships laid up, awaiting sailing orders and/or new owners/charterers.\nFalmouth is a popular holiday destination and it is now primarily a tourist resort. The five main beaches starting next to Pendennis Castle and moving along the coast towards the Helford river are Castle, Tunnel, Gyllyngvase, Swanpool and Maenporth beaches. The National Maritime Museum Cornwall opened in February 2003. The building was designed by the architect M. J. Long.\nThe \"Falmouth &amp; Penryn Packet\", first published in 1858, is still based in the town as the lead title in a series of Packet Newspapers for central and western Cornwall.\nThe West Briton newspaper, first published in 1810, is a weekly tabloid newspaper which has a \"Falmouth &amp; Penryn\" edition reporting on the area.\nCulture.\nFalmouth has many literary connections. The town was the birthplace of Toad, Mole and Rat: Kenneth Grahame's classic \"The Wind in the Willows\" began as a series of letters sent to his son. The first two were written at the Greenbank Hotel whilst Grahame was a guest in May 1907. Reproductions of the letters are currently on display in the hotel. \"Poldark\" author Winston Graham knew the town well and set his novel \"The Forgotten Story\" (1945) in Falmouth.\nThe town has been the setting for several films and television programmes. British film star Will Hay was a familiar face in Falmouth in 1935 whilst filming his comedy \"Windbag the Sailor\". The film had many scenes of the docks area. The docks area was featured in some scenes with John Mills for the 1948 film \"Scott of the Antarctic\". Robert Newton, Bobby Driscoll and other cast members of the 1950 Walt Disney film \"Treasure Island\" (some scenes were filmed along the River Fal) were visitors to the town. Stars from the BBC TV serial \"The Onedin Line\" stayed in the town during filming in the late 1970s. In 2011 Paramount Pictures filmed parts of the film \"World War Z\" starring Brad Pitt in Falmouth Docks and off the coast.\nFalmouth had the first \"Polytechnic\": Royal Cornwall Polytechnic Society which went into administration briefly in 2010 but is now a feature of the town with frequent art exhibitions, stage performances and an art house cinema.\nFalmouth is home to many theatre groups, including Falmouth Theatre Company, Falmouth Young Generation and Amity Theatre. Falmouth Theatre Company, also known as FTC, is the oldest local company with performances dating back to 1927.\nThe Falmouth Art Gallery is a public gallery with a diverse 19th and 20th century art collection including many notable modern Cornish artists exhibited in four to five seasonal exhibitions a year, as well as a \"family friendly and free\" community and schools education programme.\nFalmouth has its own community radio station Source FM broadcasting on 96.1 FM and online.\nIn 2016, Falmouth won the \"Great British High Street 2016\" award, in the 'Coastal Community' category.\nReligious sites.\nThe Anglican parish churches are dedicated to King Charles the Martyr and to All Saints. A third church is St Michael's Church, Penwerris. The Roman Catholic church of St Mary Immaculate is in Killigrew Street. It was designed by J. A. Hansom and built in 1868; the tower and spire (1881) are by J. S. Hansom; the baptistery and porch were added in 1908 to the original designs. The style is a blend of Gothic and Burgundian Romanesque, creating a very French effect. Two of the stained glass windows are early works of Dom Charles Norris. Falmouth Methodist Church is also in Killigrew Street; the street fa\u00e7ade is \"one of the grandest expressions of Methodism in Cornwall\". The United Reformed Church (originally Bible Christian) is in Berkeley Vale. The former synagogue (1816) is one of the earliest surviving synagogue buildings in England; it was in use until 1879.\nTransport.\nFalmouth harbour.\nFalmouth is famous for its harbour. Together with Carrick Roads, it forms the third deepest natural harbour in the world, and the deepest in Western Europe. It has been the start or finish point of various round-the-world record-breaking voyages, such as those of Robin Knox-Johnston and Dame Ellen MacArthur.\nRoad.\nFalmouth is a terminus of the A39 road, connecting to Bath, Somerset some distant although such a route has now been surpassed by the A303, A37 and A367. The A39 connects Falmouth with the A30 via Truro. The A30 provides a fast link between Falmouth and the M5 motorway at Exeter to the northeast.\nMost commercial bus services are provided by First Kernow who have an outstation in Falmouth. Other services are run by Office &amp; Transport Services on behalf of Transport for Cornwall.\nRailway.\nFalmouth has three railway stations (described above) at the southern end of an branch line (the Maritime Line) from Truro. The train takes roughly 28 minutes inbound and 24 minutes outbound with stops at Perranwell, Penryn, Penmere, Falmouth Town and Falmouth Docks.\nFerries.\nFalmouth has regular ferry routes connecting to St Mawes, Flushing and Trelissick, Malpas and Truro.\nEducation.\nThere are five primary schools in the town and one secondary school, namely Falmouth School.\nFalmouth University has a campus at the original town site, Woodlane, and another in the Combined Universities in Cornwall campus at Tremough, Penryn, which it shares with the University of Exeter. It offers undergraduate and postgraduate courses chiefly in the fields of Art, Design and Media. The University of Exeter, Cornwall Campus offers a range of undergraduate and postgraduate courses, often with a particular focus on the environment and sustainability, and also hosts the world-renowned Camborne School of Mines (formerly located nearby in Camborne), which specialises in the understanding and management of the Earth's natural processes, resources and the environment.\nIn 2015, actor and comedian Dawn French was installed as Falmouth University's chancellor.\nFalmouth Marine School, formerly Falmouth Technical College, specialises in traditional and modern boat-building, marine engineering, marine environmental science and marine leisure sport. The campus is part of Cornwall College.\nSport and recreation.\nThe town has a football team in the Southern Football League Division One South, Falmouth Town A.F.C., who play at Bickland Park in the north-west of the town, and also Falmouth RFC, a rugby union club who play at The Recreation Ground, a site at the top of The Moor.\nFalmouth is also home to one of Cornwall's biggest cricket clubs, where four teams represent the town in the Cornwall Cricket League, with the 1st team playing in the Cornwall Premier League. Falmouth CC play at the Trescobeas ground on Trescobeas Road.\nWith its proximity to sheltered and unsheltered waters, Falmouth has long been a popular boating and water sports location. It is, for example, a centre of Cornish pilot gig rowing, the home of Gyllyngvase Surf Life Saving Club (founded 2008) and a popular location for sea swimming. Solo yachtsman Robert Manry crossed the Atlantic from Falmouth, Massachusetts (which is named after Falmouth) to Falmouth, Cornwall, from June\u2013August 1965 in the thirteen-and-a-half-foot \"Tinkerbelle\"\u2014this was the smallest boat to make the crossing at the time. The town was the location for the 1966, 1982 and 1998 and 2014 Tall Ships' Race in which approximately ninety Tall Ships set sail for Lisbon, Portugal. The town is also hosted the start of the 2021 race.\nCornish wrestling.\nFalmouth has been a major centre for Cornish wrestling for centuries. Tournaments were often badged as \"the championship of the West of England\". Bouts were held at various venues around the town, including Pendennis Castle. Alfred Ernest Trenoweth (1868\u20131942) from Falmouth was well known as light weight champion wrestler of Cornwall. Another champion wrestler from Falmouth was Pellew, who was especially notable, since he only had one arm!\nTwinning.\nFalmouth is twinned with Douarnenez in Brittany, France and Rotenburg an der W\u00fcmme, in Lower Saxony, Germany.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73312", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73312", "title": "Maldives/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "73313", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73313", "title": "Hippolytus of Rome", "text": "Christian theologian and saint (c. 170 \u2013 c. 235)\nHippolytus of Rome ( , ; Romanized: , c.\u2009170 \u2013 c.\u2009235 AD) was a bishop of Rome and one of the most important Christian theologians of the second and third centuries whose provenance, identity, and corpus remain elusive to scholars and historians. Suggested communities include Rome, Palestine, Egypt, Anatolia, and other regions of the Middle East. The best historians of literature in the ancient church, including Eusebius and Jerome, openly admit they cannot name where Hippolytus the biblical commentator and theologian served in leadership. They had read his works but did not possess evidence of his community. Photios I of Constantinople describes him in his \"Bibliotheca\" (cod. 121) as a disciple of Irenaeus, who was said to be a disciple of Polycarp; from the context, it seems Photios was suggesting Hippolytus publicly identified himself in this way. But this assertion is doubtful. One older theory claims he came into conflict with the popes of his time and seems to have headed a schismatic group as a rival to the bishop of Rome, thus becoming an antipope. In this view, he opposed the Roman popes because they softened the penitential system to accommodate the large number of new pagan converts. However, he was reconciled to the Church before he died as a martyr.\nStarting in the fourth century, various legends arose identifying him as a priest of the Novatianist schism or as a soldier converted by Saint Lawrence. He has also been confused with another martyr of the same name. Pope Pius IV identifies him as \"Saint Hippolytus, Bishop of Pontus\", martyred in the reign of Severus Alexander, using as a source an inscription on a statue found at the Church of Saint Lawrence in Rome and kept at the Vatican.\nLife.\nLittle is known for certain about his community of origin. One Victorian theory suggested that as a presbyter of the church at Rome under Pope Zephyrinus (199\u2013217 AD), Hippolytus was distinguished for his learning and eloquence. It was at this time that Origen, then a young man, heard him preach.\nIn this view, Hippolytus accused Pope Zephyrinus of modalism, the heresy which held that the names Father and Son are simply different names for the same subject. Hippolytus championed the Logos doctrine of the Greek apologists, most notably Justin Martyr, which distinguished the Father from the Logos (\"Word\"). An ethical conservative, he was scandalized when Pope Callixtus I (217\u2013222 AD) extended absolution to Christians who had committed grave sins, such as adultery.\nSome suggest Hippolytus himself advocated a pronounced rigorism. At this time, he seems to have allowed himself to be elected as a rival Bishop of Rome, and continued to attack Pope Urban I (222\u2013230 AD) and Pope Pontian (230\u2013235 AD). G. Salmon suggests that Hippolytus was the leader of the Greek-speaking Christians of Rome. Allen Brent sees the development of Roman house-churches into something akin to Greek philosophical schools gathered around a compelling teacher.\nAlso under this view: during the persecution at the time of Emperor Maximinus Thrax, Hippolytus and Pontian were exiled together in 235 to Sardinia, likely dying in the mines. It is quite probable that, before his death there, he was reconciled to the other party at Rome, for, under Pope Fabian (236\u2013250 AD), his body and that of Pontian were brought to Rome. The so-called \"Chronography of 354\" (more precisely, the \"Liberian Catalogue\") reports that on 13 August, probably in 236, the two bodies were interred in Rome, that of Hippolytus in a cemetery on the Via Tiburtina (now known as the Catacomb of Sant'Ippolito), his funeral being conducted by Justin the Confessor. This document indicates that, by about 255, Hippolytus was considered a martyr and gives him the rank of a priest, not of a bishop, an indication that before his death the schismatic was received again into the Church.\nLegends.\nThe name Hippolytus appears in various hagiographical and martyrological sources of the early Church. The facts about the life of the writer Hippolytus, as opposed to other celebrated Christians who bore the name Hippolytus, were eventually lost in the West, perhaps partly because he wrote in Hellenic Greek. Pope Damasus I dedicated to a Hippolytus one of his famous epigrams, referring to a priest of the Novatianist schism, a view later forwarded by Prudentius in the 5th century in his \"Passion of St Hippolytus\". In the Passionals of the 7th and 8th centuries, he is represented as a soldier converted by Saint Lawrence, a legend that long survived in the Roman Breviary. He was also confused with a martyr of the same name who was buried in Portus, of which city he was believed to have been a bishop, who was put to death by drowning in a deep well.\nAccording to Prudentius' account, a martyr Hippolytus was dragged to death by wild horses, a striking parallel to the story of the mythological Hippolytus, who was dragged to death by wild horses at Athens. He described the subterranean tomb of the saint and states that he saw there a picture representing Hippolytus' execution. He also confirms 13 August as the date on which a Hippolytus was celebrated but this again refers to the convert of Lawrence, as preserved in the Menaion of the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nThe latter account led to a Hippolytus being considered the patron saint of horses. During the Middle Ages, sick horses were brought to St Ippolyts, Hertfordshire, England, where a church is dedicated to him.\nWritings.\nControversy surrounds the corpus of the writer Hippolytus. In the Victorian era, scholars claimed his principal work to be the \"Refutation of all Heresies\". Of its ten books, Book I was the most important. It was long known and was printed (with the title \"Philosophumena\") among the works of Origen. Books II and III are lost, and Books IV\u2013X were found, without the name of the author, in a monastery of Mount Athos in 1842. Emmanuel Miller published them in 1851 under the title \"Philosophumena\", attributing them to Origen of Alexandria. Recent scholarship prefers to treat the text as the work of an unknown author, perhaps of Roman origin.\nIn 1551 a marble statue of a seated figure (originally female, perhaps personifying one of the sciences) was purportedly found in the cemetery of the Via Tiburtina and was heavily restored. On the sides of the seat was carved a paschal cycle, and on the back the titles of numerous writings by Hippolytus. Many other works are listed by Eusebius and Jerome. The research of Guarducci showed the original statue was a representation of a female figure, reopening the question of its original purpose. Allen Brent analyzed the title list of the statue, questioning Hippolytan authorship of some works.\nHippolytus' voluminous writings, which for variety of subject can be compared with those of Origen, embrace the spheres of exegesis, homiletics, apologetics and polemic, chronography, and ecclesiastical law. The Apostolic Tradition, if it is the work of Hippolytus, recorded the first liturgical reference to the Virgin Mary, as part of the ordination rite of a bishop.\nOf exegetical works attributed to Hippolytus, the best preserved are the \"Commentary on the Prophet Daniel\" and the \"Commentary on the Song of Songs\". This is the earliest attested Christian interpretation of the Song, covering only the first three chapters to Song 3:7.\nThe commentary on the Song of Songs survives in two Georgian manuscripts, a Greek epitome, a Paleo-Slavonic florilegium, and fragments in Armenian and Syriac as well as in many patristic quotations, especially in Ambrose's \"Exposition on Psalm 118 (119)\". It is generally regarded as an instruction relating to a post-Baptismal rite of anointing with oil as a symbol of receiving the Holy Spirit. The commentary was originally written as part of a mystagogy, an instruction for new Christians. Scholars have usually assumed the \"Commentary on the Song of Songs\" was originally composed for use during Easter, a season favored in the West for Baptism. Hippolytus supplied his commentary with a fully developed introduction known as the \"schema isagogicum\", indicating his knowledge of the rhetorical conventions for teachers discussing classical works. He employs a common rhetorical trope, ekphrasis, using images on the walls or floors of Greco-Roman homes, and in the catacombs as paintings or mosaics. Origen felt that the Song should be reserved for the spiritually mature and that studying it might be harmful for the novice.\nScholars generally ascribe to Hippolytus a work now entitled the \"Apostolic Tradition\", which contains the earliest known ritual of ordination. The influence of Hippolytus was felt chiefly through his works on chronography and ecclesiastical law. His chronicle of the world, a compilation embracing the whole period from the creation of the world up to the year 234, formed a basis for many chronographical works both in the East and West. It is from the \"Apostolic Tradition\" that the current words of episcopal ordination in the Catholic Church come from, as updated by Pope Paul VI. Additionally, the 21st chapter of Apostolic Tradition contains what may be a proto-Apostles' Creed.\nIn the great compilations of ecclesiastical law that arose in the East since the 3rd century, the Church Orders many canons were attributed to Hippolytus, for example in the Canons of Hippolytus or the Constitutions through Hippolytus. How much of this material is genuinely his, how much of it worked over, and how much of it wrongly attributed to him, can no longer be determined beyond dispute, however a great deal was incorporated into the \"Fetha Negest\", which once served as the constitutional basis of law in Ethiopia \u2013 where he is still remembered as Abulides. During the early 20th century the work known as \"The Egyptian Church Order\" was identified as the Apostolic Tradition and attributed to Hippolytus; at present this attribution is hotly contested.\nDifferences in style and theology lead some scholars to conclude that some of the works attributed to Hippolytus actually derive from a second author.\nTwo small but potentially important works, \"On the Twelve Apostles of Christ\" and \"On the Seventy Apostles of Christ,\" are often neglected because the manuscripts were lost during most of the church age and then found in Greece in the 19th century. The two are included in an appendix to the works of Hippolytus in the voluminous collection of Early Church Fathers. The work on the 70 apostles is noteworthy as a (potentially) early source.\nA consensus of scholarship agrees on a core of authentic texts composed by the second-third-century writer Hippolytus, regardless of disputes concerning his community, or the exact dates of his biography: these are the biblical commentaries, including On Daniel, On David and Goliath, On the Song of Songs (partially extant), On the Blessings of Isaac and Jacob, and On the Antichrist. These form a sound basis for exploring and understanding his theology and biblical doctrines.\nEschatology.\nHippolytus is an important figure in the development of Christian eschatology. In his biblical compendium and topical study \"On Christ and the Antichrist\" and in his \"Commentary on the Prophet Daniel\" Hippolytus gave his interpretation of the second advent of Christ.\nWith the onset of persecutions during the reign of Septimius Severus, many early Christian writers treated topics of apocalyptic eschatology. \"On Christ and the Antichrist\" is one of the earliest works. It is thought Hippolytus was generally influenced by Irenaeus. However, unlike Irenaeus, Hippolytus focuses on the meaning of prophecy for the Church in his own time. Of the dogmatic works, \"On Christ and the Antichrist\" survives in a complete state and was probably written about 200.\nHippolytus follows the long-established usage in interpreting Daniel's seventy prophetic weeks to be weeks of literal years. Hippolytus gave an explanation of Daniel's paralleling prophecies of chapters 2 and 7, which he, as with the other fathers, specifically relates to the Babylonians, Persians, Greeks, and Romans. His interpretation of events and their significance is Christological.\nHippolytus did not subscribe to the belief that the Second Coming was imminent. In his commentary on Daniel he criticizes those who predict the Second Coming in the near future and then says that six thousand years must pass from Creation before the Second Coming. He also says that Christ was born 5500 years after Adam, so 500 years have to pass from the birth of Christ \"to the consummation of the six thousand years, and in this way the end will be\".\nFeast days.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church, the feast day of St Hippolytus falls on 13 August, which is also the Apodosis of the Feast of the Transfiguration. Because on the Apodosis the hymns of the Transfiguration are to be repeated, the feast of St. Hippolytus may be transferred to the day before or to some other convenient day. The Eastern Orthodox Church also celebrates the feast of \"St Hippolytus Pope of Rome\" on 30 January, who may or may not be the same individual.\nThe Catholic Church celebrates St Hippolytus jointly with St Pontian on 13 August. The feast of Saint Hippolytus formerly celebrated on 22 August as one of the companions of Saint Timotheus was a duplicate of his 13 August feast and for that reason was deleted when the General Roman Calendar was Mysterii Paschalis (revised in 1969). Earlier editions of the Roman Martyrology referred to the 22 August Hippolytus as Bishop of Porto. The Catholic Encyclopedia sees this as \"connected with the confusion regarding the Roman presbyter resulting from the Acts of the Martyrs of Porto. It has not been ascertained whether the memory of the latter was localized at Porto merely in connection with the legend in Prudentius, without further foundation, or whether a person named Hippolytus was really martyred at Porto, and afterwards confounded in legend with Hippolytus of Rome.\" This opinion is shared by a Benedictine source.\nEarlier editions of the Roman Martyrology also mentioned on 30 January a Hippolytus venerated at Antioch, but the details were borrowed from the story of Hippolytus of Rome. Modern editions of the Martyrology omit mention of this supposed Saint Hippolytus of Antioch.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73316", "revid": "1308811536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73316", "title": "Tacoma Narrows Bridge", "text": "Twin suspension bridges spanning the Tacoma Narrows strait of Puget Sound in Washington state\nThe Tacoma Narrows Bridge is a pair of twin suspension bridges that span the Tacoma Narrows strait of Puget Sound in Pierce County, Washington. The bridges connect the city of Tacoma with the Kitsap Peninsula and carry State Route 16 (known as Primary State Highway 14 until 1964) over the strait. Historically, the name \"Tacoma Narrows Bridge\" has applied to the original bridge, nicknamed \"Galloping Gertie\", which opened in July 1940 but collapsed possibly because of aeroelastic flutter four months later, as well as to the successor of that bridge, which opened in 1950 and still stands today as the westbound lanes of the present-day two-bridge complex.\nThe original Tacoma Narrows Bridge opened on July 1, 1940. The original bridge received its nickname \"Galloping Gertie\" for the vertical movement of the deck observed by construction workers during windy conditions. While engineers and engineering professor F.\u00a0B. Farquharson were hired to seek ways to stop the odd movements, months' experiments were unsuccessful. The bridge became known for its pitching deck, and collapsed into Puget Sound the morning of November 7, 1940, under high wind conditions. Engineering issues, as well as the United States' involvement in World War II, postponed plans to replace the bridge for several years; the new bridge was opened on October 14, 1950.\nBy 1990, population growth and development on the Kitsap Peninsula had caused traffic on the bridge to exceed its design capacity; as a result, in 1998 Washington voters approved a measure to support building a parallel bridge. After a series of protests and court battles, construction began in 2002 and the new bridge opened to carry eastbound traffic on July 16, 2007, while the 1950 bridge was reconfigured to carry westbound traffic.\nAt the time of their construction, both the 1940 and 1950 bridges were the third-longest suspension bridges in the world in terms of main span length, behind the Golden Gate Bridge and George Washington Bridge. The 1950 and 2007 bridges are as of 2017 the fifth-longest suspension bridge spans in the United States and the 43rd-longest in the world.\nTolls were charged on the bridge for the entire four-month service life of the original span, as well as the first 15 years of the 1950 bridge. In 1965, the bridge's construction bonds plus interest were paid off, and the state ceased toll collection on the bridge. Over 40 years later, tolls were reinstated as part of the financing of the twin span, and are at present collected only from vehicles traveling eastbound.\nOriginal bridge (1940).\nThe desire for the construction of a bridge in this location dates back to 1889 with a Northern Pacific Railway proposal for a trestle bridge; however, it was only in the late 1920s that interest in this project was revived. In 1937, the Washington State legislature created the Washington State Toll Bridge Authority and appropriated $5,000 to study the request by Tacoma and Pierce County for a bridge over the Narrows. The bridge was designed by Leon Moisseiff and cost $6.4 million.\nThe first Tacoma Narrows Bridge opened to traffic on July 1, 1940. Its main span collapsed into the Tacoma Narrows four months later on November 7, 1940, at 11:00\u00a0a.m. (Pacific time) possibly as a result of aeroelastic flutter caused by a wind. The bridge collapse had lasting effects on science and engineering. In many undergraduate physics texts, the event is presented as an example of elementary forced resonance, with the wind providing an external periodic frequency that matched the natural structural frequency; the cause is still debated by engineers today. A contributing factor was its solid sides which did not allow wind to pass through the bridge's deck. Thus, its design allowed the bridge to catch the wind and sway, which ultimately took it down. It was the first suspension bridge to utilize these solid I-beams as a form of support for the road deck, as other bridges would incorporate trusses in their designs in order to catch the wind. Its failure also boosted research in the field of bridge aerodynamics and aeroelastic fields which have influenced the designs of all the world's great long-span bridges built since 1940.\nThere were no human deaths in the collapse of the bridge. The only fatality was a Cocker Spaniel named Tubby, who perished after he was abandoned in a car on the bridge by his owner, Leonard Coatsworth. Professor Frederick Burt Farquharson, an engineer from the University of Washington who had been involved in the design of the bridge, tried to rescue Tubby but was bitten by the terrified dog when he attempted to remove him. The collapse of the bridge was recorded on Kodachrome 16 mm film by Barney Elliott and Harbine Monroe, owners of The Camera Shop in Tacoma, and shows Farquharson leaving the bridge after trying to rescue Tubby and making observations in the middle of the bridge. The film was subsequently sold to Paramount Studios, who then duplicated the footage for newsreels in black-and-white and distributed the film worldwide to movie theaters. Castle Films also received distribution rights for 8 mm home video.\nElliott and Monroe's original films of the construction and collapse of the bridge were shot on 16\u00a0mm Kodachrome color film, but most copies in circulation are in black and white because newsreels of the day copied the film onto 35\u00a0mm black-and-white stock. There were also film speed discrepancies between Monroe and Elliot's footage, with Monroe filming his footage in 24 fps while Elliott had filmed his footage at 16 fps. As a result, most copies in circulation also show the bridge oscillating approximately 50% faster than real time, due to an assumption during conversion that the film was shot at 24 frames per second rather than the actual 16 fps. In 1998, \"The Tacoma Narrows Bridge Collapse\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". This footage is commonly shown to engineering, architecture, and physics students as a means to teach about engineering disaster.\nThe dismantling of the towers and side spans\u00a0\u2014 having survived the collapse of the main span, but being damaged beyond repair\u00a0\u2014 began shortly after the collapse and continued into May 1943. The United States' participation in World War II, as well as engineering and finance issues, delayed plans to replace the bridge.\nWestbound bridge (1950).\nAfter the infamous fall of the original bridge, Professor Farquharson was commissioned again to test new designs for the bridge at the University of Washington, the home of these models. Tests ensured the new design would have a different outcome in high wind conditions than the first and construction began on April 12, 1948, following the completion of a financing and insurance plan. A major earthquake struck the construction site on April 13, 1949, but the only damage was to a cable that fell into the water and was recovered; a fire two months later on the west tower damaged equipment and tools but did not cause permanent damage. The towers were complete in July 1949 and the cables for the new bridge were finished on January 16, 1950. The current westbound bridge was designed and rebuilt with open trusses, stiffening struts and openings in the roadway to let wind through. It opened on October 14, 1950, and is 5,979 feet (1822\u00a0m) long\u201440 feet (12\u00a0m) longer than the first bridge. The new bridge cost $18\u00a0million to construct. Local residents nicknamed the new bridge Sturdy Gertie, as the oscillations that plagued the previous design had been eliminated. This bridge and its new parallel eastbound bridge are currently the fifth-longest suspension bridges in the United States.\nWhen built, the westbound bridge was the third longest suspension bridge span in the world. Like other modern suspension bridges, the westbound bridge was built with steel plates that feature sharp entry edges rather than the flat plate sides used in the original Tacoma Narrows Bridge (see the suspension bridge article for an example).\nThe bridge was designed to handle 60,000 vehicles a day. It carried both westbound and eastbound traffic until the eastbound bridge opened on July 15, 2007. During the Hanukkah Eve windstorm of 2006, the bridge was closed for the first time in its operating existence due to heavy winds but reopened approximately 6 hours later.\nEastbound bridge (2007).\nIn 1998, voters in several Washington counties approved an advisory measure to create a second Narrows span. Construction of the new span, which carries eastbound traffic parallel to the current bridge, began on October 4, 2002, and was completed in July 2007. The Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) signed a design-and-construction agreement with Bechtel and Kiewit Pacific Co., who then engaged in a joint venture to construct eastbound. It was estimated by WSDOT that the project would cost $849 million to complete, but ultimately finished under budget at $786 million due to not using the funds allocated to emergency scenarios.\nOn July 15, 2007, the eastbound section opened to a ceremonial 5K run across the newly constructed bridge. About 10,000 people participated in the event. After the run finished, a ceremonial ribbon cutting event took place on eastbound. WSDOT estimated 40,000 people would be in attendance for the opening, but 60,000 ultimately attended. A select few Washington State government officials partook in the ribbon cutting, such as Washington State Treasurer Michael Murphy, State Representative Pat Lantz, Chief of the Washington State Patrol John Batiste, and State Speaker of the House Frank Chopp. The bridge was dedicated in honor of State Representative Ruth Fisher and State Senator Robert \"Bob\" Oke, a South Kitsap resident, one of the main proponents of building the second span across Puget Sound between the Kitsap Peninsula and Tacoma.\nThe eastbound bridge has an overall length of , and a main span of , making it the fifth largest suspension bridge in the United States. In comparison, the Golden Gate bridge in San Francisco has a total length of m or 1.7 miles.\nWSDOT collects a toll before entering the eastbound span. Tolls currently are $4.50 for \"Good to Go\" account holders with in-vehicle transponders, $5.50 for cash/credit card customers, and $6.50 for those who choose Pay-By-Mail. The existing span had been free of tolls since 1965. The new bridge was the first facility to use the new Good To Go electronic toll collection system. Tolls on the bridge are expected to pay off the loans and deferred sales tax by 2033.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73317", "revid": "32320434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73317", "title": "Tacoma Narrows Bridge Collapse", "text": ""}
{"id": "73320", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73320", "title": "Equatorial Guinea/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "73321", "revid": "21112944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73321", "title": "Avalanche", "text": "Rapid flow of a mass of snow down a slope\nAn avalanche is a rapid flow of snow down a slope, such as a hill or mountain. Avalanches can be triggered spontaneously, by factors such as increased precipitation or snowpack weakening, or by external means such as humans, other animals, and earthquakes. Primarily composed of flowing snow and air, large avalanches have the capability to capture and move ice, rocks, and trees.\nAvalanches occur in two general forms, or combinations thereof: slab avalanches made of tightly packed snow, triggered by a collapse of an underlying weak snow layer, and loose snow avalanches made of looser snow. After being set off, avalanches usually accelerate rapidly and grow in mass and volume as they capture more snow. If an avalanche moves fast enough, some of the snow may mix with the air, forming a powder snow avalanche.\nThough they appear to share similarities, avalanches are distinct from slush flows, mudslides, rock slides, and serac collapses. They are also different from large scale movements of ice. Avalanches can happen in any mountain range that has an enduring snowpack. They are most frequent in winter or spring, but may occur at any time of the year. In mountainous areas, avalanches are among the most serious natural hazards to life and property, so great efforts are made in avalanche control. There are many classification systems for the different forms of avalanches. Avalanches can be described by their size, destructive potential, initiation mechanism, composition, and dynamics.\nFormation.\nMost avalanches occur spontaneously during storms under increased load due to snowfall and/or erosion. Metamorphic changes in the snowpack, such as melting due to solar radiation, is the second-largest cause of natural avalanches. Other natural causes include rain, earthquakes, rockfall, and icefall. Artificial triggers of avalanches include skiers, snowmobiles, and controlled explosive work. Contrary to popular belief, avalanches are not triggered by loud sound; the pressure from sound is orders of magnitude too small to trigger an avalanche.\nAvalanche initiation can start at a point with only a small amount of snow moving initially; this is typical of wet snow avalanches or avalanches in dry unconsolidated snow. However, if the snow has sintered into a stiff slab overlying a weak layer, then fractures can propagate very rapidly, so that a large volume of snow, possibly thousands of cubic metres, can start moving almost simultaneously.\nA snowpack will fail when the load exceeds the strength. The load is straightforward; it is the weight of the snow. However, the strength of the snowpack is much more difficult to determine and is extremely heterogeneous. It varies in detail with properties of the snow grains, size, density, morphology, temperature, water content; and the properties of the bonds between the grains. These properties may all metamorphose in time according to the local humidity, water vapour flux, temperature and heat flux. The top of the snowpack is also extensively influenced by incoming radiation and the local air flow. One of the aims of avalanche research is to develop and validate computer models that can describe the evolution of the seasonal snowpack over time. A complicating factor is the complex interaction of terrain and weather, which causes significant spatial and temporal variability of the depths, crystal forms, and layering of the seasonal snowpack.\nSlab avalanches.\nSlab avalanches are formed frequently in snow that has been deposited, or deposited by wind. They have the characteristic appearance of a block (slab) of snow cut out from its surroundings by fractures. Elements of slab avalanches include a crown fracture at the top of the start zone, flank fractures on the sides of the start zones, and a fracture at the bottom called the stauchwall. The crown and flank fractures are vertical walls in the snow delineating the snow that was entrained in the avalanche from the snow that remained on the slope. Slabs can vary in thickness from a few centimetres to three metres. Slab avalanches account for around 90% of avalanche-related fatalities.\nPowder snow avalanches.\nThe largest avalanches form turbulent suspension currents known as powder snow avalanches or mixed avalanches, a kind of gravity current. These consist of a powder cloud, which overlies a dense avalanche. They can form from any type of snow or initiation mechanism, but usually occur with fresh dry powder. They can exceed speeds of , and masses of 1,000,000 tons; their flows can travel long distances along flat valley bottoms and even uphill for short distances.\nWet snow avalanches.\nIn contrast to powder snow avalanches, wet snow avalanches are a low velocity suspension of snow and water, with the flow confined to the track surface (McClung, 1999, p.\u00a0108). The low speed of travel is due to the friction between the sliding surface of the track and the water saturated flow. Despite the low speed of travel (\u224810\u201340\u00a0km/h), wet snow avalanches are capable of generating powerful destructive forces, due to the large mass and density. The body of the flow of a wet snow avalanche can plough through soft snow, and can scour boulders, earth, trees, and other vegetation; leaving exposed and often scored ground in the avalanche track. Wet snow avalanches can be initiated from either loose snow releases, or slab releases, and only occur in snowpacks that are water saturated and isothermally equilibrated to the melting point of water. The isothermal characteristic of wet snow avalanches has led to the secondary term of isothermal slides found in the literature (for example in Daffern, 1999, p.\u00a093). At temperate latitudes wet snow avalanches are frequently associated with climatic avalanche cycles at the end of the winter season, when there is significant daytime warming.\nIce avalanche.\nAn ice avalanche occurs when a large piece of ice, such as from a serac or calving glacier, falls onto ice (such as the Khumbu Icefall), triggering a movement of broken ice chunks. The resulting movement is more analogous to a rockfall or a landslide than a snow avalanche. They are typically very difficult to predict and almost impossible to mitigate.\nAvalanche pathway.\nAs an avalanche moves down a slope it follows a certain pathway that is dependent on the slope's degree of steepness and the volume of snow/ice involved in the mass movement. The origin of an avalanche is called the Starting Point and typically occurs on a 30\u201345 degree slope. The body of the pathway is called the Track of the avalanche and usually occurs on a 20\u201330 degree slope. When the avalanche loses its momentum and eventually stops it reaches the Runout Zone. This usually occurs when the slope has reached a steepness that is less than 20 degrees. These degrees are not consistently true due to the fact that each avalanche is unique depending on the stability of the snowpack that it was derived from as well as the environmental or human influences that triggered the mass movement.\nInjuries and deaths.\nPeople caught in avalanches can die from suffocation, trauma, or hypothermia. From \"1950\u20131951 to 2020\u20132021\" there were 1,169 people who died in avalanches in the United States. For the 11-year period ending April 2006, 445 people died in avalanches throughout North America. On average, 28 people die in avalanches every winter in the United States. \nIn 2001 it was reported that globally an average of 150 people die each year from avalanches.\nTerrain, snowpack, weather.\nDoug Fesler and Jill Fredston developed a conceptual model of the three primary elements of avalanches: terrain, weather, and snowpack. Terrain describes the places where avalanches occur, weather describes the meteorological conditions that create the snowpack, and snowpack describes the structural characteristics of snow that make avalanche formation possible.\nTerrain.\nAvalanche formation requires a slope shallow enough for snow to accumulate but steep enough for the snow to accelerate once set in motion by the combination of mechanical failure (of the snowpack) and gravity. The angle of the slope that can hold snow, called the angle of repose, depends on a variety of factors, such as crystal form and moisture content. Some forms of drier and colder snow will only stick to shallower slopes, while wet and warm snow can bond to very steep surfaces. In coastal mountains, such as the Cordillera del Paine region of Patagonia, deep snowpacks collect on vertical and even overhanging rock faces. The slope angle that can allow moving snow to accelerate depends on a variety of factors such as the snow's shear strength (which is itself dependent upon crystal form) and the configuration of layers and inter-layer interfaces.\nThe snowpack on slopes with sunny exposures is strongly influenced by sunshine. Diurnal cycles of thawing and refreezing can stabilize the snowpack by promoting settlement. Strong freeze-thaw cycles result in the formation of surface crusts during the night and of unstable surface snow during the day. Slopes in the lee of a ridge or of another wind obstacle accumulate more snow and are more likely to include pockets of deep snow, wind slabs, and cornices, all of which, when disturbed, may result in avalanche formation. Conversely, the snowpack on a windward slope is often much shallower than on a lee slope.\nAvalanches and avalanche paths share common elements: a start zone where the avalanche originates, a track along which the avalanche flows, and a runout zone where the avalanche comes to rest. The debris deposit is the accumulated mass of the avalanched snow once it has come to rest in the run-out zone. For the image at left, many small avalanches form in this avalanche path every year, but most of these avalanches do not run the full vertical or horizontal length of the path. The frequency with which avalanches form in a given area is known as the return period.\nThe start zone of an avalanche must be steep enough to allow snow to accelerate once set in motion, additionally convex slopes are less stable than concave slopes because of the disparity between the tensile strength of snow layers and their compressive strength. The composition and structure of the ground surface beneath the snowpack influences the stability of the snowpack, either being a source of strength or weakness. Avalanches are unlikely to form in very thick forests, but boulders and sparsely distributed vegetation can create weak areas deep within the snowpack through the formation of strong temperature gradients. Full-depth avalanches (avalanches that sweep a slope virtually clean of snow cover) are more common on slopes with smooth ground, such as grass or rock slabs.\nGenerally speaking, avalanches follow drainages down-slope, frequently sharing drainage features with summertime watersheds. At and below tree line, avalanche paths through drainages are well defined by vegetation boundaries called trim lines, which occur where avalanches have removed trees and prevented regrowth of large vegetation. Engineered drainages, such as the avalanche dam on Mount Stephen in Kicking Horse Pass, have been constructed to protect people and property by redirecting the flow of avalanches. Deep debris deposits from avalanches will collect in catchments at the terminus of a run out, such as gullies and river beds.\nSlopes flatter than 25\u00a0degrees or steeper than 60\u00a0degrees typically have a lower incidence of avalanches. Human-triggered avalanches have the greatest incidence when the snow's angle of repose is between 35 and 45\u00a0degrees; the critical angle, the angle at which human-triggered avalanches are most frequent, is 38\u00a0degrees. When the incidence of human triggered avalanches is normalized by the rates of recreational use, however, hazard increases uniformly with slope angle, and no significant difference in hazard for a given exposure direction can be found. The rule of thumb is: \"A slope that is flat enough to hold snow but steep enough to ski has the potential to generate an avalanche, regardless of the angle.\"\nSnowpack structure and characteristics.\nThe snowpack is composed of ground-parallel layers that accumulate over the winter. Each layer contains ice grains that are representative of the distinct meteorological conditions during which the snow formed and was deposited. Once deposited, a snow layer continues to evolve under the influence of the meteorological conditions that prevail after deposition.\nFor an avalanche to occur, it is necessary that a snowpack have a weak layer (or instability) below a slab of cohesive snow. In practice the formal mechanical and structural factors related to snowpack instability are not directly observable outside of laboratories, thus the more easily observed properties of the snow layers (e.g. penetration resistance, grain size, grain type, temperature) are used as index measurements of the mechanical properties of the snow (e.g. tensile strength, friction coefficients, shear strength, and ductile strength). This results in two principal sources of uncertainty in determining snowpack stability based on snow structure: First, both the factors influencing snow stability and the specific characteristics of the snowpack vary widely within small areas and time scales, resulting in significant difficulty extrapolating point observations of snow layers across different scales of space and time. Second, the relationship between readily observable snowpack characteristics and the snowpack's critical mechanical properties has not been completely developed.\nWhile the deterministic relationship between snowpack characteristics and snowpack stability is still a matter of ongoing scientific study, there is a growing empirical understanding of the snow composition and deposition characteristics that influence the likelihood of an avalanche. Observation and experience has shown that newly fallen snow requires time to bond with the snow layers beneath it, especially if the new snow falls during very cold and dry conditions. If ambient air temperatures are cold enough, shallow snow above or around boulders, plants, and other discontinuities in the slope, weakens from rapid crystal growth that occurs in the presence of a critical temperature gradient. Large, angular snow crystals are indicators of weak snow, because such crystals have fewer bonds per unit volume than small, rounded crystals that pack tightly together. Consolidated snow is less likely to slough than loose powdery layers or wet isothermal snow; however, consolidated snow is a necessary condition for the occurrence of slab avalanches, and persistent instabilities within the snowpack can hide below well-consolidated surface layers. Uncertainty associated with the empirical understanding of the factors influencing snow stability leads most professional avalanche workers to recommend conservative use of avalanche terrain relative to current snowpack instability.\nWeather.\nAvalanches only occur in a standing snowpack. Typically winter seasons at high latitudes, high altitudes, or both have weather that is sufficiently unsettled and cold enough for precipitated snow to accumulate into a seasonal snowpack. Continentality, through its potentiating influence on the meteorological extremes experienced by snowpacks, is an important factor in the evolution of instabilities, and consequential occurrence of avalanches faster stabilization of the snowpack after storm cycles. The evolution of the snowpack is critically sensitive to small variations within the narrow range of meteorological conditions that allow for the accumulation of snow into a snowpack. Among the critical factors controlling snowpack evolution are: heating by the sun, radiational cooling, vertical temperature gradients in standing snow, snowfall amounts, and snow types. Generally, mild winter weather will promote the settlement and stabilization of the snowpack; conversely, very cold, windy, or hot weather will weaken the snowpack.\nAt temperatures close to the freezing point of water, or during times of moderate solar radiation, a gentle freeze-thaw cycle will take place. The melting and refreezing of water in the snow strengthens the snowpack during the freezing phase and weakens it during the thawing phase. A rapid rise in temperature, to a point significantly above the freezing point of water, may cause avalanche formation at any time of year.\nPersistent cold temperatures can either prevent new snow from stabilizing or destabilize the existing snowpack. Cold air temperatures on the snow surface produce a temperature gradient in the snow, because the ground temperature at the base of the snowpack is usually around 0\u00a0\u00b0C, and the ambient air temperature can be much colder. When a temperature gradient greater than 10\u00a0\u00b0C change per vertical meter of snow is sustained for more than a day, angular crystals called depth hoar or facets begin forming in the snowpack because of rapid moisture transport along the temperature gradient. These angular crystals, which bond poorly to one another and the surrounding snow, often become a persistent weakness in the snowpack. When a slab lying on top of a persistent weakness is loaded by a force greater than the strength of the slab and persistent weak layer, the persistent weak layer can fail and generate an avalanche.\nAny wind stronger than a light breeze can contribute to a rapid accumulation of snow on sheltered slopes downwind. Wind slabs form quickly and, if present, weaker snow below the slab may not have time to adjust to the new load. Even on a clear day, wind can quickly load a slope with snow by blowing snow from one place to another. Top-loading occurs when wind deposits snow from the top of a slope; cross-loading occurs when wind deposits snow parallel to the slope. When a wind blows over the top of a mountain, the leeward, or downwind, side of the mountain experiences top-loading, from the top to the bottom of that lee slope. When the wind blows across a ridge that leads up the mountain, the leeward side of the ridge is subject to cross-loading. Cross-loaded wind-slabs are usually difficult to identify visually.\nSnowstorms and rainstorms are important contributors to avalanche danger. Heavy snowfall will cause instability in the existing snowpack, both because of the additional weight and because the new snow has insufficient time to bond to underlying snow layers. Rain has a similar effect. In the short term, rain causes instability because, like a heavy snowfall, it imposes an additional load on the snowpack and once rainwater seeps down through the snow, acts as a lubricant, reducing the natural friction between snow layers that holds the snowpack together. Most avalanches happen during or soon after a storm.\nDaytime exposure to sunlight will rapidly destabilize the upper layers of the snowpack if the sunlight is strong enough to melt the snow, thereby reducing its hardness. During clear nights, the snowpack can re-freeze when ambient air temperatures fall below freezing, through the process of long-wave radiative cooling, or both. Radiative heat loss occurs when the night air is significantly cooler than the snowpack, and the heat stored in the snow is re-radiated into the atmosphere.\nDynamics.\nWhen a slab avalanche forms, the slab disintegrates into increasingly smaller fragments as the snow travels downhill. If the fragments become small enough the outer layer of the avalanche, called a saltation layer, takes on the characteristics of a fluid. When sufficiently fine particles are present they can become airborne and, given a sufficient quantity of airborne snow, this portion of the avalanche can become separated from the bulk of the avalanche and travel a greater distance as a powder snow avalanche. Scientific studies using radar, following the 1999 Galt\u00fcr avalanche disaster, confirmed the hypothesis that a saltation layer forms between the surface and the airborne components of an avalanche, which can also separate from the bulk of the avalanche.\nDriving an avalanche is the component of the avalanche's weight parallel to the slope; as the avalanche progresses any unstable snow in its path will tend to become incorporated, so increasing the overall weight. This force will increase as the steepness of the slope increases, and diminish as the slope flattens. Resisting this are a number of components that are thought to interact with each other: the friction between the avalanche and the surface beneath; friction between the air and snow within the fluid; fluid-dynamic drag at the leading edge of the avalanche; shear resistance between the avalanche and the air through which it is passing, and shear resistance between the fragments within the avalanche itself. An avalanche will continue to accelerate until the resistance exceeds the forward force.\nModeling.\nAttempts to model avalanche behaviour date from the early 20th century, notably the work of Professor Lagotala in preparation for the 1924 Winter Olympics in Chamonix. His method was developed by A. Voellmy and popularised following the publication in 1955 of his \"Ueber die Zerst\u00f6rungskraft von Lawinen\" (On the Destructive Force of Avalanches).\nVoellmy used a simple empirical formula, treating an avalanche as a sliding block of snow moving with a drag force that was proportional to the square of the speed of its flow:\nformula_1\nHe and others subsequently derived other formulae that take other factors into account, with the Voellmy-Salm-Gubler and the Perla-Cheng-McClung models becoming most widely used as simple tools to model flowing (as opposed to powder snow) avalanches.\nSince the 1990s many more sophisticated models have been developed. In Europe much of the recent work was carried out as part of the SATSIE (Avalanche Studies and Model Validation in Europe) research project supported by the European Commission which produced the leading-edge MN2L model, now in use with the \"Service Restauration des Terrains en Montagne\" (Mountain Rescue Service) in France, and D2FRAM (Dynamical Two-Flow-Regime Avalanche Model), which was still undergoing validation as of 2007. Other known models are the SAMOS-AT avalanche simulation software and the RAMMS software.\nHuman involvement.\nHow to prevent avalanches.\nPreventative measures are employed in areas where avalanches pose a significant threat to people, such as ski resorts, mountain towns, roads, and railways. There are several ways to prevent avalanches and lessen their power and develop preventative measures to reduce the likelihood and size of avalanches by disrupting the structure of the snowpack, while passive measures reinforce and stabilize the snowpack \"in situ\". The simplest active measure is repeatedly traveling on a snowpack as snow accumulates; this can be by means of boot-packing, ski-cutting, or machine grooming. Explosives are used extensively to prevent avalanches, by triggering smaller avalanches that break down instabilities in the snowpack, and removing overburden that can result in larger avalanches. Explosive charges are delivered by a number of methods including hand-tossed charges, helicopter-dropped bombs, Gazex concussion lines, and ballistic projectiles launched by air cannons and artillery. Passive preventive systems such as snow fences and light walls can be used to direct the placement of snow. Snow builds up around the fence, especially the side that faces the prevailing winds. Downwind of the fence, snow build-up is lessened. This is caused by the loss of snow at the fence that would have been deposited and the pickup of the snow that is already there by the wind, which was depleted of snow at the fence. When there is a sufficient density of trees, they can greatly reduce the strength of avalanches. They hold snow in place and when there is an avalanche, the impact of the snow against the trees slows it down. Trees can either be planted or they can be conserved, such as in the building of a ski resort, to reduce the strength of avalanches.\nIn turn, socio-environmental changes can influence the occurrence of damaging avalanches: some studies linking changes in land-use/land-cover patterns and the evolution of snow avalanche damage in mid latitude mountains show the importance of the role played by vegetation cover, that is at the root of the increase of damage when the protective forest is deforested (because of demographic growth, intensive grazing and industrial or legal causes), and at the root of the decrease of damage because of the transformation of a traditional land-management system based on overexploitation into a system based on land marginalization and reforestation, something that has happened mainly since the mid-20th century in mountain environments of developed countries.\nMitigation.\nIn many areas, regular avalanche tracks can be identified and precautions can be taken to minimize damage, such as the prevention of development in these areas. To mitigate the effect of avalanches the construction of artificial barriers can be very effective in reducing avalanche damage. There are several types: One kind of barrier (snow net) uses a net strung between poles that are anchored by guy wires in addition to their foundations. These barriers are similar to those used for rockslides. Another type of barrier is a rigid fence-like structure (snow fence) and may be constructed of steel, wood or pre-stressed concrete. They usually have gaps between the beams and are built perpendicular to the slope, with reinforcing beams on the downhill side. Rigid barriers are often considered unsightly, especially when many rows must be built. They are also expensive and vulnerable to damage from falling rocks in the warmer months. In addition to industrially manufactured barriers, landscaped barriers, called avalanche dams stop or deflect avalanches with their weight and strength. These barriers are made out of concrete, rocks, or earth. They are usually placed right above the structure, road, or railway that they are trying to protect, although they can also be used to channel avalanches into other barriers. Occasionally, earth mounds are placed in the avalanche's path to slow it down. Finally, along transportation corridors, large shelters, called snow sheds, can be built directly in the slide path of an avalanche to protect traffic from avalanches.\nEarly warning systems.\nWarning systems can detect avalanches which develop slowly, such as ice avalanches caused by icefalls from glaciers. Interferometric radars, high-resolution cameras, or motion sensors can monitor unstable areas over a long term, lasting from days to years. Experts interpret the recorded data and are able to recognize upcoming ruptures in order to initiate appropriate measures. Such systems (e.g. the monitoring of the Weissmies glacier in Switzerland) can recognize events several days in advance.\nAlarm systems.\nModern radar technology enables the monitoring of large areas and the localization of avalanches at any weather condition, by day and by night. Complex alarm systems are able to detect avalanches within a short time in order to close (e.g. roads and rails) or evacuate (e.g. construction sites) endangered areas. An example of such a system is installed on the only access road of Zermatt in Switzerland. Two radars monitor the slope of a mountain above the road. The system automatically closes the road by activating several barriers and traffic lights within seconds such that no people are harmed.\nSurvival, rescue, and recovery.\nAvalanche accidents are broadly differentiated into 2 categories: accidents in recreational settings, and accidents in residential, industrial, and transportation settings. This distinction is motivated by the observed difference in the causes of avalanche accidents in the two settings. In the recreational setting most accidents are caused by the people involved in the avalanche. In a 1996 study, Jamieson et al. (pages 7\u201320) found that 83% of all avalanches in the recreational setting were caused by those who were involved in the accident. In contrast, all the accidents in the residential, industrial, and transportation settings were due to spontaneous natural avalanches. Because of the difference in the causes of avalanche accidents, and the activities pursued in the two settings, avalanche and disaster management professionals have developed two related preparedness, rescue, and recovery strategies for each of the settings.\nNotable avalanches.\nTwo avalanches occurred in March 1910 in the Cascade and Selkirk Mountain ranges; on 1 March the Wellington avalanche killed 96 in Washington state, United States. Three days later 62 railroad workers were killed in the Rogers Pass avalanche in British Columbia, Canada.\nDuring World War I, an estimated 40,000 to 80,000 soldiers died as a result of avalanches during the mountain campaign in the Alps at the Austrian-Italian front, many of which were caused by artillery fire. Some 10,000 men, from both sides, died in avalanches in December 1916.\nIn the Northern Hemisphere winter of 1950\u20131951 approximately 649 avalanches were recorded in a three-month period throughout the Alps in Austria, France, Switzerland, Italy and Germany. This series of avalanches killed around 265 people and was termed the Winter of Terror.\nThe avalanche in Bia\u0142y Jar occurred on 20 March 1968, sweeping away 24 people who were walking along the bottom of Bia\u0142y Jar ravine in the Giant Mountains. Five of them, who were thrown aside by the avalanche, managed to survive. The remaining 19 people \u2013 including 13 Russians, 4 citizens of East Germany, and two Polish citizens \u2013 lost their lives. A total of 1,100 people took part in the rescue operation.\nA mountain climbing camp on Lenin Peak, in what is now Kyrgyzstan, was wiped out in 1990 when an earthquake triggered a large avalanche that overran the camp. Forty-three climbers were killed.\nIn 1993, the Bayburt \u00dczengili avalanche killed 60 individuals in \u00dczengili in the province of Bayburt, Turkey.\nA large avalanche in Montroc, France, in 1999, 300,000\u00a0cubic metres of snow slid on a 30\u00b0 slope, achieving a speed in the region of . It killed 12 people in their chalets under 100,000\u00a0tons of snow, deep. The mayor of Chamonix was convicted of second-degree murder for not evacuating the area, but received a suspended sentence.\nThe small Austrian village of Galt\u00fcr was hit by the Galt\u00fcr avalanche in 1999. The village was thought to be in a safe zone but the avalanche was exceptionally large and flowed into the village. Thirty-one people died.\nOn 1 December 2000, the Glory Bowl Avalanche formed on Mt. Glory which is located within the Teton Mountain Range in Wyoming, United States. Joel Roof was snowboarding recreationally in this backcountry, bowl-shaped run and triggered the avalanche. He was carried nearly 2,000 feet to the base of the mountain and was not successfully rescued.\nOn 28 January 2003, the Tatra Mountains avalanche swept away nine out of a thirteen-member group heading to the summit of Rysy in the Tatra Mountains. The participants of the trip were students from the I Leon Kruczkowski High School in Tychy and individuals associated with the school's sports club.\nOn 3 July 2022 a serac collapsed on the Marmolada Glacier, Italy, causing an avalanche that killed 11 alpinists and injured eight.\nClassification of avalanches.\nEuropean avalanche risk.\nIn Europe, the avalanche risk is widely rated on the following scale, which was adopted in April 1993 to replace the earlier non-standard national schemes. Descriptions were last updated in May 2003 to enhance uniformity.\nIn France, most avalanche deaths occur at risk levels 3 and 4. In Switzerland most occur at levels 2 and 3. It is thought that this may be due to national differences of interpretation when assessing the risks.\n[1] Stability:\n[2] additional load:\nGradient:\nEuropean avalanche size table.\nAvalanche size: \nNorth American Avalanche Danger Scale.\nIn the United States and Canada, the following avalanche danger scale is used. Descriptors vary depending on country.\nAvalanche problems.\nThere are nine different types of avalanche problems:\nCanadian classification for avalanche size.\nThe Canadian classification for avalanche size is based upon the consequences of the avalanche. Half sizes are commonly used.\nUnited States classification for avalanche size.\nThe size of avalanches are classified using two scales; size relative to destructive force or D-scale and size relative to the avalanche path or R-scale. Both size scales range from 1 to 5 with the D size scale half sizes can be used.\nRutschblock Test.\nSlab avalanche hazard analysis can be done using the Rutschblock Test. A 2\u00a0m wide block of snow is isolated from the rest of the slope and progressively loaded. The result is a rating of slope stability on a seven step scale. (\"Rutsch\" means slide in German.)\nAvalanches and climate change.\nAvalanche formation and frequency is highly affected by weather patterns and the local climate. Snowpack layers will form differently depending on whether snow is falling in very cold or very warm conditions, and very dry or very humid conditions. Thus, climate change may affect when, where, and how often avalanches occur, and may also change the type of avalanches that are occurring.\nImpacts on avalanche type and frequency.\nOverall, a rising seasonal snow line and a decrease in the number of days with snow cover are predicted. Climate change-caused temperature increases and changes in precipitation patterns will likely differ between the different mountain regions, and the impacts of these changes on avalanches will change at different elevations. In the long term, avalanche frequency at lower elevations is expected to decline corresponding to a decrease in snow cover and depth, and a short-term increase in the number of wet avalanches are predicted.\nPrecipitation is expected to increase, meaning more snow or rain depending on the elevation. Higher elevations predicted to remain above the seasonal snow line will likely see an increase in avalanche activity due to the increases in precipitation during the winter season. Storm precipitation intensity is also expected to increase, which is likely to lead to more days with enough snowfall to cause the snowpack to become unstable. Moderate and high elevations may see an increase in volatile swings from one weather extreme to the other. Predictions also show an increase in the number of rain on snow events, and wet avalanche cycles occurring earlier in the spring during the remainder of this century.\nImpacts on burial survival rate.\nThe warm, wet snowpacks that are likely to increase in frequency due to climate change may also make avalanche burials more deadly. Warm snow has a higher moisture content and is therefore denser than colder snow. Denser avalanche debris decreases the ability for a buried person to breathe and the amount of time they have before they run out of oxygen. This increases the likelihood of death by asphyxia in the event of a burial. Additionally, the predicted thinner snowpacks may increase the frequency of injuries due to trauma, such as a buried skier striking a rock or tree.\nSee also.\nRelated flows.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73322", "revid": "49387333", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73322", "title": "Solenostemon", "text": "Genus of plants\nSolenostemon is a former genus of flowering plants in the family Lamiaceae. It has been included in the genus \"Plectranthus\", but is now included in an expanded \"Coleus\". They are native to tropical Africa, Asia and Australia. Some species formerly placed in this genus are cultivated for their highly variegated leaves. \nFormer species.\nSome species formerly placed in the genus are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73323", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73323", "title": "Samoa/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "73326", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73326", "title": "Minoan (disambiguation)", "text": "Minoan may refer to the following:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "73327", "revid": "21436738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73327", "title": "Minoan civilization", "text": "Bronze Age civilization on Crete and other Aegean Islands\nThe Minoan civilization was a Bronze Age culture which was centered on the island of Crete. Known for its monumental architecture and energetic art, it is often regarded as the first civilization in Europe. The ruins of the Minoan palaces at Knossos and Phaistos are popular tourist attractions.\nThe Minoan civilization developed from the local Neolithic culture around 3100BC, with complex urban settlements beginning around 2000BC. After c.1450BC, they came under the cultural and perhaps political domination of the mainland Mycenaean Greeks, forming a hybrid culture which lasted until around 1100BC.\nMinoan art included elaborately decorated pottery, seals, figurines, and colorful frescoes. Typical subjects include nature and ritual. Minoan art is often described as having a fantastical or ecstatic quality, with figures rendered in a manner suggesting motion. \nLittle is known about the structure of Minoan society. Minoan art contains no unambiguous depiction of a monarch, and textual evidence suggests they may have had some other form of governance. Likewise, it is unclear whether there was ever a unified Minoan state. Religious practices included worship at peak sanctuaries and sacred caves, but nothing is certain regarding their pantheon. The Minoans constructed enormous labyrinthine buildings which their initial excavators labeled Minoan palaces. Subsequent research has shown that they served a variety of religious and economic purposes rather than being royal residences, though their exact role in Minoan society is a matter of continuing debate. \nThe Minoans traded extensively, exporting agricultural products and luxury crafts in exchange for raw metals which were difficult to obtain on Crete. Through traders and artisans, their cultural influence reached beyond Crete to the Aegean and eastern Mediterranean. Minoan craftsmen were employed by foreign elites, for instance to paint frescoes at Avaris in Egypt.\nThe Minoans developed two writing systems known as Cretan hieroglyphs and Linear A. Because neither script has been fully deciphered, the identity of the Minoan language is unknown. Based on what is known, the language is regarded as unlikely to belong to a well-attested language family such as Indo-European or Semitic. After 1450 BC, a modified version of Linear A known as Linear B was used to write Mycenaean Greek, which had become the language of administration on Crete. The Eteocretan language attested in a few post-Bronze Age inscriptions may be a descendant of the Minoan language.\nLargely forgotten after the Late Bronze Age collapse, the Minoan civilization was rediscovered in the early twentieth century through archaeological excavation. The term \"Minoan\" was coined by Arthur Evans, who excavated at Knossos and recognized it as culturally distinct from the mainland Mycenaean culture. Soon after, Federico Halbherr and Luigi Pernier excavated the Palace of Phaistos and the nearby settlement of Hagia Triada. A major breakthrough occurred in 1952, when Michael Ventris deciphered Linear B, drawing on earlier work by Alice Kober. This decipherment unlocked a crucial source of information on the economics and social organization in the final year of the palace. Minoan sites continue to be excavated\u2014recent discoveries including the necropolis at Armenoi and the harbour town of Kommos.\nName.\nThe modern term \"Minoan\" is derived from the name of the mythical King Minos, who the Classical Greeks believed to have ruled Knossos in the distant past. It was popularized by Arthur Evans, possibly drawing on an earlier suggestion by Karl Hoeck. It is a modern coinage and not used by the Minoans, whose name for themselves is unknown.\nThe Egyptians referred to the Minoans as the (vocalized as \"\" in modern Egyptological pronunciation). It is not known whether this was an exonym or if it was an endonym originating in the Minoan language. Potentially related terms were used by a variety of Near Eastern cultures, and the Biblical term Caphtor has sometimes been identified with Crete.\nChronology and history.\nTwo systems of relative chronology are used for the Minoans. The first, based on pottery styles, divides Minoan history into three major periods: Early Minoan (EM), Middle Minoan (MM) and Late Minoan (LM). These periods can be divided using Roman numerals (e.g. EM I, EM II, EM III), which can be further divided using capital letters (e.g. LM IIIA, LMIIIB, LM IIIC). An alternative system, proposed by Greek archaeologist Nikolaos Platon, divides Minoan history into four periods termed Prepalatial, Protopalatial, Neopalatial, and Postpalatial.\nEstablishing an absolute chronology has proved difficult. Archaeologists have attempted to determine calendar dates by synchronizing the periods of Minoan history with those of their better understood contemporaries. For example, Minoan artifacts from the LM IB period have been found in 18th Dynasty contexts in Egypt, for which Egyptian chronology provides calendar dates. However, dates determined in this manner do not always match the results of carbon dating and other methods based on natural science. Much of the controversy concerns the dating of the eruption of Thera, which is known to have occurred towards the end of the LM IA period. While carbon dating places this event (and thus LM IA) around 1600 BC, synchronism with Egyptian records would place it roughly a century later.\nOrigins.\nAlthough stone-tool evidence suggests that hominins may have reached Crete as early as 130,000 years ago, evidence for the first anatomically modern human presence dates to 10,000\u201312,000 YBP. The oldest evidence of modern human habitation on Crete is pre-ceramic Neolithic farming-community remains which date to about 7000BC. A comparative study of DNA haplogroups of modern Cretan men showed that a male founder group, from Anatolia or the Levant, is shared with the Greeks. The Neolithic population lived in open villages. Fishermen's huts were found on the shores, and the fertile Messara Plain was used for agriculture.\nEarly Minoan.\nEarly Minoan society developed largely continuously from local Neolithic predecessors, with some cultural influence and perhaps migration from eastern populations. This period saw a gradual shift from localized clan-based villages towards the more urbanized and stratified society of later periods.\nEM I (c. 3100-2650 BC) is marked by the appearance of the first painted ceramics. Continuing a trend that began during the Neolithic, settlements grew in size and complexity, and spread from fertile plains towards highland sites and islands as the Minoans learned to exploit less hospitable terrain.\nEM II (c. 2650-2200 BC) has been termed an international era. Trade intensified and Minoan ships began sailing beyond the Aegean to Egypt and Syria, possibly enabled by the invention of masted ships. Minoan material culture shows increased international influence, for instance in the adoption of Minoan seals based on the older Near Eastern seal. Minoan settlements grew, some doubling in size, and monumental buildings were constructed at sites that would later become palaces.\nEM III (c. 2200-2100 BC) saw the continuation of these trends.\nMiddle Minoan.\nMM I (c. 2100\u20131875 BC) saw the emergence of Protopalatial society. During MM IA (c. 2100-1925 BC), populations increased dramatically at sites such as Knossos, Phaistos, and Malia, accompanied by major construction projects. During MM IB (c. 1925-1875 BC), the first palaces were built at these sites, in areas which had been used for communal ceremonies since the Neolithic. Middle Minoan artisans developed new colorful paints and adopted the potter's wheel during MM IB, producing wares such as Kamares ware.\nMM II (c. 1875\u20131700 BC) saw the development of the Minoan writing systems, Cretan hieroglyphic and Linear A. It ended with mass destructions generally attributed to earthquakes, though violent destruction has been considered as an alternative explanation.\nMM III (c. 1750\u20131700 BC) marks the beginning of the Neopalatial period. Most of the palaces were rebuilt with architectural innovations, with the notable exception of Phaistos. Cretan hieroglyphs were abandoned in favor of Linear A, and Minoan cultural influence becomes significant in mainland Greece.\nLate Minoan.\nThe Late Minoan period was an eventful time that saw profound change in Minoan society. Many of the most recognizable Minoan artifacts date from this time, for instance the snake goddess figurines, La Parisienne Fresco, and the marine style of pottery decoration.\nLate Minoan I (c. 1700-1470 BC) was a continuation of the prosperous Neopalatial culture. A notable event from this era was the eruption of the Thera volcano, which occurred around 1600 BC towards the end of the LM IA subperiod. One of the largest volcanic explosions in recorded history, it ejected about of material and was measured at 7 on the Volcanic Explosivity Index. While the eruption destroyed Cycladic settlements such as Akrotiri and led to the abandonment of some sites in northeast Crete, other Minoan sites such as Knossos continued to prosper. The post-eruption LM IB period (c.1625-1470) saw ambitious new building projects, booming international trade, and artistic developments such as the marine style.\nLate Minoan IB (c. 1625-1470 BC) ended with severe destructions throughout the island, marking the end of Neopalatial society. These destructions are thought to have been deliberate, since they spared certain sites in a manner inconsistent with natural disasters. For instance, the town at Knossos burned while the palace itself did not. The causes of these destructions have been a perennial topic of debate. While some researchers attributed them to Mycenaean conquerors, others have argued that they were the result of internal upheavals. Similarly, while some researchers have attempted to link them to lingering environmental disruption from the Thera eruption, others have argued that the two events are too distant in time for any causal relation.\nLate Minoan II (c. 1470-1420 BC) is sparsely represented in the archaeological record, but appears to have been a period of decline.\nLate Minoan III (c. 1420-1075 BC) shows profound social and political changes. Among the palaces, only Knossos remained in use, though it too was destroyed by LM IIIB2. The language of administration shifted to Mycenaean Greek and material culture shows increased mainland influence, reflecting the rise of a Greek-speaking elite. In Late Minoan IIIC (c. 1200-1075 BC), coinciding with the wider Late Bronze Age collapse, coastal settlements were abandoned in favor of defensible locations on higher ground. These small villages, some of which grew out of earlier mountain shrines, continued aspects of recognizably Minoan culture until the Early Iron Age.\nGeography.\nThe Minoan Civilization was centered on the island of Crete, with additional settlements around the Aegean Sea. Crete is located in the south of the Aegean, situated along maritime trade routes that connect Europe, Africa, and the Middle East. Because it straddles the Mediterranean and African climate zones, with land at a variety of elevations, it provides a diverse array of natural resources. However, it is notably poor in metals, a fact believed to have spurred the Minoans' interest in international trade. The island is seismically active, with signs of earthquake damage at many Minoan sites. The majority of Minoan sites are found in central and eastern Crete, with few in the western part of the island, especially to the south.\nBeyond Crete.\nThe Minoans were traders, and their cultural contacts reached Egypt, Cyprus, Canaan and the Levantine coast and Anatolia. Minoan-style frescoes have been found at elite residences in Avaris and Tel Kabri. Minoan techniques and ceramic styles had varying degrees of influence on Helladic Greece. Along with Santorini, Minoan settlements are found at Kastri, Kythera, an island near the Greek mainland influenced by the Minoans from the mid-third millenniumBC (EMII) to its Mycenaean occupation in the 13th century. Minoan strata replaced a mainland-derived early Bronze Age culture, the earliest Minoan settlement outside Crete.\nThe Cyclades were in the Minoan cultural orbit and, closer to Crete, the islands of Karpathos, Saria and Kasos also contained middle-Bronze Age (MMI-II) Minoan colonies or settlements of Minoan traders. Most were abandoned in LMI, but Karpathos recovered and continued its Minoan culture until the end of the Bronze Age. Other supposed Minoan colonies, such as that hypothesized by Adolf Furtw\u00e4ngler on Aegina, were later dismissed by scholars. However, there was a Minoan colony at Ialysos on Rhodes.\nMinoan cultural influence indicates an orbit extending through the Cyclades to Egypt and Cyprus. Fifteenth-centuryBC paintings in Thebes, Egypt depict Minoan-appearing individuals bearing gifts. Inscriptions describing them as coming from \"keftiu\" (\"islands in the middle of the sea\") may refer to gift-bringing merchants or officials from Crete.\nSome locations on Crete indicate that the Minoans were an \"outward-looking\" society. The neo-palatial site of Kato Zakros is located within 100 meters of the modern shoreline in a bay. Its large number of workshops and wealth of site materials indicate a possible \"entrep\u00f4t\" for trade. Such activities are seen in artistic representations of the sea, including the \"Ship Procession\" or \"Flotilla\" fresco in room five of the West House at Akrotiri.\nIn 2024, archaeologists discovered a Minoan bronze dagger with silver rivets in an ancient shipwreck at Kumluca in Antalya Province. According to the researchers, the discovery highlights the cultural and commercial exchanges in the Mediterranean during the bronze age.\nArt.\nMinoan art is marked by imaginative images and exceptional workmanship. Sinclair Hood described an \"essential quality of the finest Minoan art, the ability to create an atmosphere of movement and life although following a set of highly formal conventions\". It forms part of the wider grouping of Aegean art, and in later periods came for a time to have a dominant influence over Cycladic art. Wood and textiles have decomposed, so most surviving examples of Minoan art are pottery, intricately carved Minoan seals, palace frescos which include landscapes (but are often mostly \"reconstructed\"), small sculptures in various materials, jewellery, and metalwork.\nThe relationship of Minoan art to that of other contemporary cultures and later Ancient Greek art has been much discussed. It clearly dominated Mycenaean art and Cycladic art of the same periods, even after Crete was occupied by the Mycenaeans, but only some aspects of the tradition survived the Greek Dark Ages after the collapse of Mycenaean Greece.\nMinoan art has a variety of subject-matter, much of it appearing across different media, although only some styles of pottery include figurative scenes. Bull-leaping appears in painting and several types of sculpture, and is thought to have had a religious significance; bull's heads are also a popular subject in terracotta and other sculptural materials. There are no figures that appear to be portraits of individuals, or are clearly royal, and the identities of religious figures is often tentative, with scholars uncertain whether they are deities, clergy or devotees. Equally, whether painted rooms were \"shrines\" or secular is far from clear; one room in Akrotiri has been argued to be a bedroom, with remains of a bed, or a shrine.\nAnimals, including an unusual variety of marine fauna, are often depicted; the Marine Style is a type of painted palace pottery from MM III and LM IA that paints sea creatures including octopus spreading all over the vessel, and probably originated from similar frescoed scenes; sometimes these appear in other media. Scenes of hunting and warfare, and horses and riders, are mostly found in later periods, in works perhaps made by Cretans for a Mycenaean market, or Mycenaean overlords of Crete.\nWhile Minoan figures, whether human or animal, have a great sense of life and movement, they are often not very accurate, and the species is sometimes impossible to identify; by comparison with Ancient Egyptian art they are often more vivid, but less naturalistic. In comparison with the art of other ancient cultures there is a high proportion of female figures, though the idea that Minoans had only goddesses and no gods is now discounted. Most human figures are in profile or in a version of the Egyptian convention with the head and legs in profile, and the torso seen frontally; but the Minoan figures exaggerate features such as slim male waists and large female breasts.\nWhat is called landscape painting is found in both frescos and on painted pots, and sometimes in other media, but most of the time this consists of plants shown fringing a scene, or dotted around within it. There is a particular visual convention where the surroundings of the main subject are laid out as though seen from above, though individual specimens are shown in profile. This accounts for the rocks being shown all round a scene, with flowers apparently growing down from the top. The seascapes surrounding some scenes of fish and of boats, and in the \"Ship Procession\" miniature fresco from Akrotiri, land with a settlement as well, give a wider landscape than is usual.\nThe largest and best collection of Minoan art is in the Heraklion Archaeological Museum (\"AMH\") near Knossos, on the northern coast of Crete.\nPottery.\nMany different styles of potted wares and techniques of production are observable throughout the history of Crete. Early Minoan ceramics were characterized by patterns of spirals, triangles, curved lines, crosses, fish bones, and beak-spouts. However, while many of the artistic motifs are similar in the Early Minoan period, there are many differences that appear in the reproduction of these techniques throughout the island which represent a variety of shifts in taste as well as in power structures. There were also many small terracotta figurines.\nDuring the Middle Minoan period, naturalistic designs (such as fish, squid, birds and lilies) were common. In the Late Minoan period, flowers and animals were still characteristic but more variety existed. However, in contrast to later Ancient Greek vase painting, paintings of human figures are extremely rare, and those of land mammals not common until late periods. Shapes and ornament were often borrowed from metal tableware that has largely not survived, while painted decoration probably mostly derives from frescos.\nJewellery.\nMinoan jewellery has mostly been recovered from graves, and until the later periods much of it consists of diadems and ornaments for women's hair, though there are also the universal types of rings, bracelets, armlets and necklaces, and many thin pieces that were sewn onto clothing. In the earlier periods gold was the main material, typically hammered very thin. but later it seemed to become scarce.\nThe Minoans created elaborate metalwork with imported gold and copper. Bead necklaces, bracelets and hair ornaments appear in the frescoes, and many labrys pins survive. The Minoans mastered granulation, as indicated by the Malia Pendant, a gold pendant featuring bees on a honeycomb. This was overlooked by the 19th-century looters of a royal burial site they called the \"Gold Hole\".\nWeapons.\nFine decorated bronze weapons have been found in Crete, especially from LM periods, but they are far less prominent than in the remains of warrior-ruled Mycenae, where the famous shaft-grave burials contain many very richly decorated swords and daggers. In contrast spears and \"slashing-knives\" tend to be \"severely functional\". Many of the decorated weapons were probably made either in Crete, or by Cretans working on the mainland. Daggers are often the most lavishly decorated, with gold hilts that may be set with jewels, and the middle of the blade decorated with a variety of techniques.\nThe most famous of these are a few inlaid with elaborate scenes in gold and silver set against a black (or now black) \"niello\" background, whose actual material and technique have been much discussed. These have long thin scenes running along the centre of the blade, which show the violence typical of the art of Mycenaean Greece, as well as a sophistication in both technique and figurative imagery that is startlingly original in a Greek context.\nMetal vessels.\nMetal vessels were produced in Crete from at least as early as EM II (c. 2500BC) in the Prepalatial period through to LM IA (c. 1450BC) in the Postpalatial period and perhaps as late as LM IIIB/C (c. 1200BC), although it is likely that many of the vessels from these later periods were heirlooms from earlier periods. The earliest were probably made exclusively from precious metals, but from the Protopalatial period (MM IB \u2013 MM IIA) they were also produced in arsenical bronze and, subsequently, tin bronze. The archaeological record suggests that mostly cup-type forms were created in precious metals, but the corpus of bronze vessels was diverse, including cauldrons, pans, hydrias, bowls, pitchers, basins, cups, ladles and lamps. The Minoan metal vessel tradition influenced that of the Mycenaean culture on mainland Greece, and they are often regarded as the same tradition. Many precious metal vessels found on mainland Greece exhibit Minoan characteristics, and it is thought that these were either imported from Crete or made on the mainland by Minoan metalsmiths working for Mycenaean patrons or by Mycenaean smiths who had trained under Minoan masters.\nAgriculture and cuisine.\nThe Minoans raised cattle, sheep, pigs and goats, and grew wheat, barley, vetch and chickpeas. They also cultivated grapes, figs and olives, grew poppies for seed and perhaps opium. The Minoans also domesticated bees.\nVegetables, including lettuce, celery, asparagus and carrots, grew wild on Crete. Pear, quince, and olive trees were also native. Date palm trees and cats (for hunting) were imported from Egypt. The Minoans adopted pomegranates from the Near East, but not lemons and oranges.\nThey may have practiced polyculture, and their varied, healthy diet resulted in a population increase. Polyculture theoretically maintains soil fertility and protects against losses due to crop failure. Linear B tablets indicate the importance of orchards (figs, olives and grapes) in processing crops for \"secondary products\". Olive oil in Cretan or Mediterranean cuisine is comparable to butter in northern European cuisine. The process of fermenting wine from grapes was probably a factor of the \"Palace\" economies; wine would have been a trade commodity and an item of domestic consumption. Farmers used wooden plows, bound with leather to wooden handles and pulled by pairs of donkeys or oxen.\nSeafood was also important in Cretan cuisine. The prevalence of edible molluscs in site material and artistic representations of marine fish and animals (including the distinctive Marine Style pottery, such as the LM IIIC \"Octopus\" stirrup jar), indicate appreciation and occasional use of fish by the economy. However, scholars believe that these resources were not as significant as grain, olives and animal produce. \"Fishing was one of the major activities...but there is as yet no evidence for the way in which they organized their fishing.\" An intensification of agricultural activity is indicated by the construction of terraces and dams at Pseira in the Late Minoan period.\nCretan cuisine included wild game: Cretans ate wild deer, wild boar and meat from livestock. Wild game is now extinct on Crete. A matter of controversy is whether Minoans made use of the indigenous Cretan megafauna, which are typically thought to have been extinct considerably earlier at 10,000BC. This is in part due to the possible presence of dwarf elephants in contemporary Egyptian art.\nNot all plants and flora were purely functional, and arts depict scenes of lily-gathering in green spaces. The fresco known as the \"Sacred Grove\" at Knossos depicts women facing left, flanked by trees. Some scholars have suggested that it is a harvest festival or ceremony to honor the fertility of the soil. Artistic depictions of farming scenes also appear on the \"Harvester Vase\" (an egg-shaped rhyton), which depicts 27 men led by another carrying bunches of sticks to beat ripe olives from the trees.\nThe discovery of storage areas in the palace compounds has prompted debate. At the second \"palace\" at Phaistos, rooms on the west side of the structure have been identified as a storage area. Jars, jugs and vessels have been recovered in the area, indicating the complex's possible role as a re-distribution center for agricultural produce. At larger sites such as Knossos, there is evidence of craft specialization (workshops). The palace at Kato Zakro indicates that workshops were integrated into palace structure. The Minoan palatial system may have developed through economic intensification, where an agricultural surplus could support a population of administrators, craftsmen and religious practitioners. The number of sleeping rooms in the palaces indicates that they could have supported a sizable population which was removed from manual labor.\nTools.\nTools, originally made of wood or bone, were bound to handles with leather straps. During the Bronze Age, they were made of bronze with wooden handles. Due to its round hole, the tool head would spin on the handle. The Minoans developed oval-shaped holes in their tools to fit oval-shaped handles, which prevented spinning. Tools included double adzes, double- and single-bladed axes, axe-adzes, sickles and chisels.\nSociety and culture.\nApart from the abundant local agriculture, the Minoans were also a mercantile people who engaged significantly in overseas trade, and at their peak may well have had a dominant position in international trade over much of the Mediterranean. After 1700BC, their culture indicates a high degree of organization. Minoan-manufactured goods suggest a network of trade with mainland Greece (notably Mycenae), Cyprus, Syria, Anatolia, Egypt, Mesopotamia and westward as far as the Iberian Peninsula. Minoan religion apparently focused on female deities, with women officiants. While historians and archaeologists have long been skeptical of an outright matriarchy, the predominance of female figures in authoritative roles over male ones seems to indicate that Minoan society was matriarchal, and among the most well-supported examples known.\nThe term palace economy first gained popularity among Minoan researchers. It is now used as a general term for ancient pre-monetary cultures where much of the economy revolved around the collection of crops and other goods by centralized government or religious institutions (the two tending to go together) for redistribution to the population. This is still accepted as an important part of the Minoan economy; all the palaces have very large amounts of space that seems to have been used for storage of agricultural produce, some remains of which have been excavated after they were buried by disasters. What role, if any, the palaces played in Minoan international trade is unknown, or how this was organized in other ways. The decipherment of Linear A would possibly shed light on this.\nGovernment.\nVery little is known about the forms of Minoan government, particularly since the Minoan language has not yet been deciphered. It used to be believed that the Minoans had a monarchy supported by a bureaucracy. This might initially have been a number of monarchies, corresponding with the \"palaces\" around Crete, but later all taken over by Knossos, which was itself later occupied by Mycenaean overlords. But, in notable contrast to contemporary Egyptian and Mesopotamian civilizations, \"Minoan iconography contains no pictures of recognizable kings\", and in recent decades it has come to be thought that before the presumed Mycenaean invasion around 1450BC, a group of elite families, presumably living in the \"villas\" and the palaces, controlled both government and religion. Rejecting both a monarchy and an aristocracy, David Graeber and David Wengrow recently concluded: \"Pretty much all the available evidence from Minoan Crete suggests a system of female political rule \u2013 effectively a theocracy of some sort, governed by a college of priestesses.\"\nStatus of women.\nAs Linear A Minoan writing has not been deciphered yet, most information available about Minoan women is from various art forms and Linear B tablets, and scholarship about Minoan women remains limited.\nMinoan society was a divided society separating men from women in art illustration, clothing, and societal duties. For example, documents written in Linear B have been found documenting Minoan families, wherein spouses and children are not all listed together. In one section, fathers were listed with their sons, while mothers were listed with their daughters in a completely different section apart from the men who lived in the same household, signifying the vast gender divide present in Minoan society.\nArtistically, women were portrayed very differently from men. Men were often artistically represented with dark skin while women were represented with lighter skin. Minoan dress representation also clearly marks the difference between men and women. Minoan men were often depicted clad in little clothing while women's bodies, specifically later on, were more covered up. While there is evidence that the structure of women's clothing originated as a mirror to the clothing that men wore, fresco art illustrates how women's clothing evolved to be increasingly elaborate throughout the Minoan era. Throughout the evolution of women's clothing, breasts were emphasized through varying degrees of exposure. The specific cultural significance of breasts in Minoan culture is not currently understood. Both Minoan women and men were portrayed with \"wasp\" waists, similar to the bodice Western women wore into the 20th century.\nFresco paintings portray three class levels of women: elite women, women of the masses, and servants. A fourth, smaller class of women who participated in religious and sacred tasks are also included among some paintings. Elite women were depicted in paintings as having a stature twice the size of women in lower classes, as this was a way of emphasizing the important difference between the elite wealthy women and the rest of the female population within society.\nChildcare was a central job for women within Minoan society. Other roles outside the household that have been identified as women's duties are food gathering, food preparation, and household care-taking. Additionally, it has been found that women were represented in the artisan world as ceramic and textile craftswomen. As women got older it can be assumed that their job of taking care of children ended and they transitioned towards household management and job mentoring, teaching younger women the jobs that they themselves participated in.\nWhile women were often portrayed in paintings as caretakers of children, pregnant women were rarely shown in frescoes. Pregnant women were instead represented in the form of sculpted pots with the rounded base of the pots representing the pregnant belly. Additionally, no Minoan art forms portray women giving birth, breast feeding, or procreating. Lack of such actions leads historians to believe that these actions would have been recognized by Minoan society to be either sacred or inappropriate, and kept private within society.\nChildbirth was a dangerous process within Minoan society. Archeological sources have found numerous bones of pregnant women, identified by the fetus bones within their skeleton found in the abdomen area, providing strong evidence that death during pregnancy and childbirth were common features within society.\nClothing.\nSheep wool was the main fibre used in textiles, and perhaps a significant export commodity. Linen from flax was probably much less common, and possibly imported from Egypt, or grown locally. There is no evidence of silk, but some use is possible.\nAs seen in Minoan art, Minoan men wore loincloths (if poor) or robes or kilts that were often long. Women wore long dresses with short sleeves and layered, flounced skirts. With both sexes, there was a great emphasis in art in a small wasp waist, often taken to improbable extremes. Both sexes are often shown with rather thick belts or girdles at the waist. Women could also wear a strapless, fitted bodice, and clothing patterns had symmetrical, geometric designs. Men are shown as clean-shaven, and male hair was short, in styles that would be common today, except for some long thin tresses at the back, perhaps for young elite males. Female hair is typically shown with long tresses falling at the back, as in the fresco fragment known as \"La Parisienne\". This got its name because when it was found in the early 20th century, a French art historian thought it resembled Parisian women of the day. Children are shown in art with shaved heads (often blue in art) except for a few very long locks; the rest of the hair is allowed to grow as they approach puberty; this can be seen in the Akrotiri Boxer Fresco.\nTwo famous Minoan snake goddess figurines from Knossos (one illustrated below) show bodices that circle their breasts, but do not cover them at all. These striking figures have dominated the popular image of Minoan clothing, and have been copied in some \"reconstructions\" of largely destroyed frescos, but few images unambiguously show this costume, and the status of the figures\u2014goddesses, priestesses, or devotees\u2014is not at all clear. What is clear, from pieces like the Agia Triada Sarcophagus, is that Minoan women normally covered their breasts; priestesses in religious contexts may have been an exception. This shows a funeral sacrifice, and some figures of both sexes are wearing aprons or skirts of animal hide, apparently left with the hair on. This was probably the costume worn by both sexes by those engaged in rituals.\nMinoan jewellery included many gold ornaments for women's hair and also thin gold plaques to sew onto clothing. Flowers were also often worn in the hair, as by the Poppy Goddess terracotta figurine and other figures. Frescos also show what are presumably woven or embroidered figures, human and animal, spaced out on clothing.\nLanguage and writing.\nThe Minoans used a number of different scripts. During the Palatial period, the primary scripts were Linear A and Cretan hieroglyphs, the latter falling out of use in MM III. The origins of these scripts is unknown. Although Cretan hieroglyphic is often assumed to have been inspired by Egyptian hieroglyphs, Anatolian and Mesopotamian writing systems have also been considered as models. Neither script has been deciphered, despite numerous attempts. For instance, when the values of the symbols in Linear B are used in Linear A, they produce mostly unrecognizable words. The language encoded by these scripts is tentatively dubbed \"Minoan\", though it is not certain that it was a single language. Decipherment attempts have attempted to read the language as Indo-European, Semitic, and Tyrsenian languages, but none have resulted in an accepted decipherment. The post-Bronze Age Eteocretan language has been considered as a potential descendant of Minoan. However, this language is only known from five inscriptions in eastern Crete and is thus itself poorly understood.\nLinear B became the primary Cretan script after LM II. This script was adapted from the earlier Linear A in order to write Mycenaean Greek, which had become the language of administration. Linear B was deciphered in 1952, unlocking a major source of textual evidence about the economics and social organization of the final year at the palace of Knossos.\nA handful of Minoan inscriptions use other unknown writing systems. For instance, the Phaistos Disc features a pictorial script whose only close comparison is found on the Arkalochori Axe. Because so few instances of these scripts have been found, they remain undeciphered.\nReligion.\nArthur Evans thought the Minoans worshipped, more or less exclusively, a mother goddess, which heavily influenced views for decades. Recent scholarly opinion sees a much more diverse religious landscape although the absence of texts, or even readable relevant inscriptions, leaves the picture very cloudy. We have no names of deities until after the Mycenaean era. Much Minoan art is given a religious significance of some sort, but this tends to be vague, not least because Minoan government is now often seen as a theocracy, so politics and religion have a considerable overlap. The Minoan pantheon featured many deities, among which a young, spear-wielding male god is also prominent. Some scholars see in the Minoan Goddess a female divine solar figure.\nIt is very often difficult to distinguish between images of worshipers, priests and priestesses, rulers and deities; indeed the priestly and royal roles may have often been the same, as leading rituals is often seen as the essence of rulership. Possibly as aspects of the main, probably dominant, nature/mother goddess, archaeologists have identified a mountain goddess, worshipped at peak sanctuaries, a dove goddess, a snake goddess perhaps protectress of the household, the Potnia Theron goddess of animals, and a goddess of childbirth. Late Minoan terracotta votive figures like the poppy goddess (perhaps a worshipper) carry attributes, often birds, in their diadems. The mythical creature called the Minoan Genius is somewhat threatening but perhaps a protective figure, possibly of children; it seems to largely derive from Taweret the Egyptian hybrid crocodile and hippopotamus goddess.\nMen with a special role as priests or priest-kings are identifiable by diagonal bands on their long robes, and carrying over their shoulder a ritual \"axe-sceptre\" with a rounded blade. The more conventionally shaped labrys or double-headed axe, is a very common votive offering, probably for a male god, and large examples of the Horns of Consecration symbol, probably representing bull's horns, are shown on seals decorating buildings, with a few large actual survivals. Bull-leaping, very much centred on Knossos, is agreed to have a religious significance, perhaps to do with selecting the elite. The position of the bull in it is unclear; the funeral ceremonies on the (very late) Hagia Triada sarcophagus include a bull sacrifice. The saffron may have had a religious significance.\nAccording to Nanno Marinatos, \"The hierarchy and relationship of gods within the pantheon is difficult to decode from the images alone.\" Marinatos disagrees with earlier descriptions of Minoan religion as primitive, saying that it \"was the religion of a sophisticated and urbanized palatial culture with a complex social hierarchy. It was not dominated by fertility any more than any religion of the past or present has been, and it addressed gender identity, rites of passage, and death. It is reasonable to assume that both the organization and the rituals, even the mythology, resembled the religions of Near Eastern palatial civilizations.\" It even seems that the later Greek pantheon would synthesize the Minoan female deity and Hittite goddess from the Near East.\nSymbolism.\nMinoan horn-topped altars, which Arthur Evans called Horns of Consecration, are represented in seal impressions and have been found as far afield as Cyprus. Minoan sacred symbols include the bull (and its horns of consecration), the labrys (double-headed axe), the pillar, the serpent, the sun-disc, the tree, and even the Ankh.\nHaralampos V. Harissis and Anastasios V. Harissis posit a different interpretation of these symbols, saying that they were based on apiculture rather than religion. A major festival was exemplified in bull-leaping, represented in the frescoes of Knossos and inscribed in miniature seals.\nBurial practices.\nSimilar to other Bronze Age archaeological finds, burial remains constitute much of the material and archaeological evidence for the period. By the end of the Second Palace Period, Minoan burial was dominated by two forms: circular tombs (\"tholoi\") in southern Crete and house tombs in the north and the east. However, much Minoan mortuary practice does not conform to this pattern. Burial was more popular than cremation. Individual burial was the rule, except for the Chrysolakkos complex in Malia. Here, a number of buildings form a complex in the center of Mallia's burial area and may have been the focus for burial rituals or a crypt for a notable family. Evidence of possible human sacrifice by the Minoans has been found at three sites: at Anemospilia, in a MMII building near Mt. Juktas considered a temple; an EMII sanctuary complex at Fournou Korifi in south-central Crete, and in an LMIB building known as the North House in Knossos.\nArchitecture.\nMinoan cities were connected by narrow roads paved with blocks cut with bronze saws. Streets were drained, and water and sewage facilities were available to the upper class through clay pipes.\nMinoan buildings often had flat, tiled roofs; plaster, wood or flagstone floors; and stood two to three stories high. Lower walls were typically constructed of stone and rubble, and the upper walls of mudbrick. Ceiling timbers held up the roofs.\nConstruction materials for villas and palaces varied, and included sandstone, gypsum and limestone. Building techniques also varied, with some palaces using ashlar masonry and others roughly-hewn, megalithic blocks.\nIn north-central Crete blue-greenschist was used to pave floors of streets and courtyards between 1650 and 1600BC. These rocks were likely quarried in Agia Pelagia on the north coast of central Crete.\nPalaces.\nThe Minoans famously built large complexes referred to as palaces. However, despite their name, it is generally agreed that they did not primarily serve as royal residences. The best known of them are at Knossos, Phaistos, Zakros, and Malia.\nMinoan palaces consist of wings arranged around an open rectangular court. The wings are often multi-story, with interior and exterior staircases, lightwells, massive columns, and large storage chambers. The various palaces have a fairly uniform style, though each has unique features. They are typically aligned with their surrounding topography, in particular with nearby sacred mountains. For instance, the palace at Phaistos appears to align with Mount Ida and Knossos is aligned with Mount Juktas, both on a north\u2013south axis.\nThe first palaces are generally dated to the MM IB period. However, they were not a spontaneous development but rather the culmination of a longer architectural tradition. The palace style has precedents in Early Minoan construction styles and earlier buildings were sometimes incorporated in the later palaces. The palace at Malia is sometimes regarded as having achieved palacehood at the end of the Early Minoan period. Palaces were continually renovated and altered, with their style changing over time. For instance, early palaces had a square-within-a-square layout, while later renovations introduced more internal divisions and corridors.\nThe function of the palaces is a matter of debate, though it is known that they included administrative offices, shrines, workshops and storage spaces.\nPlumbing.\nDuring the Minoan Era extensive waterways were built in order to protect the growing population. This system had two primary functions, first providing and distributing water, and secondly relocating sewage and stormwater. One of the defining aspects of the Minoan Era was the architectural feats of their waste management. The Minoans used technologies such as wells, cisterns, and aqueducts to manage their water supplies. Structural aspects of their buildings even played a part. Flat roofs and plentiful open courtyards were used for collecting water to be stored in cisterns. Significantly, the Minoans had water treatment devices. One such device seems to have been a porous clay pipe through which water was allowed to flow until clean.\nColumns.\nFor sustaining of the roof, some higher houses, especially the palaces, used columns made usually of \"Cupressus sempervirens\", and sometimes of stone. One of the most notable Minoan contributions to architecture is their inverted column, wider at the top than the base (unlike most Greek columns, which are wider at the bottom to give an impression of height). The columns were made of wood (not stone) and were generally painted red. Mounted on a simple stone base, they were topped with a pillow-like, round capital.\nVillas.\nA number of compounds known as \"villas\" have been excavated on Crete, mostly near palaces, especially Knossos. These structures share features of neopalatial palaces: a conspicuous western facade, storage facilities and a three-part Minoan Hall. These features may indicate a similar role or that the structures were artistic imitations, suggesting that their occupants were familiar with palatial culture. The villas were often richly decorated, as evidenced by the frescos of Hagia Triada Villa A.\nA common characteristic of the Minoan villas was having flat roofs. Their rooms did not have windows to the streets, the light arriving from courtyards, a common feature of larger Mediterranean in much later periods. In the 2nd millennium BC, the villas had one or two floors, and the palaces even three.\nWarfare and the \"Minoan peace\".\nEarly excavators such as Arthur Evans proposed that there was little internal armed conflict in Minoan Crete until the Mycenaean period. However, subsequent scholarship has questioned this interpretation.\nNo evidence has been found of a Minoan army or the Minoan domination of peoples beyond Crete. Evans believed that the Minoans had some kind of overlordship of at least parts of Mycenaean Greece in the Neopalatial Period, but it is now very widely agreed that the opposite was the case, with a Mycenaean elite clearly ruling Knossos from around 1450BC. Few signs of warfare appear in Minoan art: \"Although a few archaeologists see war scenes in a few pieces of Minoan art, others interpret even these scenes as festivals, sacred dance, or sports events\" (Studebaker, 2004, p.\u00a027). Although armed warriors are depicted as stabbed in the throat with swords, the violence may be part of a ritual or blood sport.\nNanno Marinatos argued that the Neopalatial Minoans had a \"powerful navy\" that made them a desirable ally to have in Mediterranean power politics, at least by the 14th century as \"vassals of the pharaoh\", leading Cretan tribute-bearers to be depicted on Egyptian tombs such as those of the top officials Rekmire and Senmut.\nOn mainland Greece during the shaft-grave era at Mycenae, there is little evidence for major Mycenaean fortifications; the citadels follow the destruction of nearly all neopalatial Cretan sites. Warfare by other contemporaries of the ancient Minoans, such as the Egyptians and the Hittites, is well-documented.\nWarfare.\nDespite finding ruined watchtowers and fortification walls, Evans said that there was little evidence of ancient Minoan fortifications. According to Stylianos Alexiou (in \"Kretologia\" 8), a number of sites (especially early and middle Minoan sites such as Aghia Photia) are built on hilltops or otherwise fortified. Lucia Nixon wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We may have been over-influenced by the lack of what we might think of as solid fortifications to assess the archaeological evidence properly. As in so many other instances, we may not have been looking for evidence in the right places, and therefore we may not end with a correct assessment of the Minoans and their ability to avoid war.\nChester Starr said in \"Minoan Flower Lovers\" that since Shang China and the Maya had unfortified centers and engaged in frontier struggles, a lack of fortifications alone does not prove that the Minoans were a peaceful civilization unparalleled in history. In 1998, when Minoan archaeologists met in a Belgian conference to discuss the possibility that the Pax Minoica was outdated, evidence of Minoan war was still scanty. According to Jan Driessen, the Minoans frequently depicted \"weapons\" in their art in a ritual context:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The construction of fortified sites is often assumed to reflect a threat of warfare, but such fortified centres were multifunctional; they were also often the embodiment or material expression of the central places of the territories at the same time as being monuments glorifying and merging leading power.\nStella Chryssoulaki's work on small outposts (or guardhouses) in eastern Crete indicates a possible defensive system; type A (high-quality) Minoan swords were found in the palaces of Mallia and Zarkos (see Sanders, AJA 65, 67, Hoeckmann, JRGZM 27, or Rehak and Younger, AJA 102). Keith Branigan estimated that 95 percent of Minoan \"weapons\" had hafting (hilts or handles) which would have prevented their use as such. However, tests of replicas indicated that the weapons could cut flesh down to the bone (and score the bone's surface) without damaging the weapons themselves. According to Paul Rehak, Minoan figure-eight shields could not have been used for fighting or hunting, since they were too cumbersome. Although Cheryl Floyd concluded that Minoan \"weapons\" were tools used for mundane tasks such as meat processing, Middle Minoan \"rapiers nearly three feet in length\" have been found.\nCharles Gates argues that the absence of warfare in Minoan art does not prove it did not occur because there is no correlation between a society's artistic depiction of warfare and how often said society is involved in conflict. Barry Molloy states that artwork is an unreliable guide to a society's behaviour, using the example that frescoes recovered prior to the Late Minoan period seldom depict people interacting with each other yet this should not be taken as evidence that Minoans rarely did so. Molloy further argues that the lack of fortifications could be attributed to Crete's rugged topography, which would have provided a significant natural defensive advantage; Molloy argues that the guardhouses could have been used to secure narrow roads through Crete.\nAbout Minoan warfare, Branigan concluded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; The quantity of weaponry, the impressive fortifications, and the aggressive looking long-boats all suggested an era of intensified hostilities. But on closer inspection there are grounds for thinking that all three key elements are bound up as much with status statements, display, and fashion as with aggression;... Warfare such as there was in the southern Aegean early Bronze Age was either personalized and perhaps ritualized (in Crete) or small-scale, intermittent and essentially an economic activity (in the Cyclades and the Argolid/Attica).\nArchaeologist Olga Krzyszkowska agreed: \"The stark fact is that for the prehistoric Aegean we have no direct evidence for war and warfare \"per se\".\"\nGenetic and anthropometric studies.\nA cephalometric analysis by Argyropoulos et al. (1989) published in \"The Angle Orthodontist\" showed remarkable similarity in craniofacial morphology between Minoans and modern Greeks, suggesting a close affinity, and that the Greek ethnic group remained stable in its cephalic and facial morphology for the last 4,000 years.\nA craniofacial morphological study by Papagrigorakis et al. (2014) published in \"Anthropologischer Anzeiger\" also indicated craniological similarities between modern Greeks and Minoans, indicating continuity.\nA 2013 archaeogenetics study by Hughey at al. published in \"Nature Communications\" compared skeletal mtDNA from ancient Minoan skeletons that were sealed in a cave in the Lasithi Plateau between 3,700 and 4,400 years ago to 135 samples from Greece, Anatolia, western and northern Europe, North Africa and Egypt. The researchers found that the Minoan skeletons were genetically very similar to modern-day Europeans\u2014and especially close to modern-day Cretans, particularly those from the Lasithi Plateau. They were also genetically similar to Neolithic Europeans, but distinct from Egyptian or Libyan populations. \"We now know that the founders of the first advanced European civilization were European,\" said study co-author George Stamatoyannopoulos, a human geneticist at the University of Washington. \"They were very similar to Neolithic Europeans and very similar to present day-Cretans.\"\nIn their archaeogenetic study published in \"Nature\", Lazaridis et al. (2017) found that Minoans and Mycenaean Greeks were genetically highly similar \u2013 but not identical \u2013 and that modern Greeks descend from these populations. The FST between the sampled Bronze Age populations and present-day West Eurasians was estimated, finding that Mycenaean Greeks and Minoans were least differentiated from the populations of modern Greece, Cyprus, Albania, and Italy. In a subsequent study, Lazaridis et al. (2022) concluded that around ~58.4\u201365.8% of the DNA of the Mycenaeans and ~70.9\u201376.7% of the Minoans came from Early European Farmers (EEF), while the remainder came from ancient populations related to the Caucasus Hunter-Gatherers (CHG) (Mycenaeans ~20.1\u201322.7%, Minoans ~17\u201319.4%) and the Pre-Pottery Neolithic (PPN) culture (Mycenaeans ~7\u201314%, Minoans ~3.9\u20139.5%). Unlike the Minoans, the Mycenaeans had also inherited ~3.3\u20135.5% ancestry on average from a source related to the Eastern European Hunter-Gatherers (EHG), introduced via a proximal source related to the inhabitants of the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe (Western Steppe Herders) who are hypothesized to be the Proto-Indo-Europeans, and ~0.9\u20132.3% from the Iron Gates Hunter-Gatherers in the Balkans.\nIn 2023, whole genome-wide data of 102 individuals from Crete, the Greek mainland and Aegean Islands were sequenced, spanning from the Neolithic to Iron Age. It was discovered that the early farmers from Crete shared the same ancestry as other Neolithic Aegeans. It also confirmed previous findings for additional Central/Eastern European ancestry in the Greek mainland by the Middle Bronze Age.\nA report in 2024 also included a bioarcheological investigation conducted on remains that were found in Armenoi, Crete. The research revealed that the DNA of 23 newly sequenced individuals from Late Minoan tombs, had derived most of their ancestry from an Anatolian Neolithic source. Modern Greeks share this genetic profile, but are more shifted towards the Yamnaya on the PCA, and differentiated from the Greek populations that lived during the Early Bronze Age. The admixture analysis identified three main reference components: Anatolian Neolithic, Iranian Neolithic, and Western Hunter-Gatherer, with the Minoans also having some Yamnaya-related ancestry. The majority of individuals in the necropolis formed a homogenous population, with the exception of one individual, who was more similar to the populations of Western Europe. Overall, the studied genomes were found to be most similar to the other published genomes of Myceneans from mainland Greece; however, on the PCA analysis they plot exactly in-between both Minoans and Myceneans. The researchers noted that based on their genomic profile and placement, they may have been a mix of both groups.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73329", "revid": "5923310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73329", "title": "Minoans", "text": ""}
{"id": "73330", "revid": "50916965", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73330", "title": "Terneuzen", "text": "Terneuzen () is a city and municipality in the southwestern Netherlands, in the province of Zeeland, in the middle of Zeelandic Flanders. With almost 55,000 inhabitants, it is the most populous municipality of Zeeland.\nHistory.\nFirst mentioned in 1325, Terneuzen was a strategically located port on the waterways to Ghent, in present-day Belgium.\nIt received city rights in 1584.\nTradition has it that Terneuzen was once the home of the legendary Flying Dutchman, Van der Decken, a captain who cursed God and was condemned to sail the seas forever, as described in the Frederick Marryat novel \"The Phantom Ship\" and the Richard Wagner opera \"The Flying Dutchman\".\nBefore 1877, the city was often called Neuzen.\nGeography.\nThe city of Terneuzen is located on the southern shore of the Western Scheldt estuary. \nThe municipality of Terneuzen consists of the following population centres:\nEconomy.\nThe Ghent\u2013Terneuzen Canal is still an important shipping route connecting the Port of Ghent. The port of Terneuzen is the third-largest in the Netherlands, after those of Rotterdam and Amsterdam. The largest plant of Dow Chemical Company outside of the United States is located at Terneuzen, on the west side of the Ghent\u2013Terneuzen Canal.\nTransport.\nTerneuzen can be reached from the rest of the Netherlands via the Western Scheldt Tunnel, which opened in March 2003. Terneuzen is not linked to the rest of the Netherlands by rail, although the Dow Chemical plant is served by a freight-only line to Ghent in Belgium (Terneuzen's passenger rail service was withdrawn in 1951).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73331", "revid": "19569748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73331", "title": "Abu Nidal", "text": "Palestinian militant (1937\u20132002)\nSabri Khalil al-Banna (; May 1937 \u2013 16 August 2002), known by his \"nom de guerre\" Abu Nidal (\"father of struggle\"), was a Palestinian militant. He was the founder of Fatah: The Revolutionary Council (), a militant Palestinian splinter group more commonly known as the Abu Nidal Organization (ANO). Abu Nidal formed the ANO in October 1974 after splitting from Yasser Arafat's Fatah faction within the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).\nAbu Nidal is believed to have ordered attacks in 20 countries, killing over 300 and injuring over 650 while acting as a freelance contractor. The group's operations included the Rome and Vienna airport attacks on 27 December 1985, when gunmen opened fire on passengers in simultaneous shootings at El Al ticket counters, killing 20. At the height of its militancy in the 1970s and 1980s, the ANO was widely regarded as the most ruthless of the Palestinian groups. Palestinian leadership long suspected that Israeli Mossad had infiltrated the ANO, with Abu Nidal himself allegedly having been on the CIA payroll.\nAbu Nidal died after a shooting in his Baghdad apartment in August 2002. Palestinian sources believed he was killed on the orders of Saddam Hussein, while Iraqi officials insisted he had committed suicide during an interrogation.\nEarly life.\nSabri Khalil al-Banna was born in May 1937 in Jaffa, on the Mediterranean coast of what was then the British Mandate of Palestine. His father, Hajj Khalil al-Banna, owned 6,000 acres (24\u00a0km2) of orange groves situated between Jaffa and Majdal (now Ashkelon in Israel). The family lived in luxury in a three-storey stone house near the beach, later used as an Israeli military court. Muhammad Khalil al-Banna, Abu Nidal's brother, told Yossi Melman:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My father ... was the richest man in Palestine. He marketed about ten percent of all the citrus crops sent from Palestine to Europe\u2014especially to England and Germany. He owned a summer house in Marseille, France, and another house in \u0130skenderun, then in Syria and afterwards Turkey, and a number of houses in Palestine itself. Most of the time we lived in Jaffa. Our house had about twenty rooms, and we children would go down to swim in the sea. We also had stables with Arabian horses, and one of our homes in Ashkelon even had a large swimming pool. I think we must have been the only family in Palestine with a private swimming pool.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe kibbutz named Ramat Hakovesh has to this day a tract of land known as \"the al-Banna orchard\".\u00a0...My brothers and I still preserve the documents showing our ownership of the property, even though we know full well that we and our children have no chance of getting it back.\n\u2014 Muhammad al-Banna, brother of Abu Nidal\nKhalil al-Banna's wealth allowed him to take several wives. In an interview with \"Der Spiegel\", Sabri stated his father had 13 wives, 17 sons and 8 daughters. Melman writes that Sabri's mother, an Alawite, was the eighth wife. She had been one of the family's maids as a 16-year-old girl. The family disapproved of the marriage, according to Patrick Seale and, as a result, Sabri Khalil's 12th child, was apparently looked down on by his older siblings, although in later life the relationships were repaired.\nIn 1944 or 1945, his father sent him to Coll\u00e8ge des Fr\u00e8res de Jaffa, a French mission school, which he attended for one year. When his father died in 1945, when Sabri was seven years old, the family turned his mother out of the house. His brothers took him out of the mission school and enrolled him instead in a prestigious, private Muslim school in Jerusalem, now known as Umariya Elementary School, which he attended for about two years.\n1948 Palestine War.\nOn 29 November 1947, the United Nations resolved to partition Palestine into an Arab and Jewish state. Fighting broke out immediately, and the disruption of the citrus-fruit business limited the family's income. In Jaffa there were food shortages, truck bombings, and an Irgun militia mortar bombardment. Melman writes that the al-Banna family had had good relations with the Jewish community. Abu Nidal's brother told Melman that their father had been a friend of Avraham Shapira, a founder of the Jewish defense organization, Hashomer, stating, \"He would visit [Shapira] in his home in Petah Tikva, or Shapira riding his horse would visit our home in Jaffa. I also remember how we visited Dr. Weizmann [later first president of Israel] in his home in Rehovot.\" However, these relationships did not help them weather the war.\nJust before Israeli troops took Jaffa in April 1948, the family fled to their house near Majdal, but Israeli troops arrived there too, and the family fled again. This time they went to the Bureij refugee camp in the Gaza Strip, then under Egyptian control. Melman writes that the family spent nine months living in tents, depending on UNRWA for an allowance of oil, rice, and potatoes. The experience had a powerful effect on Abu Nidal.\nMove to Nablus and Saudi Arabia.\nThe al-Banna family's commercial experience, and the money they had managed to take with them, meant they could re-establish themselves, Melman writes. Their orange groves were gone, now part of the new state of Israel. The family moved to Nablus in the West Bank, then under Jordanian control. In 1955, Abu Nidal graduated from high school, joined the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party, and began a degree in engineering at Cairo University, but he left after two years without a degree. In 1960, he made his way to Saudi Arabia, where he established himself as a painter and electrician, and worked as a casual laborer for Aramco. His brother told Melman that Abu Nidal would return to Nablus from Saudi Arabia every year to visit his mother. It was during one such visit in 1962 that he met his wife, whose family had also fled Jaffa. Their marriage produced a son and two daughters.\nPersonality.\nAbu Nidal was often in poor health, according to Seale, and tended to dress in zip-up jackets and old trousers, drinking whisky every night in his later years. He became, writes Seale, a \"master of disguises and subterfuge, trusting no one, lonely and self-protective, [living] like a mole, hidden away from public view\". Acquaintances said that he was capable of hard work and had a mind for finances. Salah Khalaf (Abu Iyad), the deputy chief of Fatah who was assassinated by the ANO in 1991, knew him well in the late 1960s when he took Abu Nidal under his wing. He told Seale:\nHe had been recommended to me as a man of energy and enthusiasm, but he seemed shy when we met. It was only on further acquaintance that I noticed other traits. He was extremely good company, with a sharp tongue and an inclination to dismiss most of humanity as spies and traitors. I rather liked that! I discovered he was very ambitious, perhaps more than his abilities warranted, and also very excitable. He sometimes worked himself up into such a state that he lost all powers of reasoning.\nSeale suggests that Abu Nidal's childhood explained his personality, described as chaotic by Abu Iyad and as psychopathic by Issam Sartawi, the late Palestinian heart surgeon. His siblings' scorn, the loss of his father, and his mother's removal from the family home when he was seven, followed by the loss of his home and status in the conflict with Israel, created a mental world of plots and counterplots, reflected in his tyrannical leadership of the ANO. Members' wives (the ANO was an all-male group) were not allowed to befriend each other, and Abu Nidal's expected his wife to live in isolation without friends.\nPolitical life.\nImpex, Black September.\nIn Saudi Arabia, Abu Nidal helped found a small group of young Palestinians who called themselves the Palestine Secret Organization. The activism cost him his job and home: Aramco fired him, and the Saudi government imprisoned, then expelled him in 1967. He returned to Nablus with his wife and family, and joined Yasser Arafat's Fatah faction of the PLO. Working as an odd-job man, he was committed to Palestinian politics but was not particularly active until Israel won the 1967 Six-Day War, capturing the Golan Heights, the West Bank, and the Gaza Strip. Melman writes that \"the entrance of the Israel Defense Forces tanks into Nablus was a traumatic experience for him. The conquest aroused him to action.\"\nAfter moving to Amman, Jordan, he set up a trading company called Impex, which acted as a front for Fatah and served as a meeting place and conduit for funds. This became a hallmark of Abu Nidal's career. ANO-controlled companies controlled made him a rich man by through legitimate business, and functioned as cover for arms deals and mercenary activities.\nWhen Fatah asked him to choose a \"nom de guerre\", he chose Abu Nidal (\"father of struggle\") after his son, Nidal. Those who knew him at the time said he was a well-organized leader, not a guerrilla; during fighting between the Palestinian fedayeens and King Hussein's troops, he stayed in his office. In 1968, Abu Iyad appointed him as the Fatah representative in Khartoum, Sudan. Later, at Abu Nidal's insistence, he was appointed to the same position in Baghdad in July 1970. He arrived two months before \"Black September\", when more than 10 days of fighting King Hussein's army drove the Palestinian fedayeens out of Jordan, with the loss of thousands of lives. Abu Nidal's absence from Jordan at a time, Seale writes, when it was clear that King Hussein was about to act against the Palestinians, raised suspicion within the movement that Abu Nidal was interested only in saving himself.\nFirst operation.\nShortly after Black September, Abu Nidal began accusing the PLO, over his Voice of Palestine radio station in Iraq, of cowardice for having agreed to a ceasefire with Hussein. During Fatah's Third Congress in Damascus in 1971, he joined Palestinian activist and writer Naji Allush and Abu Daoud (leader of the Black September Organization responsible for the 1972 Munich Massacre) in calling for greater democracy within Fatah and revenge against King Hussein.\nIn February 1973, Abu Daoud was arrested in Jordan for an attempt on King Hussein's life. This led to Abu Nidal's first operation, using the name (\"the Punishment\"). On 5 September 1973, five gunmen entered the Saudi embassy in Paris, took 15 hostages, and threatened to blow up the building if Abu Daoud was not released. The gunmen flew to Kuwait two days later on a Syrian Air flight, still holding five hostages, then to Riyadh, threatening to throw the hostages out of the aircraft. They surrendered and released the hostages on 8 September. Abu Daoud was released from prison two weeks later; Seale writes that the Kuwaiti government paid King Hussein $12 million for his release.\nOn the day of the attack, 56 heads of state were meeting in Algiers for the fourth Non-Aligned Movement conference. According to Seale, the Saudi Embassy operation had been commissioned by Iraq's president, Ahmed Hasan al-Bakr, as a distraction because he was jealous that Algeria was hosting the conference. One of the hostage-takers admitted that he had been told to fly the hostages around until the conference was over.\nAbu Nidal had carried out the operation without Fatah's permission. Abu Iyad (Arafat's deputy) and Mahmoud Abbas (later President of the Palestinian Authority), flew to Iraq to reason with Abu Nidal and explain that hostage-taking harmed the movement. Abu Iyad told Seale that an Iraqi official at the meeting said, \"Why are you attacking Abu Nidal? The operation was ours! We asked him to mount it for us.\" Abbas was furious and left the meeting with the other PLO delegates. From that point on, the PLO regarded Abu Nidal as under the control of the Iraqi government.\nExpulsion from Fatah.\nTwo months later, in November 1973 (just after the Yom Kippur War in October), the ANO hijacked KLM Flight 861, this time using the name Arab Nationalist Youth Organization. Fatah had been discussing convening a peace conference in Geneva and the hijacking was intended to warn them not to go ahead with it. In response, in March or July 1974, Arafat expelled Abu Nidal from Fatah.\nIn October 1974, Abu Nidal formed the ANO, calling it Fatah: The Revolutionary Council. In November that year, a Fatah court sentenced him to death \"in absentia\" for the attempted assassination of Mahmoud Abbas. It is unlikely that Abu Nidal had intended to kill Abbas, and just as unlikely that Fatah wanted to kill Abu Nidal. He was invited to Beirut to discuss the death sentence, and was allowed to leave again, but it was clear that he had become \"persona non grata\". As a result, the Iraqis gave him Fatah's assets in Iraq, including a training camp, farm, newspaper, radio station, passports, overseas scholarships, and $15 million worth of Chinese weapons. He also received Iraq's regular aid to the PLO: around $150,000 a month and a lump sum of $3\u20135 million.\nANO.\nNature of the organization.\nIn addition to Fatah: The Revolutionary Council, the ANO called itself by many names:\nThe group had up to 500 members chosen from young men in the Palestinian refugee camps and in Lebanon who were promised good pay and help looking after their families. They were sent to training camps in whichever country was hosting the ANO at the time (Syria, Iraq, or Libya), then organized into small cells. Once they had joined the ANO, As'ad AbuKhalil and Michael Fischbach write, they were not allowed to leave again. The group assumed complete control over the membership. One member who spoke to Patrick Seale was told before being sent overseas, \"If we say, 'Drink alcohol,' do so. If we say, 'Get married,' find a woman and marry her. If we say, 'Don't have children,' you must obey. If we say, 'Go and kill King Hussein,' you must be ready to sacrifice yourself!\"\nRecruits were asked to write out their life stories, including names and addresses of family and friends, then sign a paper saying they agreed to execution if they were discovered to have intelligence connections. If the ANO suspected them, they would be asked to rewrite the whole story, without discrepancies. The ANO's newspaper regularly announced the execution of traitors. Abu Nidal believed that the group had been penetrated by Israeli agents, and there was a sense that Israel may have used the ANO to undermine more moderate Palestinian groups. Terrorism experts regard the view that Abu Nidal himself was such an agent as \"far-fetched\".\nCommittee for Revolutionary Justice.\nThere were reports of purges throughout the 1970s and 1980s. Around 600 ANO members were killed in Lebanon and Libya, including 171 in one night in November 1987, when they were lined up, shot, and thrown into a mass grave. Dozens were kidnapped in Syria and killed in the Badawi refugee camp. Most of the decisions to kill, Abu Daoud told Seale, were taken by Abu Nidal \"in the middle of the night, after he [had] knocked back a whole bottle of whiskey\". The purges led to the defection from the ANO in 1989 of Atef Abu Bakr, head of the ANO's political directorate, who returned to Fatah.\nThe \"Committee for Revolutionary Justice\" routinely tortured members until they confessed to disloyalty. Reports of torture included hanging a man naked, whipping him until he was unconscious, reviving him with cold water, then rubbing salt or chili powder into his wounds. A naked prisoner would be forced into a car tyre with his legs and backside in the air, then whipped, wounded, salted, and revived with cold water. A member's testicles might be fried in oil, or melted plastic dripped onto his skin. Between interrogations, prisoners would be tied up in tiny cells. If the cells were full, they might be buried with a pipe in their mouths for air and water; if Abu Nidal wanted them dead, a bullet would be fired down the pipe instead.\nIntelligence Directorate.\nThe Intelligence Directorate was formed in 1985 to oversee special operations. It had four subcommittees: the Committee for Special Missions, the Foreign Intelligence Committee, the Counterespionage Committee, and the Lebanon Committee. Led by Abd al-Rahman Isa, the longest-serving member of the ANO\u2014Seale writes that Isa was unshaven and shabby, but charming and persuasive\u2014the directorate maintained 30\u201340 people overseas who looked after the ANO's arms caches in various countries. It trained staff, arranged passports and visas, and reviewed security at airports and seaports. Members were not allowed to visit each other at home, and no one outside the directorate was supposed to know who was a member. Abu Nidal demoted Isa in 1987, believing he had become too close to other figures within the ANO. Always keen to punish members by humiliating them, he insisted that Isa remain in the Intelligence Directorate, where he had to work for his previous subordinates who were told to treat him with contempt.\nCommittee for Special Missions.\nThe Committee for Special Missions' job was to choose targets. It had started out as the Military Committee, headed by Naji Abu al-Fawaris, who had led the attack on Heinz Nittel, head of the Israel-Austria Friendship League, who was shot and killed in 1981. In 1982, the committee changed its name to the Committee for Special Missions, headed by Dr. Ghassan al-Ali, who had been born in the West Bank and educated in England, where he obtained a bachelor's degree and a master's degree in chemistry, and married (and later divorced) a British woman. A former ANO member said that Ali favoured \"the most extreme and reckless operations\".\nOperations and relationships.\nShlomo Argov.\nOn 3 June 1982, ANO operative Hussein Ghassan Said shot Shlomo Argov, the Israeli ambassador to Britain, once in the head as he left the Dorchester Hotel in London. Said was accompanied by Nawaf al-Rosan, an Iraqi intelligence officer, and Marwan al-Banna, Abu Nidal's cousin. Argov survived, but spent three months in a coma and the rest of his life disabled, until his death in February 2003. The PLO quickly denied responsibility for the attack.\nAriel Sharon, then Israel's defence minister, responded three days later by invading Lebanon, where the PLO was based, a reaction that Seale argues Abu Nidal had intended: the Israeli government had been preparing to invade and Abu Nidal provided a pretext. \"Der Spiegel\" put it to him in October 1985 that the assassination of Argov, when he knew Israel wanted to attack the PLO in Lebanon, made him appear to be working for the Israelis, in the view of Yasser Arafat. Abu Nidal replied:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What Arafat says about me doesn't bother me. Not only he, but also a whole list of Arab and world politicians claim that I am an agent of the Zionists or the CIA. Others state that I am a mercenary of the French secret service and of the Soviet KGB. The latest rumor is that I am an agent of Khomeini. During a certain period they said we were spies for the Iraqi regime. Now they say that we are Syrian agents ... Many psychologists and sociologists in the Soviet bloc tried to investigate this man Abu Nidal. They wanted to find a weak point in his character. The result was zero.\nRome and Vienna.\nAbu Nidal's most infamous operation was the 1985 attack on the Rome and Vienna airports. On 27 December, at 08:15 GMT, four gunmen opened fire on the El Al ticket counter at the Leonardo Da Vinci International Airport in Rome, killing 16 and wounding 99. In the Vienna International Airport a few minutes later, three men threw hand grenades at passengers who were waiting to check into a flight to Tel Aviv, killing 4 and wounding 39. The gunmen had been told the people in civilian clothes at the check-in counter were Israeli pilots returning from a training mission.\nAustria and Italy had both been involved in trying to arrange peace talks. Sources close to Abu Nidal told Seale that Libyan intelligence had supplied the weapons. The damage to the PLO was enormous, according to Abu Iyad, Arafat's deputy. Most people in the West, and even many Arabs, could not distinguish between the ANO and Fatah, he said. \"When such horrible things take place, ordinary people are left thinking that all Palestinians are criminals.\"\nPatrick Seale, Abu Nidal's biographer, wrote of the shootings that their \"random cruelty marked them as typical Abu Nidal operations\".\nUnited States bombing of Libya.\nOn 15 April 1986, the US launched bombing raids from British bases against Tripoli and Benghazi, killing around 100, in retaliation for the bombing of a Berlin nightclub frequented by US service personnel. The dead were reported to include Hanna Gaddafi, the adoptive daughter of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi; two of his other children were injured. British journalist Alec Collett, who had been kidnapped in Beirut in March, was hanged after the airstrikes, reportedly by ANO operatives; his remains were found in the Beqaa Valley in November 2009. The bodies of two British teachers, Leigh Douglas and Philip Padfield, and an American, Peter Kilburn, were found in a village near Beirut on 17 April 1986; the Arab Fedayeen Cells, a name linked to Abu Nidal, claimed responsibility. British journalist John McCarthy was kidnapped the same day.\nHindawi affair.\nOn 17 April 1986\u2014the day the teachers' bodies were found and McCarthy was kidnapped\u2014Ann Marie Murphy, a pregnant Irish chambermaid, was discovered in Heathrow airport with a Semtex bomb in the false bottom of one of her bags. She had been about to board an El Al flight from New York to Tel Aviv via London. The bag had been packed by her Jordanian fianc\u00e9 Nizar Hindawi, who had said he would join her in Israel where they were to be married. According to Melman, Abu Nidal had recommended Hindawi to Syrian intelligence. The bomb had been manufactured by Abu Nidal's technical committee, who had delivered it to Syrian air force intelligence. It was sent to London in a diplomatic bag and given to Hindawi. According to Seale, it was widely believed that the attack was in response to Israel having forced down a jet, two months earlier, carrying Syrian officials to Damascus, which Israel had supposed was carrying senior Palestinians.\nPan Am Flight 73.\nOn 5 September 1986, four ANO gunmen hijacked Pan Am Flight 73 at Karachi Airport on its way from Mumbai to New York, holding 389 passengers and crew for 16 hours in the plane on the tarmac before detonating grenades inside the cabin. Neerja Bhanot, the flight's senior purser, was able to open an emergency door, and most passengers escaped. Twenty died, including Bhanot, and 120 were wounded. The London \"Times\" reported in March 2004 that Libya had been behind the hijacking.\nRelationship with Gaddafi.\nAbu Nidal began to move his organization out of Syria to Libya in the summer of 1986, arriving there in March 1987. In June that year, the Syrian government expelled him, in part because of the Hindawi affair and Pan Am Flight 73 hijacking. He repeatedly took credit during this period for operations in which he had no involvement, including the 1984 Brighton hotel bombing, 1985 Bradford City stadium fire, and 1986 assassination of Zafer al-Masri, the mayor of Nablus (killed by the PFLP, according to Seale). By publishing a congratulatory note in the ANO's magazine, he also implied that he had been behind the 1986 Space Shuttle Challenger disaster.\nAbu Nidal and Libya's leader, Muammar Gaddafi, allegedly became great friends, each holding what Marie Colvin and Sonya Murad called a \"dangerous combination of an inferiority complex mixed with the belief that he was a man of great destiny\". The relationship gave Abu Nidal a sponsor and Gaddafi a mercenary. Libya brought out the worst in Abu Nidal. He would not allow even the most senior ANO members to socialize with each other; all meetings had to be reported to him. All passports had to be handed over. No one was allowed to travel without his permission. Ordinary members were not allowed to have telephones; senior members were allowed to make local calls only. His members knew nothing about his daily life, including where he lived. If he wanted to entertain, he would take over the home of another member.\nAccording to Abu Bakr, speaking to in 2002, Abu Nidal said he was behind the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, which exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland, on 21 December 1988; a former head of security for Libyan Arab Airlines was later convicted. Abu Nidal reportedly said of Lockerbie, \"We do have some involvement in this matter, but if anyone so much as mentions it, I will kill him with my own hands!\" Seale writes that the ANO appeared to have no connection to it. One of Abu Nidal's associates told him, \"If an American soldier tripped in some corner of the globe, Abu Nidal would instantly claim it as his own work.\"\nBanking with BCCI.\nIn the late 1980s, British intelligence learned that the ANO held accounts with the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) in London. In July 1991, BCCI was closed by banking regulators in six countries after evidence emerged of widespread fraud. Abu Nidal himself was said to have visited London using the name Shakar Farhan; a BCCI branch manager, who passed information about the ANO accounts to MI5, reportedly drove him around several stores in London without realizing who he was. Abu Nidal was using a company called SAS International Trading and Investments in Warsaw as cover for arms deals. The company's transactions included the purchase of riot guns, ostensibly for Syria, then when the British refused an export license to Syria, for an African state; in fact, half the shipment went to the police in East Germany and half to Abu Nidal.\nAssassination of Abu Iyad.\nOn 14 January 1991 in Tunis, the night before US forces moved into Kuwait, the ANO assassinated Abu Iyad, head of PLO intelligence, along with Abu al-Hol, Fatah's chief of security, and Fakhri al-Omari, another Fatah aide; all three men were shot in Abu al-Hol's home. The killer, Hamza Abu Zaid, confessed that an ANO operative had hired him. When he shot Abu Iyad, he reportedly shouted, \"Let Atef Abu Bakr help you now!\", a reference to the senior ANO member who had left the group in 1989, and whom Abu Nidal believed Abu Iyad had planted within the ANO as a spy. Abu Iyad had known that Abu Nidal nursed a hatred of him, in part because he had kept Abu Nidal out of the PLO. However, the real reason for the hatred, Abu Iyad told Seale, was that he had protected Abu Nidal in his early years within the movement. Given his personality, Abu Nidal could not acknowledge that debt. The murder \"must therefore be seen as a final settlement of old scores\".\nDeath.\nAfter Libyan intelligence operatives were charged with the Lockerbie bombing, Gaddafi tried to distance himself from terrorism. Abu Nidal was expelled from Libya in 1999 and, in 2002, he returned to Iraq. The Iraqi government later said he had entered the country using a fake Yemeni passport and false name.\nOn 19 August 2002, the Palestinian newspaper \"al-Ayyam\" reported that Abu Nidal had died three days earlier of multiple gunshot wounds at his home in Baghdad, a house the newspaper said was owned by the \"Mukhabarat\", the Iraqi secret service. Two days later, Iraq's chief of intelligence Taher Jalil Habbush handed out photographs of Abu Nidal's body to journalists, along with a medical report that said he had died after a bullet entered his mouth and exited through his skull. Habbush said Iraqi officials had arrived at Abu Nidal's home to arrest him on suspicion of conspiring with foreign governments. After saying he needed a change of clothes, Abu Nidal went into his bedroom and shot himself in the mouth, according to Habbush. He died eight hours later in hospital.\nThe Janes reported in 2002 that Iraqi intelligence had found classified documents in his home about a US attack on Iraq. When they raided the house, fighting broke out between Abu Nidal's men and Iraqi intelligence. Amid this, Abu Nidal rushed into his bedroom and was killed; Palestinian sources told Janes that he had been shot several times. Janes suggested Saddam Hussein had him killed because he feared Abu Nidal would act against him in the event of an American invasion.\n\"He was the patriot turned psychopath\", David Hirst wrote in \"The Guardian\" on the news of his death. \"He served only himself, only the warped personal drives that pushed him into hideous crime. He was the ultimate mercenary.\"\nIn 2008, Robert Fisk obtained a report written in September 2002, for Saddam Hussein's \"presidency intelligence office,\" by Iraq's \"Special Intelligence Unit M4\". The report said that the Iraqis had been interrogating Abu Nidal in his home as a suspected spy for Kuwait and Egypt, and indirectly for the United States, and that he had been asked by the Kuwaitis to find links between Iraq and al-Qaeda. Just before being moved to a more secure location, Abu Nidal asked to be allowed to change his clothing, went into his bedroom and shot himself, the report said.\nHe was buried on 29 August 2002 in al-Karkh Islamic cemetery in Baghdad, in a grave marked M7.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73332", "revid": "39700576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73332", "title": "280 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 280 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Laevinus and Coruncanius (or, less frequently, year 474 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 280 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73333", "revid": "34169384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73333", "title": "EPROM", "text": "Early type of solid state computer memory\nAn EPROM (rarely EROM), or erasable programmable read-only memory, is a type of programmable read-only memory (PROM) chip that retains its data when its power supply is switched off. Computer memory that can retrieve stored data after a power supply has been turned off and back on is called non-volatile. It is an array of floating-gate transistors individually programmed by an electronic device that supplies higher voltages than those normally used in digital circuits. Once programmed, an EPROM can be erased by exposing it to strong ultraviolet (UV) light source (such as from a mercury-vapor lamp). EPROMs are easily recognizable by the transparent fused quartz (or on later models, resin) window on the top of the package, through which the silicon chip is visible, and which permits exposure to ultraviolet light during erasing. It was invented by Dov Frohman in 1971.\nOperation.\nDevelopment of the EPROM memory cell started with investigation of faulty integrated circuits where the gate connections of transistors had broken. Stored charge on these isolated gates changes their threshold voltage.\nFollowing the invention of the MOSFET (metal\u2013oxide\u2013semiconductor field-effect transistor) by Mohamed Atalla and Dawon Kahng at Bell Labs, presented in 1960, Frank Wanlass studied MOSFET structures in the early 1960s. In 1963, he noted the movement of charge through oxide onto a gate. While he did not pursue it, this idea would later become the basis for EPROM technology.\nIn 1967, Dawon Kahng and Simon Min Sze at Bell Labs proposed that the floating gate of a MOSFET could be used for the cell of a reprogrammable ROM (read-only memory). Building on this concept, Dov Frohman of Intel invented EPROM in 1971, and was awarded https:// in 1972. Frohman designed the Intel 1702, a 2048-bit EPROM, which was announced by Intel in 1971.\nEach storage location of an EPROM consists of a single field-effect transistor. Each field-effect transistor consists of a channel in the semiconductor body of the device. Source and drain contacts are made to regions at the end of the channel. An insulating layer of oxide is grown over the channel, then a conductive (silicon or aluminum) gate electrode is deposited, and a further thick layer of oxide is deposited over the gate electrode. The floating-gate electrode has no connections to other parts of the integrated circuit and is completely insulated by the surrounding layers of oxide. A control gate electrode is deposited and further oxide covers it.\nTo retrieve data from the EPROM, the address represented by the values at the address pins of the EPROM is decoded and used to connect one word (usually an 8-bit byte) of storage to the output buffer amplifiers. Each bit of the word is a 1 or 0, depending on the storage transistor being switched on or off, conducting or non-conducting.\nThe switching state of the field-effect transistor is controlled by the voltage on the control gate of the transistor. Presence of a voltage on this gate creates a conductive channel in the transistor, switching it on. In effect, the stored charge on the floating gate allows the threshold voltage of the transistor to be programmed.\nStoring data in the memory requires selecting a given address and applying a higher voltage to the transistors. This creates an avalanche discharge of electrons, which have enough energy to pass through the insulating oxide layer and accumulate on the gate electrode. When the high voltage is removed, the electrons are trapped on the electrode. Because of the high insulation value of the silicon oxide surrounding the gate, the stored charge cannot readily leak away and the data can be retained for decades.\nThe programming process is not electrically reversible. To erase the data stored in the array of transistors, ultraviolet light is directed onto the die. Photons of the UV light cause ionization within the silicon oxide, which allows the stored charge on the floating gate to dissipate. Since the whole memory array is exposed, all the memory is erased at the same time. The process takes several minutes for UV lamps of convenient sizes; sunlight would erase a chip in weeks, and indoor fluorescent lighting over several years. Generally, the EPROMs must be removed from equipment to be erased, since it is not usually practical to build in a UV lamp to erase parts in-circuit. Electrically Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memory (EEPROM) was developed to provide an electrical erase function and has now mostly displaced ultraviolet-erased parts.\nDetails.\nAs the quartz window is expensive to make, OTP (one-time programmable) chips were introduced; here, the die is mounted in an opaque package so it cannot be erased after programming \u2013 this also eliminates the need to test the erase function, further reducing cost. OTP versions of both EPROMs and EPROM-based microcontrollers are manufactured. However, OTP EPROM (whether separate or part of a larger chip) is being increasingly replaced by EEPROM for small sizes, where the cell cost isn't too important, and flash for larger sizes.\nA programmed EPROM retains its data for a minimum of ten to twenty years, with many still retaining data after 35 or more years, and can be read an unlimited number of times without affecting the lifetime. The erasing window must be kept covered with an opaque label to prevent accidental erasure by the UV found in sunlight or camera flashes. Old PC BIOS chips were often EPROMs, and the erasing window was often covered with an adhesive label containing the BIOS publisher's name, the BIOS revision, and a copyright notice. Often this label was foil-backed to ensure its opacity to UV.\nErasure of the EPROM begins to occur with wavelengths shorter than 400 nm. Exposure time for sunlight of one week or three years for room fluorescent lighting may cause erasure. The recommended erasure procedure is exposure to UV light at 253.7\u00a0nm of at least 15 Ws/cm2, usually achieved in 20 to 30 minutes with the lamp at a distance of about 2.5\u00a0cm.\nErasure can also be accomplished with X-rays:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Erasure, however, has to be accomplished by non-electrical methods, since the gate electrode is not accessible electrically. Shining ultraviolet light on any part of an unpackaged device causes a photocurrent to flow from the floating gate back to the silicon substrate, thereby discharging the gate to its initial, uncharged condition (photoelectric effect). This method of erasure allows complete testing and correction of a complex memory array before the package is finally sealed. Once the package is sealed, information can still be erased by exposing it to X radiation in excess of 5*104 rads, a dose which is easily attained with commercial X-ray generators.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEPROMs have a limited but large number of erase cycles; the silicon dioxide around the gates accumulates damage from each cycle, making the chip unreliable after several thousand cycles. EPROM programming is slow compared to other forms of memory. Because higher-density parts have little exposed oxide between the layers of interconnects and gate, ultraviolet erasing becomes less practical for very large memories. Even dust inside the package can prevent some cells from being erased.\nApplication.\nFor large volumes of parts (thousands of pieces or more), mask-programmed ROMs are the lowest cost devices to produce. However, these require many weeks lead time to make, since the artwork or design in an IC mask layer or photomask must be altered to store data on the ROMs. Initially, it was thought that the EPROM would be too expensive for mass production use and that it would be confined to development only. It was soon found that small-volume production was economical with EPROM parts, particularly when the advantage of rapid upgrades of firmware was considered.\nSome microcontrollers, from before the era of EEPROMs and flash memory, use an on-chip EPROM to store their program. Such microcontrollers include some versions of the Intel 8048, the Freescale 68HC11, and the \"C\" versions of the PIC microcontroller. Like EPROM chips, such microcontrollers came in windowed (expensive) versions that were used for debugging and program development. The same chip came in (somewhat cheaper) opaque OTP packages for production. Leaving the die of such a chip exposed to light can also change behavior in unexpected ways when moving from a windowed part used for development to a non-windowed part for production.\nEPROM generations, sizes and types.\nThe first generation 1702 devices were fabricated with the p-MOS technology. They were powered with VCC = VBB = +5\u00a0V and VDD = VGG = -9\u00a0V in Read mode, and with VDD = VGG = -47\u00a0V in Programming mode.\nThe second generation 2704 / 2708 devices switched to n-MOS technology and to three-rail VCC = +5\u00a0V, VBB = -5\u00a0V, VDD = +12\u00a0V power supply with VPP = 12\u00a0V and a +25\u00a0V pulse in Programming mode. \nThe third generation 2716 / 2732 devices upgraded to an evolved n-MOS technology that required only a single-rail VCC = +5\u00a0V power supply for read operations, and a single VPP = +25\u00a0V programming voltage without pulse. The unneeded VBB and VDD pins were reused for additional address bits allowing larger capacities (2716 / 2732) in the same 24-pin package, and even larger capacities with larger packages.\nLater the decreased cost of the CMOS technology allowed the same devices to be fabricated using it, adding the letter \"C\" to the device numbers (27xx(x) are n-MOS and 27Cxx(x) are CMOS).\nWhile parts of the same size from different manufacturers are compatible in read mode, different manufacturers added different and sometimes multiple programming modes leading to subtle differences in the programming process. This prompted larger capacity devices to introduce a \"signature mode\", allowing the manufacturer and device to be identified by the EPROM programmer. It was implemented by forcing +12\u00a0V on pin A9 and reading out two bytes of data. However, as this was not universal, programmer software also would allow manual setting of the manufacturer and device type of the chip to ensure proper programming.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73334", "revid": "49875847", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73334", "title": "Battle of Benevento", "text": "Battle between the troops of Charles of Anjou and Manfred of Sicily\nThe Battle of Benevento was a major medieval battle fought on 26 February 1266, near Benevento in present-day Southern Italy, between the forces of Charles I of Anjou and those of King Manfred of Sicily. Manfred's defeat and death resulted in Charles' conquest of the Kingdom of Sicily, effectively ending the rule of the Hohenstaufen dynasty in the Italian Peninsula and marking the rise of the royal Capetian House of Anjou. The engagement was part of the conflict which pitted Guelphs against Ghibellines.\nBackground.\nThe Papacy had long been in conflict with the Imperial house of Hohenstaufen over their rule in Italy. At the time of the battle, the Hohenstaufen ruler of the Kingdom of Sicily (which included Sicily and southern Italy) was Manfred, illegitimate son of Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor. However, the rightful heir to the kingdom was Frederick's legitimate 14-year-old grandson Conradin, living with his uncle and guardian Louis II, Duke of Bavaria. Manfred, acting as regent since 1254, took advantage of a false rumor of Conradin's death and usurped the throne in 1258. Pope Urban IV determined to take the Kingdom from him, and in 1263, concluded a secret treaty with Charles, promising him the Sicilian throne. After Pope Urban's death in October 1264, Pope Clement IV continued his predecessor's support for Charles.\nPrelude.\nCharles reached Rome in May 1265, but was temporarily halted by the need to obtain financing for his military operations. Manfred, however, instead of vigorously taking countermeasures, spent his time hunting. He obviously assumed that the Ghibellines in the northern Italian cities would already have stopped the advance of the enemy. For the rest he trusted the fighting strength of his German knights and Saracen horsemen. He did not take the field against him until January 1266, when Charles' main army had crossed the Alps. Alarmed by the ease with which many towns and castles surrendered to the French and by desertions among his followers, Manfred sought to bring Charles to battle as swiftly as possible, fearing further treachery. Charles attempted to turn Manfred's position at Capua by a perilous crossing of the Apennines which wrecked his supply line; but Manfred had intelligence of his move and waited in a strong position across the River Calore, which could only be crossed by a single bridge.\nGhibelline forces.\nManfred's army was composed of very heterogeneous elements. His infantry was essentially composed of Saracen archers set up in the fore. Behind them was his first battle, the best of his troops, consisting of 1,200 German mercenary knights and men-at-arms, clad not only in the usual mail-shirt and gambeson, but also coats of plates, a type of armour that was just beginning to come into fashion. They were commanded by his cousin Giordano d'Anglano and Galvano of Anglona. The second battle consisted of around 1,000 Italian mercenary cavalry and 300 to 400 Saracen light horsemen, commanded by his uncle Galvano Lancia. The third battle consisted of the barons of Manfred's kingdom, and numbered 1,400 knights and men-at-arms, under his personal command. Manfred stayed with the Italo-Norman noblemen and they did not form his reserve for nothing. He distrusted them.\nManfred's forces enjoyed a slight numerical superiority and a strong defensive position across the Calore.\nGuelph forces.\nCharles' army consisted of 600 mounted knights, 2,400 men-at-arms and mounted sergeants, 600 crossbowmen, 3,900 heavy infantry and 4,500 light infantry, totalling around 12,000 men. It was probably above all the prospect of loot that prompted numerous French nobles to come to Lyon, where Charles had assembled his army in autumn 1265.\nHis cavalry was also divided into three battles. The first battle consisted of 900 Proven\u00e7al knights and sergeants commanded by Marshal of France Hugh of Mirepoix and Philip of Montfort, Lord of Castres. Behind them was the second battle, which consisted of 1,000 knights and men-at-arms from Southern and Central France under the personal command of Charles; their chiefs were the Count of Vend\u00f4me, the Bishop of Auxerre, Guy de Monfort, Peter de Beaumont and Guy de Mello. Finally, the third battle consisted of men from Northern France and Flanders under Grand Constable Gilles de Trasignies and Robert of B\u00e9thune, the heir of the county of Flanders. In addition, the invaders numbered 400 Italian men-at-arms of the Guelf faction led by the Florentine Guido Guerra. It is unknown where exactly they stood; apparently they were not in the reserve but struck in with the second line at the moment of contact. Charles ordered his men-at-arms to have a couple of foot soldiers behind them whose task would be to aid the horsemen of his army in case they were dismounted and to slay those of the enemy who were overthrown. The rest of the infantry and crossbowmen were thrown in front of the line to skirmish with their Saracen counterparts.\nCharles had the advantage of leading an army which was practically homogeneous; save the few Italians, all were vassals of the French and Proven\u00e7al crowns. In addition, beyond the low esteem in which both sides held their foot-soldiery, Charles' horsemen were fairly equal to each other in military worth, something Manfred did not have the luck to benefit from.\nBattle.\nThe battle began in the morning when Manfred sent his Saracens forward. Charles' infantry and crossbowmen advanced to meet them but were driven back by the foot-archers and light cavalry. The Saracens, however, having left themselves exposed in the open were charged by Proven\u00e7al sergeants of Charles' first line and swiftly overwhelmed. It is not known whether they acted rashly or if they were ordered to do so by Manfred but the German knights and men-at-arms who formed his first battle crossed the bridge and moved up to attack the Proven\u00e7al cavalry. The Germans had at first the upper hand. They enjoyed a slight numerical advantage, were heavier men on heavier horses and their armor was quite impenetrable to the strokes of their opponents. They slowly but effectively pushed the Proven\u00e7als before them and Charles felt compelled to commit his second battle to aid the first. Accordingly, the French knights charged and with them his 400 Italians as well. Outnumbered, the Germans still held out gallantly; they seemed invulnerable to the French swords as their armor kept repelling all blows. But the enemy had soon discovered the weak point of their equipment. According to the chronicle of Andrew of Hungary, some sharp-eyed French knight noted that the new plate armor, which was still in its infancy, did not protect their armpits when the arm was lifted to strike. Closing in and wedging themselves between the somewhat shaken ranks of the German heavy cavalry, the shorter and more acutely pointed blades of the French horsemen were much more effective in close quarters than the German longswords. In a few minutes, a considerable number of Germans were mortally wounded. Overwhelmed and broken, the whole corps was practically annihilated.\nThe tide had now evidently turned against Manfred. The long time spent crossing the narrow bridge meant a very wide space arose between his first corps, which had prematurely charged, and his second, which he had deployed to assist them. By the time Manfred's second battle arrived to aid the Germans, they had been cut to pieces and they themselves were now in a precarious situation as Charles had already ordered his third battle to charge them. While some did so from the front, others swept round their flanks and beset them from the rear. Shaken in spirit by the sight of what the French had done to the Germans, they made a very poor resistance; seeing themselves about to be surrounded, they broke and attempted to flee but most were slain. Realizing defeat was imminent, most of the nobles in Manfred's third corps deserted, leaving the king to his fate. Manfred was now left with a choice himself: death or instant flight. His undaunted spirit led him to take the first alternative. After exchanging the royal surcoat with his friend Tebaldo Annibaldi to whom he had also given his royal armor prior to the battle as not to attract too much notice in the m\u00eal\u00e9e, Manfred closed up with the few faithful of his followers left and rode straight into the midst of the enemy. He found the death that he sought. The battle saw the French give little quarter; only a few prisoners were taken, the most notable being Giordano Lancia and his cousin, Count Bartolommeo. The river was at the back of the fugitives and only the bridge was safe; those who tried to swim the flooded Calore in their heavy mail were mostly drowned.\nOnly 600 of Manfred's 3,600 heavy cavalrymen managed to escape death or capture. Also, the Saracens had fought as mercenaries for Holy Roman Emperors since Frederick II Hohenstaufen planted a colony of some 35,000 Saracens near Lucera. For many decades, this colony had provided the German emperors with 5,000 archers per year. The unit was wiped out at Benevento.\nAftermath.\nThe destruction of Manfred's army marked the collapse of Hohenstaufen rule in Italy. The remainder of the Kingdom of Sicily was conquered almost without resistance. Settled in his new kingdom, Charles awaited the coming of Conradin, the last hope of the Hohenstaufen, in 1268, and met him at the Battle of Tagliacozzo.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73336", "revid": "48986655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73336", "title": "Benevento", "text": "Benevento ( ; , ; ) is a city and (municipality) of Campania, Italy, capital of the province of Benevento, northeast of Naples. It is situated on a hill above sea level at the confluence of the Calore Irpino (or Beneventano) and the Sabato. As of June 30, 2025, Benevento has 55,319 inhabitants. It is also the seat of a Catholic archbishop.\nBenevento occupies the site of the ancient \"Beneventum\", originally \"Maleventum\" or even earlier \"Maloenton\". In the imperial period, its founder was deemed to have been Diomedes after the Trojan War.\nDue to its artistic and cultural significance, the Santa Sofia Church in Benevento was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2011, as part of a group of seven historic buildings inscribed as Longobards in Italy, Places of Power (568\u2013774 A.D.).\nThe patron saint of Benevento is Saint Bartholomew, the Apostle, whose relics are kept there at the Cattedrale di Santa Maria Assunta.\nTerritorial subdivisions.\nFrazioni, or wards, include: Acquafredda, Cancelleria, Capodimonte, Caprarella, Cardoncielli, Cardoni, Cellarulo, Chiumiento, Ciancelle, Ciofani, Cretazzo, Epitaffio, Francavilla, Gran Potenza, Imperatore, Lammia, Madonna della Salute, Masseria del Ponte, Masseria La Vipera, Mascambruni, Montecalvo, Olivola, Pacevecchia, Pamparuottolo, Pantano, Perrottiello, Piano Cappelle, Pino, Ponte Corvo, Rosetiello, Ripa Zecca, Roseto, Santa Clementina, San Chirico, San Cumano (anc. \"Nuceriola\"), San Domenico, San Giovanni a Caprara, Sant'Angelo a Piesco, San Vitale, Scafa, Serretelle, Sponsilli, Torre Alfieri, and Vallereccia.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAncient era.\nBenevento, as \"Maleventum\", was one of the chief cities of Samnium, situated on the Appian Way at a distance of east of Capua on the banks of the river Calor (now Calore). There is some discrepancy as to the tribe to which it belonged at contact: Pliny the Elder expressly assigns it to the Hirpini, while Livy's wording is somewhat obscure and Ptolemy considers the town as belonging to the Samnites proper, as distinguished from the Hirpini. All ancient writers concur in representing it as a very ancient city, with Gaius Julius Solinus and Stephanus of Byzantium ascribing its foundation to Diomedes\u200a\u2014\u200athis legend appears to have been adopted by the city's inhabitants, who in the time of Procopius pretended to exhibit the tusks of the Calydonian Boar as proof of their descent. Sextus Pompeius Festus, on the contrary (\"s. v.\" Ausoniam), related that the city was founded by Auson, a son of Ulysses and Circe, a tradition which indicates that it was an ancient Ausonian city prior to its conquest by the Samnites. It first appears in history as a Samnite city, and must have already been a place of strength as the Romans did not venture to attack it during their first two wars with the Samnites; it appears, however, to have fallen into their hands during the Third Samnite War, though the exact occasion is unknown.\nBenevento was certainly in the power of the Romans in 274 BC, when Pyrrhus of Epirus was defeated in a great battle, fought in its immediate neighborhood, by the consul Manius Curius Dentatus. Six years later (268 BC) they further sought to secure its possession by establishing there a Roman colony with Latin rights. It was at this time that it first assumed the name of Beneventum (good wind in latin), having previously been called Maleventum (bad wind in latin), a name which the Romans regarded as of evil augury, and changed into one of a more fortunate signification. It is probable that the Oscan or Samnite name was Maloeis, or Malieis (\u039c\u03b1\u03bb\u03b9\u03b5\u03af\u03c2 in Ancient Greek), whence the form Maleventum would derive, like Agrigentum from Acragas (now Agrigento), Selinuntium from Selinus (the ruins of which are at now Selinunte), etc.\nAs a Roman colony Beneventum seems to have quickly become a flourishing place; and in the Second Punic War was repeatedly occupied by Roman generals as a post of importance, on account of its proximity to Campania, and its strength as a fortress. In its immediate neighborhood were fought two of the most decisive actions of the war: the Battle of Beneventum (214 BC), in which the Carthaginian general Hanno was defeated by Tiberius Gracchus; the other in 212 BC, when the camp of Hanno, in which he had accumulated a vast quantity of corn and other stores, was stormed and taken by the Roman consul Quintus Fulvius Flaccus. And though its territory was more than once laid waste by the Carthaginians, it was still one of the eighteen Latin colonies which in 209 BCE were at once able and willing to furnish the required quota of men and money for continuing the war. No mention of it occurs during the Social War, although it seems to have escaped from the calamities which at that time befell so many cities of Samnium; towards the close of the Roman Republic Benevento is described as one of the most opulent and flourishing cities of Italy.\nUnder the Second Triumvirate its territory was portioned out by the Triumvirs to their veterans, and subsequently a fresh colony was established there by Augustus, who greatly enlarged its domain by the addition of the territory of Caudium (now Montesarchio). A third colony was settled there by Nero, at which time it assumed the title of \"Concordia\"; hence we find it bearing, in inscriptions of the reign of Septimius Severus, the titles Colonia Julia Augusta Concordia Felix Beneventum. Its importance and flourishing condition under the Roman Empire is sufficiently attested by existing remains and inscriptions; it was at that period unquestionably the chief city of the Hirpini, and probably, next to Capua, the most populous and considerable city of southern Italy. For this prosperity it was doubtless indebted in part to its position on the Via Appia, just at the junction of the two principal arms or branches of that great road, the one called afterwards the Via Traiana, leading thence by Aequum Tuticum (now Ariano Irpino) into Apulia; the other by Aeclanum to Venusia (now Venosa) and Tarentum (now Taranto). Its wealth is also evidenced by the quantity of coins minted by Beneventum. Horace famously notes Beneventum on his journey from Rome to Brundusium (now Brindisi). It was indebted to the same circumstance for the honor of repeated visits from the emperors of Rome, among which those of Nero, Trajan, and Septimus Severus, are particularly recorded.\nIt was probably for the same reason that the triumphal arch, the Arch of Trajan, was erected there by the senate and people of Rome and constructed by the architect Apollodorus of Damascus in 114. The Arch of Trajan is one of the best-preserved Roman structures in the Campania. It repeats the formula of the Arch of Titus in the Roman Forum, with reliefs of Trajan's life and exploits of his reign. Some of the sculptures are in the British Museum. Successive emperors seem to have bestowed on the city accessions of territory, and erected, or at least given name to, various public buildings. For administrative purposes it was first included, together with the rest of the Hirpini, in the second region of Augustus, but was afterwards annexed to Campania and placed under the control of the consular of that province. Its inhabitants were included in the Stellatine tribe. Beneventum retained its importance down to the close of the Empire, and though during the Gothic wars it was taken by Totila, and its walls razed to the ground, they were restored, as well as its public buildings, shortly after; and P. Diaconus speaks of it as a very wealthy city, and the capital of all the surrounding provinces.\nBeneventum indeed seems to have been a place of much literary cultivation; it was the birthplace of Lucius Orbilius Pupillus, who long continued to teach in his native city before he removed to Rome, and was honored with a statue by his fellow-townsmen; while existing inscriptions record similar honors paid to another grammarian, Rutilius Aelianus, as well as to orators and poets, apparently only of local celebrity.\nThe territory of Beneventum under the Roman Empire was of very considerable extent. Towards the west it included that of \"Caudium\", with the exception of the town itself; to the north it extended as far as the river Tamarus (now Tammaro), including the village of Pago Veiano, which, as we learn from an inscription, was anciently called \"Pagus Veianus\"; on the northeast it comprised the town of Aequum Tuticum (now \"Saint Eleutherio hamlet\", between Ariano Irpino and Castelfranco in Miscano), and on the east and south bordered on the territories of Aeclanum (now Mirabella Eclano) and Abellinum (now Avellino). An inscription has preserved to us the names of several of the pagi or villages dependent upon Beneventum, but their sites cannot be identified.\nThe city's most ancient coins bear the legend \"Malies\" or \"Maliesa\", which have been supposed to belong to the Samnite, or pre-Samnite, Maleventum. Coins with the legend \"BENVENTOD\" (an old Latin \u2013 or Samnite \u2013 form for Beneventor-um), must have been struck after it became a Latin colony.\nDuchy of Benevento.\nNot long after it had been sacked by Totila and its walls razed (545), Benevento became the seat of a powerful Lombard duchy. The circumstances of the creation of duchy of Benevento are disputed. Lombards were present in southern Italy well before the complete conquest of the Po Valley: the duchy would have been founded in 576 by some soldiers led by Zotto, autonomously from the Lombard king.\nZotto's successor was Arechis I (died in 640), from the Duchy of Friuli, who captured Capua and Crotone, sacked the Byzantine Amalfi but was unable to capture Naples. After his reign the Eastern Roman Empire had only Naples, Amalfi, Gaeta, Sorrento, the tip of Calabria and the maritime cities of Apulia left in southern Italy.\nIn the following decades, Benevento added some territories to the Roman-Byzantine duchy by conquest, but the main enemy was now the northern Lombard Kingdom itself. King Liutprand intervened several times, imposing a candidate of his own to the realm's succession; his successor Ratchis declared the duchies of Spoleto and Benevento to be foreign countries where it was forbidden to travel without royal permission.\nWith the collapse of the Lombard Kingdom in 773, Duke Arechis II was elevated to Prince under the new Frankish Empire, in compensation for having some of his territory transferred back to the Papal States.\nIn November 774, the Duke of Benevento Duke Arechis II, immediately after being crowned prince, decided to send members of the Benevento Cortisani and Baccari families to occupy the central area of the Biferno river in the neighboring region of Molise, seeking to expand their political dominance.\nBenevento was acclaimed by a chronicler as a \"second Pavia\"\u2014\u2014after the Lombard capital was lost. This principality was short-lived: in 851, Salerno broke off under Siconulf and, by the end of that century, Capua was independent as well. Benevento was ruled again by the Byzantines between 891 and 895.\nThe so-called \"Langobardia minor\" was unified for the last time by Duke Pandolfo Testa di Ferro, who expanded his extensive control in the Mezzogiorno from his base in Benevento and Capua. Before his death (March 981), he had also gained the title of Duke of Spoleto from Emperor Otto I. However, both Benevento and Salerno rebelled to his son and heir, Pandulf II.\nThe first decades of the 11th century saw two more German-descended rulers in southern Italy: Henry II, conquered in 1022 both Capua and Benevento, but returned after the failed siege of Troia. Conrad II obtained similar results in 1038. In these years the three states (Benevento, Capua, and Salerno) were often engaged in local wars and disputes that favoured the rise of the Normans from mercenaries to ruler of the whole of Southern Italy. The greatest of them was Robert Guiscard, who captured Benevento in 1053 after the Emperor Henry III had first authorised its conquest in 1047 when Pandulf III and Landulf VI shut the gates to him. These princes were later expelled from the city and then recalled after the pope failed to defend it from Guiscard. The city fell to Normans in 1077. It was a papal city until after 1081.\nPapal rule.\nBenevento passed to the papacy peacefully when the emperor Henry III ceded it to Leo IX, in exchange for the pope's consent to the establishment of the Diocese of Bamberg (1053). Landulf II, Archbishop of Benevento, promoted reform, but also allied with the Normans. He was deposed for two years. Benevento was the cornerstone of the papacy's temporal powers in southern Italy. The papacy ruled it by appointed rectors, seated in a palace, and the principality continued to be a papal possession until 1806, when Napoleon granted it to his minister Talleyrand with the title of sovereign prince. Talleyrand was never to settle down and actually rule his new principality; in 1815 Benevento was returned to the papacy. It was united with Italy in 1860.\nSeveral popes personally visited Benevento. In 1128 Honorius II tried inviting Roger II of Sicily into the city in order to discuss peace terms, however, Roger refused to enter the city, for he felt unsafe within the city. Thus the two instead met on a bridge near Benevento. Only a year later, the city revolted against the Papal rule and Honorius had to beg Roger for assistance.\nIn 1130, Anacletus II fled from Rome to the safety of Benevento after hearing that his rival, Innocent II was gaining recognition in the north. When Anacletus created Roger the king of Sicily, he granted Roger the right to conscript the citizens of the city into military service, despite city itself remaining under Papal rule. The declaration was not well received, as the citizens became afraid that the city was about to be annexed into the newly found kingdom. Therefore, when Roger made his move against Robert of Capua and began the civil war, Benevento sided with Robert and ousted Anacletus's supporters from the city.\nManfred of Sicily lost his life in 1266 in battle with Charles of Anjou not far from the town, in the course of the Battle of Benevento.\nRevolution and brief republican rule.\nIn the 19th century, cultural developments in the city had caused the rise of an active bourgeoisie and contributed to the stagnation of the patrician class. This allowed liberal fervour in the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, driven by the revolutionary organisation of the Carbonari, to spread to the region.\nIn the light of the 1820 unrest in the Two Sicilies, which had forced the kingdom to liberalise, the Carbonari stimulated the revolution in Benevento. The Republic of Benevento was declared in July 1820 and the progressive Spanish constitution was adopted by the new nation.\nBenevento requested twice to be incorporated into the Two Sicilies, though these attempts were rejected both times as the nation refused to negotiate the affairs of Benevento except through the Pope, who they continued to recognise as sovereign over the area.\nIn the spring of 1821, the short-lived republic was militarily occupied by the forces of the Austrian Empire which intervened in south Italy to restore Benevento to Papal rule.\nAfter the Italian unification.\nAfter the unification of Italy, Benevento was made provincial capital of the new Province of Benevento, comprising territories formerly belonging to the dissolved Kingdom of the Two Sicilies (Principato Ultra, Molise, Terra di Lavoro, Capitanata). In the following decades, the town saw considerable expansion and modernization; the local economy became increasingly diversified, with the traditional agricultural sector (especially the cultivation of tobacco and cereals) being joined by growing confectionery, mechanical, liquor, lumber and brickmaking industries.\n During World War II, Benevento's key position in the railway communications between Rome and Apulia resulted in the town being heavily bombed by the Allied air forces in the summer of 1943. These raids caused 2,000 deaths and left 18,000 homeless out of a population of 40,000, and resulted in the destruction of half of the town. The railway and industrial districts were hit the hardest, but the old city centre also suffered heavily; the Cathedral was almost completely destroyed, and its reconstruction was only completed in the 1960s. After being briefly occupied by the Germans in the wake of the Armistice of Cassibile, Benevento was liberated by the Allies on 2 October 1943.\nFour years after the war, on 2 October 1949, Benevento was hit hard by a flood of the Calore Irpino.\nDuring the 1950s Benevento was mainly ruled by Monarchist or MSI mayors, and then for three decades (until the 1990s) by the Christian Democracy. Public sector grew considerably during this period, becoming a prime source of employment for many inhabitants of the province; the town also saw increasing demographic expansion, resulting in a somewhat incontrolled building boom. In recent years, several urban renewal projects have been carried out in the old city centre, and Benevento has become the seat of the University of Sannio and several research institutes.\nJewish history.\nEpigraphical evidence show that a Jewish community had existed in Benevento since at least the fifth century. In the 10th century, Jewish traveller Ahimaaz ben Paltiel described the Jewish community of Benevento, among other southern Italy towns. One of Paltiel's relatives established a Yeshiva in town, and a large part of his family resided in Benevento. In 1065, prince Landulf IV of Benevento forced a number of Jews to convert to Christianity, which was censured by Pope Alexander II. Jewish traveller Benjamin of Tudela, who visited Benevento in 1159 or 1165, described 200 Jewish families living in the city. Being under Papal rule (unlike the rest of southern Italy), the Jewish community of Benevento was not expelled, as most other southern Italy Jewish communities in 1541. Nevertheless, they were expelled from town later in 1569 under Pope Paul IV. In 1617 the Jewish community was given permission to resettle, though were expelled again 13 years later after being accused of well poisoning. There has been no organized Jewish community in Benevento since the expellation. However, an unorganized Jewish community has persisted. In recent years, a few Israeli Jews have faced occasional anti-semitic incidents.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMain sights.\nAncient remains.\nThe Arch of Trajan\nThe importance of Benevento in classical times is vouched for by the many remains of antiquity which it possesses, of which the most famous is the triumphal arch erected in honour of Trajan by the senate and people of Rome in 114, with important reliefs relating to its history. Enclosed in the walls, this construction marked the entrance in Benevento of the Via Traiana, the road built by the Spanish emperor to shorten the path from Rome to Brindisi. The reliefs show the civil and military deeds of Trajan. A great part of the arch is decorated with scenes in bas relief: particularly the pillars directed to the town represent scenes of peace and military scenes. The two faces of the Arch are identical in the arrangement of the reliefs. That the reliefs are for the most part not merely fanciful, nor chiefly conventional and decorative in theme and treatment, is also clear at first sight. They plainly refer to actual events and actions in the life of Trajan, whose effigy, sometimes decapitated, appears in all but two of them, one of which is the only one on all the Arch that is substantially defective. The height of the monument is of , with an arch of , a structure composed of limestone rocks and a marble covering. The arch was put during the Middle Age in the fenced area of the town, in order to represent the \"Porta Aurea,\" on account of its fair proportions and the wealth and excellence of its sculptural adornments.\nOther considerable remains\nThere are other considerable remains from ancient era:\nMany inscriptions and ancient fragments may be seen built into the old houses. In 1903 the foundations of the Temple of Isis were discovered close to the Arch of Trajan, and many fragments of fine sculptures in both the Egyptian and the Greco-Roman style belonging to it were found. They had apparently been used as the foundation of a portion of the city wall, reconstructed in 663 under the fear of an attack by the Byzantine emperor Constans II, the temple having been destroyed by order of the bishop, St Barbatus, to provide the necessary material (A. Meomartini, 0. Marucchi and L. Savignoni in \"Notizie degli Scavi\", 1904, 107 sqq.).\nSanta Sofia.\nThe church of \"Santa Sofia\" is a circular Lombard edifice dating to c. 760, now modernized, of small proportions, and is one of the main examples of religious Lombard architecture. The plan consists of a central hexagon with, at each vertex, columns taken from the temple of Isis; these are connected by arches which support the cupola. The inner hexagon is in turn enclosed in a decagonal ring with eight white limestone pillars and two columns next to the entrance. The church has a fine cloister of the 12th century, constructed in part of fragments of earlier buildings. This cloister today is the location of the Museo del Sannio. The church interior was once totally frescoed by Byzantine artists: fragments of these paintings, portraying the \"Histories of Christ\", can be still seen in the two side apses.\nSanta Sofia was almost destroyed by the earthquake of 1688, and rebuilt in Baroque forms by commission of the then cardinal Orsini of Benevento (later Pope Benedict XIII). The original forms were hidden, and were recovered only after the discussed restoration of 1951.\nIn 2011, it became a UNESCO World Heritage Site as part of a group of seven inscribed as Longobards in Italy, Places of Power (568-774 A.D.).\nThe Cathedral.\nThe Cathedral of Santa Maria Assunta, with its arcaded fa\u00e7ade and incomplete square campanile (begun in 1279 by the archbishop Romano Capodiferro) dates from the 9th century. It was rebuilt in 1114, the fa\u00e7ade inspired by the Pisan Gothic style. Its bronze doors, adorned with bas-reliefs, are notable example of Romanesque art which may belong to the beginning of the 13th century. The interior is in the form of a basilica, the double aisles carried on ancient columns. There are ambones resting on columns supported by lions, and decorated with reliefs and coloured marble mosaic, and a candelabrum of 1311. A marble statue of the apostle San Bartolomeo, by Nicola da Monteforte, is also from the 14th century. The cathedral also contains a statue of St. Giuseppe Moscati, a native of the area. The cathedral was completely destroyed in 1943 because of bombardments: what remained of the cathedral were just the bell tower, the fa\u00e7ade and the crypt. Another testimony of the cathedral is the XII century bronze door, the Janua Major, composed of 72 tiles with bas relief, whose fragments were rebuilt after the Second World War. \nThe current monument, with its modern aspect, was completed in 1965 and restored between 2005 and 2012.\nRocca dei Rettori.\nThe castle of Benevento, best known as \"Rocca dei Rettori\" or \"Rocca di Manfredi\", stands at the highest point of the town, commanding the valley of the rivers Sabato and Calore, and the two main ancient roads Via Appia and Via Traiana. The site had been already used by the Samnites, who had constructed here a set of defensive terraces, and the Romans, with a thermal plant (\"Castellum aquae\"), whose remains can be still seen in the castle garden. The Benedictines had a monastery there. It received the current name in the Middle Ages, when it became the seat of the Papal governors, the \"Rettori\".\nThe castle is in fact made by two distinct edifices: the Torrione (\"Big Tower\"), which was built by the Lombards starting from 871, and the Palazzo dei Governatori, built by the Popes from 1320.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Benevento area is traditionally agricultural. Main products include vine, olives and tobacco. The main industry is that of food processing (sweets and pasta), although textile, mechanics, and construction companies are present.\nSports.\nThe Stadio Ciro Vigorito is a multi-use stadium in Benevento, which is mostly used as the home venue of Serie C side Benevento Calcio.\nTransportation.\nBenevento is connected to Naples through the modern SS7 Appia state road, and then local roads starting from Arienzo. It is from the Naples\u2013Bari A16 motorway. The SS372 Telesina state road allows reaching the A1 Naples\u2013Rome, leading to the latter in less than three hours.\nBenevento railway station, on the Caserta-Foggia railway, has fast connections from Rome to Avellino, Bari and Lecce. Trains to Campobasso have been mostly replaced by bus services. The connection to Naples is ensured by three stations on the EAV inter-urban railway line.\nRecently, in May 2021, the company Italo also inaugurated its new route that passes by Benevento and connects the city with Milan (in 5 hours and a half) and Rome (2 hours).\nAirports.\nThe nearest airports are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73338", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73338", "title": "IBM DisplayWrite", "text": "DisplayWrite (sometimes written as Displaywrite) is a discontinued word processor program that IBM developed and marketed for the IBM PC and PCjr. It was among the company's first internally developed, commercially sold PC software titles.\nDisplayWrite's feature set was based on the IBM Displaywriter System, a dedicated microcomputer-based word processing machine. Because the two systems were so similar, an experienced Displaywriter user could start using DisplayWrite immediately.\nVersions.\nDisplayWrite/PC.\nFor the Intel platform there were DisplayWrite versions for PC/MS-DOS and DisplayWrite 5/2 programmed under OS/2.\nDisplayWrite/36.\nDisplayWrite/36 was the word processing component of IBM Office/36, which allowed an office to use the SQL-based database file for labels and form letters.\nDisplayWrite/370.\nDisplayWrite/370, a much more powerful version with full graphics and WYSIWYG support, was supported for IBM zSeries mainframe computers until May 2015. (see IBM Displaywriter System). DW/370 was a host-based word processor. It was marketed between 1993 and 2015 for MVS/CICS (now z/OS) and VM/CMS.\nFile format.\nIBM DisplayWrite's native file format is based on IBM's DCA (Document Content Architecture) RFT (Revisable Form Text) specification, but adds additional structures. Depending on the DisplayWrite version, the document files use .DOC or .TXT file name extension. The DisplayWrite software can export to and import from pure DCA/RFT files (which typically have .DCA or .RFT file name extension). RFT (IBM Revisable Form Text) should not be confused with RTF (Rich Text Format), which is a Microsoft specification.\nReception.\n DisplayWrite was the only successful IBM software product for the PC. A 1990 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants member survey found that 2% of respondents used DisplayWrite as their word processor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73339", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73339", "title": "Digital tuner", "text": "Digital tuner may refer to one of several types of tuner designed to receive digitally-encoded radio or television transmissions, or which incorporate some form of digital electronics.\nRadio.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "73341", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73341", "title": "Disjunctive normal form", "text": "Standard form of a boolean function\nIn boolean logic, a disjunctive normal form (DNF) is a normal form of a logical formula consisting of a disjunction of conjunctions; it can also be described as an OR of ANDs, a sum of products, or \u2014 in philosophical logic \u2014 a \"cluster concept\". The disjunctive normal form and its counterpart, the conjunctive normal form, are the most common standardized ways of representing boolean expressions. They are widely used in various applications such as circuit design or automated theorem proving.\nDefinition.\nA logical formula is considered to be in DNF if it is a disjunction of one or more conjunctions of one or more literals. A DNF formula is in full disjunctive normal form if each of its variables appears exactly once in every conjunction and each conjunction appears at most once (up to the order of variables). As in conjunctive normal form (CNF), the only propositional operators in DNF are and (formula_1), or (formula_2), and not (formula_3). The \"not\" operator can only be used as part of a literal, which means that it can only precede a propositional variable.\nThe following is a context-free grammar for DNF:\n \"DNF\" formula_4 (\"Disjunct\") formula_5 (\"Disjunct\") formula_6 \"DNF\"\n \"Disjunct\" formula_4 \"Literal\" formula_8 \"Literal\" formula_9 \"Disjunct\"\n \"Literal\" formula_4 \"Variable\" formula_11 formula_12 \"Variable\"\nWhere \"Variable\" is any variable.\nFor example, all of the following formulas are in DNF:\nThe formula formula_17 is in DNF, but not in full DNF; an equivalent full-DNF version is formula_18.\nThe following formulas are not in DNF:\nConversion to DNF.\nIn classical logic each propositional formula can be converted to DNF ...\n... by syntactic means.\nThe conversion involves using logical equivalences, such as double negation elimination, De Morgan's laws, and the distributive law. Formulas built from the primitive connectives formula_22 can be converted to DNF by the following canonical term rewriting system:\nformula_23\n... by semantic means.\nThe full DNF of a formula can be read off its truth table. For example, consider the formula\nformula_24.\nThe corresponding truth table is\nformula_26\nformula_28\nRemark.\nA propositional formula can be represented by one and only one full DNF. In contrast, several \"plain\" DNFs may be possible. For example, by applying the rule formula_29 three times, the full DNF of the above formula_25 can be simplified to formula_31. However, there are also equivalent DNF formulas that cannot be transformed one into another by this rule, see the pictures for an example.\nDisjunctive Normal Form Theorem.\nIt is a theorem that all consistent formulas in propositional logic can be converted to disjunctive normal form. This is called the Disjunctive Normal Form Theorem. The formal statement is as follows:Disjunctive Normal Form Theorem: Suppose formula_32 is a sentence in a propositional language formula_33 with formula_34 sentence letters, which we shall denote by formula_35. If formula_32 is not a contradiction, then it is truth-functionally equivalent to a disjunction of conjunctions of the form formula_37, where formula_38, and formula_39.The proof follows from the procedure given above for generating DNFs from truth tables. Formally, the proof is as follows:Suppose formula_32 is a sentence in a propositional language whose sentence letters are formula_41. For each row of formula_32's truth table, write out a corresponding conjunction formula_43, where formula_44 is defined to be formula_45 if formula_45 takes the value formula_47 at that row, and is formula_48 if formula_45 takes the value formula_50 at that row; similarly for formula_51, formula_52, etc. (the alphabetical ordering of formula_41 in the conjunctions is quite arbitrary; any other could be chosen instead). Now form the disjunction of all these conjunctions which correspond to formula_47 rows of formula_32's truth table. This disjunction is a sentence in formula_56, which by the reasoning above is truth-functionally equivalent to formula_32. This construction obviously presupposes that formula_32 takes the value formula_47 on at least one row of its truth table; if formula_32 doesn\u2019t, i.e., if formula_32 is a contradiction, then formula_32 is equivalent to formula_63, which is, of course, also a sentence in formula_56.This theorem is a convenient way to derive many useful metalogical results in propositional logic, such as, trivially, the result that the set of connectives formula_65 is functionally complete.\nMaximum number of conjunctions.\nAny propositional formula is built from formula_34 variables, where formula_67.\nThere are formula_68 possible literals: formula_69.\nformula_70 has formula_71 non-empty subsets.\nThis is the maximum number of conjunctions a DNF can have.\nA full DNF can have up to formula_72 conjunctions, one for each row of the truth table.\nExample 1\nConsider a formula with two variables formula_73 and formula_74.\nThe longest possible DNF has formula_75 conjunctions:\nformula_76\nThe longest possible full DNF has 4 conjunctions: they are underlined.\nThis formula is a tautology. It can be simplified to formula_77 or to formula_78, which are also tautologies, as well as valid DNFs.\nExample 2\nEach DNF of the e.g. formula formula_79 has formula_80 conjunctions.\nComputational complexity.\nThe Boolean satisfiability problem on conjunctive normal form formulas is NP-complete. By the duality principle, so is the falsifiability problem on DNF formulas. Therefore, it is co-NP-hard to decide if a DNF formula is a tautology.\nConversely, a DNF formula is satisfiable if, and only if, one of its conjunctions is satisfiable. This can be decided in polynomial time simply by checking that at least one conjunction does not contain conflicting literals.\nVariants.\nAn important variation used in the study of computational complexity is \"k-DNF\". A formula is in \"k-DNF\" if it is in DNF and each conjunction contains at most k literals.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73342", "revid": "48867476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73342", "title": "Conjunctive normal form", "text": "Standard form of Boolean function\nIn Boolean algebra, a formula is in conjunctive normal form (CNF) or clausal normal form if it is a conjunction of one or more clauses, where a clause is a disjunction of literals; otherwise put, it is a product of sums or an AND of ORs.\nIn automated theorem proving, the notion \"clausal normal form\" is often used in a narrower sense, meaning a particular representation of a CNF formula as a set of sets of literals.\nDefinition.\nA logical formula is considered to be in CNF if it is a conjunction of one or more disjunctions of one or more literals. As in disjunctive normal form (DNF), the only propositional operators in CNF are or (formula_1), and (formula_2), and not (formula_3). The \"not\" operator can only be used as part of a literal, which means that it can only precede a propositional variable.\nThe following is a context-free grammar for CNF:\n \"CNF\" formula_4 \"Disjunct\" formula_5 \"Disjunct\" formula_6 \"CNF\"\n \"Disjunct\" formula_4 \"Literal\" formula_8 \"Literal\" formula_9 \"Disjunct\"\n \"Literal\" formula_4 \"Variable\" formula_11 formula_12 \"Variable\"\nWhere \"Variable\" is any variable.\nAll of the following formulas in the variables formula_13 and formula_14 are in conjunctive normal form:\nThe following formulas are not in conjunctive normal form:\nConversion to CNF.\nIn classical logic each propositional formula can be converted to an equivalent formula that is in CNF. This transformation is based on rules about logical equivalences: double negation elimination, De Morgan's laws, and the distributive law.\nBasic algorithm.\nThe algorithm to compute a CNF-equivalent of a given propositional formula formula_23 builds upon formula_24 in disjunctive normal form (DNF): step 1.\nThen formula_25 is converted to formula_26 by swapping ANDs with ORs and vice versa while negating all the literals. Remove all formula_27.\nConversion by syntactic means.\nConvert to CNF the propositional formula formula_23.\nStep 1: Convert its negation to disjunctive normal form. \nformula_29,\nwhere each formula_30 is a conjunction of literals formula_31.\nStep 2: Negate formula_25.\nThen shift formula_33 inwards by applying the (generalized) De Morgan's equivalences until no longer possible.\nformula_34\nwhereformula_35\nStep 3: Remove all double negations.\nExample\nConvert to CNF the propositional formula\nformula_36.\nThe (full) DNF equivalent of its negation is\nformula_37\nformula_38\nConversion by semantic means.\nA CNF equivalent of a formula can be derived from its truth table. Again, consider the formula\nformula_39.\nThe corresponding truth table is\nA CNF equivalent of formula_23 is\nformula_41\nEach disjunction reflects an assignment of variables for which formula_23 evaluates to F(alse).\nIf in such an assignment a variable formula_43\nOther approaches.\nSince all propositional formulas can be converted into an equivalent formula in conjunctive normal form, proofs are often based on the assumption that all formulae are CNF. However, in some cases this conversion to CNF can lead to an exponential explosion of the formula. For example, translating the non-CNF formula\nformula_46 \ninto CNF produces a formula with formula_47 clauses:\nformula_48\nEach clause contains either formula_49 or formula_50 for each formula_51.\nThere exist transformations into CNF that avoid an exponential increase in size by preserving satisfiability rather than equivalence. These transformations are guaranteed to only linearly increase the size of the formula, but introduce new variables. For example, the above formula can be transformed into CNF by adding variables formula_52 as follows:\nformula_53\nAn interpretation satisfies this formula only if at least one of the new variables is true. If this variable is formula_54, then both formula_49 and formula_50 are true as well. This means that every model that satisfies this formula also satisfies the original one. On the other hand, only some of the models of the original formula satisfy this one: since the formula_54 are not mentioned in the original formula, their values are irrelevant to satisfaction of it, which is not the case in the last formula. This means that the original formula and the result of the translation are equisatisfiable but not equivalent.\nAn alternative translation, the Tseitin transformation, includes also the clauses formula_58. With these clauses, the formula implies formula_59; this formula is often regarded to \"define\" formula_54 to be a name for formula_61.\nMaximum number of disjunctions.\nConsider a propositional formula with formula_62 variables, formula_63.\nThere are formula_64 possible literals: formula_65.\nformula_66 has formula_67 non-empty subsets.\nThis is the maximum number of disjunctions a CNF can have.\nAll truth-functional combinations can be expressed with formula_68 disjunctions, one for each row of the truth table.In the example below they are underlined.\nExample\nConsider a formula with two variables formula_69 and formula_70.\nThe longest possible CNF has formula_71 disjunctions:\nformula_72\nThis formula is a contradiction. It can be simplified to formula_73 or to formula_74, which are also contradictions, as well as valid CNFs.\nComputational complexity.\nAn important set of problems in computational complexity involves finding assignments to the variables of a Boolean formula expressed in conjunctive normal form, such that the formula is true. The \"k\"-SAT problem is the problem of finding a satisfying assignment to a Boolean formula expressed in CNF in which each disjunction contains at most \"k\" variables. 3-SAT is NP-complete (like any other \"k\"-SAT problem with \"k\"&gt;2) while 2-SAT is known to have solutions in polynomial time. As a consequence, the task of converting a formula into a DNF, preserving satisfiability, is NP-hard; dually, converting into CNF, preserving validity, is also NP-hard; hence equivalence-preserving conversion into DNF or CNF is again NP-hard.\nTypical problems in this case involve formulas in \"3CNF\": conjunctive normal form with no more than three variables per conjunct. Examples of such formulas encountered in practice can be very large, for example with 100,000 variables and 1,000,000 conjuncts.\nA formula in CNF can be converted into an equisatisfiable formula in \"\"k\"CNF\" (for \"k\"\u22653) by replacing each conjunct with more than \"k\" variables formula_75 by two conjuncts formula_76 and formula_77 with Z a new variable, and repeating as often as necessary.\nFirst-order logic.\nIn first order logic, conjunctive normal form can be taken further to yield the clausal normal form of a logical formula, which can be then used to perform first-order resolution.\nIn resolution-based automated theorem-proving, a CNF formula \nSee below for an example.\nConverting from first-order logic.\nTo convert first-order logic to CNF:\nExample\nAs an example, the formula saying \"Anyone who loves all animals, is in turn loved by someone\" is converted into CNF (and subsequently into clause form in the last line) as follows (highlighting replacement rule redexes in formula_117):\nInformally, the Skolem function formula_118 can be thought of as yielding the person by whom formula_106 is loved, while formula_120 yields the animal (if any) that formula_106 doesn't love. The 3rd last line from below then reads as \"formula_106 doesn't love the animal formula_120, or else formula_106 is loved by formula_118\".\nThe 2nd last line from above, formula_126, is the CNF.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73344", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73344", "title": "Carl von Ossietzky", "text": "German journalist and pacifist (1889\u20131938)\nCarl von Ossietzky (; 3 October 1889 \u2013 4 May 1938) was a German journalist and pacifist. He was the recipient of the 1935 Nobel Peace Prize for his work in exposing the clandestine German rearmament.\nAs editor-in-chief of the magazine , Ossietzky published a series of expos\u00e9s in the late 1920s, detailing Germany's violation of the Treaty of Versailles by rebuilding an air force (the predecessor of the Luftwaffe) and training pilots in the Soviet Union. He was convicted of treason and espionage in 1931 and sentenced to eighteen months in prison but was granted amnesty in December 1932.\nOssietzky continued to be a vocal critic against German militarism after the Nazis' rise to power. Following the 1933 Reichstag fire, Ossietzky was again arrested and sent to the Esterwegen concentration camp near Oldenburg. His brutal torture after his arrest was attested by International Red Cross. In 1936, he was awarded the 1935 Nobel Peace Prize, but was forbidden from travelling to Norway to accept the prize. After enduring years of mistreatment in Nazi concentration camps, Ossietzky died of tuberculosis in 1938 in a Berlin hospital after more than five years of imprisonment.\nEarly life.\nOssietzky was born in Hamburg, the son of Carl Ignatius von Ossietzky (1848\u20131891), a Protestant from Upper Silesia, and Rosalie (n\u00e9e Pratzka), a devout Catholic who wanted her son to enter Holy Orders and become a priest or monk. His father worked as a stenographer in the office of a lawyer, and of senator Max Pred\u00f6hl, but died when Ossietzky was two years old. Ossietzky was baptized as a Roman Catholic in Hamburg on 10 November 1889 and confirmed in the Lutheran Hauptkirche St Michaelis on 23 March 1904.\nThe von in Ossietzky's name, which would generally suggest noble ancestry, is of unknown origin. Ossietzky himself explained, perhaps half in jest, that it derived from an ancestor's service in a Polish lancer cavalry regiment as the Elector of Brandenburg was unable to pay his two regiments of lancers at one point due to an empty war chest, so he instead conferred nobility upon the entirety of the two regiments.\nDespite his failure to finish Realschule (a form of German secondary school), Ossietzky succeeded in embarking on a career in journalism, with the topics of his articles ranging from theatre criticism to feminism and the problems of early motorisation. He later said that his opposition to German militarism during the final years of the German Empire under Wilhelm II led him as early as 1913 to become a pacifist.\nThat year, he married Maud Lichfield-Woods, a Mancunian suffragette, born to British colonial officer and the great-granddaughter of an Indian princess in Hyderabad. They had one daughter, Rosalinda. During World War I, Ossietzky was drafted much against his will into the Army and his experiences during the war\u00a0\u2013 where he was appalled by the carnage\u00a0\u2013 confirmed him in his pacifism. During the Weimar Republic (1919\u20131933), his political commentaries gained him a reputation as a fervent supporter of democracy and a pluralistic society.\nDiscovery of illegal German rearmament.\nIn 1921, the German military founded the (work squads) built up by Major Bruno Ernst Buchrucker. Officially labour groups intended to assist with civilian projects, in reality the members were soldiers secretly trained by the Reichswehr in order to exceed the limits on troop strength set by the Treaty of Versailles.\nThe Black Reichswehr took its orders from a group in the German Army led by Fedor von Bock, Kurt von Schleicher, Eugen Ott and Kurt von Hammerstein-Equord. The Black Reichswehr became infamous for using \"Feme\" murders to punish \"traitors\" who, for example, revealed the locations of weapons' stockpiles or names of members. Secret \"trials\" were conducted of which the victims were unaware, and after finding the accused guilty they would send out a man to execute the \"court's\" sentence of death. During the trials of some of those charged with the murders, prosecutors alleged that the killings were ordered by the officers from Bock's group. Regarding the \"Feme\" murders, Ossietzky wrote:\nLieutenant Schulz (charged with the murder of informers against the Black Reichswehr) did nothing but carry out the orders given him, and that certainly Colonel von Bock, and probably Colonel von Schleicher and General Seeckt, should be sitting in the dock beside him.\nReflecting his pacifism, Ossietzky became secretary of the German Peace Society () in 1919.\n\"Homeless left\".\nIn the 1920s, Ossietzky became one of the leaders of the \"homeless left\", centered on the newspaper which rejected Communism, but found the Social Democrats too inclined to compromise with the old order.\nOssietzky often complained that the men who staffed the bureaucracy, the judiciary and the military under the Kaiser were the same men serving the Weimar Republic, something that was a major concern for him as he frequently warned that these men had no commitment to democracy, and would turn against the republic at the first chance.\nIn this regard, Ossietzky at helped to publish a statistical study in 1923, showing that German judges were inclined to impose extremely harsh sentences on those who broke laws in the name of the left while imposing very lenient sentences on those who committed much violence in the name of the right. He often drew a contrast between the fate of Social Democrat Felix Fechenbach who was imprisoned after a questionable trial for publishing secret documents showing that the German Empire was responsible for World War\u00a0I and that of the Navy captain Hermann Ehrhardt of the whose men occupied Berlin during the Kapp Putsch, killed several hundred civilians and was never tried for his actions. At the same time, Ossietzky was often critical of those republicans who claimed to believe in democracy without actually knowing what democracy meant.\nOssietzky was especially critical of the (Reich Banner Black-Red-Gold), the paramilitary group set up by the Social Democrats to defend democracy. Ossietzky wrote in 1924:\nWhoever has learned from the events of the past five years knows that it is not the nationalists, the monarchists who represent the real danger, but the absence of substantive content and ideas in the concept of the German republic and that no-one will succeed in vitalizing that concept. Defence of the republic is good. It is better to go beyond that to an understanding of what in the republic is worth defending and what should not be retained. This question escapes the ; more precisely, it has probably not yet recognized that such a question even exists.Our republic is not yet an object of mass consciousness but a constitutional document and a governmental administration. When people want to see the republic, they are shown the Wilhelmstrasse. And then one wonders why they return home somewhat shamed. Nothing is there to make the heart beat faster. Around this state, lacking any ideas and with an eternally guilty conscience, there are grouped a couple of so-called constitutional parties, likewise lacking an idea and with no better conscience, which are not led, but administered. Administered by a bureaucratic caste that is responsible for the misery of recent years in domestic and foreign affairs and that smothers all signs of fresh life with a cold hand. If the does not find within itself the idea, the inspiring idea, and the youth does not finally storm the gates, then it will not become the avant-garde of the republic, but the cudgel-guard of the partycrats, and their interests will be defended foremost, not the republic...And the effect? The honours the constitution with festivals; the goose-steps; the drapes Potsdam in black-red-gold; the scraps with the Communists and Fechenbach sits in the penitentiary. That is the joke of it. But if the had as many determined fellows among its members as Captain Ehrhardt, then Fechenbach would no longer be sitting in the penitentiary today. French democrats rescued their Spanish brothers in the cause, whom they did not even know by sight, from the claws of a dictator. The thought of an injustice committed somewhere in the world kept them from sleeping. The German democrats and socialists are more solidly organized. It is not at all true that they are as weak-kneed as is always believed; it is just that they have terribly thick skin. Besides, they are faithful to the law and to the constitution. To rescue someone from prison-that would mean acting against the law! God forbid! And Fechenbach sits in the penitentiary.\nIn 1927, Ossietzky succeeded Kurt Tucholsky as editor-in-chief of the periodical . In 1932, he supported Ernst Th\u00e4lmann's candidacy for the German presidency, though still a critic of the actual policy of the German Communist Party and the Soviet Union.\naffair.\nOn 12 March 1929 published an article by Walter Kreiser, one of its writers: an expos\u00e9 of the training of a special air unit of the , referred to as (Section M), which was secretly training in Germany and in Soviet Russia, in violation of Germany's agreements under the 1919 Treaty of Versailles. Kreiser and Ossietzky, the paper's editor, were questioned by a magistrate of the Supreme Court about the article later that year and were finally indicted in early 1931 for \"treason and espionage\", the assertion being that they had drawn international attention to state affairs which the state had purposefully attempted to keep secret. The arrests were widely seen at the time as an effort to silence , which had been a vocal critic of the 's policies and secret expansion.\nCounsel for the defendants pointed out that the information they had published was true, and \u2013 more to the point \u2013 that the budgeting for had actually been cited in reports by the 's budgeting commission. The prosecution successfully countered that Kreiser (and Ossietzky as his editor) should have known that the reorganization was a state secret when he questioned the Ministry of Defense on the subject of Abteilung M and the ministry refused to comment on it. Kreiser and Ossietzky were convicted and sentenced by the on 23 November 1931 to eighteen months in prison.\nKreiser fled Germany, but Ossietzky remained and was imprisoned, being released at the end of 1932 on the occasion of the Christmas amnesty.\nArrest by the Nazis.\nOssietzky continued to be a constant warning voice against militarism and Nazism. In 1932, he published an article in which he stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Anti-Semitism is akin to nationalism and its best ally. They are of a kind because a nation that, without territory or state power, has wandered through two thousand years of world history is a living refutation of the whole nationalist ideology that derives the concept of a nation exclusively from factors of power politics. Anti-Semitism has never had roots among workers. It has always been a middle-class and small-peasant affair. Today, when these classes face their greatest crisis, it has become to them a kind of religion or at least a substitute for religion. Nationalism and anti-Semitism dominate the German domestic political picture. They are the barrel organs of fascism, whose pseudo-revolutionary shrieks drown out the softer tremolo of social reaction.\nIn the same essay, Ossietzky wrote:\nIntellectual anti-Semitism was the special prerogative of Houston Stewart Chamberlain, who, in The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century, concretized the fantasies of Count Arthur de Gobineau, which had penetrated to Bayreuth. He translated them from the language of harmless snobbery into that of a modernized, seductive mysticism... Contemporary anti-Semitic literature, insofar as it is not simple, crude Jew-baiting, in so far as it claims intellectual consideration, is satisfied to postulate an imposing Teutonism which, examined critically dissolves into thin air like a beautiful Epicurean god. The word blood plays a large part in its phraseology. Blood, the immutable substance, determines the fate of nations and men. Because of the secret laws of blood, Germans and Jews will never be able to mix, must be mutually antagonistic until doomsday. This is romantic but hardly deep. No real science of nationalities can be based on such flimsy premises. For German and Jewish are not fixed categories established once and for all in some mystic prehistoric age, but rather flexible concepts which change their content with spiritual and economic changes dependent on the general dynamics of history.\nFinally, Ossietzky warned: \"Today there is a strong smell of blood in the air. Literary anti-Semitism forges the moral weapon for murder. Sturdy and honest lads will take care of the rest\".\nAdolf Hitler was appointed Chancellor in January 1933, the Nazi dictatorship began soon after in late March with the Enabling Act of 1933, but even then Ossietzky was one of a very small group of public figures who continued to speak out against the Nazi Party. On 28 February 1933, after the Reichstag fire, he was arrested and held in so-called protective custody in Spandau prison. Wilhelm von Sternburg, one of Ossietzky's biographers, surmises that if Ossietzky had had a few more days, he would surely have joined the vast majority of writers who fled the country. In short, Ossietzky underestimated the speed with which the Nazis would go about ridding the country of unwanted political opponents. He was detained afterwards at the Esterwegen concentration camp near Oldenburg, among other camps. Throughout his time in the concentration camps, Ossietzky was mercilessly mistreated by the guards while being deprived of food. In November 1935, when a representative of the International Red Cross visited Ossietzky, he reported that he saw \"a trembling, deadly pale something, a creature that appeared to be without feeling, one eye swollen, teeth knocked out, dragging a broken, badly healed leg . . . a human being who had reached the uttermost limits of what could be borne\".\n1935 Nobel Peace Prize.\nOssietzky's international rise to fame began in 1936 when, already suffering from serious tuberculosis, he was awarded the 1935 Nobel Peace Prize. The government had been unable to prevent this but refused to release him to travel to Oslo to receive the prize. In an act of civil disobedience, after Hermann G\u00f6ring prompted him to decline the prize, Ossietzky issued a note from the hospital saying that he disagreed with the authorities who had stated that by accepting the prize he would cast himself outside the (community of German people):\nAfter much consideration, I have made the decision to accept the Nobel Peace Prize which has fallen to me. I cannot share the view put forward to me by the representatives of the Secret State Police that in doing so I exclude myself from German society. The Nobel Peace Prize is not a sign of an internal political struggle, but of understanding between peoples. As a recipient of the prize, I will do my best to encourage this understanding and as a German I will always bear in mind Germany's justifiable interests in Europe.\nThe award was extremely controversial, prompting two members of the prize committee to resign because they held or had held positions in the Norwegian government. King Haakon VII of Norway, who had been present at other award ceremonies, stayed away from the ceremony.\nThe award divided public opinion and was generally condemned by conservative forces. The leading conservative Norwegian newspaper argued in an editorial that Ossietzky was a criminal who had attacked his country \"with the use of methods that violated the law long before Hitler came into power\" and that \"lasting peace between peoples and nations can only be achieved by respecting the existing laws\".\nOssietzky's Nobel Prize was not allowed to be mentioned in the German press and a government decree forbade German citizens from accepting future Nobel Prizes.\nDeath.\nIn May 1936, Ossietzky was sent to the Westend hospital in Berlin-Charlottenburg because of his tuberculosis, but under Gestapo surveillance. On 4 May 1938, he died in the Nordend hospital in Berlin-Pankow, still in police custody, of tuberculosis and from the after-effects of the abuse he suffered in the concentration camps.\nLegacy.\nSupporters of convicted Nobel Prize-winning Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo compared him to Ossietzky, both being prevented by the authorities from accepting their awards and both having died while in custody. The International League for Human Rights (Berlin) awards an annual Carl von Ossietzky Medal \"to honor citizens or initiatives that promote basic human rights\".\nIn 1963, East German television produced the film \"Carl von Ossietzky\" about Ossietzky's life, starring Hans-Peter Minetti in the title role.\nIn 1991, the University of Oldenburg was renamed Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg in his honor. Ossietzky's daughter Rosalinde von Ossietzky-Palm took part in the formal ceremony, accompanied by then Prime Minister of Lower Saxony Gerhard Schr\u00f6der.\nIn 1992, Ossietzky's 1931 conviction was upheld by Germany's (Federal Court of Justice), applying the law as it stood in 1931.\nAccording to the case law of the , the illegality of covertly conducted actions did not cancel out the principle of secrecy. According to the opinion of the , every citizen owes his Fatherland a duty of allegiance regarding information, and endeavours towards the enforcement of existing laws may be implemented only through the utilization of responsible domestic state organs, and never by appealing to foreign governments.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73345", "revid": "49523", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73345", "title": "AppleTalk address resolution protocol", "text": ""}
{"id": "73348", "revid": "1319229356", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73348", "title": "Calendula", "text": "Genus of flowering plants in the daisy family Asteraceae\nCalendula () is a genus of about 15\u201320 species of annual and perennial herbaceous plants in the daisy family, Asteraceae that are often known as marigolds. They are native to Europe, North Africa, Macaronesia, West Asia and Western Himalayas and have their center of diversity in the Mediterranean Region. Other plants known as marigolds include corn marigold, desert marigold, marsh marigold, and plants of the genus \"Tagetes\".\nThe genus name \"Calendula\" is a modern Latin diminutive of \"calendae\", meaning \"little calendar\", \"little clock\" or possibly \"little weather-glass\". The common name \"marigold\", a contraction of \"Mary's gold\" used especially for \"Calendula officinalis\", refers to the Virgin Mary. \"C.officinalis\" is the most commonly cultivated and used species, popular herbal and cosmetic products named \"Calendula\" invariably derive from it.\nUses.\nHistory.\n\"Calendula\" was not a major medicinal herb but it was used in historic times for headaches, red eye, fever and toothaches. As late as the 17th century Nicholas Culpeper claimed \"Calendula\" benefited the heart, but it was not considered an especially efficacious medicine.\nIn historic times \"Calendula\" was more often used for magical purposes than medicinal ones. One 16th-century potion containing \"Calendula\" claimed to reveal fairies. An unmarried woman with two suitors would take a blend of powdered \"Calendula\", marjoram, wormwood and thyme simmered in honey and white wine used as an ointment in a ritual to reveal her true match.\nAncient Romans and Greeks used the golden \"Calendula\" in many rituals and ceremonies, sometimes wearing crowns or garlands made from the flowers. One of its nicknames is \"Mary's Gold\", referring to the flowers' use in early Christian events in some countries. \"Calendula\" flowers are sacred flowers in India and have been used to decorate the statues of Hindu deities since early times.\nThe most common use in historic times was culinary, however, and the plant was used for both its color and its flavor. They were used for dumplings, wine, oatmeal and puddings. In English cuisine \"Calendula\" were often cooked in the same pot with spinach, or used to flavor stewed birds. According to sixteenth-century Englishman John Gerard, every proper soup of Dutch cuisine in his era would include \"Calendula\" petals.\nCulinary.\nAlso known as \"poor man's saffron,\" the petals are edible and can be used fresh in salads or dried and used to color cheese or as a substitute for saffron. Calendulas have a mildly sweet taste that is slightly bitter, and as it dries these flavors become more intense. It can be used to add color to soups, stews, poultry dishes, custards and liquors.\nThe common name for \"Calendula officinalis\" in Britain is 'pot-marigold,' named so because of its use in broths and soups.\nDyes.\nDye can be extracted from the flower and produce shades of honey, gold, orange, light brown, and vibrant yellow.\nChemistry.\nThe flowers of \"C. officinalis\" contain flavonol glycosides, triterpene oligoglycosides, oleanane-type triterpene glycosides, saponins, and a sesquiterpene glucoside.\nPharmacological effects.\n\"Calendula officinalis\" oil is still used medicinally as an anti-inflammatory and a remedy for healing wounds. \"Calendula\" ointments are skin products available for use on minor cuts, burns, and skin irritation; though evidence of their effectiveness is weak.\nPlant pharmacological studies have suggested that \"Calendula\" extracts have antiviral, antigenotoxic, and anti-inflammatory properties \"in vitro\". In herbalism, \"Calendula\" in suspension or in tincture is used topically for treating acne, reducing inflammation, controlling bleeding, and soothing irritated tissue.\nLimited evidence indicates \"Calendula\" cream or ointment is effective in treating radiation dermatitis. Topical application of \"C. officinalis\" ointment has helped to prevent dermatitis and pain; thus reducing the incidence rate of skipped radiation treatments in randomized trials.\n\"Calendula\" has been used traditionally for abdominal cramps and constipation. In experiments with rabbit jejunum, the aqueous-ethanol extract of \"C. officinalis\" flowers was shown to have both spasmolytic and spasmogenic effects, thus providing a scientific rationale for this traditional use. An aqueous extract of \"C. officinalis\" obtained by a novel extraction method has demonstrated antitumor (cytotoxic) activity and immunomodulatory properties (lymphocyte activation) \"in vitro\", as well as antitumor activity in mice.\n\"Calendula\" plants are known to cause allergic reactions in susceptible individuals, and should be avoided during pregnancy.\nDiversity.\nSpecies include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73351", "revid": "20398877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73351", "title": "Skittles", "text": "Skittles may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "73352", "revid": "50618461", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73352", "title": "Newport, Rhode Island", "text": "City in Rhode Island, United States\nNewport is a seaside city on Aquidneck Island in Rhode Island, United States. It is located in Narragansett Bay, approximately southeast of Providence, south of Fall River, Massachusetts, south of Boston, and northeast of New York City. It is known as a New England summer resort and is famous for its historic mansions and its rich sailing history. The city has a population of about 25,000 residents.\nNewport hosted the first U.S. Open tournaments in both tennis and golf, as well as every challenge for the America's Cup between 1930 and 1983. It is also the home of Salve Regina University and Naval Station Newport, which houses the United States Naval War College, the Naval Undersea Warfare Center, and an important Navy training center. It was a major 18th-century port city and has many buildings from the colonial era.\nNewport is the county seat of Newport County, which has no governmental functions other than court administrative and sheriff corrections boundaries. It was the location of \"Summer White Houses\" of presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower and John F. Kennedy.\nHistory.\nColonial period.\nNewport was founded in 1639 on Rhode Island, which is now called Aquidneck Island. Its eight founders and first officers were Nicholas Easton, William Coddington, John Clarke, John Coggeshall, William Brenton, Jeremy Clark, Thomas Hazard, and Henry Bull. Many of these people were part of the settlement at Portsmouth, along with Anne Hutchinson and her followers. They separated within a year of settling Portsmouth and began the settlement of Newport on the southern side of the island.\nNewport grew to be the largest of the four original settlements that became the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, including Providence Plantations and Shawomett. Many of the first colonists in Newport became Baptists, and the second Baptist congregation in Rhode Island was formed in 1640 under the leadership of John Clarke.\nIn 1658, a group of Jews were welcomed to settle in Newport, fleeing the Inquisition in Spain and Portugal. They were not allowed to settle elsewhere. This group eventually came to be known as Congregation Jeshuat Israel, and is the second-oldest Jewish congregation in the United States. They meet in Touro Synagogue, the oldest synagogue in America.\nThe Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations received its royal charter in 1663. Benedict Arnold was elected as the first governor. The Old Colony House at the head of Washington Square in Newport served as the seat of Rhode Island's government from 1741 until the current Rhode Island State House was completed in Providence in 1904. At that time, Providence became the state's sole capital city.\nNewport was the most important port in colonial Rhode Island, and a public school was established in 1640. The commercial activity that raised Newport to its fame as a rich port began with the immigration of a second wave of Portuguese Jews, who settled there around the middle of the 18th century. The new settlers had been practicing Judaism secretly for 300 years in Portugal, and they were attracted to Rhode Island because of its freedom of worship. They brought with them commercial experience, connections, capital, and a spirit of enterprise.\nMost prominent among them was Jacob Rodrigues Rivera, who arrived in 1745 (died 1789). Rivera introduced the manufacture of sperm oil, derived from sperm whales. This became one of Newport's leading industries and made the town a wealthy, prominent whaling community. Newport developed 17 manufacturers of oil and candles, and enjoyed a practical monopoly of this trade until the American Revolution.\nAaron Lopez is also credited with making Newport an important center of trade. He encouraged 40 Portuguese Jewish families to settle there, and Newport had 150 vessels engaged in trade within 14 years. Lopez was involved in the slave trade, as were other shipping magnates, and the manufacture of spermaceti candles, ships, barrels, rum, chocolate, textiles, clothes, shoes, hats, and bottles. Lopez became the wealthiest man in Newport, but he was denied citizenship on religious grounds, even though British law protected the rights of Jews to become citizens in England.\nLopez appealed to the Rhode Island colonial legislature for redress and was refused with this ruling:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Inasmuch as the said Aaron Lopez hath declared himself by religion a Jew, this Assembly doth not admit himself nor any other of that religion to the full freedom of this Colony. So that the said Aaron Lopez nor any other of said religion is not liable to be chosen into any office in this colony nor allowed to give vote as a free man in choosing others.\nLopez persisted by applying for citizenship in Massachusetts Bay Colony, where it was granted.\nFrom the mid-17th century, the religious tolerance in Newport attracted numbers of Quakers, known also as the \"Society of Friends\". The Great Friends Meeting House in Newport (1699) is the oldest existing structure of worship in Rhode Island.\nIn 1727, James Franklin (brother of Benjamin Franklin) printed the \"Rhode-Island Almanack\" in Newport. In 1732, he published the first newspaper, the \"Rhode Island Gazette\". In 1758, his son James founded the weekly newspaper \"Mercury\". The famous 18th-century Goddard and Townsend furniture was also made in Newport.\nThroughout the 18th-century, Newport suffered from an imbalance of trade with the largest colonial ports. As a result, Newport merchants were forced to develop alternatives to conventional exports. In the 1720s, Colonial leaders arrested many pirates, acting under pressure from the British government. Many were hanged in Newport and buried on Goat Island.\nSlave trade.\nNewport was a major center of the slave trade in colonial and early America, active in the \"triangle trade\" in which slave-produced sugar and molasses from the Caribbean were carried to Rhode Island and distilled into rum that was then carried to West Africa and exchanged for captives. In 1764, Rhode Island had about 30 rum distilleries, 22 in Newport alone.\nSlaves were trafficked illegally into Rhode Island, breaking a 1787 law prohibiting residents of the state from trading in slaves. Slave traders were also breaking federal statutes of 1794 and 1800 barring Americans from carrying slaves to ports outside the United States, as well as the 1807 Congressional act abolishing the transatlantic slave trade.\nA few Rhode Island families made substantial fortunes in the trade. William and Samuel Vernon were Newport merchants who later played an important role in financing the creation of the United States Navy; they sponsored 30 African slaving ventures. However, it was the DeWolfs of Bristol, Rhode Island, and most notably James De Wolf, who were the largest slave-trading family in America, mounting more than 80 transatlantic voyages, most of them illegal. The Rhode Island slave trade was broadly based. Seven hundred Rhode Islanders owned or captained slave ships, most of whom were substantial merchants, though many were ordinary shopkeepers and tradesmen who purchased shares in slaving voyages.\nNewport was inhabited by a small group of abolitionists and free blacks. Reverend Samuel Hopkins, minister at Newport's First Congregational Church, has been called \"America's first abolitionist\". Among subscribers to Hopkins' writings were 17 free black citizens, most of whom lived in Newport. This community of freemen, including Newport Gardner, founded the Free African Union Society in 1780, the first African mutual aid society in America.\nAmerican Revolutionary era.\nNewport was the scene of much activity during the American Revolution. William Ellery was a Newport native and one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence.\nIn the winter of 1775, and 1776, the Rhode Island Legislature placed militia general William West in charge of rooting out loyalists in Newport, which resulted in several individuals being exiled to the northern part of the state, including Joseph Wanton and Thomas Vernon.\nOn December 8, 1776, the British occupied the city without opposition. Sir Peter Parker led 50-gun British ships, while Lieutenant-General Henry Clinton led 7,000 troops. According to Alfred Thayer Mahan, \"The immediate effect was to close a haven of privateers, which flanked the route of all vessels bound from Europe to New York.\"\nIn the summer of 1778, the Americans began the campaign known as the Battle of Rhode Island. This was the first joint operation between the Americans and the French after the signing of the Treaty of Alliance. The Americans based in Tiverton planned a formal siege of the town, but the French refused to take part, instead preferring a frontal assault. This weakened the American position, and the British were able to expel the Americans from the island.\nIn 1779, the British abandoned the location. Rodney lamented, \"The evacuating Rhode Island was the most fatal measure that could possibly have been adopted. It gave up the best and noblest harbor in America, capable of containing the whole Navy of Britain, and where they could in all seasons lie in perfect security; and from whence squadrons, in forty-eight hours, could blockade the three capital cities of America; namely, Boston, New York, and Philadelphia.\"\nOn July 10, 1780, a French expedition arrived in Narragansett Bay off Newport with an army of 450 officers and 5,300 men, sent by King Louis XVI and commanded by Jean-Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, comte de Rochambeau. For the rest of the war, Newport served as the base of the French forces in the United States. In July 1781, Rochambeau was finally able to leave Newport for Providence to begin the decisive march to Yorktown, Virginia, along with General George Washington. The Rochambeau Monument in King Park on Wellington Avenue commemorates Rochambeau's contributions to the Revolutionary War and to Newport's history.\nNewport's population fell from over 9,000 (according to the census of 1774) to fewer than 4,000 by the time that the war ended (1783). Over 200 abandoned buildings were torn down in the 1780s. The war destroyed Newport's economic wealth, because years of military occupation closed the city to any form of trade.\nIt was in Newport that the Rhode Island General Assembly voted to ratify the Constitution in 1790 and become the 13th state, acting under pressure from the merchant community of Providence. The city was the last residence of Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry and the birthplace of Commodore Matthew C. Perry and Unitarian William Ellery Channing.\nSummer mansions.\nBeginning in the mid-nineteenth century, wealthy southern planters seeking to escape the heat began to build summer cottages on Bellevue Avenue, such as Kingscote (1839). Around the middle of the century, wealthy northerners, such as the Wetmore family, began construction on larger mansions, such as Chateau-sur-Mer (1852) nearby. Most of these early families made a substantial part of their fortunes in the Old China Trade.\nBy the turn of the 20th century, many of the nation's wealthiest families were summering in Newport, including the Vanderbilts, Astors, and the Widener family, who constructed the largest \"cottages\", such as The Breakers (1895) and Miramar (1915). They resided for a brief summer social season in grand mansions with elaborate receiving rooms, dining rooms, music rooms, and ballrooms\u2014but with few bedrooms, since the guests were expected to have \"cottages\" of their own. Many of the homes were designed by New York architect Richard Morris Hunt, who kept a house in Newport himself.\nThe social scene at Newport is described in Edith Wharton's novel \"The Age of Innocence\". Wharton's own Newport \"cottage\" was called Land's End\".\" Today, many mansions continue in private use. Hammersmith Farm is the mansion where John F. Kennedy and Jackie Kennedy held their wedding reception; it was open to tourists as a \"house museum\", but has since been purchased and reconverted into a private residence. Many of the other mansions are open to tourists, and others were converted into academic buildings for Salve Regina College in the 1930s, when the owners could no longer afford their tax bills.\nIn the mid-19th century, a large number of Irish immigrants settled in Newport. The Fifth Ward of Newport in the southern part of the city became a staunch Irish neighborhood for many generations. To this day, St. Patrick's Day is an important day of pride and celebration in Newport, with a large parade down Thames Street.\nThe oldest Catholic parish in Rhode Island is St. Mary's, located on Spring Street, though the current building is not original.\n20th century and beyond.\nRhode Island did not have a fixed capital during and after the colonial era, but rotated its legislative sessions among Providence, Newport, Bristol, East Greenwich, and South Kingstown. In 1854, the sessions were eliminated in cities other than Providence and Newport, and Newport was ultimately dropped in 1900 as a constitutional amendment that year restricted the meetings of the legislature to Providence.\nThe Kennedys and Newport.\nFirst Lady Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis had many ties to Newport. She spent her childhood summers at Newport's Hammersmith Farm. She and John Fitzgerald Kennedy attended nearby St. Mary's Church and were married there on September 12, 1953. The Kennedys sailed their yacht \"Honey Fitz\" in Narragansett Bay, golfed at Newport Country Club, dined at The White Horse Tavern, and attended social events at The Breakers.\nPresidents Kennedy and Eisenhower both made Newport the sites of their \"Summer White Houses\" during their years in office. Eisenhower stayed at Quarters A at the Naval War College and at what became known as the Eisenhower House, while Kennedy used Hammersmith Farm.\nU.S. Navy.\nThe city has long been entwined with the United States Navy. It held the campus of the U.S. Naval Academy during the American Civil War (1861\u201365) when the undergraduate officer training school was temporarily moved north from Annapolis, Maryland. From 1952 to 1973, it hosted the Cruiser-Destroyer Force of the U.S. Atlantic Fleet, and subsequently, it has hosted smaller numbers of warships from time to time. Today it hosts Naval Station Newport (NAVSTA Newport) and remains home to the U.S. Naval War College, the center for Surface Warfare Officer training, the Navy Supply Corps School and other schools, and the headquarters of the Naval Undersea Warfare Center. The decommissioned aircraft carrier was moored in an inactive status at the docks previously used by the Cruiser-Destroyer Force until it was towed to Brownsville, Texas in August\u2013September 2014 to be dismantled. The shared the pier until June 2010.\nThe departure of the Cruiser-Destroyer fleet from Newport, and the closure of nearby Naval Air Station Quonset Point in 1973 were devastating to the local economy. The population of Newport decreased, businesses closed, and property values plummeted. However, in the late 1960s, the city began revitalizing the downtown area with the construction of America's Cup Avenue, malls of stores and condominiums, and upscale hotels. Construction was also completed on the Claiborne Pell Bridge. The Preservation Society of Newport County began opening Newport's historic mansions to the public, and the tourist industry has become Newport's primary commercial enterprise over the subsequent years.\nGeography and climate.\nNewport is located at . It is the most populous municipality on Aquidneck Island in Narragansett Bay. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and , or 32.64%, is water. The Newport Bridge, the longest suspension bridge in New England, connects Newport to neighboring Conanicut Island across the East Passage of the Narragansett.\nNewport has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfa/Dfb\"), bordering on a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfa\") and oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfb\"). Being surrounded by ocean water, Newport is often cooler in the summer than some coastal cities further north, such as Boston. According to the USDA, Newport is located in plant hardiness zone 7a.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nThe 2020 United States census counted 25,163 people, 10,898 households, and 4,982 families in Newport. The population density was 3,286.7 per square mile (1,269.0/km2). There were 13,466 housing units at an average density of 1,758.9 per square mile (679.1/km2). The racial makeup was 75.91% (19,102) white or European American (73.62% non-Hispanic white), 5.93% (1,492) black or African-American, 0.86% (217) Native American or Alaska Native, 1.76% (444) Asian, 0.06% (16) Pacific Islander or Native Hawaiian, 6.08% (1,530) from other races, and 9.39% (2,362) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race was 11.82% (2,975) of the population.\nOf the 10,898 households, 18.9% had children under the age of 18; 31.0% were married couples living together; 37.1% had a female householder with no spouse or partner present. Of households, 41.8% consisted of individuals and 16.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.1 and the average family size was 2.8. The percent of those with a bachelor's degree or higher was estimated to be 41.0% of the population.\nOf the population, 14.5% was under the age of 18, 15.5% from 18 to 24, 27.1% from 25 to 44, 23.5% from 45 to 64, and 19.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37.9 years. For every 100 females, the population had 106.4 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older, there were 108.3 males.\nThe 2016-2020 5-year American Community Survey estimates show that the median household income was $68,201 (with a margin of error of +/- $4,880) and the median family income was $96,161 (+/- $10,800). Males had a median income of $40,018 (+/- $3,361) versus $29,535 (+/- $3,288) for females. The median income for those above 16 years old was $34,315 (+/- $2,816). Approximately, 12.4% of families and 14.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 25.0% of those under the age of 18 and 7.7% of those ages 65 or over.\n2013 Update.\nAs of 2013, there were 24,027 people, 10,616 households, and 4,933 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 13,069 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 82.5% White, 6.9% African American, 0.8% Native American, 1.4% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 3.1% some other race, and 5.2% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8.4% of the population (3.3% Puerto Rican, 1.2% Guatemalan, 1.1% Mexican).\nThere were 10,616 households, out of which: 21.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 30.9% were headed by married couples living together, 12.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 53.5% were non-families. Of all households, 41.4% were made up of individuals, and 12.7% were someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.05, and the average family size was 2.82.\nThe age distribution was 16.5% under the age of 18, 16.3% from 18 to 24, 28.1% from 25 to 44, 24.9% from 45 to 64, and 14.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36.4 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.3 males.\nFor the period 2009\u20132011, the estimated median annual income for a household in the city was $59,388, and the median income for a family was $83,880. Male full-time workers had a median income of $52,221 versus $41,679 for females. The per capita income for the city was $35,644. About 10.7% of the population were below the poverty line.\nCulture.\nColonial era architecture.\nThe Newport Historic District \u2014 one of the city's three National Historic Landmark Districts \u2014 boasts one of the highest concentrations of colonial homes in the nation. Doris Duke, heir to the tobacco fortune of her father, James B. Duke, founded the Newport Restoration Foundation (NRF) in 1968, and for the next 25 years, until her death in 1993, saved much of Newport's colonial architectural heritage. Under Duke's leadership, the NRF restored more than 80 18th- and early 19th-century buildings in Newport and neighboring Middletown, Rhode Island, most of which are still owned by the Foundation.\nThe White Horse Tavern was built prior to 1673 and is one of the oldest taverns in the US. Newport is also home to the Touro Synagogue, one of the oldest Jewish houses of worship in the Western hemisphere. Newport also has the nation's oldest lending libraries, the Redwood Library and Athenaeum.\nGilded Age mansions.\nIn addition to colonial architecture, the city is known for its many Gilded Age mansions \u2014 summer \"cottages\" built in varying styles copied from the royal palaces of Europe\u2014mostly built between 1870 through 1915 by wealthy American families. Many of these mansions, including The Breakers (Vanderbilt family), Marble House (William Kissam Vanderbilt), Chateau-sur-Mer (William Shepard Wetmore), Rosecliff (Theresa Fair Oelrichs), and Rough Point (Doris Duke) are open to the public as museums.\nMusic.\nNewport is the hometown of The Cowsills, a pop group formed by the members of the Cowsill family, which had success in the late 1960s. The alternative rock band Throwing Muses was founded in Newport in the 1980s by step-sisters Kristin Hersh and Tanya Donelly. Belly, an alternative band formed by Donnelly in the 1990s, was also based in Newport.\nFort Adams State Park hosts both the Newport Folk Festival and the Newport Jazz Festival. The Jazz Festival was established in 1954 by local socialite Elaine Lorillard and music promoter George Wein. It was held annually until 1971, and was re-established in Newport in 1981. In 1959, George Wein, folk singer Pete Seeger, and music manager Albert Grossman established the Newport Folk Festival as a counterpart to the Jazz Festival. It was held in Newport through 1969, returned to the city in 1985, and has been held annually at Fort Adams since. The Folk Festival was the venue for a controversial performance by singer-songwriter Bob Dylan in July 1965 that proved influential on the folk rock genre. Both festivals were held at other venues in Newport before moving to Fort Adams when they were revived in the 1980s.\nFilm.\nThe Jane Pickens Theater, a single-screen arthouse movie theater, is located on Touro Street in downtown Newport. The theater was built as a church in 1834, and was converted into a movie theater in 1922. The theater was renamed after singer Jane Pickens in 1974. The Jane Pickens Theater became the only movie theater on Aquidneck Island after a multiplex theater in Middletown closed in January 2024.\nNewport has been a filming location for several motion pictures, including \"High Society\" (1956), \"The Great Gatsby\" (1974), \"Mr. North\" (1988), \"Wind\" (1992), \"True Lies\" (1994), \"Amistad\" (1997), \"Me, Myself &amp; Irene\" (2000), \"Dan in Real Life\" (2007), \"Moonrise Kingdom\" (2012), and \"Hocus Pocus 2\" (2022).\nAquarium.\nThe Hamilton Family Aquarium, operated by the non-profit Save the Bay, opened at the Gateway Center on America's Cup Avenue in March 2024. Save the Bay had previously operated an aquarium at Easton's Beach until October 2023.\nSports and recreation.\nBecause of its history as a summer playground for the wealthy, Newport has played a major role in the history and development of several sports. The League of American Wheelmen was formed in Newport in 1880. The first were held in 1881 on grass courts at the Newport Casino. The first U.S. Open golf tournament was played in 1895 at the Newport Country Club. The America's Cup sailing races were held in Newport from 1930 to 1983.\nSailing.\nNewport is sometimes referred to as the \"Sailing Capital of the World\". The city was chosen as the new home of the National Sailing Hall of Fame which moved from Annapolis, Maryland in 2019. Several sailing clubs are based in the city, including the New York Yacht Club and the Ida Lewis Yacht Club.\nNewport was the site of the America's Cup sailing races from 1930 to 1983, and it remains the starting point of the biannual 635 nautical-mile Newport Bermuda Race.\nTennis.\nNewport Casino was the site of the earliest American lawn tennis championships. Since 1954 it has housed the International Tennis Hall of Fame. The Newport Casino also hosted the first Newport Jazz Festival in 1954. The Hall of Fame Open has been held every July since 1976, during the week following Wimbledon. The week also includes annual inductions into the Hall of Fame.\nGolf.\nNewport is home to the Newport Country Club, which hosted both the first U.S. Amateur Championship and the first U.S. Open in 1895. More recently, the Newport Country Club hosted the 1995 Men's US Amateurs and the 2006 U.S. Women's Open.\nBicycling.\nIn the late nineteenth century, Newport became the center of an emerging pastime for young, athletic, upper-class men: bicycling. On May 29, 1880, representatives of 31 cycling clubs convened in Newport to hold a parade and meeting, and formed the League of American Wheelmen, the first national bicycling organization. The League was instrumental in establishing the Good Roads Movement.\nIn fall 2013, Newport was designated a Bronze Bicycle Friendly Community by the League of American Bicyclists.\nBaseball.\nDowntown Newport is home to Cardines Field, one of the oldest ballparks in the country. Since 2001, the venue has played host to the Newport Gulls, a collegiate summer baseball team. Cardines Field has hosted the New England Collegiate Baseball League's All-Star Game and Home Run Derby four times, in 2005, 2010, 2016, and 2021.\nSince its formation in 1919, the amateur George Donnelly Sunset League has played at Cardines Field. Salve Regina University also plays select baseball games at the park.\nOther sports.\nBrenton Point State Park is the site of the annual Brenton Point Kite Festival.\nThe annual Citizens Bank Pell Bridge Run is held every Fall to raise money for local charities.\nBeaches and parks.\nAquidneck Island has several beaches, both public and private. The largest public beach is Easton's beach or First Beach, which has a view of the Newport Cliff Walk. The Cliff Walk is one of the most popular attractions in the city. It is a public access walkway bordering the shoreline and has been designated a National Recreation Trail. Sachuest Beach or Second Beach in Middletown is the second-largest beach in the area. Gooseberry Beach is private but is open to the public on certain days of the year. It is located on Ocean Drive, along with the private beaches, Bailey's Beach and Hazard's Beach. In 2014 Maya Lin, the architect who designed the Vietnam Memorial in Washington D.C., completed a $3.5\u00a0million renovation of Queen Anne Square Park, titled \"The Meeting Room\".\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nNewport Public Schools operates public schools for the area including Claiborne Pell Elementary School, Thompson Middle School, Rogers High School, Newport Area Career and Technical Center, and the Aquidneck Island Adult Learning Center. Prior to 2013, multiple small public elementary schools served the Newport community; the Pell School, a consolidation of those schools, opened in 2013.\nSt. Michael's Country Day School is the only private elementary school in the city. Nearby private primary schools include All Saints Academy in Middletown, The Pennfield School in Portsmouth, and St. Philomena School in Portsmouth. Nearby private secondary schools include Portsmouth Abbey School in Portsmouth and St. George's School in Middletown.\nSt. Joseph of Cluny School was formerly located in Newport, on property given by the estate of Arthur Curtiss James to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Providence in 1941. Military families from Fort Adams requested a Catholic school, so St. Joseph of Cluny opened in September 1957 as a kindergarten and added grades until 1965, when the first eighth-grade graduation was held. Later on, the overall population of Newport declined along with the concentration of middle class families. Much of the housing became too expensive for families with young children, and there were relatively few houses sold to new residents. In addition, many families previously going to the school instead sent their children to the Portsmouth School Department. From 2014 to 2017, the enrollment decreased by a quarter. The school administration stated that this decline and the general competition among private schools in the Newport area meant the operation of the school was no longer viable. It closed in 2017. Betsy Sherman Walker of \"Newport This Week\" described the closure as a \"curveball\", unexpected by the community.\nTertiary education.\nPost-secondary schools include the Naval Academy Preparatory School, Salve Regina University, Naval War College, International Yacht Restoration School, and the Community College of Rhode Island Newport Campus.\nEconomy.\nWhile technology and defense are the largest employment sectors in the region, seasonal tourism is a major economic engine of the city of Newport, including hotels, restaurants, and retail. As of 2013, 89.64% of all private employment in the city of Newport was in the service sector. Retail trade was the third largest sector, with 1,341 jobs. Retail and restaurant employment can swell by as many as 1,500 jobs during the peak summer season.\nPrincipal employers.\nAccording to Newport's 2022 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, the principal employers in the city are:\nSister cities.\nNewport's sister cities are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73355", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73355", "title": "Pioneer Venus Orbiter", "text": "NASA orbiter mission to Venus (1978\u20131992)\nThe Pioneer Venus Orbiter, also known as Pioneer Venus 1 or Pioneer 12, was a mission to Venus conducted by NASA as part of the Pioneer Venus project. Launched in May 1978 atop an Atlas-Centaur rocket, the spacecraft was inserted into an elliptical orbit around Venus on December 4, 1978. It returned data from Venus until October 1992.\nThe spacecraft conducted radar altimetry observations allowing the first global topographic map of the Venusian surface to be constructed.\nSpacecraft.\nManufactured by Hughes Aircraft Company, the \"Pioneer Venus Orbiter\" was based on the HS-507 bus. The spacecraft was a flat cylinder, in diameter and long. All instruments and spacecraft subsystems were mounted on the forward end of the cylinder, except the magnetometer, which was at the end of a boom. A solar array extended around the circumference of the cylinder. A despun dish antenna provided S and X band communication with Earth. A Star 24 solid rocket motor was integrated into the spacecraft to provide the thrust to enter orbit around Venus.\nInstruments.\nThe \"Pioneer Venus Orbiter\" carried 17 experiments with a total mass of :\nOrbiter Cloud Photopolarimeter (OCPP).\nThe Orbiter Cloud Photopolarimeter was used to measure the vertical distribution of clouds on Venus. It was a photo-polarimeter built by the Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS), similar to \"Pioneer 10\" and \"Pioneer 11\" imaging photopolarimeter (IPP). The principal investigator was J. Hansen, later succeeded by L. Travis. The instrument had a mass of 5 kilograms and consumed 5.4 watts of power.\nOrbiter Radar Mapper Instrument (ORAD).\nThe Orbiter Radar Mapper Instrument was designed to determine the topography and surface characteristics of Venus. It was a radar system developed by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), with G. Pettengill serving as the principal investigator. Weighing 9 kilograms and consuming 18 watts, the instrument operated when the spacecraft was within of the planet. It transmitted a 20-watt S-band signal at 1.757 Gigahertz and achieved a surface mapping resolution of at periapsis.\nOrbiter Infrared Radiometer (OIR).\nThe Orbiter Infrared Radiometer was used to measure infrared emissions from Venus's atmosphere. It was constructed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), and the principal investigator was F. Taylor. The instrument had a mass of 5.9 kilograms and required 5.2 watts of power.\nOrbiter Ultraviolet Spectrometer (OUVS).\nThe Orbiter Ultraviolet Spectrometer measured scattered and emitted ultraviolet light from Venus. Built by the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics (LASP), its principal investigator was A.I.F. Stewart. The spectrometer weighed 3.1 kilograms and consumed 1.7 watts of power.\nOrbiter Neutral Mass Spectrometer (ONMS).\nThe Orbiter Neutral Mass Spectrometer was used to determine the composition of Venus's upper atmosphere. Manufactured by the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), it was managed by principal investigator H. Neimann. The instrument had a mass of 3.8 kilograms and consumed 12 watts.\nOrbiter Plasma Analyzer (OPA).\nThe Orbiter Plasma Analyzer measured properties of the solar wind. Developed at the Ames Research Center (ARC), the instrument was led by principal investigator J. Wolfe, who was later succeeded by A. Barnes. It had a mass of 3.9 kilograms and required 5 watts of power.\nOrbiter Magnetometer (OMAG).\nThe Orbiter Magnetometer was designed to characterize Venus\u2019s magnetic field. It was built by the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), with C. Russell as the principal investigator. The 2-kilogram instrument consumed 2.2 watts of power and was mounted on a 4.7-meter boom to reduce spacecraft interference.\nOrbiter Electric Field Detector (OEFD).\nThe Orbiter Electric Field Detector studied electric fields in the Venusian environment. Built by TRW and led by principal investigator F. Scarf, it had a mass of 0.8 kilograms and used only 0.7 watts of power.\nOrbiter Electron Temperature Probe (OETP).\nThe Orbiter Electron Temperature Probe investigated the thermal properties of Venus\u2019s ionosphere. It was developed by the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) under the direction of principal investigator L. Brace. The probe had a mass of 2.2 kilograms and consumed 4.8 watts.\nOrbiter Ion Mass Spectrometer (OIMS).\nThe Orbiter Ion Mass Spectrometer was used to characterize the ion population in the ionosphere of Venus. Built by the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), it was managed by principal investigator H. Taylor. The instrument had a mass of 3 kilograms and required 1.5 watts of power.\nOrbiter Retarding Potential Analyzer (ORPA).\nThe Orbiter Retarding Potential Analyzer studied ionospheric particles. It was developed at the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory (LPARL), with W. Knudsen as the principal investigator. This instrument weighed 2.8 kilograms and consumed 2.4 watts of power.\nOrbiter Gamma-Ray Burst Detector (OGBD).\nThe Orbiter Gamma-Ray Burst Detector recorded gamma-ray burst events. It was constructed by the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory (LASL), and W. Evans served as the principal investigator. The instrument had a mass of 2.8 kilograms.\nExperiments.\nThe orbiter also performed in situ radio science experiments:\nOrbiter Atmospheric Propagation Experiment (OGPE).\nThe OGPE utilized dual-frequency radio signals to investigate how Venus's atmosphere affects radio wave propagation. By analyzing signal attenuation and phase shifts, the experiment aimed to deduce atmospheric properties such as electron density and refractive index. This information is crucial for understanding the structure and composition of Venus's ionosphere. T. Croft from SRI was the principal investigator.\nOrbiter Atmospheric Drag Experiment (OAD).\nThe OAD measured the deceleration of the spacecraft due to atmospheric drag at the fringes of Venus's atmosphere. By tracking changes in the spacecraft's velocity, the experiment provided data on atmospheric density and its variations with altitude and solar activity. G. Keating from LRC was the principal investigator.\nDifferential Long Baseline Interferometry (DLBI).\nDLBI, also known as delta-VLBI, involved simultaneous observations of the spacecraft's radio signals by widely separated Earth-based antennas. By measuring the time difference in signal arrival, the experiment achieved precise spacecraft positioning, enhancing orbit determination and navigation accuracy. \nOrbiter Atmospheric and Solar Wind Turbulence Experiment (OTUR).\nOTUR focused on detecting and analyzing turbulence in Venus's upper atmosphere and the solar wind. By examining fluctuations in radio signal properties, the experiment aimed to understand the dynamic interactions between the solar wind and Venus's ionosphere. T. Croft from SRI was the principal investigator.\nOrbiter Dual-Frequency Occultation (ORO).\nThe ORO experiment employed radio occultation techniques, where the spacecraft's radio signals passed through Venus's atmosphere to Earth. By analyzing changes in signal frequency and amplitude, the experiment derived vertical profiles of atmospheric temperature, pressure, and electron density. A. Kliore from JPL was the principal investigator.\nOrbiter Internal Density Distribution Experiment (OIDD).\nOIDD aimed to map Venus's gravitational field by tracking the spacecraft's orbit perturbations. Variations in gravity indicated differences in mass distribution within the planet, providing insights into its internal structure and composition. R. Phillips from JPL was the principal investigator.\nOrbiter Celestial Mechanics Experiment (OCM).\nThe OCM focused on precise measurements of the spacecraft's trajectory to study Venus's gravitational field and test aspects of celestial mechanics. Data from this experiment contributed to refining models of planetary motion and gravitational interactions. I. Shapiro from MIT was the principal investigator\nTable.\n\"Note: \"\nMission.\nLaunch and arrival at Venus.\nThe \"Pioneer Venus Orbiter\" was launched by an Atlas SLV-3D Centaur-D1AR rocket, which flew from Launch Complex 36A at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. The launch occurred at 13:13:00 (8:13 a.m. local time) on May 20, 1978, and deployed the Orbiter into heliocentric orbit for its coast to Venus. Venus orbit insertion occurred on December 4, 1978.\nObservation of Venus.\nFrom Venus orbit insertion to July 1980, periapsis was held between (at 17 degrees north latitude) to facilitate radar and ionospheric measurements. The spacecraft was in a 24-hour orbit with an apoapsis of . Thereafter, the periapsis was allowed to rise to a maximum of and then fall, to conserve fuel.\nIn 1991, the Radar Mapper was reactivated to investigate previously inaccessible southern portions of the planet, in conjunction with the recently arrived \"Magellan\" spacecraft. In May 1992, the probe began the final phase of its mission, in which the periapsis was held between , until the spacecraft's propellant was exhausted, after which the orbit decayed naturally. The spacecraft continued to return data until 8 October 1992, with the last signals being received at 19:22 UTC. The \"Pioneer Venus Orbiter\" disintegrated upon entering the atmosphere of Venus on October 22, 1992.\nObservation of comets.\nFrom its orbit of Venus, the \"Pioneer Venus Orbiter\" was able to observe Halley's Comet when it was unobservable from Earth due to its proximity to the sun during February 1986. UV spectrometer observations monitored the loss of water from the comet's nucleus at perihelion on February 9.\nThe extended mission allowed the spacecraft controllers to make several comet observations that were never part of the original mission objectives. The tilt of the spacecraft was altered during these comet observations so that the Ultraviolet Spectrometer (OUVS) could view the comets rather than Venus. Comets Encke (April 13\u201316, 1984), Giacobini-Zinner (September 8\u201315, 1985), Halley (December 27, 1985 - March 9, 1986), Wilson (March 13 - May 2, 1987), NTT (April 8, 1987), and McNaught (November 19\u201324, 1987) were all observed in this way.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73356", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73356", "title": "Fernandel", "text": "French actor (1903-1971)\nFernand Joseph D\u00e9sir\u00e9 Contandin (; 8 May 1903 \u2013 26 February 1971), better known as Fernandel (), was a French comic actor. Born in Marseille, France, to D\u00e9sir\u00e9e Bedouin and Denis Contandin, originating in Perosa Argentina, a town located in the province of Turin, Italy, he became a comedy star, first gaining popularity in French vaudeville, operettas, and music-hall revues. His stage name originated from his marriage to Henriette Manse, the sister of his best friend and frequent cinematic collaborator Jean Manse. So attentive was he to his wife that his mother-in-law amusingly referred to him as \"Fernand d'elle\" (\"Fernand of her\").\nBiography.\nAppearing as Fernandel since 1922, in 1930, Fernandel appeared in his first motion picture and for more than forty years he would be one of France's top comic actors. He was perhaps best loved for his portrayal of the irascible Italian village priest at war with the town's Communist mayor in the \"Don Camillo\" series of motion pictures. His horse-like teeth became part of his trademark.\nHe also appeared in Italian and American films. His first Hollywood motion picture was 1956's \"Around the World in 80 Days\" in which he played David Niven's coachman. His popular performance in that film led to his starring with Bob Hope and Anita Ekberg in the 1958 comedy \"Paris Holiday\".\nIn addition to acting, Fernandel also directed or co-produced several of his own films. His profile was raised in Britain by the 60s TV advertisements for Dubonnet in which he would say \"Do 'Ave A Dubonnet\"\nFernandel died from lung cancer and is buried in the Cimeti\u00e8re de Passy, Paris, France.\nFamily.\nHe had two daughters, Josette (1926) and Janine (1930), and a son Franck (1935). His son, known as Franck Fernandel, became an actor and a singer. Franck acted alongside his father in two films, Gilles Grangier's \"L'\u00c2ge ingrat\" and Georges Bianchi's \"En avant la musique\".\nLiterature.\nIn \"The Stranger\" by Albert Camus, Meursault and his female friend Marie Cordona watch a movie starring Fernandel on the day after the funeral of Meursault's mother. According to Meursault, \"The movie was funny in parts, but otherwise it was just too stupid.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73357", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73357", "title": "Pioneer Venus project", "text": "Two spacecraft sent to Venus in 1978\nThe Pioneer Venus project was part of the Pioneer program consisting of two spacecraft, the Pioneer Venus Orbiter and the Pioneer Venus Multiprobe, launched to Venus in 1978. The program was managed by NASA's Ames Research Center.\nThe Pioneer Venus Orbiter entered orbit around Venus on December 4, 1978, and performed observations to characterize the atmosphere and surface of Venus. It continued to transmit data until October 1992.\nThe Pioneer Venus Multiprobe deployed four small probes into the Venusian atmosphere on December 9, 1978. All four probes transmitted data throughout their descent to the surface. One probe survived the landing and transmitted data from the surface for over an hour.\nOverview.\nThe Pioneer mission consisted of two components, launched separately: an orbiter and a multiprobe.\nOrbiter.\nThe orbiter was launched on May 20, 1978 on an Atlas-Centaur rocket. The orbiter's mass was . The Pioneer Venus Orbiter was inserted into an elliptical orbit around Venus on December 4, 1978. It carried 17 experiments (with a total mass of 45\u00a0kg): \nIn May 1992 the orbiter began the final phase of its mission, in which the periapsis was held between 150 and 250\u00a0km until the fuel ran out and atmospheric entry destroyed the spacecraft in August 1992.\nMultiprobe.\nThe Pioneer Venus Multiprobe was launched on August 8, 1978 on an Atlas-Centaur rocket. It consisted of a 290\u00a0kg bus which carried one large (315\u00a0kg) and three small atmospheric probes. The large probe was released on November 16, 1978 and the three small probes on November 20. All four probes entered the Venus atmosphere on December 9, followed by the bus.\nThe Pioneer Venus large probe was about 1.5 m in diameter and equipped with 7 science experiments. After deceleration from initial atmospheric entry at about 11.5\u00a0km/s, a parachute was deployed at 47\u00a0km altitude. The probe stopped broadcasting when it impacted the surface. The science experiments were: \nThe three small probes were identical to each other, 0.8 m in diameter and 90\u00a0kg each small probe. The small probes were each targeted at different parts of the planet; They had no parachutes and the aeroshells did not separate from the probe. Two of the small probes reached the surface, and one of these, the day probe, continued to broadcast for 67 minutes and 37 seconds after reaching the surface.\nThe Pioneer Venus bus also carried two experiments, a neutral mass spectrometer and an ion mass spectrometer to study the composition of the atmosphere. With no heat shield or parachute, the bus made measurements only to about 110\u00a0km altitude before burning up.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73358", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73358", "title": "Venera program", "text": ""}
{"id": "73360", "revid": "14940", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73360", "title": "Lyapunov fractal", "text": "Type of fractal\nIn mathematics, Lyapunov fractals (also known as Markus\u2013Lyapunov fractals) are bifurcational fractals derived from an extension of the logistic map in which the degree of the growth of the population, \"r\", periodically switches between two values \"A\" and \"B\".\nA Lyapunov fractal is constructed by mapping the regions of stability and chaotic behaviour (measured using the Lyapunov exponent formula_1) in the \"a\"\u2212\"b\" plane for given periodic sequences of \"a\" and \"b\". In the images, yellow corresponds to formula_2 (stability), and blue corresponds to formula_3 (chaos).\nLyapunov fractals were discovered in the late 1980s by the Germano-Chilean physicist Mario Markus from the Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology. They were introduced to a large public by a science popularization article on recreational mathematics published in Scientific American in 1991.\nProperties.\nLyapunov fractals are generally drawn for values of \"A\" and \"B\" in the interval formula_4. For larger values, the interval [0,1] is no longer stable, and the sequence is likely to be attracted by infinity, although convergent cycles of finite values continue to exist for some parameters. For all iteration sequences, the diagonal \"a = b\" is always the same as for the standard one parameter logistic function.\nThe sequence is usually started at the value 0.5, which is a critical point of the iterative function. The other (even complex valued) critical points of the iterative function during one entire round are those that pass through the value 0.5 in the first round. A convergent cycle must attract at least one critical point. Therefore, all convergent cycles can be obtained by just shifting the iteration sequence, and keeping the starting value 0.5. In practice, shifting this sequence leads to changes in the fractal, as some branches get covered by others. For instance, the Lyapunov fractal for the iteration sequence AB (see top figure on the right) is not perfectly symmetric with respect to \"a\" and \"b\".\nAlgorithm.\nThe algorithm for computing Lyapunov fractals works as follows:\nMore dimensions.\nLyapunov fractals can be calculated in more than two dimensions. The sequence string for a \"n\"-dimensional fractal has to be built from an alphabet with \"n\" characters, e.g. \"ABBBCA\" for a 3D fractal, which can be visualized either as 3D object or as an animation showing a \"slice\" in the C direction for each animation frame, like the example given here.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73362", "revid": "1164328119", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73362", "title": "Visualization", "text": "Visualization or visualisation may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "73363", "revid": "1812441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73363", "title": "Callista", "text": "Callista, also spelled Calista, Callistee, Kallista, Kalista and Kallistee, comes from the Greek for \"most beautiful (feminine)\" (\u03ba\u03b1\u03bb\u03bb\u03af\u03c3\u03c4\u03b7 \u2013 \"kall\u00edst\u0113\").\nCallista may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "73364", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73364", "title": "Fraxinus quadrangulata", "text": "Species of ash\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFraxinus quadrangulata, the blue ash, is a species of ash native primarily to the Midwestern United States from Oklahoma to Michigan, as well as the Bluegrass region of Kentucky and the Nashville Basin region of Tennessee. Isolated populations exist in Alabama, Southern Ontario, and small sections of the Appalachian Mountains. It is typically found over calcareous substrates such as limestone, growing on limestone slopes and in moist valley soils, at elevations of .\nDescription.\nBlue ash is a medium sized deciduous tree typically reaching a height of with a trunk in diameter. The twigs typically have four corky ridges, a distinctive feature giving them a square appearance (in cross-section), hence the species name, \"quadrangulata\", meaning four-angled. The winter buds are reddish-brown. The leaves are long, with 5\u201311 (most often 7) leaflets, the leaflets long and broad, with a coarsely serrated margin and short but distinct petiolules. The flowers are small and purplish, produced in the early spring before the leaves appear. The fruit is a samara long and broad, including the wing.\nHistory and uses.\nThe name blue ash is derived from the black dye extracted from the tree's inner bark through immersion in water. European colonists and American pioneers used this dye to color yarn for use in the production of textiles, sewing, crocheting, knitting, weaving, and embroidery. Blue Ash wood is used to make flooring, baseball bats, furniture, tool handles, crates and barrels. The city of Blue Ash, Ohio, an inner suburb of Cincinnati, drew its name from the blue ash trees in the area, the logs of which were used to build many of the community's earliest buildings.\nNorth American native ash tree species are used by North American frogs as a critical food source, as the leaves that fall from the trees are particularly suitable for tadpoles to feed upon in ponds (both temporary and permanent), large puddles, and other water sources. Species such as red maple, which are taking the place of ash, due to the ash borer, are much less suitable for the frogs as a food source\u2014resulting in poor frog survival rates and small frog sizes. It is the lack of tannins in the American ash varieties that makes them good for the frogs as a food source and also not resistant to the ash borer. Varieties of ash from outside North America typically have much higher tannin levels and resist the borer. Maples and various non-native invasive trees, which are taking the place of American ash species in the North American ecosystem, typically have much higher leaf tannin levels. It is possible that the blue ash's increased resistance to the borer, as compared with other North American varieties, is due to a higher tannin content. If that is the case, the blue ash is less palatable for maturing frogs than those most threatened by the borer. Black Ash species native to North America also provide important habitat and food for various other creatures that are native to North America.\nConservation status.\nAs of 2014, blue ash appears to be least threatened in comparison to other North American ash by the infestation of the emerald ash borer. First detected in North America in 2002, this invasive beetle has since spread throughout much of this tree's range. Approximately sixty to seventy percent of these trees survive compared to other ash such as black ash and green ash where up to ninety-nine percent of them are killed by emerald ash borer. In 2017, the blue ash, along with other ashes native to the Eastern United States such as the black ash, green ash and white ash were assessed as Critically Endangered by the IUCN. This is due to the non-native invasive emerald ash borer's massive population increase across the native habitat of these trees.\nIn Canada, \"Fraxinus quadrangulata\" is legally protected as a threatened species under the Species at Risk Act. \"F. quadrangulata\" is found in Ontario and has experienced habitat fragmentation within that portion of its range. Ongoing threats to this species in Canada may include white-tailed deer browsing of young trees and emerald ash borer activity, although the impact of these threats is not well defined at present.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73365", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73365", "title": "Oola", "text": "Village in County Limerick, Ireland\nOola (, meaning 'round hillocks' or ) is a village in County Limerick in Ireland. It is near the border with County Tipperary in the midwest of the country. The village is home to a Catholic church (Church of the Sacred Heart), a petrol station, a convenience store, two public houses, a GAA pitch, a post office, a takeaway, a betting shop, a credit union, a hall, and a chemist. As of the 2016 census, Oola had a population of 324 inhabitants. The village is in a civil parish of the same name.\nHistory.\nThe ruins of Oola Castle stand close to the village and in 1825, some large and perfect antlers of the Irish elk were discovered; and, in 1828, a brazen trumpet, and spear and arrowheads of bronze were found, which were placed in the museum of Trinity College, Dublin.\nTransport.\nThe main N24 road from Limerick to Waterford passes through the town, with the town of Tipperary lying 12 kilometres southeast of Oola.\nThough the town is no longer connected to the rail network, the important station at Limerick Junction is nearby, 5\u00a0km to the south-east. Oola railway station opened on 9 May 1848 and finally closed on 9 September 1963.\nOola is on Bus \u00c9ireann's \"Expressway\" route no. 55, which runs between Limerick and Waterford several times a day.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73366", "revid": "49291638", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73366", "title": "The Band Wagon", "text": "1953 musical film by Vincente Minnelli\nThe Band Wagon is a 1953 American musical romantic comedy film directed by Vincente Minnelli, starring Fred Astaire and Cyd Charisse. The plot follows an aging musical star who hopes a Broadway show will revive his career, but the play's director envisions a pretentious retelling of \"Faust\" and brings in a \"prima ballerina\" who clashes with the star. Although initially a box-office disappointment, the film is now regarded among the finest Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer musicals, alongside \"An American in Paris\" (1951) and \"Singin' in the Rain\" (1952).\nProlific Hollywood composer Arthur Schwartz and lyricist Howard Dietz wrote the songs, with orchestrations by Conrad Salinger, and dance and musical numbers staged by Michael Kidd. Schwartz and Dietz adapted parts of the score from their 1931 Broadway revue \"The Band Wagon\", starring siblings Fred and Adele Astaire. The song \"Dancing in the Dark\", from the original Broadway production, is considered part of the Great American Songbook. Schwartz and Dietz wrote the song \"That's Entertainment!\" specifically for the film, a notable hit that subsequently became a standard in popular music. \nAstaire's early number in the film, \"A Shine on Your Shoes\", was written for the 1932 Broadway revue \"Flying Colors\", with score by Schwartz and Dietz. (It was originally performed by the dancing team of Buddy and Vilma Ebsen). For \"The Band Wagon\" film, the song was reworked as a specialty number by jazz arranger Skip Martin to showcase all of Astaire's musical talents. The song is the only time Astaire danced on-screen with a black dancer, the uncredited Leroy Daniels.\nThe musical director was Adolph Deutsch and the production was designed by Oliver Smith working for the first time in motion pictures. The film was nominated for Academy Awards for Best Costume Design, Color, Best Music, Scoring of a Musical Picture and Best Writing, Story and Screenplay.\nScreenwriters Betty Comden and Adolph Green, who received the nomination for the screenplay, patterned the film's characters Lester and Lily Marton after themselves; however, the fictional characters were a married couple, and Comden and Green were not romantically involved. The character of an overachieving impresario was developed with the successful producer-director-actor Jos\u00e9 Ferrer in mind.\nIn 1995, \"The Band Wagon\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". In 2006, this film ranked number 17 on the American Film Institute's list of best musicals.\nPlot.\nTony Hunter, once a famous star of musical comedies on stage and later on screen, is largely forgotten after three years without appearing in a film. He returns from Hollywood to New York. At Grand Central Terminal, he is recognized but almost ignored by reporters who are there by chance as Ava Gardner is on the same train. However, he is greeted enthusiastically by his good friends Lester and Lily Marton, and they tell him they have written a stage show, a light musical comedy, that will be a perfect comeback for Tony. They will also act in it, and they already have caught the interest of Jeffrey Cordova, who they say can do anything: Currently he is starring in, as well as directing, a new adaptation of \"Oedipus Rex\" that he wrote based on the original Greek story.\nAs soon as Jeffrey hears Lily outline the play, he declares it to be a brilliant reinterpretation of the \"Faust\" legend, which should star Tony and himself as the characters corresponding to Faust and the Devil. The Martons are delighted that he will be acting as well as directing, but Tony is dubious about the \"Faust\" idea. Jeffrey declares that the boundaries between genres in the theater are artificial, and \"Bill Shakespeare\" and Bill Robinson are all parts of the same whole. Tony agrees, and Jeffrey has the Martons rewrite the play as a dark, pretentious musical drama (when Lester also becomes dubious, Lily insists that one person must be in charge and Jeffrey can succeed at anything).\nJeffrey does succeed in arranging for the beautiful and talented ballerina Gabrielle \"Gaby\" Gerard to join the production, along with Paul Byrd, who is her boyfriend, choreographer, and manager\u2014even though he always insisted that a musical play would be beneath her. When Tony and Gaby meet, they become sarcastic and hostile to each other, but this is actually because they are insecure: Each of them feels much less talented than the other.\nEventually, it all proves too much for Tony, and he walks out. Gaby follows to meet him privately. In his hotel room, she comments that the paintings by famous artists on the wall are better reproductions than usual in a hotel; he says they are his own property, and are originals. She recognizes a painting of ballerinas as an early Degas. Tony and Gaby put their troubles aside, go for a horse-drawn carriage ride, dance together, and realize they can work together after all. They also begin to fall in love.\nWhen the first out-of-town tryout in New Haven proves disastrous, Tony demands that Jeffrey convert the production back into the light comedy that the Martons had envisioned. Jeffrey says that while they will have to find new backers because the original ones have walked out, he will be happy to appear in that show\u2014if Tony is in charge of it. Tony accepts, using his art collection to finance the production. Paul says the show is no longer suitable for Gaby and walks out, expecting her to follow, but she is pleased to stay and work with Tony.\nAfter some weeks on tour to perfect the new lighthearted musical numbers, the revised show proves to be a hit on its Broadway opening. Gaby professes her love to Tony.\nCast.\nUncredited\nMusical numbers.\nSource:\nOne musical number shot for the film, but dropped from the final release, was a seductive dance routine featuring Charisse performing \"Two-Faced Woman\". As with the other Charisse songs, her singing was dubbed by India Adams. Adams' recording of the song was reused for \"Torch Song\" (1953) for a musical number featuring Joan Crawford. The MGM retrospective \"That's Entertainment! III\" (1994) released the Charisse version to the public for the first time. This footage was included with the 2005 DVD release of \"The Band Wagon\".\nRelease.\nIn seven weeks at Radio City Music Hall in New York City, the film grossed $1,044,000, one of the higher grossing films at the theater. According to MGM records, the film earned distributor rentals of $2.3\u00a0million in the U.S. and Canada and $1,202,000 in other countries, resulting in a loss of $1,185,000.\nReception.\nIn a 1999 \"Guardian\" article about the importance of the film, Derek Desmond wrote: \"But the whole point about The Band Wagon, and one which sometimes makes people underrate it, was the way everything seems to mesh so seamlessly\u2014almost effortlessly, in fact. That was due to Minnelli, whose flair and imagination, admittedly aided by the huge array of MGM talent both behind and in front of the cameras, was matched by his almost perfect control.\" Pauline Kael wrote: \"The Comden-Green script isn't as consistently fresh as the one they did for \"Singin' in the Rain\" but there have been few screen musicals as good as this one, starring those two great song-and-dance men Fred Astaire and Jack Buchanan.\" Leslie Halliwell lauded the film: \"Simple but sophisticated musical with the bare minimum of plot, told mostly in jokes, and the maximum of music and song... Level of technical accomplishment very high.\" Leonard Maltin gave it four of four stars: \"Sophisticated backstage musical improves with each viewing.\"\nMartin Scorsese listed \"The Band Wagon\" as his favorite musical.\nStage adaptation.\nA musical stage adaptation, titled \"Dancing in the Dark\", ran at the Old Globe Theatre in San Diego from March 4 to April 20, 2008, with plans to bring the show to Broadway. Gary Griffin directed, with a book by Douglas Carter Beane and choreography by Warren Carlyle. The cast included Patrick Page as the \"deliciously pretentious\" director-actor-producer Jeffrey Cordova, Mara Davi playing Gabrielle Gerard, and Scott Bakula as \"song-and-dance man\" Tony Hunter.\nIn the \"Variety\" review of the musical, Bob Verini wrote: \"There's no reason this reconstituted \"Band Wagon\" can't soar once it jettisons its extraneous and self-contradictory elements.\"\nA revised version of the stage adaptation under the name \"The Band Wagon\" was presented in a staged concert in November 2014 as part of a New York City Center Encores! special event. The cast starred Brian Stokes Mitchell, Tracey Ullman, Michael McKean, Tony Sheldon, and Laura Osnes, with direction and choreography by Kathleen Marshall.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73367", "revid": "49480732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73367", "title": "Big business", "text": "Large-scale corporate organisation\nBig business involves large-scale corporate-controlled financial or business activities. As a term, it describes activities that run from \"huge transactions\" to the more general \"doing big things\". In corporate jargon, the concept is commonly known as enterprise, or activities involving enterprise customers.\nThe concept first rose in a symbolic sense after 1880 in connection with the combination movement that began in American business at that time. Some examples of American corporations that fall into the category of \"big business\" as of 2015[ [update]] are ExxonMobil, Walmart, Google, Microsoft, Apple, General Electric, General Motors, JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, Citigroup, and Goldman Sachs; in the United States, big businesses in general are sometimes collectively pejoratively called \"corporate America\". The largest German corporations as of 2012[ [update]] included Daimler AG, Deutsche Telekom, Siemens, and Deutsche Bank. SAP is Germany's largest software company. Among the largest companies in the United Kingdom as of 2012[ [update]] are HSBC, Barclays, WPP plc, and BP. The latter half of the 19th century saw more technological advances and corporate growth in additional sectors, such as petroleum, machinery, chemicals, and electrical equipment (see Second Industrial Revolution).\nIn the sphere of enterprise software, beyond the functional level, an enterprise edition would emphasize institutional concerns around software security, fault tolerance, geographic redundancy, disaster recovery, dispersed operational collaboration with administrative teams large enough to have internal sub-departments, and multilingual and localized functionality that spans the global marketplace. Procurement, validation and regulatory compliance of large systems at the enterprise scale often involves a multi-year planning cycle.\nHistory.\nOrigin of term.\nThe Oxford English Dictionary identifies the first use of the term, in 1905, to be in \"The City: The Hope of Democracy\", Frederic C. Howe.\nEarly 20th century.\nThe automotive industry began modestly in the late-19th century, but grew rapidly following the development of large-scale gasoline production in the early 20th century.\nPost-World War II.\nThe relatively stable period of rebuilding after World War II led to new technologies (some of which were spin-offs from the war years) and new businesses.\nComputers.\nThe new technology of computers spread worldwide in the post war years. Businesses built around computer technology include: IBM, Microsoft, Apple Inc., Samsung, and Intel.\nElectronics.\nMiniaturization and integrated circuits, together with an expansion of radio and television technologies, provided fertile ground for business development. Electronics businesses include JVC, Sony (Masaru Ibuka and Akio Morita), and Texas Instruments (Cecil H. Green, J. Erik Jonsson, Eugene McDermott, and Patrick E. Chodery), while also the companies in the computer-section above can be considered electronics.\nEnergy.\nNuclear power was added to fossil fuel as the main sources of energy.\nCriticism of big business.\nThe social consequences of the concentration of economic power in the hands of those persons controlling \"big business\" has been a constant concern both of economists and of politicians since the end of the 19th century. Various attempts have been made to investigate the effects of \"bigness\" upon labor, consumers, and investors, as well as upon prices and competition. \"Big business\" has been accused of a wide variety of misdeeds that range from the exploitation of the working class to the corruption of politicians and the fomenting of war. Attitudes toward big business have fluctuated; Americans generally had a favorable view of big business in the 1950s, which would worsen drastically in a generation later.\nInfluence over government.\nCorporate concentration can lead to influence over government in areas such as tax policy, trade policy, environmental policy, foreign policy, and labor policy through lobbying. In 2005, the majority of Americans believed that big business has \"too much power in Washington.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73368", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73368", "title": "The Big Parade", "text": "1925 film\nThe Big Parade is a 1925 American silent war drama film directed by King Vidor, starring John Gilbert, Ren\u00e9e Ador\u00e9e, Hobart Bosworth, Tom O'Brien, and Karl Dane. Written by World War I veteran Laurence Stallings, the film is about an idle rich boy who joins the U.S. Army's Rainbow Division, is sent to France to fight in World War I, becomes a friend of two working-class men, experiences the horrors of trench warfare, and finds love with a French girl. A sound version of the film was released in 1930. While the sound version of the film has no audible dialog, it featured a synchronized musical score with sound effects using both the sound-on-disc and sound-on-film process.\nThe film has been praised for its realistic depiction of warfare, and it heavily influenced a great many subsequent war films, especially \"All Quiet on the Western Front\" (1930). \"The Big Parade\" is regarded as one of the greatest films made about World War I, and, in 1992, was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress.\nPlot.\nIn the United States in 1917, James \"Jim\" Apperson's idleness, in contrast to his hardworking brother, incurs the great displeasure of his wealthy businessman father. Then America enters World War I. Jim informs his worried mother that he has no intention of enlisting, and his father threatens to kick him out of the house if he does not join. However, when he runs into his patriotic friends at a send-off parade, he is persuaded to enlist, making his father very proud.\nDuring training, Jim makes friendships with Southern construction worker Slim and Bronx bartender Bull. Their unit ships out to France, where they are billeted at a farm in the village of Champillon in the Marne.\nAll three men are attracted to Melisande, whose mother owns the farm. She repulses all their advances, but gradually warms to Jim, bonding at first over chewing gum. They eventually fall in love, despite not being able to speak each other's language. One day, however, Jim receives a letter and a photograph from Justyn, which reveals that they are engaged. When Melisande sees the picture, she realizes the situation and runs off in tears. Before Jim can decide what to do, his unit is ordered to the front. Melisande hears the commotion and races back, just in time for the lovers to embrace and kiss.\nThe Americans march towards the front and are strafed by an enemy fighter before it is shot down. The unit is sent to the attack immediately, advancing against snipers and machine guns in the woods, then more machine guns, artillery, and poison gas in the open. They settle down in a makeshift line. Jim shelters in a shellhole with Slim and Bull.\nThat night, orders come down for one man to go out and eliminate a troublesome mortar crew; Slim wins a spitting contest for the opportunity. He succeeds, but is spotted and wounded on the way back. After listening to Slim's pleas for help, Jim cannot stand it any longer and goes to his rescue against orders. Bull follows, but is shot and killed. By the time Jim reaches Slim, he is already dead. Jim is then shot in the leg. When a German comes to finish him off, Jim shoots and wounds him. The German starts crawling back to his line. Jim catches up to him in another shellhole, but, face to face, cannot bring himself to finish him off with his bayonet. Instead, he gives his erstwhile enemy a cigarette. Soon after, the German dies. However, Jim is not stuck in no man's land for long; the Americans attack, and he is taken away to a hospital.\nFrom another patient, he learns that Champillon has changed hands four times. Worried about Melisande, Jim sneaks out of the hospital and hitches a ride. When he gets to the farmhouse, he finds it damaged and empty. Melisande and her mother have joined a stream of refugees. Jim collapses and is carried off in an ambulance by retreating soldiers.\nAfter the war ends, Jim goes home to America. Before he arrives, his mother overhears Justyn and Jim's brother Harry discussing what to do; in Jim's absence, they have fallen in love. When Jim appears, it is revealed that he has had his leg amputated. Later, Jim tells his mother about Melisande; she tells him to go back and find her. When he returns to the farm, Melisande rushes into his arms.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* John Gilbert as James Apperson\nMusic.\nThe 1930 sound version featured a number of songs. The theme song was entitled \u201cMy Dream of the Big Parade\u201d and was composed by Al Dubin (words) and Jimmy McHugh (music). Other songs featured on the soundtrack include \u201cI\u2019m Gonna Tramp Tramp Tramp\u201d by B. G. DeSylva and Harry Woods, \u201cSweet Little Woman of Mine\u201d by Frank Stanton (words) and Floy Little Bartlett\nand Y. Ener (music).\nReception.\n\"The Big Parade\" was one of the great hits of the 1920s earning gross rentals of $4,990,000 in the United States and $1,141,000 overseas on a budget of $382,000 during its initial release, with MGM recording a profit of $3.4 million, its biggest of the silent era. The domestic earnings were MGM's biggest until the release of \"Gone with the Wind\" (1939). It played in some larger cities continually for a year or more, boosting Gilbert's career and made Ren\u00e9e Ador\u00e9e a major star, although Ador\u00e9e would soon be diagnosed with tuberculosis and die only a few years later. Its release in some nations of the British Empire was initially delayed to resolve claims that the film, in focusing only on America's part in the war, was propaganda. The film ultimately grossed $18\u2013$22 million in worldwide rentals and is sometimes proclaimed as the most successful film of the silent era, although it is most likely this record falls to \"The Birth of a Nation\" (1915). The film won the \"Photoplay\" Magazine Medal for best film of the year in 1925. The medal is considered the first significant annual movie award, prior to the establishment of the Oscars.\nAfter the film's producers found a clause in Vidor's contract that entitled the director to 20% of the net profits, studio lawyers called for a meeting with him. At the meeting, accountants upgraded the costs of the picture and downgraded their forecast of its potential success. Vidor was thus persuaded to sell his stake in the film before he could receive his percentage. However, the film's tremendous success established Vidor as one of MGM's top directors.\nLegacy.\n\"The Big Parade\" survives in a print of the 1930 sound version. The original silent version is now lost. In 1992, \"The Big Parade\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nAlthough the surviving print had the original 1930 soundtrack consisting of William Axt's musical score, the version released to the public had the score replaced with a modern one. Composer Carl Davis created a new orchestral score for the film in the 1980s (quoting the theme associated with Melisande in Axt's original setting), and it was added to the film and released on video in the late 1980s as part of the MGM and British television Thames Silents project. The original 1930 35mm negative was subsequently discovered intact, and has been the source for theatrical showings and the DVD and Blu-ray editions (Blu-ray was released October 1, 2013). In spite of the fact that William Axt's synchronized score survives the film was again released with a modern score that bears no resemblance to the original score.\nThe 2013 DVD and Blu-ray Warner Home Video release of \"The Big Parade\" features the most complete TCM print of running time 151 minutes. It also contains an audio commentary track by film historian Jeffrey Vance (with excerpts from King Vidor's oral history with the Directors Guild of America). In February 2020, the film was shown at the 70th Berlin International Film Festival, as part of a retrospective dedicated to King Vidor's career.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73369", "revid": "293724", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73369", "title": "Montpellier", "text": " \nMontpellier (; ) is a city in southern France near the Mediterranean Sea. One of the largest urban centres in the region of Occitania, Montpellier is the prefecture of the department of H\u00e9rault. At the 2020 census, 299,096 people lived in the city proper, while its metropolitan area had a population of 813,272. The inhabitants are called \"Montpelli\u00e9rains\". \nIn the Middle Ages, Montpellier was an important city of the Crown of Aragon (and was the birthplace of James I), and then of Majorca, before its sale to France in 1349. Established in 1220, the University of Montpellier is one of the oldest universities in the world and has the oldest medical school still in operation, with notable alumni such as Petrarch, Nostradamus and Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais. Above the medieval city, the ancient citadel of Montpellier is a stronghold built in the seventeenth century by Louis XIII.\nSince the 1990s, Montpellier has experienced one of the strongest economic and demographic growths in the country. Its urban area has experienced the highest population growth in France since the year 2000. Numbering 70,000, students comprise nearly one-fourth of its population, one of the highest such proportions in Europe. Its living environment, with one of Europe's largest pedestrian areas, along with its rich cultural life and Mediterranean climate, explains the enthusiasm for the city, which is nicknamed the \"Gifted\". Montpellier was nominated for \"Best Emerging Culture City of the Year 2017\" by the think tank LCD. It is ranked as a Sufficiency city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.\nStatus.\nMontpellier is the third-largest French city near the Mediterranean coast, behind Marseille and Nice. It is the seventh-largest city of France, and has also been the fastest-growing city in the country for 25\u00a0years.\nHistory.\nMedieval period.\nIn the Early Middle Ages, the nearby episcopal town of Maguelone was the major settlement in the area but raids by pirates encouraged settlement a little farther inland. In 737 Charles Martel destroyed Maguelone.\nMontpellier, first mentioned in a document of 985, was founded under a local feudal dynasty, the Guilhem, who combined two hamlets and built a castle and walls around the united settlement. The name is from medieval Latin \"mons pisleri\", \"Woad Mountain\" referring to the woad (Latin \"pastellus\", \"pestellus\") used for dyeing locally. There is no real \"mountain\" in the area, with the \"mons\" referring to a pile of stones. In 986 the Lords of Montpellier begin with William I of Montpellier. In the 10th century the town consisted of two portions, Montpellier and Montpelli\u00e9ret. In 1160 the law school was active.\nThe two surviving towers of the city walls, the \"Tour des Pins\" and the \"Tour de la Babotte\", were built later, around the year 1200. Montpellier came to prominence in the 12th century\u2014as a trading centre, with trading links across the Mediterranean world, and a rich Jewish cultural life that flourished within traditions of tolerance of Muslims, Jews and Cathars\u2014and later of its Protestants. William VIII of Montpellier gave freedom for all to teach medicine in Montpellier in 1180. The city's faculties of law and medicine were established in 1220 by Cardinal Conrad of Urach, legate of Pope Honorius III; the medical faculty has, over the centuries, been one of the major centres for the teaching of medicine in Europe. This era marked the high point of Montpellier's prominence. The city became a possession of the Kings of Aragon in 1204 by the marriage of Peter II of Aragon with Marie of Montpellier, who was given the city and its dependencies as part of her dowry.\nMontpellier gained a charter in 1204 when Peter and Marie confirmed the city's traditional freedoms and granted the city the right to choose twelve governing consuls annually. Under the Kings of Aragon, Montpellier became a very important city, a major economic centre and the primary centre for the spice trade in the Kingdom of France. It was the second or third most important city of France at that time, with some 40,000 inhabitants before the Black Death. Montpellier remained a possession of the crown of Aragon until it passed to James III of Majorca, who sold the city to the French king Philip VI in 1349, to raise funds for his ongoing struggle with Peter IV of Aragon.\nFrom the middle of the 14th century until the French Revolution (1789), Montpellier was part of the province of Languedoc.\nRenaissance.\nIn the 14th century, Pope Urban VIII gave Montpellier a new monastery dedicated to Saint Peter, noteworthy for the very unusual porch of its chapel, supported by two high, somewhat rocket-like towers. With its importance steadily increasing, the city finally gained a bishop, who moved from Maguelone in 1536, and the huge monastery chapel became a cathedral. In 1432, Jacques C\u0153ur established himself in the city and it became an important economic centre, until 1481 when Marseilles overshadowed it in this role.\nAfter the Reformation.\nAt the time of the Reformation in the 16th century, many of the inhabitants of Montpellier became Protestants (or Huguenots as they were known in France) and the city became a stronghold of Protestant resistance to the Catholic French crown. Montpellier was among the most important of the 66 ('cities of protection' or 'protected cities') that the Edict of Nantes granted to the Huguenots. The city's political institutions and the university were all handed over to the Huguenots. \nIncreasing tension with Paris led to King Louis XIII besieging the city in 1622. The city surrendered after a two-month siege. Peace terms called for the dismantling of the city's fortifications and the building of the royal Citadel of Montpellier to secure the city for the government. The university and consulate were taken over by the Catholic party. Even before the Edict of Al\u00e8s in 1629, Protestant rule was dead and the was no more.\nLouis XIV made Montpellier capital of Bas Languedoc, and the town started to embellish itself, by building the Promenade du Peyrou, the Esplanade and a large number of houses in the historic centre.\nFrench Revolution.\nAfter the French Revolution, the city became the capital of the much smaller Department of H\u00e9rault. \nModern history.\nDuring the 19th century the city thrived on the wine culture that it was able to produce due to the abundance of sun throughout the year. The wine consumption in France allowed Montpellier's citizens to become very wealthy until in the 1890s the phylloxera induced fungal disease had spread amongst the vineyards and the people were no longer able to grow the grapes needed for wine. \nDuring the repression of January and February 1894, the police conducted raids targeting the anarchists living there, without much success.\nAfter this the city grew because it welcomed French repatriates from Algeria and other parts of northern Africa after Algeria's independence from France. In the 21st century Montpellier is between France's number seventh and eighth largest city. The city had another influx in population more recently, largely due to the student population, who make up about one-fourth of Montpellier's population. The school of medicine kickstarted the city's thriving university culture, though many other universities have been well established there. The coastal city also benefited in the past 40 years from major construction programs such as Antigone, Port Marianne and Odysseum districts.\nGeography.\nThe city is situated on hilly ground inland from the Mediterranean coast, on the river Lez.\nMontpellier is located from Marseille, from Toulouse, and from Paris.\nMontpellier's highest point is the Place du Peyrou, at an altitude of . The city is built on two hills, Montpellier and Montpelli\u00e9ret, thus some of its streets have great differences of altitude. Some of its streets are also very narrow and old, which gives it a more intimate feel.\nClimate.\nMontpellier has a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Csa\"), with cool, damp winters, and hot, rather dry summers. The monthly mean ranges from in January to in July. Precipitation is around , and is greatest in fall and winter, but not absent in summer, either. Extreme temperatures have ranged from recorded on 5 February 1963 and up to on 28 June 2019.\nNeighborhoods.\nSince 2001, Montpellier has been divided into seven official neighbourhoods, themselves divided into sub-neighbourhoods. Each of them possesses a neighbourhood council.\nPopulation.\nThe whole metropolitan area had a population of 813,272 at the 2020 census. In a study made by INSEE from 2007 to 2012 Montpellier saw the strongest population growth of France's main communes (+1.1%), ahead of Paris and Lyon. For most of its history, and even today, Montpellier has been known for its significant Spanish population, heritage and influence. Montpellier also houses significant Moroccan, Algerian, and Italian communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nHistory.\nThe University of Montpellier is one of the oldest in the world, founded in 1160, and having been granted a charter in 1220 by Cardinal Conrad von Urach and confirmed by Pope Nicholas IV in a papal bull of 1289. It was suppressed during the French Revolution but was re-established in 1896.\nIt is not known exactly at what date the schools of literature were founded which developed into the Montpellier faculty of arts; it may be that they were a direct continuation of the Gallo-Roman schools. The school of law was founded by Placentinus, a doctor from Bologna University, who came to Montpellier in 1160, taught there during two different periods, and died there in 1192. With regard to the school of medicine, there were excellent physicians at Montpellier. The statutes given in 1220 by Cardinal Conrad, legate of Honorius III, which were completed in 1240 by Pierre de Conques, placed this school under the direction of the Bishop of Maguelonne. Pope Nicholas IV issued a Bull in 1289, combining all the schools into a university, which was placed under the direction of the bishop, but which in fact enjoyed a large measure of autonomy.\nTheology was at first taught in the convents, in which St. Anthony of Padua, Raymond Lullus, and the Dominican Bernard de la Treille lectured. Two letters of King John prove that a faculty of theology existed at Montpellier independently of the convents, in January 1350. By a Bull of 17 December 1421, Martin V granted canonical institution to this faculty and united it closely with the faculty of law. In the 16th century the faculty of theology disappeared for a time, when Calvinism, in the reign of Henry II of France, held complete possession of the city. It resumed its functions after Louis XIII had reestablished the royal power at Montpellier in 1622; but the rivalries of Dominicans and Jesuits interfered seriously with the prosperity of the faculty, which disappeared at the Revolution. The faculty numbered among its illustrious pupils of law Petrarch, who spent four years at Montpellier, and among its lecturers Guillaume de Nogaret, chancellor to Philip the Fair, Guillaume de Grimoard, afterwards pope under the name of Urban V, and Pedro de Luna, antipope as Benedict XIII. But after the 15th century this faculty fell into decay, as did also the faculty of arts, although for a time, under Henry IV of France, the latter faculty had among its lecturers Isaac Casaubon.\nThe Montpellier school of medicine owed its success to the ruling of the Guilhems, lords of the town, by which any licensed physician might lecture there; there was no fixed limit to the number of teachers, lectures were multiplied, and there was a great wealth of teaching. Rabelais took his medical degrees at Montpellier. It was in this school that the biological theory of vitalism, elaborated by Barthez (1734\u20131806), had its origin. The French Revolution did not interrupt the existence of the faculty of medicine.\nThe faculties of science and of letters were re-established in 1810; that of law in 1880. It was on the occasion of the sixth centenary of the university, celebrated in 1889, that the Government of France announced its intention\u2014which has since been realized\u2014of reorganizing the provincial universities in France.\nUniversities.\nWith 70,000 students and good universities whose influence radiates worldwide, as well as very prestigious schools, the capital of H\u00e9rault is a fantastic setting for a post-baccalaureate course.\nUniversity of Montpellier 1 and University of Montpellier 2 reunified in January 2015 to form the University of Montpellier. Paul Val\u00e9ry University Montpellier, remains a separate entity.\nMoreover, Montpellier was ranked 137th best student city in the world for 2026, according to QS Best Student Cities 2025 ranking. \nGrandes Ecoles.\nPublic service schools\nTransport.\nMontpellier is served by railway, including TGV highspeed trains. Montpellier's main railway station is Saint-Roch. Since 2018, there is also a station on the high-speed railway linking N\u00eemes and Montpellier with the LGV M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e, called Montpellier-Sud de France.\nThe Montpellier \u2013 M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e Airport is located in the area of Fr\u00e9jorgues, in the town of Mauguio, southeast of Montpellier.\nThe \"Transports de l'agglom\u00e9ration de Montpellier\" (TaM) manages the city's public transportation, including its tramway network consisting of four lines and several parking facilities. Line 1 runs from Mosson in the west to Odysseum in the east. Line 2 runs from Jacou in the northeast to St. Jean-de-Vedas in the southwest. Line 3 and Line 4 opened in April 2012. Line 3, which is long, links Juvignac and P\u00e9rols with a branch to Lattes and serves 32 stations. Line 4 circles the centre and serves as a connector line between the various arms of tram system. They intersect at Gare St. Roch station, Rives du Lez and Corum.\nSince 2019, \u20ac440 million were invested into the construction of a 5th tramway line, linking the south from Lav\u00e9rune to Clapiers, up north.\nSince 21 December 2023, the public transport is free for all residents. Previously, all residents under 18 and over 65 years of age have been transported free of charge since 1 September 2021.\nThe TaM also manages the large bike sharing scheme V\u00e9lomagg', started in June 2007, comprising 1200 bicycles and 50 stations.\nSports.\nMontpellier was the finish of Stage 11 and the departure of Stage 12 in the 2007 Tour de France. It was also the finish of Stage 11 and the departure of Stage 12 in the 2016 edition. The city is home to a variety of professional sports teams:\nMontpellier was one of the hosts of the FIBA EuroBasket 2015.\nThe city is home to the Open Sud de France tennis tournament since 2010, and will host the XXXI World Rhythmic Gymnastics Championship.\nThe main athletics stadium is the Philippid\u00e8s Stadium, which is owned by the University of Montpellier.\nCulture.\nThe city is a centre for cultural events as there are many students. Montpellier has two large concert venues: Le Z\u00e9nith Sud (7.000 seats) and L'Arena (14.000 seats). Le Corum cultural and conference centre contains three auditoriums.\nInternational relations.\nMontpellier is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable people.\nMontpellier was the birthplace of:\nOther notable inhabitants include:\nOther locations named after Montpellier.\nThe name Montpellier is used for towns and streets in as many as four continents. Many places in the United Kingdom and Ireland carry the name Montpellier. Often they are in resort locations claiming some of the healthy attributes for which the French city was renowned in earlier centuries. The variant spelling \"Montpelier\" is common, and is of quite early provenance. Brewer uses that spelling. The first example was the early 19th-century suburb of Montpelier in Brighton.\nThe capital of the American state of Vermont was named Montpelier because of the high regard in which the Americans held the French who had aided their Revolutionary War against the British. Several other American cities are also named Montpelier.\nPlaces named Montpellier/Montpelier are also found in Australia, Canada, South Africa, and the Caribbean.\nJames Madison, the United States fourth president, named his plantation Montpelier (Orange, Virginia), after the resort-like properties associated with the city at the time.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73370", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73370", "title": "Last of the Summer Wine", "text": "British TV sitcom (1973\u20132010)\nLast of the Summer Wine is a British sitcom set in Yorkshire created and written by Roy Clarke and originally broadcast by the BBC from 1973 to 2010. It premiered as an episode of \"Comedy Playhouse\" on 4 January 1973, and the first series of episodes followed on 12 November 1973. Alan J. W. Bell produced and directed all episodes of the show from late 1981 to 2010. The BBC confirmed on 2 June 2010 that \"Last of the Summer Wine\" would no longer be produced and the 31st series would be its last. Subsequently, the final episode was broadcast on 29 August 2010. Since its original release, all 295 episodes, comprising thirty-one series \u2013 including the pilot and all films and specials \u2013 have been released on DVD. Repeats of the show are broadcast in the UK on BBC One (until 18 July 2010 when the 31st and final series started on 25 July of that year), U&amp;Gold, U&amp;Yesterday, and U&amp;Drama. It is also seen in more than 25 countries, including various PBS stations in the United States and on VisionTV in Canada. With the exception of programmes relaunched after long hiatuses, \"Last of the Summer Wine\" is the longest-running TV comedy programme in Britain and the longest-running TV sitcom in the world.\n\"Last of the Summer Wine\" was set and filmed in and around Holmfirth, West Yorkshire, England, and centred on a trio of elderly men and their youthful misadventures; the members of the trio changed many times over the years. The original trio consisted of Bill Owen as the mischievous and impulsive Compo Simmonite, Peter Sallis as easy-going everyman Norman Clegg, and Michael Bates as uptight and arrogant Cyril Blamire. When Bates dropped out due to illness in 1976 after two series, the role of the third man of the trio was filled in various years up to the 30th series by the quirky war veteran Walter C \"Foggy\" Dewhurst (Brian Wilde) (who had two lengthy stints), the eccentric inventor and ex-headmaster Seymour Utterthwaite (Michael Aldridge), and former police officer Herbert \"Truly of The Yard\" Truelove (Frank Thornton). The men never seem to grow up, and they develop a unique perspective on their equally eccentric fellow townspeople through their stunts. Although in its early years the series generally revolved around the exploits of the main trio, with occasional interaction with a few recurring characters, over time the cast grew to include a variety of supporting characters and by later years the series was very much an ensemble piece. Each of these recurring characters contributed their own running jokes and subplots to the show, often becoming reluctantly involved in the schemes of the trio, or on occasion having their own, separate storylines.\nAfter the death of Owen in 1999, Compo was replaced at various times by his real-life son, Tom Owen, as Tom Simmonite, Keith Clifford as Billy Hardcastle, a man who thought of himself as a direct descendant of Robin Hood, and Brian Murphy as the cheeky-chappy Alvin Smedley. Due to the age of the main cast, a new trio was formed during the 30th series, featuring somewhat younger actors. This format was used for the final two instalments of the show. This group consisted of Russ Abbot as Luther Hobdyke, known as Hobbo, a former milkman who fancied himself as a secret agent, Burt Kwouk as the electrical repairman, \"Electrical\" Entwistle, and Murphy as Alvin Smedley. Sallis and Thornton, both past members of the trio, continued in supporting roles alongside the new actors.\nAlthough many felt that the show's quality had declined over the years, \"Last of the Summer Wine\" continued to receive large audiences for the BBC and was praised for its positive portrayal of older people and family-friendly humour. Many members of the royal family enjoyed the show. The programme was nominated for numerous awards and won the National Television Award for Most Popular Comedy Programme in 1999. There were twenty-one Christmas specials, three television films and a documentary film about the series. \"Last of the Summer Wine\" inspired other adaptations, including a television prequel, several novelisations, and stage adaptations.\nProduction.\nHistory and development.\nIn 1972, Duncan Wood, the BBC's Head of Comedy, watched a comedy on television called \"The Misfit\". Impressed by writer Roy Clarke's ability to inject both comedy and drama into the sitcom, Wood offered Clarke the opportunity to write a sitcom. Clarke nearly turned the job down as he felt that the BBC's idea for a programme about three old men was a dull concept for a half-hour sitcom. Instead, Clarke proposed that the men should all be unmarried, widowed, or divorced and either unemployed or retired, leaving them free to roam around like adolescents in the prime of their lives, unfettered and uninhibited.\nClarke chose the original title, \"The Last of the Summer Wine\", to convey the idea that the characters are not in the autumn of their lives but the summer, even though it may be \"the last of the summer\". BBC producers hated this at first and insisted that it remain a temporary working title, while the cast worried that viewers would forget the name of the show. The working title was changed later to \"The Library Mob\", a reference to one of the trio's regular haunts early in the show. Clarke switched back to his original preference shortly before production began, a title that was shortened to \"Last of the Summer Wine\" after the pilot show.\n\"The Last of the Summer Wine\" premiered as an episode of BBC's \"Comedy Playhouse\" on 4 January 1973. The pilot, \"Of Funerals and Fish\", received enough positive response that a full series was commissioned to be broadcast before the end of the year. Although the initial series did not do well in the ratings, the BBC ordered a second series in 1975.\nFilming.\nThe site for the exterior shots of \"Last of the Summer Wine\" was, in part, suggested by television producer Barry Took, who was familiar with the area. Took had, in the 1950s, toured as a stand-up comic, often appearing at working men's clubs. One such appearance was at Burnlee Working Men's Club, a club in the small West Yorkshire town of Holmfirth, and Took saw Holmfirth's potential as the backdrop of a television show. Twenty years later, he returned to Holmfirth, where he filmed an episode of the BBC documentary series \"Having a Lovely Time\", which turned out to be the highest rated episode of the show. When Took heard that James Gilbert and Roy Clarke were looking for a place with a centre surrounded by hills for their new television programme, he suggested the idea to Duncan Wood, who was at that time filming \"Comedy Playhouse\". Gilbert and Clarke then travelled to Holmfirth and decided to use it as the setting for the pilot episode.\nThough the exterior shots were always filmed on location in Holmfirth and the surrounding countryside, the interior shots were, until the early 1990s, filmed in front of a live studio audience at BBC Television Centre in London. The amount of location work increased, however, as studio work became a drain on time and money. Under Alan J. W. Bell, \"Last of the Summer Wine\" became the first comedy series to do away with the live studio audience, moving all of the filming to Holmfirth. The episodes were filmed and then shown to preview audiences, whose laughter was recorded and then mixed into each episode's soundtrack to provide a laugh track and avoid the use of canned laughter.\nThe show used actual businesses and homes in and around Holmfirth, and Nora Batty's house, which is actually a Summer Wine themed holiday cottage where members of the public can stay in a replica of Nora Batty's home. Although this helped the Holmfirth economy and made it a tourist destination, tensions occasionally surfaced between Holmfirth residents and the crew. One such incident, regarding compensation to local residents, prompted producer Bell to consider not filming in Holmfirth any more. The situation escalated to the point that Bell filmed a scene in which Nora Batty put her house up for sale.\nCrew.\nEvery episode of \"Last of the Summer Wine\" was written by Roy Clarke. The \"Comedy Playhouse\" pilot and all episodes of the first series were produced and directed by James Gilbert. Bernard Thompson produced and directed the second series of episodes in 1975. In 1976, Sydney Lotterby took over as producer and director. He directed every episode of the third series, except for \"The Great Boarding House Bathroom Caper\" and \"Cheering up Gordon\". Lotterby directed two further series before departing the show in 1979. In 1981, Alan J. W. Bell took over as producer and director. Bell, in an effort to get each scene exactly right, was known for his use of more film and more takes than his predecessors and for using wider angles that feature more of the local Holmfirth landscape.\nIn 1983, Lotterby returned to the show at the insistence of Brian Wilde, who preferred Lotterby's use of tight shots focused on the trio as they talked rather than Bell's wide-angle scenes. Lotterby produced and directed one additional series before departing again the same year. Bell then returned to the show beginning with the 1983 Christmas special and produced and directed all episodes of the show to the end of the 31st series.\nIn 2008, Bell announced that he had quit as producer of \"Last of the Summer Wine\". Citing differences with the BBC and his dislike of their indifference towards the series, Bell said, \"I have now decided I will not do it again. I have had enough of the BBC's attitude.\" The announcement came following rumours initiated by Bell that the corporation would not commission another series of episodes following the 30th series and their indecision regarding a possible one-off special. However, on 26 June 2009, the BBC announced that it had recommissioned the show for a 31st series with Bell continuing as producer and director.\nMusic.\nComposer and conductor Ronnie Hazlehurst, who also produced themes for such series as \"Are You Being Served?\", \"Yes Minister\", and \"The Two Ronnies\", created the theme for the show. The BBC initially disliked Hazlehurst's theme, feeling it was not proper for a comedy programme to have such mellow music. He was asked to play the music faster for more comedic effect but eventually his original slower version was accepted. A jauntier, upbeat version was played by a brass band in the episode \"Full Steam Behind\".\nThe theme, an instrumental work, featured lyrics three times. The 1981 Christmas special, \"Whoops\", had two verses of lyrics written by Roy Clarke that were performed over the closing credits. The 1983 Last of the Summer Wine film, \"Getting Sam Home\", used those two verses, with an additional two and played them over the opening credits. Another altered version was sung during Compo's funeral in the 2000 episode \"Just a Small Funeral\". Bill Owen also wrote a different version of the lyrics but this version was never used during an episode of the show.\nComposing the score for each episode until his death in 2007, Hazlehurst spent an average of ten hours per episode watching scenes and making notes for music synchronisation. Hazlehurst then recorded the music using an orchestra consisting of a guitar, harmonica, two violins, a viola, cello, accordion, horn, double bass, flute, and percussion. The distinctive harmonica was played by Harry Pitch, who had featured in the 1970 one-hit-wonder \"Groovin With Mr Bloe\".\nEnding.\nDespite numerous cast and production changes over the years, \"Last of the Summer Wine\" continued to be popular with viewers and was renewed year after year despite reports to the contrary. Rumours circulated as early as the 1980s that the BBC wanted to end the show and replace it with a new programme aimed at a younger audience. Its popularity made this decision hard to justify, however, since even repeats sometimes received ratings of as many as five million viewers per episode.\nIn December 2008, Alan J. W. Bell stated in an interview with \"The Daily Telegraph\" that the BBC had not yet commissioned a new series and that bosses at the network told him one would not be produced. Bell criticised this decision, stating that \"millions still enjoy the series and the actors love being involved\" and that it would be a terrible blow to the shops and businesses in Holmfirth who have come to depend on tourist revenue. The BBC denied these claims, saying that a decision had not yet been reached whether to commission another series or not.\nIt was confirmed on 26 June 2009 that a 31st series of 6 episodes had been commissioned for transmission in 2010. In June 2010 the BBC announced that it would not renew \"Last of the Summer Wine\" after its thirty-first series was broadcast during the summer of 2010. Tom Owen criticised the BBC for not permitting a special final episode. Roy Clarke, however, stated that he was fully aware this was the last series, and preferred the show to have a quiet ending. The final episode of the show, \"How Not to Cry at Weddings\", was subsequently broadcast on 29 August 2010. The final line was said by Peter Sallis, the longest-serving actor.\nCharacters and casting.\nInitially, the only certain cast member for the show was Peter Sallis. Clarke had already collaborated on a few scripts with him and knew he wanted Sallis on the show. The character of Norman Clegg was created especially for Sallis, who liked the character and agreed to play him. He was soon joined by an actor he had previously worked with, Michael Bates as Cyril Blamire. James Gilbert wanted Bates as Blamire because of his reputation as a comedy actor, and Bates loved the role.\nCompo Simmonite was the last role to be cast in the original trio. Gilbert had seen film actor Bill Owen playing northern characters in the Royal Court Theatre and proposed to cast him as Compo. Clarke, who initially saw Owen as an archetypal cockney who could not play as solid a northern character as Compo was meant to be, recognised Owen's potential only after going to London for a read-through with him.\nOn-screen chemistry with existing players determined the later changes to the cast. Brian Wilde, Michael Aldridge and Frank Thornton each brought a sense of completion to the trio after the departure of the preceding third man. Tom Owen provided a direct link between his father and himself after the death of Bill Owen. Keith Clifford was added following three popular guest appearances on the show. Brian Murphy was chosen as Nora Batty's neighbour because of his work on \"George and Mildred\", where he played the hen-pecked husband to a strong-willed woman.\nIn 2008, the BBC announced that Russ Abbot would join the cast in series 30 as a relatively youthful actor. Abbot was cast to allow Sallis and Thornton to reduce their role on the show to indoor scenes only. Abbot portrayed Luther \"Hobbo\" Hobdyke, who formed a new trio with Entwistle and Alvin. Entwistle, played by Burt Kwouk, had been a supporting character brought in to replace Wesley Pegden after the death of actor Gordon Wharmby, but his role on the show steadily increased in the previous two series.\nThe original cast of \"Last of the Summer Wine\" also included a handful of characters with whom the trio regularly interacted. Kathy Staff was chosen to play Compo's neighbour, Nora Batty. Gilbert was initially sceptical about casting Staff but changed his mind after she padded herself to look bigger and read from a scene between her character and Owen's. This group was rounded out by characters at two locations frequented by the trio: John Comer and Jane Freeman as Sid and Ivy, the quarrelling husband-and-wife owners of the local caf\u00e9; and Blake Butler and Rosemary Martin as Mr Wainwright and Mrs Partridge, the librarians having a not-so-secret affair. Butler and Martin, however, were dropped as major characters after the first series. According to Peter Sallis, Roy Clarke felt there was little more he could do with them.\nAlthough the show initially focused on the trio and four to five supporting characters, the cast expanded over the years to include an ensemble of eccentric characters who rounded out the show. The biggest expansion came in 1985 when four characters from the stage adaptation of the show were brought over to the series proper: Howard (Robert Fyfe), Pearl (Juliette Kaplan), Marina (Jean Fergusson), and Ivy's nephew, \"Crusher\" Milburn (Jonathan Linsley). Further additions came the following year when the film \"Uncle of the Bride\" introduced Seymour's sister, Edie, played by veteran actress Thora Hird, and her family, who were brought over to the programme the following series. The only addition with no professional acting experience was the Holmfirth resident Gordon Wharmby, who performed so well during his audition as mechanic Wesley Pegden, that Alan J. W. Bell cast him in one episode. Pegden would make two more appearances before being brought in permanently as Edie's husband and Seymour's brother-in-law after positive audience reception, becoming a regular character starting in \"Uncle of the Bride\". The increasingly large cast ensured a sense of continuity with the changing configuration of the trio, especially following the death of Bill Owen.\nDuring the late 1970s, after the introduction of Foggy, the plots of \"Last of the Summer Wine\" moved away from the original dialogue-packed scenes in the pub and the library; guest actors were brought in to interact with the trio in new situations. Although many of these guest appearances lasted for only one episode, some led to a permanent role on the show, as in the cases of Gordon Wharmby, Thora Hird, Jean Alexander, Stephen Lewis, Dora Bryan, Keith Clifford, Brian Murphy, Josephine Tewson, June Whitfield, Barbara Young, and Trevor Bannister. Other noted guests on the programme included John Cleese, Ron Moody, Sir Norman Wisdom, Eric Sykes, Liz Fraser, Stanley Lebor, and Philip Jackson.\nScenario.\n\"Last of the Summer Wine\" focused on a trio of older men and their youthful antics. The original trio consisted of Compo Simmonite, Norman Clegg, and Cyril Blamire. Blamire left in 1976, when Michael Bates fell ill shortly before filming of the third series, requiring Clarke to hastily rewrite the series with a new third man. The third member of the trio would be recast four times over the next three decades: Foggy Dewhurst in 1976, Seymour Utterthwaite in 1986, Foggy again in 1990, and Truly Truelove in 1997. After Compo died in 1999, his son, Tom Simmonite, filled the gap for the rest of that series, and Billy Hardcastle joined the cast as the third lead character in 2001. The trio became a quartet between 2003 and 2006 when Alvin Smedley moved in next door to Nora Batty, but returned to the usual threesome in 2006 when Billy Hardcastle left the show. The role of supporting character Entwistle steadily grew until the beginning of the 30th series, when he and Alvin were recruited by Hobbo Hobdyke, a former milkman with ties to MI5, to form a new trio of volunteers who respond to any emergency.\nThe trio explored the world around them, experiencing a second childhood with no wives, jobs, or responsibilities. They passed the time by speculating about their fellow townspeople and testing inventions. Regular subplots in the first decade of the show included: Sid and Ivy bickering over the management of the caf\u00e9, Mr Wainwright and Mrs Partridge having a secret love affair that everyone knows about, Wally trying to get away from Nora's watchful eye, Foggy's exaggerated war stories, and Compo's schemes to win the affections of Nora Batty.\nThe number of subplots on the show grew as more cast members were added. Regular subplots since the 1980s included: Howard and Marina trying to have an affair without Howard's wife finding out (a variation of the Wainwright-Partridge subplot of the 1970s), the older women meeting for tea and discussing their theories about men and life, the police officers trying not to work, Auntie Wainwright trying to sell unwanted merchandise to unsuspecting customers, Smiler trying to find a woman, Barry trying to better himself (at the insistence of Glenda), and Tom trying to stay one step ahead of the repo man.\nEpisodes.\n\"Last of the Summer Wine\" is the longest-running comedy programme in Britain, and the longest running situation comedy in the world. Each series has between six and twelve episodes; most were thirty minutes in length, with some specials running longer. There were 295 episodes and 31 series between 1973 and 2010, counting the pilot, all episodes of the series, specials, and two films.\nSpecials.\nIn 1978, the BBC commissioned a \"Last of the Summer Wine\" Christmas special instead of a new series. Titled \"Small Tune on a Penny Wassail\", it was broadcast on 26 December 1978. Other Christmas programmes followed in 1979 and 1981. The 1981 special, \"Whoops\", gained 17\u00a0million viewers and was beaten only by \"Coronation Street\" for the number one spot. Christmas shows were produced infrequently thereafter and sometimes were the only new episodes in years without an order for a new series. This happened often during the 1980s when Roy Clarke's commitment to \"Open All Hours\" prevented the production of a full series every year. The specials often included well-known guest stars such as John Cleese and June Whitfield.\nThe first New Year special, \"The Man who Nearly Knew Pavarotti\", was commissioned in 1994. The hour-long show was broadcast on 1 January 1995 and featured Norman Wisdom as a piano player who had lost the confidence to play. A second New Year programme was produced and broadcast in 2000 to celebrate the new millennium. It featured the second guest appearance by Keith Clifford and a guest appearance by Dora Bryan. Titled \"Last Post and Pigeon\", the show ran for sixty minutes and dealt with the trio's pilgrimage to visit World War II graves in France. Part of this special was shot on location in France. A third New Year show, titled \"I Was a Hitman for Primrose Dairies\", was broadcast on 31 December 2008 and introduced Hobbo and the new trio he formed with Entwistle and Alvin.\nFilms.\nIn 1983, Bill Owen suggested to a newly returned producer Alan J. W. Bell that Roy Clarke's novelisation of the show should be made into a feature-length special. Other British sitcoms such as \"Steptoe and Son\" and \"Dad's Army\" had previously produced films made for the cinema, but the BBC were initially sceptical as they had never before commissioned a film based on a comedy programme for original broadcast on television. They nevertheless commissioned a ninety-minute film named \"Getting Sam Home\", which was broadcast on 27 December 1983, and started a trend which would continue with other British sitcoms, including \"Only Fools and Horses\".\nFollowing the success of \"Getting Sam Home\", a second film was made during 1985, and broadcast on 1 January 1986. Titled \"Uncle of the Bride\", the film featured the introduction of Michael Aldridge as Seymour Utterthwaite, the new third man of the trio. The plot centred on the marriage of Seymour's niece, Glenda (Sarah Thomas), to Barry (Mike Grady). Also making her first appearance in the film was Thora Hird as Seymour's sister and Glenda's mother, Edie, as well as re-introducing Gordon Wharmby as Edie's husband Wesley, previously seen in three popular one-off appearances. The second film proved a success and all four new characters were carried over to the show beginning with the ninth series in 1986.\nDocumentaries.\nA documentary film was commissioned to celebrate the 25th anniversary of \"Last of the Summer Wine\". Produced and directed by Alan J. W. Bell, it featured interviews with the majority of cast and crew members, outtakes from the show, and a behind-the-scenes look at production. Segments with Duncan Wood and Barry Took explained the origins of the show and how it came to be filmed in Holmfirth. The documentary was broadcast on 30 March 1997.\nAn updated version of the documentary was commissioned for the 30th anniversary of the series. Broadcast on 13 April 2003, this version featured an expanded interview with Brian Wilde and new interviews with Brian Murphy and Burt Kwouk.\nIn March 2022, Channel 5 aired a 67-minute special retrospective for their series \"30 Years Of Laughs\". Cast, crew and celebrities paid tribute to the show.\nDVD releases.\nIn September 2002, Universal Playback (licensed by the BBC) began releasing boxed sets of episodes on DVD for region two. Each set contains two consecutive full series of episodes. The entire series is now available on home video, both in box sets with two series of episodes each, and in a complete collection which features every episode of \"Last of the Summer Wine\" plus the pilot, all films, and specials. The entire series is also available for region four from ABC. Like the region two releases, each box set contains two series.\nThree \"best of\" collections as well as sets devoted to individual series have been released for region one. The first, simply titled \"Last of the Summer Wine\", was released in 2003 and includes early episodes from the 1970s and 1980s. The second collection, titled \"Last of the Summer Wine: Vintage 1995\", followed in 2004 and includes episodes from series seventeen and the 30th anniversary documentary. A 2008 release named \"Last of the Summer Wine: Vintage 1976\" focuses on the third series of the show and includes bonus interviews with Peter Sallis, Brian Wilde, and Frank Thornton. Subsequently, every episode from the third to the twenty-seventh series has been released on DVD in \"Vintage\" collections, many including special features and interviews.\nOther adaptations.\n\"First of the Summer Wine\".\nA spin-off prequel show, \"First of the Summer Wine\", premiered on BBC1 in 1988. The new programme was written by Roy Clarke and used different actors to follow the activities of the principal characters from \"Last of the Summer Wine\" in the months leading up to World War II. Unlike its mother show, \"First of the Summer Wine\" was not filmed in Holmfirth. Period music was used instead of Ronnie Hazlehurst's score to create a more World War II era atmosphere. New supporting characters were added to those from \"Last of the Summer Wine\". Peter Sallis and Jonathan Linsley were the only actors from the original series to appear in the spin-off: Sallis played the father of his own character from the original show and Linsley appeared during the second series as a different character.\nThe spin-off show could not build on its early success and was cancelled after two series totalling thirteen episodes in 1989. Although the BBC has never rerun the show, it has been broadcast on Gold and internationally.\n\"Cooper and Walsh\".\nIn 2014, it was announced that long-time supporting actors Ken Kitson and Louis Emerick had returned to Holmfirth to reprise their roles as Police Constables Cooper and Walsh in the pilot for a new proposed spin-off, \"Cooper and Walsh\". Alan J.W. Bell as well as crew from \"Last of the Summer Wine\" were involved in the creation of two short films while Kitson and Emerick appealed for funding through crowd-sourcing sites in the hopes of gaining enough support to produce a feature film featuring the duo or even a television series. Associate Producer Terry Bartlam believed there was enough of a scope with Cooper and Walsh that they could carry their own series and that this spin-off could be the answer to those who believed \"Last of the Summer Wine\" should have been given a proper ending.\nStage adaptations.\nA live production of \"Last of the Summer Wine\", known informally as the \"summer season\", was produced in Bournemouth in 1983. While Bill Owen and Peter Sallis reprised their roles as Compo and Clegg, Brian Wilde chose not to take part because of personal differences with Owen. The show focused on the men's interaction with Clegg's new neighbour, Howard (Kenneth Waller), and his wife, Pearl, played by a local actress. The first act built up to the appearance of Marina (Jean Fergusson), who was in correspondence with Howard. At the end of the first act, Marina was revealed to be a blonde sexpot. Howard and Marina's story line was partly based on an early subplot of the television show. In the first series, the librarian, Mr. Wainwright, was having a love affair with his married assistant, Mrs. Partridge. Despite their efforts to keep the plot a secret, especially from Mrs. Partridge's husband, the trio of old men were well aware of the affair. The summer season reversed the roles: Howard became the married partner, and the challenge was to keep the affair secret from his wife.\nThe summer season proved to be a success and frequently played to packed houses. In 1984, the show was once again produced, first as a two-week tour of Britain, and then as another summer season in Bournemouth. Fergusson returned for the second summer season, once again playing Marina. Robert Fyfe replaced Waller in the role of Howard, and Juliette Kaplan took the role of Pearl for this season. Although the new characters were not originally intended to be carried over to the television programme, Roy Clarke included them in four of the following six episodes of the 1985 series, beginning with the episode \"Catching Digby's Donkey\". All three characters remained until the end of the sitcom.\nAn amended version of the show toured across Britain in 1985. Sallis was reluctant to appear in the new production, and his role in the show was rewritten and played by Derek Fowlds. Because Owen was the only member of the television show's trio to appear in the production, it was retitled \"Compo Plays Cupid\". Once again, the summer season was a success.\nA new stage adaptation of the show debuted in 2003. Based on Clarke's novel \"The Moonbather\", the play was first performed by the Scunthorpe Little Theatre Club from 7 to 11 October 2003. Using new actors to perform the roles of Compo, Clegg, and Foggy, the play featured the trio as they attempted to get to the bottom of the disturbance created by a near-naked man in the town. The play was later performed in Eastbourne by Eastbourne Theatres from 15 July 2009 to 8 August 2009 before touring the country through November 2009.\nIn 2010, it was announced that long-time supporting cast members Ken Kitson and Louis Emerick would spin their characters off into their own stage adaptation, titled \"An Arresting Night\". Kitson and Emerick, who appeared together on \"Last of the Summer Wine\" as Police Constables Cooper and Walsh from 2003 to 2010, reprised their roles in an improvised stage play. While some elements of the series will be used, the majority of the play was improvised, with Kitson and Emerick each deriving their cues of what to do from the audience. The play was successfully performed in Holmfirth, after which dates were announced in Emerick's hometown on the Wirral Peninsula.\nOther media.\nCoronet Books released a novelisation of \"Last of the Summer Wine\" in 1974. Written by Roy Clarke as an unbroadcast original story, the novel featured Compo, Clegg and Blamire helping their friend, Sam, enjoy one last night with a glam girl. The book became the basis for the \"Last of the Summer Wine\" film, \"Getting Sam Home\", with Blamire being replaced by Foggy. In 1983, Granada Books published a slightly different version of the first novel with Foggy in it instead of Blamire. In the late 1980s, Roy Clarke wrote two novels featuring Compo, Clegg, and Seymour. The books were published by Penguin Books under the series heading \"Summer Wine Chronicles\", and were titled \"Gala Week\" and \"The Moonbather\". Clarke later adapted \"The Moonbather\" into a stage play. An audio cassette of \"Gala Week\", narrated by Peter Sallis, was released in 1988. \nIn the early 1980s, a daily comic strip based on the show was drawn by Roger Mahoney and appeared in the \"Daily Star\". A compilation of these strips, published by Express Books, was released in 1983.\nIn 1993, the Summer Wine Appreciation Society asked their members for their favourite musical themes from \"Last of the Summer Wine\". Ronnie Hazlehurst used the resulting list for an independently released CD collection titled \"Last of the Summer Wine: Original Music from the TV Series\". BBC Radio released audio-only versions of episodes starting in 1995. Peter Sallis provided narration to compensate for the loss of the televised visual elements. All twelve audio episodes were released in CD format.\nIn 1976, a selection of early scripts from the series was published as \"Last of the Summer Wine Scripts\". A companion guide to the show, \"Last of the Summer Wine: The Finest Vintage\", was released in 2000. The book was written by Morris Bright and Robert Ross and chronicled the show from its inception through the end of the 2000 series. Included were interviews with cast and crew, a character guide, and an episode guide. Both the companion guide and its updated 30th anniversary version are now out of print. A release by journalist Andrew Vine titled \"Last of the Summer Wine: The Inside Story of the World's Longest-running Comedy Programme\" covered the entire series, including the story of the final words of the series. It was released on 16 August 2010. On 5 November 2012, a new book titled \"Last of the Summer Wine - From the Directors Chair\" was released and written by producer and director Alan J.W. Bell. 2023 saw the publication of \"50 Years of Last of the Summer Wine: An Appreciation by\" author Miles Eaton. The book was released to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the first broadcast of the sitcom.\nReception.\nDuring its first series, \"Last of the Summer Wine\" did not receive a high ratings share. The second series proved to be a success, however, and two episodes made it to the top ten programmes of the week. The programme has since consistently been a favourite in the ratings, peaking at 18.8\u00a0million viewers for an episode shown on 10 February 1985. The premiere of the 28th series in 2007 brought in an 18.6 percent share of viewers in the 6:20 time slot with an average of 3.2\u00a0million viewers. \"Last of the Summer Wine\"'s audience grew from 2.7\u00a0million to 3.4\u00a0million over the 30\u00a0minutes. The show was beaten for the night only by Channel 4's \"Big Brother\" with 3.6\u00a0million viewers at 9:00\u00a0p.m., although the reality show had a smaller share of viewers for its time slot. The 29th series finale, which was broadcast on 31 August 2008, was watched by 4.2 million people, giving the network a 22.5% share for the night. The 31st series continued to bring in over four million viewers, with the series opener pulling in 4.77 million viewers for an overall 21.6% share of the ratings for the night.\nSeveral members of the royal family were viewers of \"Last of the Summer Wine\". While presenting an OBE to Roy Clarke in 2002, Prince Charles said that his grandmother, the Queen Mother, had introduced him to the show. The Queen told Dame Thora Hird during a 2001 meeting that \"Last of the Summer Wine\" was her favourite television programme.\nA 2003 survey by \"Radio Times\" found that \"Last of the Summer Wine\" was the programme readers most wanted to see cancelled. With nearly 12,000\u00a0votes in the survey, the show received one-third of the total vote, and twice as many votes as the runner up in the poll, \"Heartbeat\". Alan J. W. Bell responded that \"Radio Times\" has always been anti-\"Last of the Summer Wine\", and Roy Clarke remarked that people who dislike the show \"shouldn't switch it on\" if they are \"too idle to turn it off\". A 2008 survey by \"County Life\" magazine, which named the show the worst thing about Yorkshire, was disputed by members of the Holme Valley Business Association, who said the show was good for business. The BBC wanted to cancel \"Last of the Summer Wine\" for years in favour of a new programme aimed at a younger audience, but the show remained too popular for cancellation; even repeats received ratings of as much as five million viewers per episode. The show came 14th in a high-profile 2004 BBC poll to find Britain's Best Sitcom, and was praised for portraying older people in a non-stereotypical, positive, and active manner. It was also praised for its clever and at times philosophical writing, and for being a family-friendly show.\n\"Last of the Summer Wine\" was nominated numerous times for two British television industry awards. The show was proposed five times between 1973 and 1985 for the British Academy Film Awards, twice for the Best Situation Comedy Series award (in 1973 and 1979) and three times for the Best Comedy Series award (in 1982, 1983, and 1985). The show was also considered for the National Television Awards four times since 1999 (in 1999, 2000, 2003, and 2004), each time in the Most Popular Comedy Programme category. In 1999 the show won the National Television Award for Most Popular Comedy Programme.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73371", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73371", "title": "The Black Pirate", "text": "The Black Pirate is a 1926 American silent color adventure film directed by Albert Parker, starring Douglas Fairbanks, Billie Dove, Donald Crisp, Sam De Grasse, and Anders Randolf.\nAfter the first natural color films appeared in 1922, Douglas Fairbanks envisioned a color pirate film. However, he waited to start production until 1925. Once Technicolor had improved its filming and printing capacity, Fairbanks took financial risks due to the added costs and fragility of the film process. He also hesitated because color was rumored to distract from the narrative and strain viewers\u2019 eyes.\nTo address these concerns, Fairbanks avoided Technicolor\u2019s saturated tones and instead chose a restricted palette, inspired by Flemish painters and American illustrators who had popularized pirate themes in the early twentieth century.\nHis team spent months testing and refining color control for all on-screen elements, including the studio-created ocean. This focus on visual consistency also led to the simplification of the story, contributing to the film\u2019s success. Fairbanks continued to deliver his signature acrobatic stunts.\nThe film achieved international success, notably for its colors, but suffered from the fragility of its two-strip laminated film. This issue prompted Technicolor to abandon the process and develop a more durable single-strip film, which was later used for some prints. \"The Black Pirate\" became both a commercial and technical milestone, showcasing Fairbanks\u2019s influence, while also exposing the process\u2019s limitations.\nIn his subsequent films, Fairbanks considered using Technicolor again but gave up on it for various reasons. In 1928, when Technicolor felt that it had overcome the difficulties encountered with \"The Black Pirate\", it produced \"The Viking\" (1928) as a demonstration, for which Fairbanks' film would serve as a hidden model. Other successful films, including \"The Black Swan\" (1942) with Tyrone Power, and \"The Crimson Pirate\" (1952) with Burt Lancaster would further exploit the link he had imagined between pirates and Technicolor.\nPlot.\nPirates capture, badly maul, and loot a ship. After relieving the ship and crew of valuables, the pirates fire the ship, blowing up the gunpowder on board, sinking her. While the pirates celebrate, two survivors wash up on an island: an old man and his son. Before dying, the older man gives his signet ring to his son. His son buries him, vowing vengeance.\nThe Pirate Captain and Lieutenant bring some crew to the other side of the same island to bury some of their plunder. They then plan to murder the other pirates: \"Dead men tell no tales.\" But first, the son appears as the \"Black Pirate\", who offers to join their company and fight their best man to prove his worth. After much fighting, the Black Pirate kills the Pirate Captain. The Pirate Lieutenant sneers and says there is more to being a pirate than sword tricks. To further prove his worth, the Black Pirate says he will capture the next ship of prey single-handed, which he does. He then uses his wits to prevent the pirates from blowing up the ship along with the crew and passengers, suggesting that they hold the ship for ransom.\nWhen a beautiful woman is discovered on board, the Pirate Lieutenant claims her. Being in love at first sight for her, the Black Pirate finds a way to temporarily save her from this fate by presenting her as a \"princess\" and urging the crew to use her as a hostage to ensure their ransom will be paid, as long as she remains \"spotless and unharmed\".\nThe pirates cheer the Black Pirate and want to name him captain. The Pirate Lieutenant jeers but consents to wait to see if the ransom is paid by noon the next day. However, he secretly has a confederate destroy the ransom ship later that night to ensure it will not return. Then, when the Black Pirate is caught trying to release the woman, the Pirate Lieutenant exposes him as a traitor, and the pirates force him to walk the plank.\nAt noon the next day, with the ransom ship having failed to show, the Pirate Lieutenant goes to the woman to claim his prize. But just then, the Black Pirate, who with the help of the sympathetic one-armed pirate MacTavish had survived being sent overboard, returns, leading troops to stop the pirates. After a long fight, the pirates are routed. In the end, the Black Pirate is revealed to be a Duke, and the \"Princess\" he loves is a noble Lady. Even MacTavish is moved to tears of joy by the happy ending.\nProduction.\nPrecedents.\nListed in 1993 on the National Film Registry for its \"cultural, historical or aesthetic significance\", \"The Black Pirate\" is considered \"one of the silent films that is best remembered\" Part of that reputation is based on the plot, but above all on the fact that it was one of the first films shot with the Technicolor two-tone process, which was rare and very expensive at the time. \"The Black Pirate\" is often referred to as the first \"good\" color film, with a \"level of quality [of colour] never before seen in a feature film.\" Given the limitations of the process used, it is also a \"flawed but strangely beautiful artifact\". According to his son, Fairbanks was \"the first to make a feature film in color\", despite the prohibitive cost and technical problems, spending \"a whole year with laboratory experiments to find the combination that would be the most restful for the eye\" and choosing a chromatic choice that \"no one had ever thought of\".\nHowever, the film is far from being the first to use colors. These have been present since the earliest days of cinema, not to perfect an illusion of realism, but as an ornamental and spectacular attraction. In 1926, when Fairbanks' film was released, 80 to 85% of film productions featured color effects, mainly by tinting or toning. These are arbitrary colors, added with dyes, and are supposed to connote the psychological atmosphere of the scene. On the other hand, the colors of \"The Black Pirate\" are supposed to be natural, i.e., produced by the subject's light imprint alone \"in such a way that the colors are exclusively chosen and reproduced by optical and mechanical means\". The opposition between natural and artificial colors dates back to the introduction in the 1910s of the first natural color process, Kinemacolor, the predecessor of Technicolor and a competitor of the Path\u00e9color process, which used stencil coloring. However, for technical reasons, the supposedly \"natural\" processes of Kinemacolor and then Technicolor are based on compression, simplifying the removal of blue, one of the three primary components of color, to retain only a \"duotone\" of red and green. The lack of fidelity in certain parts of the spectrum, combined with other technical problems, leads to a paradoxical situation where processes that are supposed to give colors greater veracity, or even a \"sterecopic\" quality, present worse results in some respects than those deemed artificial and subjective. Like its predecessor, Technicolor has a complex relationship with competing processes, sometimes opposing them in the name of the distinction between the natural and the artificial and sometimes in the name of the aesthetic quality of the result, the cinematographic color being compared to that of the painting of the \"old masters\".\nTechnicolor Process No. 2 used for Fairbanks\u2019 film is a process for rendering natural colors by duotone developed in 1921 and which represented a significant improvement over Technicolor No. 1, for which the Technicolor company had been established in 1915. Process No. 1, two-tone like its successor, had the disadvantage of requiring the separate projection of the green and red recordings, the two images being superimposed on the screen, by additive synthesis, with the inevitable colored fringes as soon as the subject was in motion. On the contrary, in process number 2, called subtractive synthesis, the red and green recordings are glued back-to-back to form just one single reel, usable with the projector model available in all theaters.\n\"The Black Pirate\" is not the first subtractive duotone fiction film; however, this primacy belongs to \"The Glorious Adventure\", directed by James Stuart Blackton in Prizma Color and released in 1922. It was also not the first film made entirely in Technicolor No. 2, since it was preceded by Chester M. Franklin's \"The Toll of the Sea\", a medium-length film also released in 1922 and produced by the Technicolor company to promote its process. \"The Glorious Aventure\" demonstrates the ability of the Prizma Color process to delicately reproduce skin tones, while exposing himself to reproach for \"stained glass effects\" that seem to be directly derived from magic lantern views and for poorly proportioned costume colors and backgrounds, Bernard Eisenschitz even believes that \"all the critics\" condemn the colors.\n\"The Toll of the Sea\", on the other hand, has a well-defined and stable image, with bright orange and red tones, but a tendency towards brown and impasto in the rendering of vegetal exteriors and distances. Repeating the choices of the inventors of Kinemacolor, Technicolor's engineers prioritize skin tones and sacrifice the blue of the sea and sky, which leads to a \"paradoxical coexistence of the natural and the ornamental\". Professionals enthusiastically receive both films and help to create a demand for natural colors, due to the disappearance of the effects of colored fringes of previous processes and the beauty of subtractive duotone, perceived as providing \"everything that can be desired\", particularly the rendering of flesh tones which acquire the quality of \"exquisite\" paintings \"endowed with life\" However, it would take four years for a second film, made entirely in Technicolor, to be released, which would be Fairbanks'.\nThe difficulties of printing these films betray the still experimental nature of the processes. It was not until four months after the premiere of \"The Toll of the Sea\" that the film went into general release, due to Technicolor's lengthy process of developing prints. These logistical problems led Technicolor to increase the development capacity of its Boston plant, open a small laboratory in Hollywood, and then solicit producers to obtain the work needed to supply this increased production capacity. Herbert Kalmus, the president of Technicolor, proposed to Cecil B. DeMille to shoot color sequences for the film \"The Ten Commandments\" in 1923 at his own expense. Their success with the public convinced Jesse Lasky, the head of Paramount, to take the risk of signing a contract with Technicolor in November 1923 for a western with several scenes in Technicolor, \"Wanderer of the Wasteland\", which was released in 1924 and whose \"pictorial beauty\" was praised by the press. The New York Herald Tribune reviewer, however, noted that it was impossible to concentrate on the story when \"images far more beautiful than the works of the great masters\" were parading by. Its director, Irvin Willat, pays particular attention to the film's chromatic balance, seeking to avoid overly bright red and green tones and not separating himself during the shooting of reference watercolor charts. It leverages the consistency between Technicolor's palette and the orange and green tones characteristic of the Southwestern United States. However, several factors mitigated the film's success: Technicolor took more than a year to deliver the 280 prints ordered by Paramount, the cost of color printing was high, and the process of gluing two films back to back made the prints fragile.\nDespite the interest it aroused, the Technicolor process remained little used by the film industry prior to \"The Black Pirate\", which continues to prefer tinting and turning, and even coloring for certain special effects, and to reserve its use for particular sequences. For example, in \"\", the biblical scenes were constructed like paintings. The studios' reluctance was due to the cost and production limitations of the Technicolor print, as well as concerns about the potentially deleterious effect of natural colors, which were said to tire the viewer and distract them from the narrative.\nBeginnings.\n\"The Black Pirate\" project was born more than three years before it was filmed, in the context of a literary vogue on the theme of pirates in the United States, which is self-integrated in a \"Peter Pan business culture\" marked by the desire of young urban whites not to grow up, to do their job like a game, and to be able to attribute their social success to their eternal youthfulness. This vogue resulted in the development of a visual stereotype of the \"mythical pirate\", a mixture of a sixteenth-century sailor and a gypsy with a scarf on his head, an earring and a scarf at his waist, created by Howard Pyle, who trained and inspired cartoonists Maxfield Parrish and N. C. Wyeth.\nFrom the outset, Fairbanks associated the project of a pirate film with that of a color film. Before the release of \"The Toll of the Sea\", the actor and producer had been skeptical about the interest of this type of process, declaring that it was only a \"fetish\" and that adding color would be as useless as \"putting lipstick on Venus de Milo\". After attending the premiere of \"The Toll of the Sea\", he contacted Kalmus and expressed interest in the process. He then linked the project of a pirate film to that of a color film on a regular basis. He declared in January 1923: \"All the pirate movies I've seen are disappointing because they're in black and white. Color is the theme and flavor of piracy\".\nIn 1923, Fairbanks stated that the film would not be shot in the shades of red and green that he believed had spoiled other productions, but in pastel shades in the style of a Maxfield Parrish painting. This would create a very different reference to what would be the chromatic tone of \"The Black Pirate\", but which evokes the dyed prologue of \"The Thief of Baghdad\". Maxfield Parrish, one of the most famous American illustrators of the 1920s, was above all known for the use of a \"fairytale\" cobalt blue \u2014 Parrish Blue \u2014 Surrounded by pastel tones, as in the illustration opposite, as well as for his joyful treatment of children's stories that earned him the nickname \"Peter Pan of illustration\". Fairbanks first hired him as artistic director for \"The Thief of Baghdad\" before abandoning this collaboration, as the painter's projects proved to be unfeasible. The film was nevertheless presented as imbued with the \"feeling of a rich Parrish blue\", a quality particularly evident in its poster, which is often erroneously attributed to this artist.\nJackie Coogan would later claim to have given Fairbanks the idea of \"The Black Pirate\" in 1922, praising Howard Pyle's \"Book of Pirates\" that he had just read, from which Douglas Fairbanks immediately drew a first draft of the screenplay, according to him. At the time, Ernst Lubitsch was considered a specialist in historical films in costume. In November 1922, after being invited to Hollywood by Fairbanks' wife, Mary Pickford, Lubitsch stated that he was going to direct Fairbanks in a \"swashbuckling romance of the time of the pirates\" of which the actor, for his part, said he still had only a vague idea. There was talk of entrusting the writing of the screenplay to Edward Knoblock and the female lead to Evelyn Brent. At the end of 1922, Fairbanks was obsessed with the pirate film being shown, and Mary Pickford gave him an old model of a galleon for Christmas.\nIn 1923, the film press reported many rumors about the imminent start of production of the pirate film. At the beginning of the year, it was stated that Lubitsch would directed it; then, that this task would be entrusted to Raoul Walsh, as Lubitsch had begun work on \"Rosita\" with Mary Pickford. A little later, it was revealed that Fairbanks had hired Dwight Franklin, a diorama designer considered a specialist in piracy; as the start of filming is neared, the working title became \"The Black Pirate\", and was originally to be a big-budget sea film set in the Middle Ages.\nThe press also began reporting on the film that would become \"The Thief of Baghdad\", struggling to distinguish between the two projects. According to one source, Fairbanks led the pirate film at the same time as another with an \"Arab setting\", while for another, he was working on a single movie, whose oriental title and plot conceal a screenplay borrowed from Rafael Sabatini's \"Captain Blood\". A few weeks later, Fairbanks explained that he decided to incorporate some of the ideas developed for his pirate film into the oriental-themed one, which Walsh would direct. The pirate film was postponed, in particular, due to the number of shoots underway in this genre (including \"Peter Pan\", \"Strangers of the Night\", \"The Sea Hawk\", and \"Captain Blood\"), as well as because the available color processes did not satisfy Fairbanks. At the time, he hesitated between Prizma Color and Technicolor. Although the latter was more successful and had an advantage in terms of sharpness and speed of shooting, it lacked in terms of color fidelity: \"reddish-brown dominates, light yellows, and blues are not rendered as by the Prizma process\", which was problematic if you wanted to get a palette like Maxfield Parrish's. Fairbanks experimented with both processes, and recognized that the problems are both logistical and chromatic. It did not exist before 1924 in California as a laboratory to develop and print copies of color films, Prizma's in Brooklyn, and Technicolor's in Boston, which led to a fifteen-day wait for the results of the Prizma tests. Additionally, printing capacities were still limited. Albert Parker, the director of \"The Black Pirate\", confirmed in 1926 that Fairbanks had only given up shooting the film in 1923 because he could not do it in color.\nPre-production.\nBy 1925, the context had changed enough to lead Fairbanks to consider producing his color pirate film. Such a big-budget film in full color was a boon for Technicolor, but a significant risk for Fairbanks.\nFrom the birth of the project of a pirate film, in 1922, Fairbanks affirmed that color was \"the theme and the flavor of piracy\", because pirates \"suggest colour to the imagination\" and that it would be \"impossible to film a story about them in a satisfactory way in black and white\". Joshua Yumibe explains this function of color by drawing on Walter Benjamin's analyses of color copper engraving in children's books. According to Benjamin, color opens up a space of play that \"immerses the imagination in itself\" by promoting what he calls an \"innervation\", a \"mimetic imitation of the work by the spectator\". According to this analysis, the function of color is not to create an illusion of reality, but a sensual experience of enchantment, of \"stereoscopic depth\".\nDespite this intention, Fairbanks, like other American filmmakers of his time, believed that color was a distraction that presented, in addition to the risk of tiring the audience, the risk of \"taking all attention away from the acting and the facial expression, by staining and confusing the action.\" He thus shared a suspicion of the sensual, spectacular, metaphorical dimension, even ornamental color. He evokes what he calls \"conventional doubts\" about it, in particular the idea that it \"militates against the simplicity and direct action\" of black and white. These doubts are notably those of Cecil B. DeMille, who suggests that color should be discreet to avoid interfering with the narrative. According to DeMille, the viewer's eye cannot \"bear too much tension,\" and the variety of colors can distract attention from the story.\nThis prejudice about color dates back in particular to a commercial conflict in the 1900s and 1910s between Path\u00e9's stencil-colored films and those of its American competitors in black and white, in the context of specifically American cultural developments, such as the rise of half-tone printing at the expense of chromolithography and that of a \"virilist\" aesthetic of authenticity to the detriment of a supposedly feminine delectation for imitation. This aesthetic translates into a preference for plausible play, as opposed to \"histrionic\" play, and a moderate use of color, which does not distract from the narrative, to bring a psychological rather than an optical realism.\nIn May 1925, before confirming his decision and on the advice of Kalmus, Fairbanks therefore commissioned two university professors of ophthalmology, Ray Irvine and M. F. Weymann, to carry out a study of the comparative effect on visual fatigue of a color film \"(Wanderer of the Wasteland)\" and a black and white film \"(Don Q, Son of Zorro)\". It emerges that, contrary to a prejudice of the time related to the colored fringes of the first films in additive synthesis, not only is it more tiring to read a newspaper for 45 minutes than to watch a film in black and white or color, but in addition, a film in Technicolor is no more tiring for the eyes than a film in black and white and seems on the contrary to be less so.\nIn July 1925, Kalmus traveled to Hollywood for two weeks to talk with Fairbanks, his brother Robert Fairbanks, and their production manager, Theodore Reed. They argued that the film was going to cost a million dollars. They requested guarantees from Technicolor regarding its ability to deliver prints of satisfactory quality. To resolve the problem, the engineering firm Kalmus, Comstock &amp; Wescott, Inc., which had developed all of Technicolor's industrial processes, undertook to provide the color prints in the event of a Technicolor failure. Fairbanks also won a special award for color film as well as the provision of four of the seven Technicolor cameras in existence at the time, so that each shot could be filmed with two Technicolor cameras placed side by side and equipped with lenses of the same focal length, while two other cameras were ready to replace them in case of a problem.\nDirector Albert Parker, sharing the \"chromophobic\" prejudice of Hollywood, initially had an adverse reaction to the project of a color film: \"When [Fairbanks] told me he was going to do \"The Black Pirate\" in color, I thought, 'Oh my God... The color is appalling... At the time, we did \"The Glorious Adventure\", horrible.\"\nHowever, by visiting an exhibition of paintings by \"old masters\" at the Huntington Library in Pasadena, Rembrandt in particular, Parker found a solution to prevent the film from looking like a \"cheap postcard\". He brought to Fairbanks, who agreed with him: \"no bright colors, but calm, mixed and toned tones,\" so that the viewer is not even aware of the coloring. In particular, Fairbanks is said to have noticed, on examination of Rembrandt's paintings in the Huntington collection, a subordination of the colors to the harmony and unity of the overall composition, the saturated tones being masked and harmonized by a neutral shadow in such a way that no stain of color attracted the attention but the only overall impression is that of restraint. Fairbanks contrasted Rembrandt, who \"was mainly concerned with theatrical compositions which he presented in discreet tones, like a golden brown\", with Gainsborough, who could all the more easily be a great colorist because his subjects were at rest. He was not to suggest movement.\nDespite these references to the paintings of the \"great masters\", which were frequently taken up by Fairbanks' communication, the film's critics spoke more about the sparing use of bright colors in favor of muted colors, the influence of American illustrators from the Howard Pyle school, in particular Maxfield Parrish.\nTechnicolor then undertook \"tests with six different levels of color, ranging from a level of saturation barely more tinted than black and white to the most saturated rendering of which the Technicolor process was capable\", at the end of which Fairbanks chose to use a very \"restricted\" and desaturated palette.\nTo determine how to restrict the color, how to work without blue and yellow, and how to make sure that the color recorded on the film corresponds to what is desired, Fairbanks' team, with the help of Technicolor technicians, embarked on a preliminary research program that lasted several months.\nAccording to Fairbanks, these experiments show that color shooting \"records what is presented to it with such avidity that the problem is not to be able to nourish it sufficiently, but to bring the tones back to soft, almost neutral hues.\" This is why \"only dark greens, silvery hues, and chrome yellows are used, on backgrounds of grey-green seas, greyish sand dunes and washed skies in neutral tones\", in order to obtain a general effect that is \"rather warmth than color, animation rather than true pigmentation\", \"a softer vision, which envelops the sharp points and contours, \u2026 beautifies and glorifies, like the eye of the idealist; in a word, [an] Impressionist painting effect\". In February 1926, he declared to a journalist: \"Some colors like purple can't be photographed at all. Therefore, the effect of this process is not at all natural, even if it is referred to as natural colors. Our problem was therefore to overcome this artificiality by an artifice.\"\nApplying what they consider to be a principle of Rembrandt's, putting bright colors only in the shadows to attenuate them, Fairbanks' operators also apply themselves to attenuating them by relegating them to the background: \"for example, there were painters who were always ready to intervene, in such a way that if a man dressed in light color was forced by the necessities of the action to get closer to the camera, it was immediately covered with a dust of a darker color\". In application of the choice to favor green and brown, only very rare touches of red were allowed on the set, to mark blood or fire, and their presence on the screen was so brief that their effect was \"more mental than visual.\"\nParker, aware of the difficulty of rendering the blue of the sky, believes that the film should be taken as an artistic \"idealization\" where the skies are \"almost white, with just a very slight touch of a warm brown\". On the other hand, he admitted that a scene where the sky must be blue is not the most successful. Thousands of liters of water also had to be tinted to make it appear on the screen in the desired color.\nAccording to Thorp, \"all the free time\" in the six months leading up to filming was devoted to color testing for sets, make-up, and costumes. These tests quickly showed that the same paint does not produce the same color on the film, depending on whether it is applied to two different substrates; however, two shades could match on the film even though they clashed in reality. The walls of the studios were painted with samples of all shades to appreciate the rendering of each of them, and from there build a color chart to determine which color an object should be painted or dyed, to obtain the desired result on the screen. This process was complicated by the fact that the color rendering changed depending on whether the lighting was natural or artificial. In view of this compilation of color charts, the decision was made to paint or dye all the costumes, sets and accessories to control their chromatic rendering. On the subject of color essays, Albert Parker develops the notion of \"color personality\", explaining that cinematic actors in black and white are not necessarily also cinegenic in color, but that it seems complicated to characterize what gives a good color personality other than what he calls a \"quality of the soul\". In contrast, cinegenic in black and white is essentially reduced to the geometry of the face. \"Disconcertingly\", out of 300 color essays for the female lead, only a dozen revealed real color personalities, of great variety.\nFor their part, Technicolor's engineers adjusted the color print to meet Fairbanks' expectations. To do this, on the initiative of Arthur Ball and despite their personal preference for more saturated colors, they used \"blackened dyes\" to dye the color stripes, i.e. dyes to which black had been added to \"modulate\" their brilliance. Kalmus notes how well the result corresponds to the desired effect: the skin tones are softer, excess red is reduced, and the prints \"have an absence of grain, a softness of texture, as well as a sharpness and clarity of the faces that are highly satisfactory\".\nCasting.\nFairbanks surrounded himself with a group of talented performers. For the role of MacTavish, he chose Donald Crisp, who had directed him in \"Don Q, Son of Zorro\" (1925), and also played the film\u2019s main villain. Sam de Grasse, who had played the role of the lecherous Prince John in \"Robin Hood\" (1922), was awarded the role of the pirate lieutenant, while Anders Randolph was given the role of the ill-fated pirate captain. Randolph had prior fencing experience, which aided in his performance. Charles Stevens, who had supported Fairbanks in many films, including \"The Three Musketeers\" (1921) and \"Robin Hood\", was cast as the pirate whose job it is to blow up ships after his crewmates had ransacked them.\nFor the role of the heroine, Fairbanks originally wanted an unknown actress. However, after seeing Billie Dove in \"Wanderer of the Wasteland\", he offered her the role. In an interview made many years later, she recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was making a lumbering picture, \"The Ancient Highway\", for Paramount. We were up in Washington state when I received a call from Doug Fairbanks. He said, \u201cBillie, are you finished with that picture?\u201d\nI said, \u201cI haven\u2019t the vaguest idea.\u201d\nHe said, \u201cWell, when you know it\u2019s going to be finished, I want you to call me because I want you for my leading lady in \"The Black Pirate\".\u201d Doug must have seen \"Wanderer of the Wasteland\" and liked the way I photographed in Technicolor.\nScenario.\nIn early 1922, after the success of \"The Mark of Zorro\" (1920), Fairbanks invited Johnston McCulley, the author of the novel on which the film is based, to propose a new subject. McCulley presented various ideas, including a sequel to Zorro with pirates and a story of chivalry (which would become \"Robin Hood\" after modification). The specialized press was quick to announce that Fairbanks' next film would be a Zorro adventure with pirates, but the news was denied after a month. However, it was planned that the story, entitled \"The Further Adventures of Zorro\", would be published as a serial release, so that the upcoming film, starring the same actors as \"The Mark of Zorro\", can build on the expected success with the readership. Fairbanks bought the rights to the story in 1922 and reused several elements of it in the screenplay of \"The Black Pirate\", including the character played by Donald Crisp, the capture of the heroine by the pirates, Fairbanks' acrobatics in the sails of the ship and the final intervention of his acolytes. \"The Black Pirate\" also takes up the stereotypes of the hero's secret identity and the superiority of a normative political order over its violent negation by pirates.\nThe film's synopsis is based, in addition to McCulley's story, on a screenplay called \"The Black Pirate\" written in 1923 for Fairbanks by Eugene Wiley Presbrey, as well as elements of Robert Louis Stevenson's \"Treasure Island\" and J. M. Barrie's \"Peter Pan\". Despite these borrowings, the authorship of the film's synopsis is claimed by Fairbanks, as with most of his films, under the pen name (formed from his middle and third names) of Elton Thomas. The final version, however, was developed in collaboration with screenwriter Jack Cunningham and Lotta Woods, Fairbanks' secretary and screenwriter.\nHowever, this is not strictly speaking a detailed scenario: according to a claim published in the New York Times and attributed to Ted Reed, Fairbanks' production manager, or Fairbanks itself, \"there is no script\", but only a \"set plot\" and a \"shooting schedule\" where the action was summarized in less than 2,000 words and which dealt only with the essence of the action, leaving Fairbanks more room for improvisation during filming. For his part, Albert Parker believes that the concern to balance the use of color to give the viewer the feeling of the pirate world and the development of a plot led to the latter being limited to a \"succession of situations\", the narrative framework being reduced to a simple thread. According to Bernard Eisenschitz, the simplification of the story and the slowing down of its pace are intended to focus the viewer's attention on the colors. Paul Rotha, for his part, considers this film to be one of Fairbanks' best and sees in it \"a collection of impossible situations in wonderful settings\".\nThe simplification of the script results in a reduced number of scenes, 750 compared to an average of 1,000 to 3,000 for a feature film, and intertitles (only 78). According to Ralph Hancock, it is one of the main qualities of the film. Jeffrey Richards, for the same reason, considers him one of the best in Fairbanks:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Neither based on a classic novel, nor burdened with court intrigues, it is entirely a cinematographic creation: a film light as air, graceful as a pavane, joyful as a summer day [...] Just like the conception of his production, the content of the story is rigorously stylized. It's a distillation of all pirate myths.\nSet design.\n \nThe artistic direction of the film was entrusted to Carl Oscar Borg, a self-taught painter and former sailor, known for his illustrations of the Southwest United States, whom Fairbanks had previously consulted for westerns and to whom he gave great creative freedom. Borg made \"hundreds of sketches of the sets and characters\" before filming. His contribution was described in January 1926 as \"the greatest cinematographic innovation since the invention of the close-up by D. W. Griffith\", suggesting that \"the screenwriter of the future will be an artist and no longer just an author\". According to a journalist, as a \"brilliant painter\", he created \"a whole historical novel on the web even before the first turn of the crank\". He was assisted by Dwight Franklin, who was considered a specialist on pirates. While Borg designed the sets, Franklin took care of the costumes and the positioning of the actors and extras, preparing sketches each evening for the next day's filming. For his part, the English poet Robert Nichols was in charge of \"orchestrating the movement\", especially those of pirate groups by adjusting even their hand movements.\nIt was first planned to shoot on Santa Catalina Island, near Los Angeles, where other pirate film shoots have already taken place. However, it appears from the first color tests that it is too difficult to control the effect of external light is too difficult, with the chromatic rendering being \"all wrong \u2014 the yellows too yellow and the greens too violent\".\nTo control the color effects, all sets designed by Borg and his team, as well as 95% of the exteriors, were created at the Pickford-Fairbanks studio in Hollywood. A 60 by 60 meter pool, containing more than two and a half million liters of water, was built, on the edges of which were placed aircraft propellers to obtain waves one meter high. The water was colored with a green tint to avoid the uncertain rendering of blue tones. The blue of the sky that could not be rendered, so it was made into an \"idealized\" white with touches of brown, an effect produced by hanging canvases from the ceiling in gradient browns.\nFairbanks originally considered adapting old boats to the needs of filming. Instead, using Borg's plans, he decided to have a team of 380 people build four ships, including three galleons, ranging in length from 30 to 65 meters and a 100-oared galley. This task was coordinated by a specialist named \"Doc\" Wilson. To ensure the verisimilitude of details, such as hemp swellings, he employed European craftsmen, especially Norwegian. Small-sized galleons, maneuverable by a single stuntman, were specially built, as well as various boat sections. To simulate pitching for scenes with actors, these were mounted on motorized metal hoops.\nStunts.\nThe two main traits of the pirate played by Fairbanks are, as in most of his films, his smile and the ease with which he performs his stunts. By the 1910s, Fairbanks was seen as an ideal model not only of \"vigorous American masculinity\", but also a form of youthful enthusiasm often compared to Peter Pan's refusal to grow old. This double characterization as a man in whom the instincts and needs of the child are always present and who cultivates them through physical regeneration and an optimistic morality. This helped to make him an American cultural icon in the 1920s, at a time when boys' education and male models of behavior were being challenged by the arrival of women in the workforce and urban sedentarisation. To conform to this ideal image of his public persona, Fairbanks' communication constantly emphasized his \"extraordinary muscular development\" and the fact that he performed all his stunts himself, from which he derived great amusement.\nIn the 1920s, Fairbanks abandoned the character of a young man refusing to become an adult, but chose themes from children's literature and adventure novels. While being part of a situation of revenge and filiation and transposing into a prestigious epic context issues related to the affirmation of a heroic virile personality, his stunts express the nostalgia of a childlike innocence before the world of work, aiming to please both adults and children by \"making the impossible become true\". \"The Black Pirate\" was considered by critics to be an adventure \"seen through the eyes of a boy\", which \"will delight the big children that we are\", because one would have to \"have nothing that survives from childhood\" not to derive pleasure from it.\nFairbanks' expertise in stunts lay in the choreographic care taken in the preparation and innovation of the stunts. \"The Black Pirate\" features one of its most famous stunts, where he immobilizes a boat by sliding down a sail, helped only by his knife. According to William K. Everson, Fairbanks was doubled in this scene by stuntman Richard Talmadge. According to other sources, the stunt was performed by Charles Stevens or Chuck Lewis, friends of Fairbanks who played minor roles in the film. According to Booton Herndon, Rudy Behlmer, and Tracey Goessel, however, the examination of the stunt makes it possible to recognize Fairbanks. According to Robert Parrish, Fairbanks told him that Talmadge had developed the stunt and that he had shot it himself. The scene was shot in a separate set from the boat, with a tilted sail, inflated by an airplane propeller, and cameras also angled to give the illusion of verticality. The sail was pre-cut, and the knife, positioned on the side of the sail, invisible on the screen, was held on a rope and balanced by a counterweight. Fairbanks was protected by a harness and duct tape, according to a device designed by his brother Robert, the film's producer. L\u00e9on Moussinac in \"L'Humanit\u00e9\" considers this scene to be \"the only shot to remember\" from a film that is \"stupid [...] atrociously aggravated by a coloring of the images that is not frank enough to impose itself and which is strong enough to make us regret the game of white and black\".\nOn the other hand, the critic John Grierson, in a column entitled \"The Pink Pirate\", published in 1926, considered that the light atmosphere and the extreme care given to the visual effects, which worked well in \"The Thief of Bagdad\", were detrimental to \"The Black Pirate\", which was not as dark and brutal as a film devoted to pirates should be, and instead fell into a fairytale beauty that was applied and \"eviscerated\" the film. According to him, Fairbanks twirls in the rigging \"a little too pretty\" and his combat swimmers are reminiscent of \"a group of fairies swimming under the moon\". Jeffrey Richards refers to another remarkable scene in the film, \"unforgettable and resembling a dream\", about fifty soldiers swim underwater in formation. The scene was actually shot upside down and dry, in a painted set, with each of the extras suspended by a piano wire and holding in their mouths a pipe from which small balls and feathers fell. This, once the film is turned over, gives the illusion of air bubbles. According to Henri Diamant-Berger, this sequence \"deserves to remain among the classics of cinema\".\nRelease.\nDistribution.\nThe film premiered on May 8, 1926, simultaneously at the Tivoli cinema in London, in the presence of Robert Fairbanks, crowned heads and \"eminent Parisian critics\", and in New York at the Selwyn Theatre, in the presence of Doug, Mary and, outside, a crowd that the police had difficulty containing. This New York premiere was preceded by a promotional campaign consisting of a treasure hunt, organized with the daily newspaper \"The Evening World\", and a radio broadcast of the film's accompanying music, complemented by an interview with Fairbanks. The staging of the first broadcast at the Selwyn, introduced by a performance of the song \"Dead Man's Chest\", followed by the invitation by a sepulchral voice to transport oneself in thought to the time of the pirates, is noted in the \"New York Times\" and the \"Moving Picture World\".\nAfter nine weeks, the Selwyn's exclusivity ended. Sid Grauman seized the chance to stage a West Coast premiere at Hollywood's Egyptian Theatre on May 14, 1926, pairing \"The Black Pirate\" with Mary Pickford's \"Sparrows\". Ingeniously compensating for the absence of Doug and Mary, on vacation in Europe, Grauman organized a successful event that attracted a large crowd, whose high price was justified before the screening of the two films with by the addition of dancing and inging of \"preludes\", and in sets reminiscent of those of the film. In addition, the beginning was accompanied by sound effects from under the spectators' seats.\nNational distribution began at the end of May 1926, supported by favorable reviews and the novelty effect of Technicolor. \"The Black Pirate\" was voted one of the ten best films of 1926 and one of the most popular films of 1927. By the end of 1927, the revenue from its American operations amounted to $1,730,000. A total of 416 copies were ordered from Technicolor, which took a year to deliver. However, because of the high costs, which amounted to $847,000, including $170,000 for the Technicolor print run that was three times more expensive than a black and white one, the film was one of the least profitable of those produced by Fairbanks, surpassed only in this respect by the expensive \"The Thief of Baghdad\".\nInternationally, the film's distribution capitalized on the \"global star\" status of Fairbanks and the success of his previous swashbuckling films. In 1926, he was one of the most popular stars in Korea, which led to record-breaking distribution rights for his films. The exclusive first rights to \"The Black Pirate\" in Seoul sparked a resounding competition between exhibitors, leading to police intervention before the rights were awarded to the Dansungsa theatre for the Korean-speaking audience and the Ogonkan theatre for the Japanese-language audience. The film was also a great success in India.\nTechnical problems.\nWhile specialized operators had supervised the screening of the premieres, many difficulties arise during the screening in ordinary theaters. In particular because projectionists, after screening black-and-white newsreels, refrained from changing the setting of their projectors, despite the recommendations given to them by Technicolor to avoid problems related to operating errors.\nThe double emulsion process not only poses problems with adjusting the sharpness of the projection but also makes the film more prone to scratches and poor workmanship, such as air bubbles between the two glued strips that create blurring. In addition, the humidity variations and the contraction caused by the heat released by the arc lamps of the projectors create curves \"(cupping)\" that prevent focus and sometimes cause the film to detach, making it unusable. It was then necessary to return these films to the Technicolor laboratory in Boston for repair, or even to prepare replacement copies and make them quickly available anywhere. Herbert Kalmus summed it up: \"the film was a great success but our troubles never ended\". These setbacks had the opposite effect to that expected by Technicolor, as commercial success revealed technical failure. They caused apprehension among the studios and, consequently, a contraction of Technicolor's order book.\nTechnicolor did not design the two-strip glued process used to produce \"The Black Pirate\" as the best possible solution, but as a step in a gradual process leading to the superimposition of several layers of color on a single film. To achieve this, the engineers had broken down the problem into several aspects, first the production of tanned matrices, glued together at first (Technicolor Process No. 2), then the imbibition of the reliefs by dyes and their transfer by hydrotypic discharge on a neutral film coated with a layer of etched gelatin (Technicolor Process No. 3). Unlike Technicolor process 2, the two positives obtained by the separation carried out behind the lens are not intended to be colored, but hardened, to form \"matrices\" that allow, like the lithographic process, printing on a neutral support. The principle of this process was discovered by Technicolor engineers before 1925. Still, a disagreement with Kalmus, leading to a split within the company, delayed the development of the process, which was therefore not usable for the release of \"The Black Pirate\". However, the desire to meet Fairbanks' demands and, above all, to satisfy him enough to obtain the market for his next film led Technicolor's managers to hasten the development of an imbibition process. Fairbanks was particularly concerned about the lack of sharpness of the color image. He considered alleviating the problem by increasing the light output of the projectors. Still, he found that, while this solution did improve the depth of field, it increased the intensity of the color more than he had intended. The problem was solved by imbibition printing and the addition of a \"blackened dye\", i.e. a third pass adding a black \"silhouette\". Kalmus emphasizes the superiority of this three-layer print: \"Flesh tones have more softness, more color, and there is no more excess red tone.\" He also notes the \"very great difference in the clarity of the facial expression \u2026 the absence of grain, the regularity of the textures and a very satisfactory appearance of contrast and clarity\".\n\"The Black Pirate\" was in release long enough that copies of Technicolor No. 2 coexisted with others of Technicolor No. 3. As this last process allows for better preservation of the colors, the survival of such copies today provides valuable information for assessing the original colors, as the surviving copies in Technicolor No. 2 are unusable or very degraded.\nAftermath.\nFairbanks and Technicolor.\nIn February 1927, Fairbanks planned to shoot a new film that would become \"The Gaucho\". He wondered if the subject required color, like piracy. Eager to obtain a new contract, Herbert Kalmus and his collaborators tried to show him that the new imbibition process solved both the problems of the fragility of the copies and those of color adjustment, thanks to the printing of a black layer that allows the color tone to be modulated during the print run. Fairbanks ran more than 3,000 meters of color tests in four different tones and was ready to exploit a broader chromatic palette than that of \"The Black Pirate\". However, in June 1927, he decided to use color only for a prologue scene and a miracle scene, a process that seemed to confer dignity on Mary Pickford's representation of the Virgin. Two weeks before the premiere, he changed his mind again and completely renounced color, considering that \"the mix of media is basically in bad taste\". The Technicolor prologue, however, was kept for the world premiere at Grauman's Chinese Theatre, and for the New York premiere, at the Liberty Theatre.\nIn 1929, following the advent of talkies, Fairbanks decided to shoot \"The Taming of the Shrew\" with Mary Pickford, the only film in which they starred together as the lead actors. The film was first conceived and announced as being with sound and color. At that time, however, the Technicolor process had become more sought after. The limited number of cameras available meant that only one scene at the end of the film could be considered, for which a test was conducted. Due to the scheduling difficulties created by the high demand for Technicolor on other shoots, Fairbanks and Pickford renounced it.\nTo address the inability to use Technicolor, Fairbanks and Pickford turned to Sonochrome, a newly marketed, pre-tinted monochrome film by Eastman Kodak, which had only just begun to market with the argument that the dye did not mask the soundtrack. Selected from eighteen available shades, Sonochrome aimed to evoke a \"warm Italian atmosphere\". However, it proved to be a technical and commercial failure. Joshua Yumibe, nonetheless, argues that \"color consciousness\" was put forward for his promotion, even though it is rooted in archaic conceptions of the moral value of colors inherited from Goethe, which would be taken over a few years later by Natalie Kalmus to promote Technicolor.\nTechnicolor and pirate films.\n\"The Black Pirate\" serves as a \"hidden model\" for the film \"The Viking\" (1928), directed by Roy William Neill. The latter, which evokes medieval Viking pirates, shared with Fairbanks the same screenwriter, Jack Cunningham, the same production designer, Carl Oscar Borg, the same production manager, Theodore Reed, and two of the lead actors, Donald Crisp and Anders Randolf. Technicolor produced it on a budget of $325,000 to prove the superiority of the imbibition process, both in terms of colors and film behavior. It was also the first full-length film in color to be accompanied by a musical soundtrack. Herbert Kalmus was closely responsible for all aspects of production and color control was overseen by his ex-wife Natalie Kalmus. Several authors believed that the film should have been nicknamed \"The White Pirate\" in so much so that it was imbued with a \"Nordic romanticism\", accentuated borrowing Richard Wagner's music onto the soundtrack, with heroine Pauline Starke's Valkyrie outfit and the striking color contrasts in the service of a \"racialized\" discourse on the history of the settlement of the United States. The film met with only limited success, except communities of Scandinavian origin, which Herbert Kalmus attributes to the American public's preference for hairless faces, while long moustaches, like the one worn by Donald Crisp in the film, sometimes \"fill the whole screen\".\nSeveral other films attest to the special link between pirates and color in cinema that Fairbanks intuited. In particular, \"The Black Swan\", a 1942 big-budget film based on a novel by Rafael Sabatini, received an Academy Award for its use of three-color Technicolor, which gave saturated colors to sunsets and Maureen O'Hara's red hair. This film made it possible, thanks to the three-color Technicolor, to highlight the three colors of \"special significance\" for the pirate film as a genre, blue, black, and red. It inaugurated a second wave of association of the Technicolor process with pirate themes, culminating with \"The Crimson Pirate\" (1952), which was more \"carnivalesque\" and less \"flamboyant\". Several critics have noted the similarity between Burt Lancaster's acrobatics and those of Fairbanks, as well as the nod to an underwater scene. After the latter, the genre of the color pirate film experienced a decline, due to budget constraints, changes in viewers' expectations, and monotony.\nRestoration and home media.\nThe copyright for \"The Black Pirate\" is now in the public domain. In 1999, a restored print was released on DVD by Kino Video. A blu-ray edition, also from Kino was released in 2004 and reissued by them in 2010. In 2023, a new blu-ray edition from the Cohen Media Group was released on a double-bill with \"Robin Hood\".\n\"The Black Pirate\" was given a major restoration in 2023 by the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York. As MoMA curator Dave Kehr explains:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The restoration of \"The Black Pirate\" required returning to the original camera negatives for the first time in 50 years. Fairbanks shot the film with five cameras simultaneously, creating four color negatives and one black-and-white. The restoration process required the painstaking review of hundreds of film cans containing unedited raw footage from the B, C, and D negatives. Additionally, three edited reels of the long-lost A negative\u2014the preferred source\u2014were rediscovered in the process and became central to the restoration.\nModern digital restoration techniques were used to faithfully reconstruct the film\u2019s original color scheme. The red and green color records were precisely realigned, and missing shots were culled from across the different negatives. Although no original color prints of \"The Black Pirate\" are known to survive, an early test reel printed in Technicolor\u2019s dye-transfer process, combined with documentation in the Technicolor archive, allowed the original look to be recreated. With its rich browns and greens, the results look quite a bit different from the thin, gray colors of the previous photochemical restoration.\nThis restored print received its world premiere at the BFI London Film Festival on October 15, 2023. It was also screened at the San Francisco Silent Film Festival on April 10, 2024, and at the Academy Museum of Motion Pictures in Hollywood on November 24, 2024.\nLegacy.\nFairbanks biographer Jeffrey Vance maintains that \u201c\"The Black Pirate\" was the most carefully prepared and controlled work of Fairbanks\u2019s entire career\u201d and \u201cthe most important feature-length silent film designed entirely for color cinematography.\u201d Vance believes the limitations imposed by early Technicolor forced him to remove the \"pageantry and visual effects\" of his earlier swashbuckler and produce a straightforward action adventure. \"The result was a refreshing return to form and a dazzling new showcase for the actor-producer\u2019s favorite production value: himself. Fairbanks is resplendent as the bold buccaneer and buoyed by a production brimming with rip-roaring adventure and spiced with exceptional stunts and swordplay, including the celebrated \u2018sliding down the sails\u2019 sequence, arguably the most famous set piece of the entire Fairbanks treasure chest.\u201d\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73372", "revid": "5839510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73372", "title": "Blacksmith Scene", "text": "Blacksmith Scene (also known as Blacksmith Scene #1 and Blacksmithing Scene) is an 1893 American short black-and-white silent film directed by William K.L. Dickson, the Scottish-French inventor who, while under the employ of Thomas Edison, developed one of the first fully functional motion picture cameras. It is historically significant as the first Kinetoscope film shown in public exhibition on May 9, 1893, and is the earliest known example of actors performing a role in a film. It was also the first U.S. motion picture film ever copyrighted that same year. 102 years later, in 1995, \"Blacksmithing Scene\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". It is the second-oldest film included in the Registry, after \"Newark Athlete\" (1891).\nProduction.\nThe film was produced by the Edison Manufacturing Company, which had begun making films in 1890 under the direction of William K.L. Dickson. It was filmed entirely within the Black Maria studio at West Orange, New Jersey, in the United States, which is widely referred to as \"America's First Movie Studio\". It is believed to have been filmed in April 1893 and was shown publicly, in a Kinetoscope viewer, at the Brooklyn Institute on May 9, 1893.\nAccording to the Internet Movie Database, the film was made in a 35\u00a0mm format with an aspect ratio of 1.33:1. The movie was intended to be displayed on a Kinetoscope. Dickson selected a lens that worked best for medium shots and medium close-up shots and probably stationed his camera approximately ten to twelve feet from the anvil.\nThe men featured are not true blacksmiths, nor are they in a blacksmith shop working on metal: they are performers on a set pretending to be blacksmiths and to have a drink in between. While the background is simply left black, the crew went through some trouble to bring in a real anvil, real sledgehammers and leather aprons.\nCurrent status.\nA surviving 35-mm print of this film was found at the Henry Ford Museum; it is the source of the negative preserved by the Museum of Modern Art film archive. Another copy is at the Edison National Historic Site, administered by the National Park Service. Because the film was finished before 1925, its copyright has expired; it is freely available on the World Wide Web.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73373", "revid": "1313727927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73373", "title": "Malvasia", "text": "Variety of wine grape\nMalvasia (), also known as Malvazia, is a group of wine grape varieties grown historically in the Mediterranean region and Macaronesia, but now grown in many of the winemaking regions of the world. In the past, the names Malvasia, Malvazia, and Malmsey have been used interchangeably for Malvasia-based wines; however, in modern oenology, \"Malmsey\" is now used almost exclusively for a sweet variety of Madeira wine made from the Malvasia grape. Grape varieties in this family include Malvasia bianca, Malvasia di Schierano, Malvasia negra, Malvasia nera, Malvasia nera di Brindisi, Malvasia di Candia aromatica, Malvasia odorosissima, and a number of other varieties.\nMalvasia wines are produced in Greece (regions of Peloponnese, Cyclades and Crete), Italy (including Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Lombardia, Apulia, Sicily, Lipari, Calabria, Emilia-Romagna, and Sardinia), Slovenia (including Istria), Croatia (including Istria), Corsica, the Iberian Peninsula, the Canary Islands, the island of Madeira, California, Arizona, New Mexico, Australia and Brazil. These grapes are used to produce white (and more rarely red) table wines, dessert wines, and fortified wines of the same name, or are sometimes used as part of a blend of grapes, such as in Vin Santo.\nHistory.\nMost ampelographers believe that the Malvasia family of grapes are of ancient origin, most likely originating in Crete, Greece. The name \"Malvasia\" comes from the Italian name for Monemvasia, a medieval and early Renaissance Byzantine fortress on the coast of Laconia in southern Greece; the town's port acted as a trading center for wine produced in the eastern Peloponnese and perhaps in some of the Cyclades. During the Middle Ages, the Venetians became so prolific in the trading of Malvasia wine that merchant wine-shops in Venice were known as \"malvasie\". The occasional claim that the name might come from the district of Malevizi, near Iraklion, Crete, is not taken seriously by scholars.\nMalmsey was one of the three major wines exported from Greece in medieval times. (For other examples, see Rumney wine and Cretan wine). \nEnglish historical tradition associates Malmsey wine with the 1478 death of George Plantagenet, 1st Duke of Clarence, brother of King Edward IV of England. Following his conviction for treason, he was \"privately executed\" at the Tower of London on 18 February 1478, by tradition in the Bowyer Tower; soon after the event, the rumour gained ground that he was drowned in a butt of malmsey wine, as dramatized in Shakespeare's \"Richard III\"..\nBoth Monemvasia and Candia have lent their names to modern grape varieties. In Greece there is a variety known as Monemvasia, evidently named after the port, though now grown primarily in the Cyclades. In western Europe, a common variety of Malvasia is known as \"Malvasia Bianca di Candia\" (white malmsey of Crete), from its reputed origin in that area. The Monemvasia grape was long thought to be ancestral to the western European Malvasia varieties, but recent DNA analysis does not suggest a close relationship between Monemvasia and any Malvasia varieties. DNA analysis does, however, suggest that the Athiri wine grape (a variety widely planted throughout Greece) is ancestral to Malvasia.\nGrape varieties and wine regions.\nMost varieties of Malvasia are closely related to Malvasia bianca. One notable exception is the variety known as Malvasia di Candia which is a distinctly different sub-variety of Malvasia. Malvasia bianca is grown widely throughout the world in places like Italy; Sitges in Catalonia, with the renowned variety Malvasia de Sitges; the San Joaquin Valley of California; or the Greek Islands of Paros and Syros. Throughout Central Italy, Malvasia is often blended with Trebbiano to add flavor and texture to the wine. In Rioja, it performs a similar function when blended with Viura.\nCroatian varieties.\nMalvazija Istarska got the name after peninsula of Istria shared between Croatia, Slovenia and Italy (see also Slovene and Italian varieties). It represents one of the main white wines of Croatian Istria and the north Dalmatian coast. The vine was introduced to the area by Venetian merchants who brought cuttings from Greece. The malvasia is called \"malvazija\" in Croatian. It is the main white wine in the region.\nThe Dalmatian \"Mara\u0161tina\" (also known as \"Rukatac\" etc.) is identical to the Italian variety \"Malvasia Lunga\".\nItalian varieties.\nMalvasia Bianca di Candia is Italy's most widely planted Malvasia. \nIn Italy this wine is grown in the Friuli-Venezia Giulia region in Collio DOC and Isonzo DOC. The name comes from the Istria peninsula, which takes in parts of Croatia, Slovenia, and Italy (see also Croatian and Slovene varieties). The vine was introduced into the area by Venetian merchants who brought cuttings from Greece. Malvasia Istriana is also found in the Colli Piacentini region of Emilia, where it is used to make sparkling wine known locally as \"champagnino\" or \"little Champagne\".\nIn the 19th century and early 20th century, sweet \"passito\" style dessert wines made from the Malvasia grape were held in high esteem and considered among Italy's finest wines. Following the Second World War, lack of interest in the consumer market led to a sharp decline in plantings, with many varieties going to the verge of extinction. Today only a few dedicated producers are still making these Malvasia dessert wines from local varieties including the Malvasia di Grottaferrata in Lazio and the Malvasia di Bosa and Malvasia di Planargia in Sardinia.\nSince the 1980s, dessert wines made from the Malvasia delle Lipari variety has seen a resurgence in interest on the volcanic Aeolian Islands off the north east coast of Sicily. With distinctive orange notes, this Sicilian wine saw its peak of popularity just before the phylloxera epidemic, when more than 2.6 million gallons (100,000 hectoliters) were produced annually.\nWhile most varieties of Malvasia produce white wine, Malvasia nera is a red wine variety that in Italy is used primarily as a blending grape, being valued for the dark color and aromatic qualities it can add to a wine. Piedmont is the only significant region to make this varietal Malvasia nera, with two DOC zones covering less than 250 acres (100 hectares): Malvasia di Casorzo and Malvasia di Castelnuovo Don Bosco. In the Apulian regions of Brindisi and Lecce it is blended with Negroamaro, while in the 1970s &amp; 1980s, it was a frequent blending partner of Sangiovese in Tuscany. In recent times, Cabernet Sauvignon has been supplanting Malvasia nera in Tuscany in both planting and in use as a blending partner with Sangiovese. Other regions growing Malvasia nera include the Bolzano region of Alto Adige, Sardinia, Basilicata and Calabria. Malvasia nera wines are often noted for their rich chocolate notes with black plums and floral aromas.\nThe Lazio region of Frascati is the source of the majority of plantings of Malvasia di Candia, a distinct sub-variety of Malvasia that is not part of the Malvasia bianca branch of the grape family. It is most often used for blending with the related Malvasia Puntinata and Malvasia di Lazio being more highly prized due to their higher acidity and tendency to produce less flabby wines.\nSpanish varieties.\nIn Spain the Malvas\u00eda name is a synonym for Alarije, a white grape variety from Extremadura, south-west Spain, but this variety is genetically distinct from the true Malvasias of Malvasi di Lipari (under the Spanish name Malvas\u00eda Rosada) and Malvas\u00eda de Lanzarote grown in Canary Islands. Malvas\u00eda de Lanzarote is a white variety from the Canary Islands, that may be a natural cross between Mavasi di Lipari and Marmajuelo.\nMalvas\u00eda Rosada is a red grape variety that is a colour mutation of Malvasi di Lipari / Malvas\u00eda de Sitges, and grown on the Canary Islands.\nThe name Malvasia Fina is for a Portuguese variety that goes under the synonyms Gual and Torront\u00e9s in Spain.\nMalvasia de Sitges\nWith recorded presence in Catalonia since early 14th century. Legend has it that a soldier from the Almog\u00e0vers fleet commanded by Roger de Flor brought a stem of malvasia from the eastern Mediterranean. But the \"Chronicle\" (1325) by Ramon Muntaner acknowledges its name, value and origin. It was widely grown and exported since medieval times until the advent of phylloxera. Being prone to mildew and other attacks, its cultivation now is much diminished, but the wines produced with it are still highly appreciated globally.\nThis variety is now only grown in the countryside of Sitges and its surroundings. The grape must, once fermented, gives way to a fragrant, sweet drink with a high alcohol content which is usually drunk after celebrations and after the \"xatonadas\". Nevertheless, it is also used in the preparation of various meat dishes, such as duck breast with raisins or pig's trotters. Its unusual bouquet is the result of various factors: proximity to the sea, a late harvest and the considerable alcohol content and acidity of the wine.\nMalvasia de Sitges is an authorised vine variety in the DOPs of Pened\u00e8s and Catalunya.\nPortuguese varieties.\nIn Portugal, there are no fewer than 12 varieties known as \"Malvasia\". They may or may not be related to true Malvasia. \nIn 2004, there was nearly 18,533 acres (7500 ha) of Malvasia Fina grown in Portugal where it is also known as Boal (though it is most likely not related to the grape Bual which is used to produce the Boal style of Madeira). Malvasia Fina is found in the Douro where it is a permitted grape in the production of white Port. It is also found in the Tejo and the D\u00e3o DOC where it is grown on vineyard land located at high elevations. \nMalvasia Candida (different from the variety known as Malvasia di Candia) has been historically grown on the island of Madeira being used to produce the sweetest style of Madeira wine known Malmsey.\nMalvasia Rei is believed to be the Palomino grown in Spain for Sherry production which may be related to the Malvasia family. In Portugal, Malvasia Rei is grown in the Douro, Beiras and Lisboa region. \nMalvasia Corada is a synonym used in the Douro for an obscure white wine grape variety known as Vital that may or may not be related to true Malvasia. \nMalvasia da Trincheira is a synonym used in the Douro for the white Port grape Folgas\u00e3o that may or may not be related to true Malvasia.\n (Italian Malvasia Istriana and Croatian Malvazija Istarska)\nSlovene variety.\nIn Slovenian Istria the malvasia grape is grown in Koper area, especially on Debeli Rti\u010d, \u0160kocjan, Kortina and Labor. It is also grown in Italy and Croatia (see Italian and Croatian varieties). The vine was introduced to the area in the 14th century by Venetian merchants who brought cuttings from Greece. Over matured grapes give a dessert wine with non-fermented sugars and high alcohol level (around 12%) called \"sweet malvasia\" (Slovene and Croatian: sladka/slatka malvazija).\nCommon synonyms.\nThe various varieties of Malvasia are known under a wide range of synonyms including Malvasier in Germany, Malvazija and Malvazia in Istria. Despite its similar-sounding name, the French grape varieties (it is a widely used synonym) referred to variously as \"Malvoisie\" are not related to Malvasia. The one possible exception may be the Malvoisie of Corsica that ampelographers believe is actually the Vermentino grape that may be related to Malvasia. Other synonyms for the various sub-varieties of Malvasia include Uva Greca, Rojal, Subirat, Blanquirroja, Blancarroga, Tobia, Cagazal and Blanca-Rioja.\nViticulture.\nWhile differences among the many sub-varieties of Malvasia exist, there are some common viticultural characteristics of the family. Malvasia tends to prefer dry climates with vineyards planted on sloping terrain of well-drained soils. In damp conditions, the vine can be prone to developing various grape diseases such as mildew and rot. The rootstock is moderately vigorous and capable of producing high yields if not kept in check.\nWines.\nGiven the broad expanse of the Malvasia family, generalizations about the Malvasia wine are difficult to pinpoint. Most varieties of Malvasia are derived from Malvasia bianca which is characterized by its deep color, noted aromas and the presence of some residual sugar. The red varieties of Malvasia tend to make wines with pale, pinkish to light red color. In their youth, Malvasia wines are characterized by their heavy body that is often described as \"round\" or \"fat\" and soft texture in the mouth. Common aroma notes associated with Malvasia include peaches, apricots and white currants. Red Malvasia wines are characterized by a richness and chocolate notes. Fortified Malvasia, such as Madeira, are noted for their intense smokey notes and sharp acidity. As Malvasia ages, the wines tend to take on more nutty aromas and flavors though many Malvasia have a short life span of only a few years after vintage.\nMalmsey.\nIn the past, the names \"Malvasia\" and \"Malmsey\" occurred interchangeably. As of 2014[ [update]], however, \"Malvasia\" generally refers to unfortified white table or dessert wines produced from this grape, while \"Malmsey\" refers to a sweet variety of Madeira wine, though this is also sometimes called \"Malvasia\" or \"Malvazia\". Further confusion results from the fact that, in the past, the term \"Malmsey\" referred to any very sweet Madeira wine, regardless of the grape variety involved. This resulted from the devastation of Madeiran vineyards by phylloxera in the late 19th century, which greatly reduced the production of Malvasia and other \"noble grape\" varieties on Madeira for the next century. As a result, most non-vintage-dated \"Malmsey\" was made from the widely grown Tinta Negra Mole or even from fox grape varieties. This changed when Portugal entered the European Union (EU) in 1986; EU regulations required that any wine bearing the name \"Malmsey\" contain at least 85% Malvasia grapes. Even further confusion results from the fact that vintage-dated Malmseys are often labeled \"Malvasia\" or \"Malvazia\", probably because the relatively rare vintage Malvasias were always made with Malvasia grapes even when most non-vintage \"Malmsey\" came from lesser varieties. Some companies occasionally use the name \"Malvasia\" or \"Malvazia\" for non-vintage Madeiras, especially those primarily marketed to Portuguese-speaking countries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73374", "revid": "22279400", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73374", "title": "Mercenary", "text": "Soldier who fights for hire\nA mercenary is a private individual who joins an armed conflict for personal profit, is otherwise an outsider to the conflict, and is not a member of any other official military. Mercenaries fight for money or other forms of payment rather than for political interests.\nBeginning in the 20th century, mercenaries have increasingly come to be seen as less entitled to protection by rules of war than non-mercenaries. The Geneva Conventions declare that mercenaries are not recognized as legitimate combatants and do not have to be granted the same legal protections as captured service personnel of the armed forces. In practice, whether or not a person is a mercenary may be a matter of degree, as financial and political interests may overlap.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nInternational and national laws of war.\nProtocol Additional GC 1977 (APGC77) is a 1977 amendment protocol to the Geneva Conventions. Article 47 of the protocol provides the most widely accepted international definition of a mercenary, though it is not endorsed by some countries, including the United States. The \"Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts\" (Protocol I), 8 June 1977 states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Art 47. Mercenaries\nAll the criteria, as listed in 2(a) through 2(f), must be met, according to the Geneva Convention, for a combatant to be considered a mercenary. While mercenaries do not enjoy the same protection as prisoners of war do, they must still be treated humanely according to the rules of the Protocol and they may not be punished without a trial.\nOn 4 December 1989, the United Nations passed resolution 44/34, the International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries. It entered into force on 20 October 2001 and is usually known as the UN Mercenary Convention. Article 1 of the UN Mercenary Convention contains the definition of a mercenary. Article 1.1 is similar to Article 47 of Protocol I. Article 1.2 broadens the definition to include a non-national recruited to overthrow a \"Government or otherwise undermin[e] the constitutional order of a State; or Undermin[e] the territorial integrity of a State\"; and \"Is motivated to take part therein essentially by the desire for significant private gain and is prompted by the promise or payment of material compensation\". Under Article 1.2, a person does not have to take a direct part in the hostilities in a planned \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" to be a mercenary.\nAustria.\nIf a person is proven to have worked as a mercenary for any other country while retaining Austrian citizenship, their Austrian citizenship will be revoked.\nFrance.\nIn 2003, France criminalized mercenary activities, as defined by the protocol to the Geneva convention for French citizens, permanent residents, and legal entities (Penal Code, http://, http://, http://, http://, http://). This law does not prevent French citizens from serving as volunteers in foreign forces. The law applies to military activities with a specifically mercenary motive or with a mercenary level of remuneration. However, due to jurisdictional loopholes several French companies provide mercenary services.\nThe French state owns 50% of D\u00e9fense conseil international, which it founded, a private military company (PMC) which does not supply any fighters but is used to export military training services. It realised a profit of \u20ac222 million in 2019.\nGermany.\nIt is an offence \"to recruit\" German citizens \"for military duty in a military or military-like facility in support of a foreign power\" (http:// StGB).\nFurthermore, a German citizen who enlists in the armed forces of a state they are also a citizen of risks the loss of their citizenship\n(https:// StAG).\nSouth Africa.\nIn 1998, South Africa passed the Foreign Military Assistance Act that banned citizens and residents from any involvement in foreign wars, except for humanitarian operations, unless a government committee approved deployment. In 2005, the legislation was reviewed by the government because:\nAs of 2010, South Africa forbids citizens from fighting in foreign wars unless they are under the direct control of their own national armed forces.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, the Foreign Enlistment Act 1819 and the Foreign Enlistment Act 1870 make it unlawful for British subjects to join the armed forces of any state warring with another state at peace with Britain. During the Greek War of Independence, British volunteers fought with the Greek rebels, which could have been unlawful per the Foreign Enlistment Act. It was unclear whether or not the Greek rebels constituted a 'state', but the law was later clarified to indicate that they were.\nThe British government considered using the Act against British subjects fighting for the International Brigades in the Spanish Civil War and the FNLA in the Angolan Civil War, but on both occasions chose not to do so.\nUnited States.\nCivilians with the US Armed Forces lose their law of war protection from direct attack if, and for such time as, they directly participate in hostilities.\nThe Anti-Pinkerton Act of 1893 (\u00a0https://) forbids the US government from using Pinkerton National Detective Agency employees or similar private police companies.\nIn 1977, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit interpreted the Anti-Pinkerton Act as forbidding the US government from employing companies offering \"mercenary, quasi-military forces\" for hire (United States ex rel. \"Weinberger v. Equifax\", 557 F.2d 456, 462 (5th Cir. 1977), cert. denied, 434 U.S. 1035 (1978)). There is disagreement over whether this proscription is limited to strikebreakers only, because \"Weinberger v. Equifax\" states the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The purpose of the Act and the legislative history reveal that an organization was \"similar\" to the Pinkerton Detective Agency only if it offered for hire mercenary, quasi-military forces as strikebreakers and armed guards. It had the secondary effect of deterring any other organization from providing such services lest it be branded a \"similar organization.\" The legislative history supports this view and no other.\u2014\u200a\nIn the 7 June 1978 letter to the heads of Federal Departments and Agencies, the Comptroller General interpreted this decision in a way that carved out an exemption for \"Guard and Protective Services\".\nA United States Department of Defense (DoD) interim rule revised DoD Instruction 3020.41 to authorize contractors, other than private security contractors, to use deadly force against enemy armed forces only in self-defense (71 Fed. Reg. 34826), effective 16 June 2006. Per that interim rule, private security contractors were authorized to use deadly force when protecting their client's assets and persons, consistent with their contract's mission statement. One interpretation is that this authorized contractors to engage in combat on behalf of the US government. It is the combatant commander's responsibility to ensure that private security contract mission statements do not authorize performance of inherently governmental military functions, i.e. preemptive attacks, assaults, or raids, etc.\nOn 18 August 2006, the US Comptroller General rejected bid protest arguments that the United States Army contracts violated the Anti-Pinkerton Act by requiring that contractors provide armed convoy escort vehicles and labor, weapons, and equipment for internal security operations at Victory Base Complex in Iraq. The Comptroller General reasoned the act was unviolated because the contracts did not require contractors to provide quasi-military forces as strikebreakers.\nIn 2007, the US Army was temporarily barred from awarding a $475 million security contract in Iraq, the largest one at that time, because of a lawsuit filed by a US citizen alleging violation of the Anti-Pinkerton Act of 1893. Three of the candidates under final consideration for the contract (to include intelligence services and security for reconstruction work by the United States Army Corps of Engineers) included British firms Aegis Defence Services and Erinys Iraq, as well as Blackwater of North Carolina. The case was later dismissed.\nForeign national servicemen.\nThe better-known combat units in which foreign nationals serve in another country's armed forces are the Gurkha regiments of the British Army and Indian Army, the French Foreign Legion, the Spanish Legion and the Ukraine Foreign Legion.\nRecruits from countries of the Commonwealth of Nations in the British Army swear allegiance to the British monarch and are liable to operate in any unit. Gurkhas, however, operate in dedicated Gurkha units of the British Army (specifically units that are administered by the Brigade of Gurkhas) and the Indian Army. Although they are nationals of Nepal, a country that is not part of the Commonwealth, they still swear allegiance (either to the Crown or the Constitution of India) and abide by the rules and regulations under which all British or Indian soldiers serve. French Foreign Legionnaires serve in the French Foreign Legion, which deploys and fights as an organized unit of the French Army. This means that as members of the armed forces of Britain, India, and France these soldiers are not classed as mercenary soldiers per APGC77 Art 47.e and 47.f. Volunteers for the Ukraine Foreign legion have three-year contracts, and are eligible for Ukrainian citizenship (the probation period being the duration of the war).\nPrivate military companies.\nThe private military company (PMC) is a private company providing armed combat or security services for financial gain. PMCs refer to their personnel as security contractors or private military contractors. PMC contractors are civilians (in governmental, international, and civil organizations) authorized to accompany an army to the field; thus, the term \"civilian contractor\". PMCs may use armed force, defined as: \"legally established enterprises that make a profit, by either providing services involving the potential exercise of [armed] force in a systematic way and by military means, and/or by the transfer of that potential to clients through training and other practices, such as logistics support, equipment procurement, and intelligence gathering\".\nPrivate paramilitary forces are functionally mercenary armies, though they may serve as security guards or military advisors; however, national governments reserve the right to control the number, nature, and armaments of such private armies, arguing that, provided they are not pro-actively employed in front-line combat, they are not mercenaries. In February 2002, a British Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) report about PMCs noted that the demands of the military service from the UN and international civil organizations might mean that it is cheaper to pay PMCs than use soldiers. PMC \"civilian contractors\" tend to have poor reputations among professional government soldiers and officers\u2014the U.S. Military Command has questioned their war zone behavior.\nIn September 2005, Brigadier General Karl Horst, deputy commander of the Third Infantry Division charged with Baghdad security after the 2003 invasion of Iraq, said of DynCorp and other PMCs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;These guys run loose in this country and do stupid stuff. There's no authority over them, so you can't come down on them hard when they escalate force... They shoot people, and someone else has to deal with the aftermath. It happens all over the place.\nIn 2004, the US and Coalition governments hired PMCs for security in Iraq. In March 2004, four Blackwater employees escorting food supplies and other equipment were attacked and killed in Fallujah in a videotaped attack; the killings and subsequent dismemberments were a cause for the First Battle of Fallujah.\nAfghan war operations also boosted the business. The United States has made extensive use of PMCs in Afghanistan since 2001, mostly in a defensive role. PMC teams have been used to guard bases and to protect VIPs from Taliban assassins, but almost never in offensive operations. One mercenary stated about his work in Afghanistan: \"We are there purely to protect the principals and get them out, we're not there to get into huge firefights with the bad guys\". One team from DynCorp provided bodyguards for President Hamid Karzai.\nColombia.\nIn 2006, a US congressional report listed a number of PMCs and other enterprises that have signed contracts to carry out anti-narcotics operations and related activities as part of Plan Colombia. Referring to the use of American PMCs in Colombia, the former US Ambassador to Colombia Myles Frechette has said: \"Congress and the American people don't want any servicemen killed overseas. So it makes sense that if contractors want to risk their lives, they get the job\".\nNot only have foreign PMCs worked in Colombia, but a disproportionate number of the mercenaries with PMCs are Colombian, as Colombia's long history of civil war has led to a surplus of experienced soldiers. Also, Colombian soldiers are much cheaper than soldiers from developed countries. PMCs from several Middle Eastern countries have signed contracts with the Colombian Defense Ministry to carry out security or military activities.\nUN concerns over legality of PMCs.\nThe United Nations questions whether PMC soldiers are sufficiently accountable for their war zone actions. A common argument for using PMCs (used by the PMCs themselves), is that PMCs may be able to help combat genocide and civilian slaughter where the UN or other countries are unwilling or unable to intervene. Yet, after considering using PMCs to support UN operations, Kofi Annan, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, decided against it.\nIn October 2007, the United Nations released a two-year study that stated, that although hired as \"security guards\", private contractors were performing military duties. The report found that the use of contractors such as Blackwater was a \"new form of mercenary activity\" and illegal under international law.\nMost countries, including the United States and the United Kingdom, are not signatories to the 1989 United Nations Mercenary Convention banning the use of mercenaries. A spokesman for the U.S. Mission to U.N. denied that Blackwater security guards were mercenaries, saying \"Accusations that U.S. government-contracted security guards, of whatever nationality, are mercenaries is inaccurate and demeaning to men and women who put their lives on the line to protect people and facilities every day.\"\nHistory.\nEurope.\nClassical era.\nGreek mercenaries in ancient India.\nGreek mercenaries were a significant part of the military forces in ancient India, particularly under the Indo-Greek Kingdoms and the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom. These Hellenistic states, founded by Greek rulers after the conquests of Alexander the Great, frequently employed mercenaries from the wider Greek world to maintain control over their territories and to engage in warfare with both Indian and Central Asian adversaries.\nThe presence of Greek mercenaries in India is documented in ancient Tamil literature, such as the \"Purananuru\", which describes Greek soldiers, referred to as \"Yavanas,\" (transliteration of \"Ionians\") as formidable warriors serving Indian rulers. These texts depict them as \"valiant-eyed Yavanas, whose bodies were strong and of terrible aspect.\"\nGreek mercenaries were particularly prominent in the armies of the Indo-Greek and Greco-Bactrian kings. Alfred Charles Auguste Foucher suggested that some of the warrior figures depicted in Gandhara art may represent Greek mercenaries, further supporting their role in military campaigns.\nStephanus of Byzantium recorded the existence of an ancient city called Daedala or Daidala () in India, which he described as Indo-Cretan, likely due to the presence of Cretan mercenaries. This suggests that Greek soldiers not only fought in Indian campaigns but also settled in military colonies, forming part of the Hellenistic governance in the region.\nByzantine Empire.\nIn the late Roman Empire, it became increasingly difficult for Emperors and generals to raise military units from the citizenry for various reasons: lack of manpower, lack of time available for training, lack of materials, and, inevitably, political considerations. Therefore, beginning in the late 4th century, the empire often contracted whole bands of barbarians either within the legions or as autonomous foederati. The barbarians were Romanized and surviving veterans were established in areas requiring population. The Varangian Guard of the Byzantine Empire is the best known formation made up of barbarian mercenaries (see next section).\nMedieval warfare.\nByzantine emperors followed the Roman practice and contracted foreigners especially for their personal corps guard called the Varangian Guard. They were chosen among war-prone peoples, of whom the Varangians (Norsemen) were preferred. Their mission was to protect the Emperor and Empire and since they did not have links to the Greeks, they were expected to be ready to suppress rebellions. One of the most famous guards was the future king Harald III of Norway, also known as Harald Hardrada (\"Hard-counsel\"), who arrived in Constantinople in 1035 and was employed as a Varangian Guard. He participated in eighteen battles and was promoted to , the commander of the Guard, before returning home in 1043. He was killed at the Battle of Stamford Bridge in 1066 when his army was defeated by an English army commanded by King Harold Godwinson. The point at which the Varangians ceased to be in the service of the Roman Empire remains unclear.\nIn England at the time of the Norman Conquest, Flemings (natives of Flanders) formed a substantial mercenary element in the forces of William the Conqueror with many remaining in England as settlers under the Normans. Contingents of mercenary Flemish soldiers were to form significant forces in England throughout the time of the Norman and early Plantagenet dynasties (11th and 12th centuries). A prominent example of these were the Flemings who fought during the English civil wars, known as the Anarchy or the Nineteen-Year Winter (AD 1135 to 1154), under the command of William of Ypres, who was King Stephen's chief lieutenant from 1139 to 1154 and who was made Earl of Kent by Stephen.\nIn Italy, the was a military chief offering his troops, the , to Italian city-states. The were extensively used by the Italian city-states in their wars against one another. At times, the seized control of the state, as one , Francesco Sforza, made himself the Duke of Milan in 1450. During the ages of the Taifa kingdoms of the Iberian peninsula, Christian knights like El Cid could fight for a Muslim ruler against his Christian or Muslim enemies. The Almogavars originally fought for the counts of Barcelona and kings of Aragon, but as the Catalan Company, they followed Roger de Flor in the service of the Byzantine Empire. In 1311, the Catalan Great Company defeated at the Battle of Halmyros their former employer, Walter V, Count of Brienne, after he refused to pay them, and took over the Duchy of Athens. The Great Company ruled much of central and southern Greece until 1388\u20131390 when a rival mercenary company, the Navarrese Company were hired to oust them. Catalan and German mercenaries also had prominent role in the Serbian victory over Bulgarians in the Battle of Velbuzd in 1330.\nDuring the later Middle Ages, Free Companies (or \"Free Lances\") were formed, consisting of companies of mercenary troops. Nation-states lacked the funds needed to maintain standing forces, so they tended to hire free companies to serve in their armies during wartime. Such companies typically formed at the ends of periods of conflict, when men-at-arms were no longer needed by their respective governments. The veteran soldiers thus looked for other forms of employment, often becoming mercenaries. Free Companies would often specialize in forms of combat that required longer periods of training that was not available in the form of a mobilized militia.\nThe formed a distinctive subculture in medieval France who alternated between serving as mercenaries in wartime and bandits in peacetime. The were very destructive and became a significant social problem. After the Treaty of Br\u00e9tigny ended the war between England and France in 1360, the French countryside was overrun by Free Companies of while the French Crown lacked the necessary military and economic strength to put an end to their activities. To rid France of the rampaging mercenaries and to overthrow the pro-English King Pedro the Cruel of Castile, Marshal Bertrand du Guesclin was directed by King Charles V of France to take the Free Companies into Castile with the orders to put the pro-French Enrique de Trast\u00e1mara on the Castilian throne. Guesclin's mercenaries were organized into the Big Companies and French Companies and played a decisive role in putting Enrique on the Castilian throne in 1369, who styled himself King Enrique II, the first Castilian monarch of the House of Trast\u00e1mara.\nThe White Company commanded by Sir John Hawkwood is the best known English Free Company of the 14th century. Between the 13th and 17th centuries the Gallowglass fought within the Islands of Britain and also mainland Europe. A Welshman Owain Lawgoch (Owain of the Red Hand) formed a free company and fought for the French against the English during the Hundred Years' War, before being assassinated by a Scot named Jon Lamb, under the orders of the English Crown, during the siege of Mortagne in 1378.\n15th and 16th centuries.\nSwiss mercenaries were sought during the late 15th and early 16th centuries as being an effective fighting force, until their somewhat rigid battle formations became vulnerable to arquebuses and artillery being developed at the same time. The Swiss Guard in particular were employed by the Papal States from 1506 (continuing to serve today as the military of Vatican City).\nIt was then that the German landsknechts, colorful mercenaries with a redoubtable reputation, took over the Swiss forces' legacy and became the most formidable force of the late 15th century and throughout the 16th century, being hired by all the powers in Europe and often fighting at opposite sides. Sir Thomas More in his Utopia advocated the use of mercenaries in preference to citizens. The barbarian mercenaries employed by the Utopians are thought to be inspired by the Swiss mercenaries.\nAt approximately the same period, Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli argued against the use of mercenary armies in his book of political advice \"The Prince\". His rationale was that since the sole motivation of mercenaries is their pay, they will not be inclined to take the kind of risks that can turn the tide of a battle, but may cost them their lives. He also noted that a mercenary who failed was obviously no good, but one who succeeded may be even more dangerous. He astutely pointed out that a successful mercenary army no longer needs its employer if it is more militarily powerful than its supposed superior. This explained the frequent, violent betrayals that characterized mercenary/client relations in Italy, because neither side trusted the other. He believed that citizens with a real attachment to their home country will be more motivated to defend it and thus make much better soldiers.\nThe Stratioti or Stradioti (Italian: Stradioti or Stradiotti; Greek: \u03a3\u03c4\u03c1\u03b1\u03c4\u03b9\u03ce\u03c4\u03b5\u03c2, Stratiotes) were mercenary units from the Balkans recruited mainly by states of Central and Southern Europe from the 15th century until the middle of the 18th century. The Stratioti were recruited in Albania, Greece, Dalmatia, Serbia, and later Cyprus. Most modern historians have indicated that the Stratioti were mostly Albanians. According to a study by a Greek author, around 80% of the listed names attributed to the Stratioti were of Albanian origin while most of the remaining ones, especially those of officers, were of Greek origin; a small minority were of South Slavic origin. Among their leaders there were also members of some old Byzantine Greek noble families such as the Palaiologoi and Comneni. The Stratioti were pioneers of light cavalry tactics during this era. In the early 16th century heavy cavalry in the European armies was principally remodeled after Albanian Stratioti of the Venetian army, Hungarian hussarss, and German mercenary cavalry units (Schwarzreitern). They employed hit-and-run tactics, ambushes, feigned retreats, and other complex maneuvers. In some ways, these tactics echoed those of the Ottoman sipahis and akinci. They had some notable successes also against French heavy cavalry during the Italian Wars. They were known for cutting off the heads of dead or captured enemies, and according to Commines they were paid by their leaders one ducat per head.\nIn Italy, during inter-family conflicts such as the Wars of Castro, mercenaries were widely used to supplement the much smaller forces loyal to particular families. Often these were further supplemented by troops loyal to particular \"duchies\" which had sided with one or more of the belligerents.\n17th and 18th centuries.\nDuring the 17th and 18th centuries, extensive use was made of foreign recruits in the now regimented and highly drilled armies of Europe, beginning in a systematized way with the Thirty Years' War. Historian Geoffrey Parker notes that 40,000 Scotsmen (about fifteen percent of the adult male population) served as soldiers in Continental Europe from 1618 to 1640.\nAfter the signing of the Treaty of Limerick (1691) the soldiers of the Irish Army who left Ireland for France took part in what is known as the \"Flight of the Wild Geese\". Subsequently, many made a living from fighting in continental armies, the most famous of whom was Patrick Sarsfield, who, having fallen mortally wounded at the Battle of Landen fighting for the French, said \"If this was only for Ireland\".\nThe brutality of the Thirty Years' War, in which several parts of Germany were ransacked by the mercenary troops, and left almost unpopulated, led to the formation of standing armies of professional soldiers, recruited locally or abroad. These armies were active also in peacetime. The formation of these armies in the late 18th century led to professionalization and standardization of clothing (uniforms), equipment, drill, weapons, etc. Since smaller states like the Dutch Republic could afford a large standing army, but could not find enough recruits among its own citizens, recruiting foreigners was common. Prussia had developed a form of conscription, but relied in wartime also on foreign recruits, although the regulations stated that no more than one third of the recruits were to be foreign. Prussian recruiting methods were often aggressive, and resulted more than once in conflicts with neighbouring states. The term mercenary gained its notoriety during this development, since mercenaries were\u2014and now are\u2014often seen as soldiers who fight for no noble cause, but only for money, and who have no loyalty than to the highest bidder, as opposed to the professional soldiers who takes an oath of loyalty and who is seen as the defender of the nation.\nThe mercenary soldiers thus fell out of favour and was replaced by the professional soldier. To augment the army, major European powers like France, Britain, the Dutch Republic and Spain contracted regiments from Switzerland, the Southern Netherlands (modern day Belgium), and several smaller German states. About a third of the infantry regiments of the French Royal Army prior to the French Revolution were recruited from outside France. The largest single group were the twelve Swiss regiments (including the Swiss Guard). Other units were German and one Irish Brigade (the \"Wild Geese\") had originally been made up of Irish volunteers. By 1789 difficulties in obtaining genuinely Irish recruits had led to German and other foreigners making up the bulk of the rank and file. The officers however continued to be drawn from long established Franco-Irish families. During the reign of Louis XV there was also a Scottish (), a Swedish (), an Italian (Royal-Italien) and a Walloon (Horion-Liegeois) regiment recruited outside the borders of France. The foreign infantry regiments comprised about 20,000 men in 1733, rising to 48,000 at the time of the Seven Years' War and being reduced in numbers thereafter.\nThe Dutch Republic had contracted several Scots, Swiss and German regiments in the early 18th century, and kept three Scots, one Walloon, and six Swiss regiments (including a Guard regiment raised in 1749) throughout the 18th century. The Scots regiments were contracted from Great Britain, but as relations between Britain and the Republic deteriorated, the regiments could no longer recruit in Scotland, leading to the regiments being Scots in name only until they were nationalized in 1784. Patrick Gordon, a Scottish mercenary fought at various times for Poland and Sweden, constantly changing his loyalty based on who could pay him the best, until he took up Russian service in 1661. In August 1689, during a coup d'\u00e9tat attempt in Moscow against co-tsar Peter the Great led by the Sophia Alekseyevna in the name of the other co-tsar, the intellectually disabled Ivan V, Gordon played the decisive role in defeating the coup and ensuring Peter's triumph. Gordon remained one of Peter's favorite advisers until his death.\nThe Spanish Army also made use of permanently established foreign regiments. These were three Irish regiments (Irlanda, Hiberni and Ultonia); one Italian (Naples) and five Swiss (Wimpssen, Reding, Betschart, Traxer and Preux). In addition one regiment of the Royal Guard including Irishmen as \"Patten\", \"McDonnell\" and \"Neiven\", was recruited from Walloons. The last of these foreign regiments was disbanded in 1815, following recruiting difficulties during the Napoleonic Wars. One complication arising from the use of non-national troops occurred at the Battle of Bail\u00e9n in 1808 when the \"red Swiss\" (so-called from their uniforms) of the invading French Army clashed bloodily with \"blue Swiss\" in the Spanish service.\nDuring the American Revolutionary War, the British government hired several regiments from German principalities to supplement the Army. They became known to revolutionaries as Hessians and were portrayed by propagandists as mercenaries. However, they were auxiliaries and do not meet the definition of mercenary.\n19th to 21st centuries.\nDuring the South American wars of independence from Spain, the British Legions from 1817 onward fought for General Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar. Some of the British Legionaries were liberal idealists who went to South America to fight in a war for freedom, but others were the more classic mercenaries, mostly unemployed veterans of the Napoleonic wars, who fought for money. In South America, especially in Colombia, the men of the British Legions are remembered as heroes for their crucial role in helping end Spanish rule. During the First Carlist War, the British government suspended the Foreign Enlistment Act to allow the recruitment of a quasi-official British Auxiliary Legion under George de Lacy Evans, which went to Spain to fight for Queen Isabel II against the followers of Don Carlos, the pretender to the Spanish throne.\nThe Atholl Highlanders, a private Scottish infantry regiment of the Duke of Atholl, was formed in 1839 purely for ceremonial purposes. It was granted official regimental status by Queen Victoria in 1845 and is the only remaining legal private army in Europe.\nTurkey and Azerbaijan deployed Syrian mercenaries during the 2020 Nagorno-Karabakh war.\nSyrian mercenaries are being deployed by Russia, with expected numbers ranging from hundreds to up to 40,000 fighters ultimately expected to take part. Wagner mercenaries are active in the Syrian civil war and sledgehammered a Syrian man to death. On 8 November 2024, US President Joe Biden allowed American Private Military Contractors to deploy to Ukraine. Per the United States Department of Defense, these contractors will help Ukraine repair and maintain military equipment.\nEast Asia.\nWarring States.\nMercenaries were regularly used by the kingdoms of the Warring States period of China. Military advisers and generals trained through the works of Mozi and Sun Tzu would regularly offer their services to kings and dukes.\nAfter the Qin conquest of the Warring States, the Qin and later Han Empires would also employ mercenaries \u2013 ranging from nomadic horse archers in the Northern steppes or soldiers from the Yue kingdoms of the South. The 7th-century Tang dynasty was also prominent for its use of mercenaries, when they hired Tibetan and Uyghur soldiers against invasion from the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks and other steppe civilizations.\n15th to 18th centuries.\nThe Saika mercenary group of the Kii Province, Japan, played a significant role during the Siege of Ishiyama Hongan-ji that took place between August 1570 to August 1580. The Saikashuu were famed for the support of Ikk\u014d Buddhist sect movements and greatly impeded the advance of Oda Nobunaga's forces.\nNinja were peasant farmers who learned the art of war to combat the \"daimy\u014d\"'s samurai. They were hired out by many as mercenaries to perform capture, infiltration and retrieval, and, most famously, assassinations. Ninja possibly originated around the 14th century, but were not widely known or used till the 15th century and carried on being hired till the mid-18th century. In the 16th and 17th centuries, the Spanish in the Philippines employed samurai mercenaries from Japan to help control the archipelago. Abroad the wreck of one Spanish galleon, the \"San Diego\", that sank in Filipino waters on 14 December 1600 were found numerous \"tsuba\"s, the handguards of the \"katana\"s, the distinctive swords used by the samurai.\nIn 1615, the Dutch invaded Ai Island with Japanese mercenaries.\n19th century.\nBetween 1850 and 1864, the Taiping Rebellion raged as the Taiping (Heavenly Peace) Army led by Hong Xiuquan, the self-proclaimed younger brother of Jesus Christ, engaged in a bloody civil war against the forces loyal to the Qing emperor. As Hong and his followers, who numbered in the millions, were hostile to Western business interests, a group of Western merchants based in Shanghai created a mercenary army known as the Ever Victorious Army. During the Taiping Rebellion, the Qing came close to losing control of China. It was common for the financially hard-pressed Qing emperors to subcontract out the business of raising armies to fight the Taiping to the loyalist provincial gentry, which formed the origins of the warlords who were to dominate China after the overthrow of the Qing in 1912.\nThe rank and file of the Ever-Victorious Army were Chinese, but the senior officers were Westerners. The first commander was an American adventurer, Colonel Frederick Townsend Ward. After Ward was killed in action in 1862, command was assumed by another American adventurer, Henry Andres Burgevine, but the Chinese disliked him on the account of his racism and his alcoholism. Burgevine was replaced with a British Army officer seconded to Chinese service, Colonel Charles \"Chinese\" Gordon.\nA highly successful commander, Gordon won thirty-three battles in succession against the Taipings in 1863\u20131864 as he led the Ever Victorious Army down the Yangtze river valley and played a decisive role in defeating the Taipings. Through technically not a mercenary as Gordon had been assigned by the British government to lead the Ever Victorious Army, the \"Times\" of London in a leader (editorial) in August 1864 declared: \"the part of the soldier of fortune is in these days very difficult to play with honour...but if ever the actions of a soldier fighting in foreign service ought to be viewed with indulgence, and even with admiration, this exceptional tribute is due to Colonel Gordon\".\nDuring the French conquest of Vietnam, their most persistent and stubborn opponents were not the Vietnamese, but rather the Chinese mercenaries of the Black Flag Army commanded by Liu Yongfu, who been hired by the Emperor T\u1ef1 \u0110\u1ee9c. In 1873, the Black Flags killed the French commander, Francis Garnier, attracting much attention in France. In 1883, Captain Henri Rivi\u00e8re, leading another French expedition into Vietnam was also killed by the Black Flags. When the French conquest of Vietnam was finally completed in 1885, one of the peace terms were the disbandment of the Black Flag Army. Chinese flag rebels also fought in the Haw wars in Laos and northern Thailand.\nPhilo McGiffin served as a naval mercenary in the Sino-French War and First Sino-Japanese War.\n20th century.\nIn the Warlord Era of China, some British mercenaries like Morris \"Two Gun\" Cohen, and Francis Arthur \"One Armed\" Sutton found employ in China.\nEasily the largest group of mercenaries in China were the Russian emigres who arrived after 1917 and who hired themselves out to various Chinese warlords in the 1920s. Unlike the Anglo-American mercenaries, the Russians had no home to return to nor were any foreign nations willing to accept them as refugees, causing them to have a grim, fatalistic outlook as they were trapped in what they regarded as a strange land that was as far from home as imaginable. One group of Russians wore Tartar hats and the traditional dark greycoats, and fought for Marshal Zhang Zuolin, the \"Old Marshal\" who ruled Manchuria. White Russian mercenaries claimed that they had considerable effectiveness against ill-trained armies of the Chinese warlords; one White Russian claimed that when he and other Russians serving Marshal Zhang they \"went through the Chinese troops like a knife through butter\".\nChinese forces slaughtered most of a 350 strong White Russian forces in June 1921 under Colonel Kazagrandi in the Gobi desert, with only two batches of 42 men and 35 men surrendering separately as Chinese were wiping out White Russian remnants following the Soviet Red army defeat of Ungern Sternberg, and other Buryat and White Russian remnants of Ungern-Sternberg's army were massacred by Soviet Red Army and Mongol forces.\nOne group of Russian mercenaries led by General Konstantin Petrovich Nechaev were dressed in the uniform of the Imperial Russian Army and fought for General Zhang Zongchang, the \"Dogmeat General\" who ruled Shangdong province. Zhang Zongchang had Russian women as concubines. Nechaev and his men were infamous for their ruthlessness, and on one occasion in 1926, rode three armored trains through the Chinese countryside, killing everybody they met. When the Chinese peasants tore up the rails to stop Nechaev's rampage, he and his men vented their fury by sacking in an especially brutal manner the nearest town. Nechaev suffered a huge defeat at the hands of Chinese, when he and one armoured train under his command were trapped near Suichzhou in 1925. Their Chinese adversaries had pulled up the rail, and took this opportunity to massacre almost all Russian mercenaries on board the train. Nechaev managed to survive this incident, but lost a part of his leg during the bitter fighting. In 1926 Chinese warlord Sun Chuanfang inflicted bloody death tolls upon the White Russian mercenaries under Nechaev's brigade in the 65th division serving Zhang Zongchang, reducing the Russian numbers from 3,000 to only a few hundred by 1927 and the remaining Russian survivors fought in armored trains. During the Northern Expedition Chinese Nationalist forces captured an armoured train of Russian mercenaries serving Zhang Zongchang and brutalized the Russian prisoners by piercing their noses with rope and marching them in public through the streets in Shandong in 1928, described as \"stout rope pierced through their noses\".\nAlcoholic White Russian mercenaries defeated Muslim Uyghurs in melee fighting when Uyghurs tried to take Urumqi on 21 February 1933 in the Battle of \u00dcr\u00fcmqi (1933). Wu Aitchen mentioned that 600 Uyghurs were slaughtered in a battle by White Russian mercenaries in the service of the Xinjiang clique warlord Jin Shuren. Jin Shuren would take Russian women as hostages to force their husbands to serve as his mercenaries.\nHui Muslims fought brutal battles against White Russians and Soviet Red Army Russians at the Battle of Tutung and Battle of Dawan Cheng inflicting heavy losses on the Russian forces.\nChinese forces killed many White Russian soldiers and Soviet soldiers in 1944-1946 when the White Russians of Ili and Soviet Red Army served in the Second East Turkestan Republic's military during the Ili Rebellion.\nDuring the early stages of the Second Sino-Japanese War, a number of foreign pilots served in the Chinese Air Force, most famously in the 14th Squadron, a light bombardment unit often called the International Squadron, which was briefly active in February and March 1938.\nIndia.\n18th to 19th centuries.\nIn the medieval period, Purbiya mercenaries from Bihar and Eastern Uttar Pradesh were a common feature in kingdoms in western and northern India. They were also later recruited by the Marathas and the British. In southern India, there is a caste/community of mercenaries in the state of Karnataka which is called Bunt. The word \"bunt\" itself translates to warrior or mercenary, this community later elevated itself as the rulers of the land, several powerful dynasties emerged from this community. The most notable dynasty being the Alupas of Dakshina Kannada, which reigned for 1,300 years. This community still survives and has adopted the surnames shetty, Rai, Alva, chowta etc. In Tamil Nadu, the three crowned empires used the Kongar pastro-peasantry tribes of the Kongunad region and the Kongar peasant tribes of the Erumainad region as their swordsman mercenaries, cavalry mercenaries, and as chariot soldier mercenaries, as well as personal guards. Kongars worked along with the three empires' warrior tribes such as the Kallar, Maravar, Aghamudaiyar, Parkavar, Valaiya-Mutharaiyar, and Mazhavar tribes. During that time, these Kongar tribes were led only by the chiefs of their own tribe and would not come under the command of the emperor or his military general. Though these Kongar tribes of Kongunad were feudatories to the three crowned empires, Kongunad was divided into 24 subdivisions and was only ruled by Kongars. However, the Kongars (Gangars) of Erumainad established their own empire, the Western Ganga dynasty, and ruled over it for centuries. Kongar tribes still exist in the modern world, where they are referred as Kongu Vellala Gounder (Kongunadu) and Gangadhikar Vokkaliga Gowda (Erumainad).\nThe Mukkuvar clan of Malabar Coast and Sri Lankan coast did the role of soldiers in Kalinga Magha's invasion to Sri Lanka and in Nair's battle with the Dutch in the Battle of Colachel.\nIn the 18th and early 19th centuries, the imperial Mughal power was crumbling and other powers, including the Sikh Misls and Maratha chiefs, were emerging. At this time, a number of mercenaries, arriving from several countries found employment in India. Some of the mercenaries emerged to become independent rulers. The Sikh Maharaja, Ranjit Singh, known as the \"Lion of the Punjab\", employed Euro-American mercenaries such as the Neapolitan Paolo Avitabile; the Frenchmen Claude Auguste Court and Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Allard; and the Americans Josiah Harlan and Alexander Gardner. The Sikh army, \"Dal Khalsa\", was trained by Singh's French mercenaries to fight alone the lines used by the French in the Napoleonic era, and following French practice, \"Dal Khalsa\" had excellent artillery. Singh had a low opinion of his Euro-American mercenaries, once saying \"German, French or English, all these European bastards are alike\".\nUntil 1858, India was a proprietary colony that belonged to the East India Company, not the British Crown. The East India Company became the world's most influential corporation, having exclusive monopolies on trade with India and China. By the early 19th century, the East India Company in its proprietary colony of India ruled over 90\u00a0million Indians and controlled of land under its own flag, issued its own currency and maintained its own civil service and its own army of 200,000 men led by officers trained at its officer school, giving the company an army larger than that possessed by most European states. In the 17th century, the East India Company recruited Indian mercenaries to guard its warehouses and police the cities under its rule. However, these forces were ad hoc and disbanded as quickly as they were recruited.\nStarting in 1746, the Company recruited Indian mercenaries into its own army. By 1765, the board of directors of the Company had come to accept it was necessary to rule its conquests to maintain a standing army, voting to maintain three presidency armies to be funded by taxes on Indian land. The number of Indians working for the Company's armies outnumbered the Europeans ten to one. When recruiting, the East India Company tended to follow Indian prejudices in believing the pale-skinned men from northern India made for better soldiers than the dark-skinned peoples of southern India, and that high-caste Hindus were superior to the low-caste Hindus. Despite these prejudices, the men of the Madras Army were from south India. The Bengal Army were largely high-cast Hindus from northern India while the Bombay Army prided itself on being a \"melting pot\".\nBecause the East India Company ultimately by the end of the 18th century came to offer higher pay than the Maharajahs did, and offered the novelty in India of paying a pension to veterans and their families, it came to attract the best of the Indian mercenaries. Initially, the mercenaries serving in the company's armies brought along their own weapons, which was the normal practice in India, but after the 1760s the company began to them arm with the standard British weapons. The East India Company, generally known in both Britain and in India as \"the Company\", had sufficient lobbying power in London to ensure that several British Army regiments were also stationed to work alongside the Company army, whose troops were mostly \"Sepoys\" (Indians). The Company never entirely trusted the loyalty of its sepoys. The company had its own officer training school at the Addiscombe Military Seminary. The company's armies were trained in the Western style and by the end of the 18th century its troops were ranked as the equal of any European army.\nLatin America.\nNicaragua.\nIn 1855, during a civil war in Nicaragua between the Conservatives and Liberals, the latter recruited an American adventurer named William Walker who promised to bring 300 mercenaries to fight for the Liberals. Through Walker only brought 60 mercenaries with him, to be joined by another 100 Americans together with the Belgian mercenary Charles Frederick Henningsen who were already in Nicaragua, he was able to defeat the Conservatives at the Battle of La Virgen on 4 September 1855 and by 13 October, Walker had taken Grenada, the Conservative capital. After his victories, Walker became the \"de facto\" dictator of Nicaragua, which many both inside and outside of the country soon started to call \"Walkeragua\".\nAt the time, Nicaragua was an extremely important transit point between the Western and Eastern United States. In the days before the Panama Canal and the first transcontinental railroad, ships from the Eastern United States would sail up the San Juan River to Lake Nicaragua, where passengers and goods were unloaded at the port of Rivas and then made the short journey via stagecoach to the Pacific coast, to be loaded onto ships that would take them to the west coast of the United States. One of the most important companies of the Nicaraguan stagecoach business was the Accessory Transit Company owned by Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt of New York. Walker confiscated the Accessory Transit Company's assets in Nicaragua, which he handed over to the Morgan &amp; Garrison company, owned by rivals of Vanderbilt. As Vanderbilt happened to be the richest man in the United States, he launched a lobbying campaign against Walker in Washington, D.C., and was able to pressure President Franklin Pierce into withdrawing American recognition of Walker's regime.\nOnce it was understood that the US government was no longer supporting Walker, Costa Rica invaded Nicaragua with the aim of deposing Walker, whose ambitions were felt to be a threat to all of Central America. The Costa Ricans defeated Walker at the Battle of Santa Rosa and the Second Battle of Rivas. The beleaguered Walker sought to appeal to support in his native South by restoring slavery in Nicaragua, making English the official language, changing the immigration law to favor Americans, and declaring his ultimate intention was to bring Nicaragua into the United States as a slave state. By this point, Walker had thoroughly alienated public opinion in Nicaragua while he was besieged in Grenada by a coalition of Guatemalan, Salvadorian, and Costa Rican troops. The decision by Henningsen to burn down Grenada enraged Nicaraguan people and in March 1857, Walker, with his dreams of an empire in tatters, fled Nicaragua.\nIn the 1980s, one of the Reagan administration's foreign policy was to overthrow the left-wing Sandinista government by arming guerrillas known as the Contras. Between 1982 and 1984, Congress passed the three Boland amendments which limited the extent of American aid to the Contra rebels. By the late 1970s, the popularity of magazines such as \"Soldier of Fortune\", which glorified the mercenary subculture, led to the opening of numerous camps in the United States designed to train men to be mercenaries and also to serve as guerrillas in case of a Soviet conquest of the United States. The vast majority of the men who trained in these camps were white men who saw para-military training as a \"reverse the previous twenty years of American history and take back all the symbolic territory that has been lost\" as the possibility of becoming mercenaries gave them \"the fantastic possibility of escaping their present lives, being reborn as warrior and remaking the world\".\nOwing to the legal problems posed by the Boland amendments, the Reagan administration turned to the self-proclaimed mercenaries to arm and train the Contra guerrillas. In 1984, the CIA created the Civilian Military Assistance (CMA) group to aid the Contras. The CMA were led by a white supremacist from Alabama named Tom Posey, who like all of the other members of the CMA were graduates of the mercenary training camps. John Negroponte, the American ambassador to Honduras, arranged for permission to be given for the CMA to operate from Honduran territory. However, the operation collapsed later in 1984 when the Nicaraguans shot down a CMA plane carrying arms to the Contras, killing two Americans. Sam Hall, a self proclaimed mercenary hero and \"counter-terrorist\" who joined the CMA entered Nicaragua with the aim of performing sabotage operations. In 1986, Hall was captured by the Sandinistas, who held him for four months before releasing him under the grounds that he was not a mercenary, but rather a mercenary imposer. John K. Singlaub who worked alongside Hall described him as suffering from a \"Walter Mitty type complex\".\nColombia.\nIn 1994, President C\u00e9sar Gaviria of Colombia signed Decree 356, which allowed wealthy landowners to recruit private armies of their own and liberalised the law on settling up PMCs in order to fight the Communist FARC (\"Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia\" \u2013 Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia) guerrillas. As a result of Decree 356, by 2014 Colombia had 740 PMCs operating, more than anywhere else in the world. Increasingly Colombian mercenaries have been hired by American PMCs as being cheaper than American mercenaries. The government of the United Arab Emirates has hired Colombian mercenaries to fight its war in Yemen.\nAfrica.\nAncient Africa.\nAn early recorded use of foreign auxiliaries dates back to ancient Egypt, the thirteenth century BC, when Pharaoh Ramesses II used 11,000 mercenaries during his battles. A long established foreign corps in the Egyptian forces were the Medjay\u2014a generic term given to tribal scouts and light infantry recruited from Nubia serving from the late period of the Old Kingdom through that of the New Kingdom. Other warriors recruited from outside the borders of Egypt included Libyan, Syrian and Canaanite contingents under the New Kingdom and Sherdens from Sardinia who appear in their distinctive horned helmets on wall paintings as body guards for Ramesses II. Celtic mercenaries were greatly employed in the Greek world (leading to the sack of Delphi and the Celtic settlement of Galatia). The Greek rulers of Ptolemaic Egypt, too, used Celtic mercenaries. Carthage was unique for relying primarily on mercenaries to fight its wars, particularly Gaul and Spanish mercenaries.\n19th and 20th centuries.\nIn the 20th century, mercenaries in conflicts on the continent of Africa have in several cases brought about a swift end to bloody civil war by comprehensively defeating the rebel forces. There have been a number of unsavory incidents in the brushfire wars of Africa, some involving recruitment of European and American men \"looking for adventure\". \nMany of the adventurers in Africa who have been described as mercenaries were in fact ideologically motivated to support particular governments, and would not fight \"for the highest bidder\". An example of this was the British South Africa Police (BSAP), a paramilitary, mounted infantry force formed by the British South Africa Company of Cecil Rhodes in 1889\u20131890 that evolved and continued until 1980.\nFamous mercenaries in Africa include:\nCongo Crisis.\nThe Congo Crisis (1960\u20131965) was a period of turmoil in the First Republic of the Congo that began with national independence from Belgium and ended with the seizing of power by Joseph Mobutu. During the crisis, mercenaries were employed by various factions, and also at times helped the United Nations and other peace keepers.\nIn 1960 and 1961, Mike Hoare worked as a mercenary commanding an English-speaking unit called \"4 Commando\" supporting a faction in Katanga, a province trying to break away from the newly independent Congo under the leadership of Mo\u00efse Tshombe. Hoare chronicled his exploits in his book the \"Road to Kalamata\".\nIn 1964, Tshombe (then Prime Minister of Congo) hired Major Hoare to lead a military unit called \"5 Commando\" made up of about 300 men, most of whom were from South Africa. The unit's mission was to fight a rebel group called Simbas, who already had captured almost two-thirds of the country.\nIn Operation Dragon Rouge, \"5 Commando\" worked in close cooperation with Belgian paratroopers, Cuban exile pilots, and CIA hired mercenaries. The objective of Operation Dragon Rouge was to capture Stanleyville and save several hundred civilians (mostly Europeans and missionaries) who were hostages of the Simba rebels. The operation saved many lives; however, the Operation damaged the reputation of Mo\u00efse Tshombe as it saw the return of white mercenaries to the Congo soon after independence and was a factor in Tshombe's loss of support from president of Congo Joseph Kasa-Vubu who dismissed him from his position\nAt the same time Bob Denard commanded the French-speaking \"6 Commando\", \"Black Jack\" Schramme commanded \"10 Commando\" and William \"Rip\" Robertson commanded a company of anti-Castro Cuban exiles.\nLater, in 1966 and 1967, some former Tshombe mercenaries and Katangese gendarmes staged the Mercenaries' Mutinies.\nBiafra.\nMercenaries fought for Biafra in the Fourth Commando Brigade led by Rolf Steiner during the Nigerian Civil War (1967\u20131970). Other mercenaries flew aircraft for the Biafrans. In October 1967, for example, a Royal Air Burundi DC-4M Argonaut, flown by mercenary Heinrich Wartski, also known as Henry Wharton, crash-landed in Cameroon with military supplies destined for Biafra.\nIt was hoped that employing mercenaries in Nigeria would have similar impact to the Congo, but the mercenaries proved largely ineffective. The British historian Philip Baxter wrote the principle difference was that the Congolese militias commanded by leaders with almost no military experience were no match for the mercenaries, and by contrast the Sandhurst-trained Nigerian Army officers were of an \"altogether higher caliber\" than Congolese militia leaders. Through much of the leadership of the Nigerian Army had been killed in two coups in 1966, there were still just enough Sandhust graduates left in 1967 to hold the Nigerian Army together and provide enough of a modicum of military professionalism to defeat the mercenaries. By October 1967, most of the mercenaries who had been expecting easy victories like those won in the Congo had already left Biafra, complaining that the Nigerians were a much tougher opponent who were defeating them in battle.\nWhen asked about the impact of the white mercenaries, General Philip Effiong, the chief of the Biafran general staff replied: \"They had not helped. It would have made no difference if not a single one of them came to work for the secessionist forces. Rolf Steiner stayed the longest. He was more of a bad influence than anything else. We were happy to get rid of him.\" One Biafran officer, Fola Oyewole, wrote about the sacking of Steiner in late 1968: \"Steiner's departure from Biafra removed the shine from the white mercenaries, the myth of the white man's superiority in the art of soldering\". Oyewole wrote that the white mercenaries were hated by the ordinary people of Biafra due to their high-handed behavior; a tendency to retreat when it appeared possible the Nigerians were about to cut them off instead of holding their ground; and a fondness for looting, noting that the European mercenaries seemed more interested in stealing as much as possible instead of helping Biafra.\"\nIn May 1969, Count Carl Gustaf von Rosen formed a squadron of five light aircraft known as the \"Babies of Biafra\", which attacked and destroyed Nigerian jet aircraft on the ground and delivered food aid. Count von Rosen was assisted by ex-RCAF fighter pilot Lynn Garrison.\nAngola.\nIn 1975, John Banks, an Englishman, recruited mercenaries to fight for the National Liberation Front of Angola (FNLA) against the \"Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola\" (MPLA) in the civil war that broke out when Angola gained independence from Portugal in 1975. In the United States, David Bufkin, a self-proclaimed mercenary hero started a recruiting campaign in \"Soldier of Fortune\" magazine calling for anti-Communist volunteers, especially Vietnam veterans, to fight in Angola as mercenaries, claiming to be funded to the tune of $80,000 by the Central Intelligence Agency. Bufkin was in fact a former U.S. Army soldier \"who has gone AWOL several times, has been tried for rape, and been in and out of jail several times\", did not have $80,000, was not supported by the CIA, instead being a con-man who had stolen most of the money paid to him. Bufkin managed to get a dozen or so American mercenaries to Angola, where several of them were killed in action with the rest being captured.\nOne of the leaders of the mercenaries was Costas Georgiou (the self-styled \"Colonel Callan\"), who was described by the British journalist Patrick Brogan as a psychopathic killer who personally executed fourteen of his fellow mercenaries for cowardice, and who was extremely brutal to black people. Within 48 hours of his arrival in Angola, Georgiou had already led his men in disarming and massacring a group of FNLA fighters (his supposed allies), who he killed just for the \"fun\" of it all. At his trial, it was established that Georgiou had personally murdered at least 170 Angolans. Inept as a military leader as he was brutal, Georgiou notably failed as a commander. It was believed in 1975\u201376 that recruiting white mercenaries to fight in Angola would have a similar impact that the mercenaries had in the Congo in the 1960s, but in Angola the mercenaries failed completely as Brogan described their efforts as a \"debacle\". If anything, the white mercenaries with their disdain for blacks, or in the case of Georgiou murderous hatred seemed to have depressed morale on the FNLA side.\nMany of the mercenaries in Angola were not former professional soldiers as they claimed to have been, but instead merely fantasists who had invented heroic war records for themselves. The fantasist mercenaries did not know how to use their weapons properly, and often injured themselves and others when they attempted to use weaponry that they did not fully understand, leading to some of them being executed by the psychopathic killer Georgiou who did not tolerate failure. On 27 January 1976, a group of 96 British mercenaries arrived in Angola and within a week about dozen had accidentally maimed themselves by trying to use weapons that they falsely claimed to be proficient with. The MLPA forces were better organized and led, and the dispatch of 35,000 Cuban Army troops in November 1975 decided the war for the MLPA. Cuban accounts of the Angolan war speak of the efforts of the mercenaries in a tone of contempt as Cuban veterans contend that the mercenaries were poor soldiers who they had no trouble defeating.\nWhen captured, John Derek Barker's role as a leader of mercenaries in Northern Angola led the judges to send him to face the firing squad following the Luanda Trial. Nine others were imprisoned. Three more were executed: American Daniel Gearhart was sentenced to death for advertising himself as a mercenary in an American newspaper; Andrew McKenzie and Georgiou, who had both served in the British Army, were sentenced to death for murder. Georgiou was shot by firing squad in 1976. Costas' cousin Charlie Christodoulou was killed in an ambush.\nExecutive Outcomes employees, Captains Daniele Zanata and Raif St Clair (who was also involved in the 1981 Seychelles coup attempt), fought on behalf of the MPLA against the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) in the 1990s in violation of the Lusaka Protocol.\nComoros.\nA major aim of French foreign policy was and still is to maintain the French sphere of influence in what is called \"Fran\u00e7afrique\". In 1975, Ali Soilih took power in the Comoros via a coup, and proved unwilling to accept the French viewpoint that his nation was part of \"Fran\u00e7afrique\". Unhappy with Soilih, the French secret service, the \"Service de Documentation Ext\u00e9rieure et de Contre-Espionnage\" in 1978 hired the French mercenary Bob Denard to invade the Comoros to overthrow Soilih. Making the Comoros a tempting target for Denard were its small size, consisting of only three islands in the Indian Ocean. Moreover, Soilih had abolished the Comorian Army, replacing the Army with a militia known as the Moissy, made up mostly of teenage boys with only the most rudimentary military training. The Moissy, which was modeled after the Red Guards in China, existed mainly to terrorize Soilih's opponents and was commanded by a 15-year-old boy, appointed solely because of his blind devotion to Soilih.\nOn the night of 13 May 1978, Denard and 42 other mercenaries landed on Grande Comore island, annihilated the poorly trained and badly commanded Moissy, none of whom had any military experience, and by the morning the Comoros was theirs. President Soilih was high on marijuana and naked in his bed together with three nude teenage schoolgirls watching a pornographic film, when Denard kicked in the door to his room to inform him that he was no longer president. Soilih was later taken out and shot with the official excuse being that he was \"shot while trying to escape\". The new president of the Comoros, Ahmed Abdallah, was a puppet leader and the real ruler of the Comoros was Colonel Denard, who brought the Comoros back into \"Fran\u00e7afrique\".\nAs a ruler, Denard proved himself to be extremely greedy as he rapaciously plundered the Comorian economy to make himself into a very rich man. Denard served as the commander of the Comorian Presidential Guard and became the largest single landowner in the Comoros, developing the best land by the sea into luxury resorts catering to tourists who wanted to enjoy the tropics. Denard converted to Islam (the prevailing religion in the Comoros), and took advantage of the Islamic rules on polygamy to maintain for himself a harem of Comorian women. Officially, France was committed to the United Nations sanctions against the apartheid government of South Africa, which French and South African businesses circumvented via the Comoros, a form of sanctions-busting that was tolerated by Denard as long as he received his cut of the profits.\nUltimately, Denard's antics as the \"great white conqueror\" of the Comoros and his lavish lifestyle made him into embarrassment for the French government, as there were charges that France was engaged in neo-colonialism in the Comoros. At the same time there were alternatives to Denard in the form of black Comorian politicians who wanted Denard out, but were willing to keep the Comoros in \"Fran\u00e7afrique\", which would allow Paris to achieve its aims without the embarrassment of a white European exploiting a country inhabited by black Africans. When Abdallah tried to dismiss Denard as commander of the Presidential Guard, Denard had him assassinated on 26 November 1989. At that point, the French government, which had an alternative leadership in place, intervened by sending paratroopers to remove Denard and the other mercenaries from the Comoros while installing Said Mohamed Djohar as president.\nOn 28 September 1995, Denard again invaded the Comoros, but this time, Paris was against the invasion, and staged Operation Azalee \u2013 dispatching 600 paratroops to the Comoros to usher Denard and his mercenaries out. Denard was charged in France with the murder of President Abdallah, but was acquitted owing to a lack of evidence. In 2006, he was found guilty of conspiracy to overthrow the government of the Comoros in 1995, but by this point Denard was suffering from Alzheimer's disease and he did not serve a day in prison, instead dying in a Paris hospital on 13 October 2007.\nSeychelles.\nIn 1981, \"Mad Mike\" Hoare was hired by the government of South Africa to lead an invasion of the Seychelles with the aim of deposing the left-wing President France-Albert Ren\u00e9, who had roundly criticized apartheid, and replacing him with a more apartheid-friendly leader. Disguised as a drinking club, Ye Ancient Order of Froth-Blowers, and as rugby players, Hoare led a force of 53 men into the airport at Port Larue on 25 November 1981. Hoare's men failed to make it past the customs at the airport as an alert customs officer noticed one of the \"rugby players\" had an AK-47 assault rifle hidden in his luggage. What followed was a shoot-out at the airport between Hoare's men and Seychellois customs officers. Realizing the invasion was doomed, Hoare and his men escaped by hijacking an Air India jet which flew them back to South Africa. The fiasco of the Seychelles invasion marked the beginning of the decline of the traditional soldier of fortune, centered around a charismatic figure like Hoare or Denard, and a change over to the corporatized private military company, run by men who shunned the limelight.\nEritrea and Ethiopia.\nBoth sides hired mercenaries in the Eritrean\u2013Ethiopian War from 1998 to 2000. Russian mercenaries were believed to be flying in the air forces of both sides.\nSierra Leone.\nAmerican Robert C. MacKenzie was killed in the Malal Hills in February 1995, while commanding Gurkha Security Guards (GSG) in Sierra Leone. GSG pulled out soon afterwards and was replaced by Executive Outcomes. Both were employed by the Sierra Leone government as military advisers and to train the government soldiers. It has been alleged that the firms provided soldiers who took an active part in the fighting against the Revolutionary United Front (RUF).\nIn 2000, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's (ABC-TV) international affairs program \"Foreign Correspondent\" broadcast a special report \"Sierra Leone: Soldiers of Fortune\", focusing on former 32BN and Recce members who operated in Sierra Leone while serving for SANDF. Officers like De Jesus Antonio, TT D Abreu Capt Ndume and Da Costa were the forefront because of their combat and language skills and also the exploits of South African pilot Neall Ellis and his MI-24 Hind gunship. The report also investigated the failures of the UN Peacekeeping Force, and the involvement of mercenaries and private military contractors in providing vital support to UN operations and British military Special Operations in Sierra Leone in 1999\u20132000.\nEquatorial Guinea.\nIn August 2004 there was a plot, which later became known as the \"Wonga Coup\", to overthrow the government of Equatorial Guinea in Malabo. eight South African apartheid-era soldiers, organised by Neves Matias (former Recce major and De Jesus Antonio former Captain in 2sai BN) with (the leader of whom is Nick du Toit) and five local men were held in Black Beach prison on the island. They were accused of being an advanced guard for a coup to place Severo Moto in power. Six Armenian aircrew, also convicted of involvement in the plot, were released in 2004 after receiving a presidential pardon. CNN reported on 25 August, that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Defendant Nick du Toit said he was introduced to Thatcher in South Africa last year by Simon Mann, the leader of 70 men arrested in Zimbabwe in March suspected of being a group of mercenaries heading to Equatorial Guinea.\nIt was planned, allegedly, by Simon Mann, a former SAS officer. On 27 August 2004 he was found guilty in Zimbabwe of purchasing arms, allegedly for use in the plot (he admitted trying to procure dangerous weapons, but said that they were to guard a diamond mine in DR Congo). It is alleged that there is a paper trail from him which implicates Sir Mark Thatcher, Lord Archer, and Ely Calil (a Lebanese-British oil trader).\nThe BBC reported in an article entitled \"Q&amp;A: Equatorial Guinea coup plot\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The BBC's Newsnight television programme saw the financial records of Simon Mann's companies showing large payments to Nick du Toit and also some $2m coming in \u2013 though the source of this funding they say is largely untraceable.\nThe BBC reported on 10 September 2004 that in Zimbabwe:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Simon Mann], the British leader of a group of 67 alleged mercenaries accused of plotting a coup in Equatorial Guinea has been sentenced to seven years in jail... The other passengers got 12 months in jail for breaking immigration laws while the two pilots got 16 months...The court also ordered the seizure of Mann's $3m Boeing 727 and $180,000 found on board.\nLibya.\nMuammar Gaddafi in Libya was alleged to have been using mercenary soldiers during the 2011 Libyan civil war, including Tuaregs from various nations in Africa. Many of them had been part of his Islamic Legion created in 1972. Reports say around 800 had been recruited from Niger, Mali, Algeria, Ghana and Burkina Faso. In addition, small numbers of Eastern European mercenaries have also turned up supporting the Gaddafi regime. Most sources have described these troops as professional Serbian veterans of the Yugoslav conflict, including snipers, pilots and helicopter experts. Certain observers, however, speculate that they may be from Poland or Belarus. The latter has denied the claims outright; the former is investigating them. Although the Serbian government has denied that any of their nationals are currently serving as mercenary soldiers in North Africa, five such men have been captured by anti-Gaddafi rebels in Tripoli and several others have also allegedly fought during the Second Battle of Benghazi. a number of unidentified white South African mercenaries were hired to smuggle Gaddafi and his sons to exile in Niger. Their attempts were thwarted by NATO air activity shortly before the death of Libya's ousted strongman. Numerous reports have indicated that the team was still protecting Saif al-Islam Gaddafi shortly before he was apprehended.\nAmnesty International has claimed that such allegations against Gaddafi and the Libyan state turned out to either be false or lacking any evidence. Human Rights Watch has indicated that while many foreign migrants were erroneously accused of fighting with Gaddafi, there were also genuine mercenaries from several nations who participated in the conflict.\nMore recently in 2020 at least several hundred mercenaries from the Russian Wagner Group have been fighting on the side of the warlord, General Khalifa Haftar, whom the government of Russia supports. The Wagner Group mercenaries arrived in Libya in late 2019. The Wagner Group have excelled as snipers, and one result of their arrival was a rapid increase in the number of sniper deaths on the opposing side that holds Tripoli. In response, the government of Turkey hired 2,000 Syrian mercenaries to fight for the opposing faction that it is supporting in the Libyan civil war.\nSince 2019, Turkey deployed Syrian mercenaries in the Libya (See: Turkish military intervention in the Second Libyan Civil War). In July 2020 Al Arabiyah reported that Turkey sent Syrian, Tunisian, Egyptian and Sudanese mercenaries into Libya.\nA November 2020 report by human rights advocacy group Human Rights Watch claimed that approximately hundreds of Sudanese men were hired by an Emirati security firm Black Shield Security Services as security guards for shopping centres and hotels in the UAE, but were subsequently tricked into fighting in the Libyan Civil War. Reportedly 390 men were recruited from Khartoum, out of which 12 spoke to HRW and told that they were made to live alongside Libyan fighters aligned with UAE-backed General Khalifa Haftar. The recruits were hired to safeguard the oil facilities controlled by the Haftar forces.\nMiddle East.\nEgypt.\nBy 1807, Muhammad Ali the Great, the Albanian tobacco merchant turned \"de facto\" independent Ottoman \"vali\" (governor) of Egypt had imported about 400 French mercenaries to train his army. After the end of the Napoleonic wars, Muhammad Ali recruited more mercenaries from all over Europe and the United States to train his army, through French and Italian veterans of the Napoleonic wars were much preferred and formed the largest two groups of mercenaries in Egypt. The most famous of Muhammad Ali's mercenaries was the Frenchman Joseph-Anthelme S\u00e8ve who set up the first staff school in Egypt and served as the chief of staff to Ibrahim Pasha, the son of the \"vali\" and his favorite general. By the 1820s, Muhammad Ali's mercenaries had created a mass conscript army trained to fight in the Western style together with schools for training Egyptian officers and factories for manufacturing Western style weapons as the \"vali\" did not wish to be dependent upon imported arms.\nMuhammad Ali's grandson, Ismail the Magnificent, who ruled as the Khedive of Egypt between 1863 and 79 recruited mercenaries on large scale. After Napoleon III made an unfavorable arbitration ruling in 1869 about the share of royalties from the newly opened Suez canal, which cost Ismail 3, 000, 000 Egyptian pounds per year, Ismail came to distrust his French mercenaries, and began to look elsewhere. A number of Italian mercenaries such as Romolo Gessi, Gaetamo Casati, Andreanni Somani, and Giacomo Messedaglia played prominent roles in the Egyptian campaigns in the Sudan. Ismail also recruited British mercenaries such as Samuel Baker and the Swiss mercenaries such as Werner Munzinger. After 1869, Ismail recruited 48 American mercenaries to command his army. General Charles Pomeroy Stone, formerly of the United States Army, served as the chief of the Egyptian general staff between 1870 and 1883. Ismail's Americans went to Egypt largely because of the high pay he offered, through several were Confederate veterans who were barred from serving in post-1865 United States Army; the fact that the Americans in Egyptian service had fought on opposing sides in the Civil War was a source of recurring tension as the antagonism between North and South continued in Egypt.\nSyrian civil war.\nThe Free Syrian Army claimed the Bashar al-Assad regime recruited mercenaries from Iran, Hezbollah militia, and the Iraqi Mahdi Army militia during the Syrian civil war. The Russian government had approved of the deployment in 2016 of the Wagner Group mercenaries to fight for the Syrian government. The Wagner Group is reported to have played an important role in helping to turn the tide of the Syrian civil war in favor of the government, which in 2015 appeared to be close to collapse. On 7 February 2018, the Wagner Group mercenaries were reported to have attacked an American base in Syria together with a pro-Assad militia in what is known as the Battle of Khasham.\nTurkey used Syrian mercenaries against the Kurds in Syria.\nYemen civil war.\nMultiple mercenary groups, called Popular Committees, which consists of Yemeni tribes loyal to different factions, were formed by both the Hadi government as well as the Houthi Supreme Political Council in the Yemeni Civil War.\nSaudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen.\nDuring Operation Decisive Storm, multiple sources reported that Latin American military contractors from Academi headed by Erik Prince were hired by UAE Armed Forces to assist in the fight against Houthis.\nNotable mercenaries.\nThe list includes foreign volunteers, private military contractors, and other \"soldiers of fortune\" from antiquity to the modern era.\nCyber mercenary.\nA cyber mercenary is a non-state actor that carries out cyber attacks for nation states for hire. State actors can use cyber mercenaries as a front to try and distance themselves from attacks with plausible deniability.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73375", "revid": "6060594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73375", "title": "Bride of Frankenstein", "text": "1935 film by James Whale\nBride of Frankenstein is a 1935 American horror film, and the first sequel to Universal Pictures' 1931 film \"Frankenstein\". As with the first film, \"Bride\" was directed by James Whale, starring Boris Karloff as the Monster and Colin Clive as Dr. Frankenstein. Additionally, it features Elsa Lanchester in the dual role of Mary Shelley and the bride, Ernest Thesiger as Doctor Septimus Pretorius, and Oliver Peters Heggie as the blind hermit.\nTaking place immediately after the events of the earlier film, it is rooted in a subplot of the original Mary Shelley novel, \"Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus\" (1818). \"Bride\" follows a chastened Henry Frankenstein as he attempts to abandon his plans to create life, only to be tempted and finally blackmailed by his old mentor Dr. Pretorius, along with threats from the Monster, into constructing a bride for the Monster.\nPreparation to film a sequel to \"Frankenstein\" began shortly after its premiere, but script problems delayed the project. Principal photography on \"Bride of Frankenstein\" finally commenced in January 1935, with creative personnel from the original returning both in front of and behind the camera. The film was released to critical and popular acclaim, although it encountered difficulties with some state and national censorship boards.\nSince its release \"Bride of Frankenstein\"'s reputation has grown, and it is now frequently considered one of the greatest sequels ever made. Many critics consider it to be an improvement on the original, and have hailed it as Whale's masterpiece. In 1998, it was selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the National Film Registry, having been deemed \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nIn a castle on a stormy night, Percy Bysshe Shelley and Lord Byron praise Mary Shelley for her story of Frankenstein and his Monster. She reminds them that her intention for writing the novel was to impart a moral lesson, the consequences of a mortal man who tries to play God. Mary says she has more of the story to tell.\nFollowing the events \"Frankenstein\" (1931), villagers gather around the burning windmill to cheer the apparent death of the Monster. Hans, the father of the girl the Monster drowned, wants to see the Monster's bones. He falls into a flooded pit underneath the mill, where the Monster\u2014having survived the fire\u2014strangles him. Hauling himself from the pit, the Monster also casts Hans' wife to her death. He next encounters Frankenstein's servant Minnie, who flees in terror.\nThe body of Henry Frankenstein, who is thought to have died at the windmill, is returned to his fianc\u00e9e Elizabeth at his castle home. Minnie arrives to sound the alarm about the Monster, but her warning goes unheeded. Elizabeth, seeing Henry move, realizes he is still alive. Nursed back to health by Elizabeth, Henry renounces his creation, but still believes he may be destined to unlock the secret of life and immortality. A hysterical Elizabeth cries that she foresees death.\nHenry visits the lab of his former mentor Doctor Septimus Pretorius, where Pretorius shows Henry several homunculi he has created. Pretorius wishes to work with Henry to create a mate for the Monster, with the proposed venture involving Pretorius growing an artificial brain while Henry gathers parts for the mate.\nMeanwhile, the Monster saves a young shepherdess from drowning. Her screams upon seeing the Monster alert two hunters, who shoot and injure him. They raise a mob that sets out in pursuit. Captured and trussed to a pole, the Monster is hauled to a dungeon and chained. Left alone, he breaks his chains, overpowers the guards, and escapes into the woods. That night, the Monster encounters an old blind hermit who thanks God for sending him a friend. He teaches the Monster words like \"friend\" and \"good\" and shares a meal with him. Two lost hunters stumble upon the cottage and recognize the Monster. He attacks them and accidentally burns down the cottage as the hunters lead the hermit away.\nTaking refuge from another angry mob in a crypt, the Monster spies Pretorius and his cronies Karl and Ludwig breaking open a grave. The henchmen depart as Pretorius has supper. The Monster reveals himself, eats some of the food, and learns that Pretorius plans to create a mate for him.\nHenry and Elizabeth, now married, are visited by Pretorius. Henry expresses his refusal to assist Pretorius, who calls the Monster. The Monster demands Henry's help, to no avail. Pretorius orders the Monster out, secretly signaling him to kidnap Elizabeth. Pretorius guarantees her safe return upon Henry's participation. Henry returns to his tower laboratory and, despite himself, grows excited over his work. After being assured of Elizabeth's safety, Henry completes the Bride's body.\nA storm rages as final preparations are made to bring the Bride to life. Her bandage-wrapped body is raised through the roof, where electricity is harnessed from lightning to animate her. Henry and Pretorius lower her and, after realizing their success in bringing her to life, remove her bandages and help her to stand.\nThe Monster comes down the steps after killing Karl on the rooftop and sees the Bride. The Monster reaches out to her and asks, \"Friend?\". The Bride, screaming, rejects him. He observes, \"She hate me! Like others\". As Elizabeth races to Henry's side, the Monster rampages through the lab. Before destroying everything, the Monster pauses and tells Henry and Elizabeth: \"Go! You live! Go!\" To Pretorius and the Bride, he says: \"You stay. We belong dead.\" While Henry and Elizabeth flee, the Bride hisses at the Monster. Shedding a tear, the Monster pulls a lever to trigger the laboratory and tower's destruction.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nUniversal considered making a sequel to \"Frankenstein\" as early as its 1931 preview screenings, following which the film's original ending was changed to allow for Henry Frankenstein's survival. James Whale initially refused to direct \"Bride\", believing he had already \"squeezed the idea dry\". Kurt Neumann was originally scheduled to replace Whale but decided to film \"The Black Cat\" instead. Following the success of Whale's \"The Invisible Man\", producer Carl Laemmle, Jr. realized that Whale was the only possible director for \"Bride\"; Whale took advantage of the situation by persuading Universal to let him make \"One More River\". Whale believed the sequel would not top the original, so he decided instead to make it a memorable \"hoot\". According to a studio publicist, Whale and Universal's studio psychiatrist decided \"the Monster would have the mental age of a ten-year-old boy and the emotional age of a lad of fifteen\".\nScreenwriter Robert Florey wrote a treatment entitled \"The New Adventures of Frankenstein: The Monster Lives!\", but it was rejected without comment early in 1932. Universal staff writer Tom Reed wrote a treatment as \"The Return of Frankenstein\", a title retained until filming began. Following its acceptance in 1933, Reed wrote a full script that was submitted to the Hays office for review. The script passed its review, but Whale, who by then had been contracted to direct, complained that \"it stinks to heaven\". L. G. Blochman and Philip MacDonald were the next writers assigned, but Whale also found their work unsatisfactory. In 1934, Whale set John L. Balderston to work on yet another version, and it was he who returned to an incident from the novel in which the Monster demands a mate. Frankenstein subsequently creates a mate, but destroys it without bringing it to life. Balderston also created the Mary Shelley prologue. After several months Whale was still not satisfied with Balderston's work and handed the project to playwright William James Hurlbut and Edmund Pearson. The final script, combining elements of a number of these versions, was submitted for Hays office review in November 1934. Kim Newman reports that Whale planned to make Elizabeth the heart donor for the bride, but film historian Scott MacQueen states that Whale never had such an intention.\nSources report that Bela Lugosi and Claude Rains were considered, with varying degrees of seriousness, for the role of Frankenstein's mentor, Pretorius; others report that the role was created specifically for Ernest Thesiger. Because of Mae Clarke's ill health, Valerie Hobson replaced her as Henry Frankenstein's love interest, Elizabeth. Early in production, Whale decided that the same actress cast to play the Bride should also play Mary Shelley in the film's prologue, to represent how the story \u2014 and horror in general \u2014 springs from the dark side of the imagination. He considered Brigitte Helm and Phyllis Brooks before deciding on Elsa Lanchester. Lanchester, who had accompanied husband Charles Laughton to Hollywood, had met with only moderate success while Laughton had made a strong impact with several films, even winning an Academy Award for Best Actor. Lanchester had returned alone to London when Whale contacted her to offer her the dual role. Lanchester modeled the Bride's hissing on that of swans. She gave herself a sore throat while filming the hissing sequence, which Whale shot from multiple angles.\nColin Clive and Boris Karloff reprised their roles from \"Frankenstein\" as creator and creation, respectively. Hobson recalled Clive's alcoholism had worsened since filming the original, but Whale did not recast the role because his \"hysterical quality\" was necessary for the film. Karloff strongly objected to the decision to allow the Monster to speak: \"Speech! Stupid! My argument was that if the monster had any impact or charm, it was because he was inarticulate \u2013 this great, lumbering, inarticulate creature. The moment he spoke you might as well ... play it straight\". This decision also meant that Karloff could not remove his dental plate, so now his cheeks did not have the sunken look of the original film. Whale and the studio psychiatrist selected 44 simple words for the Monster's vocabulary by looking at test papers of ten-year-olds working at the studio. Dwight Frye returned to play the doctor's assistant, Karl, having played the hunchback Fritz in the original. Frye also filmed a scene as an unnamed villager and the role of \"Nephew Glutz\", a man who murdered his uncle and blamed the death on the Monster. Boris Karloff is credited simply as KARLOFF, which was Universal's custom during the height of his career. Elsa Lanchester is credited for Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley, but in a nod to the earlier film, the Monster's bride is credited only as \"?\" just as Boris Karloff had been in the opening credits of \"Frankenstein\".\nUniversal makeup artist Jack Pierce paid special attention to the Monster's appearance in this film. He altered his 1931 design to display the after-effects of the mill fire, adding scars and shortening the Monster's hair. Over the course of filming, Pierce modified the Monster's makeup to indicate that the Monster's injuries were healing as the film progressed. Pierce co-created the Bride's makeup with strong input from Whale, especially regarding the Bride's iconic hair style, based on Nefertiti. Lanchester's hair was given a Marcel wave over a wire frame to achieve the style. Lanchester disliked working with Pierce, who she said \"really did feel that he made these people, like he was a god ... in the morning he'd be dressed in white as if he were in hospital to perform an operation\". To play Mary Shelley, Lanchester wore a white net dress embroidered with sequins of butterflies, stars, and moons, which the actress had heard required 17 women 12 weeks to make. Lanchester said of her bride costume: \"I drank as little liquid as possible. It was too much of an ordeal to go to the bathroom--all those bandages--and having to be accompanied by my dresser\".\nKenneth Strickfaden created and maintained the laboratory equipment. Strickfaden recycled a number of the fancifully named machines he had created for the original \"Frankenstein\" for use in \"Bride\", including the \"Cosmic Ray Diffuser\", and the \"Nebularium\". A lightning bolt generated by Strickfaden's equipment has become a stock scene, appearing in any number of films and television shows. The man behind the film's special photographic effects was John P. Fulton, head of the special effects department at Universal Studios at the time. Fulton and David S. Horsley created the homunculi over the course of two days by shooting the actors in full-size jars against black velvet and aligning them with the perspective of the on-set jars. The foreground film plate was rotoscoped and matted onto the rear plate. Diminutive actor Billy Barty is briefly visible from the back in the finished film as a homunculus infant in a high chair, but Whale cut the infant's reveal before the film's release.\nWhale met Franz Waxman at a party and asked him to score the picture. Whale told him: \"Nothing will be resolved in this picture except the end destruction scene. Would you write an unresolved score for it?\" Waxman created three distinctive themes: one for the Monster; one for the Bride; and one for Pretorius. The score closes, at Whale's suggestion, with a powerful dissonant chord, intended to convey the idea that the on-screen explosion was so powerful that the theater where the film was being screened was affected by it. Constantin Bakaleinikoff conducted 22 musicians to record the score in a single nine-hour session.\nShooting began on January 2, 1935, with a projected budget of US$293,750 ($ as of 2024)\u00a0\u2013 almost exactly the budget of the original \u2013 and an estimated 36-day shooting schedule. On the first day, Karloff waded in the water below the destroyed windmill wearing a rubber suit under his costume. Air got into the suit and expanded it like an \"obscene water lily\". Later that day, Karloff broke his hip, necessitating a stunt double. Clive had also broken his leg. Shooting was completed on March 7. The film was ten days over schedule because Whale shut down the picture for ten days until Heggie became available to play the Hermit. With a final cost of $397,023 ($ as of 2024), \"Bride\" was more than $100,000 ($ as of 2024) over budget. As originally filmed, Henry died fleeing the exploding castle. Whale re-shot the ending to allow for their survival, although Clive is still visible on-screen in the collapsing laboratory. Whale completed his final cut, shortening the running time from about 90 to 75 minutes and re-shooting and re-editing the ending, only days before the film's scheduled premiere date.\nCensorship.\n\"Bride of Frankenstein\" was subjected to censorship, both during production by the Hays office and following its release by local and national censorship boards. Joseph Breen, lead censor for the Hays office, objected to lines of dialogue in the originally submitted script in which Henry Frankenstein and his work were compared to that of God. He continued to object to such dialogue in revised scripts, and to a planned shot of the Monster rushing through a graveyard to a figure of a crucified Jesus and attempting to rescue the figure from the cross. Breen also objected to the number of murders, both seen and implied by the script and strongly advised Whale to reduce the number. The censors' office, upon reviewing the film in March 1935, required a number of cuts. Whale agreed to delete a sequence in which Dwight Frye's \"Nephew Glutz\" kills his uncle and blames the Monster, and shots of Elsa Lanchester as Mary Shelley in which Breen felt too much of her breasts were visible. Despite his earlier objection, Breen offered no objection to the cruciform imagery throughout the film \u2013 including a scene with the Monster lashed Christ-like to a pole \u2013 nor to the presentation of Pretorius as a coded homosexual. \"Bride of Frankenstein\" was approved by the Production Code office on April 15.\nFollowing its release with the Code seal of approval, the film was challenged by the censorship board in the state of Ohio. Censors in England and China objected to the scene in which the Monster gazes longingly upon the body intended for reanimation as the Bride, citing concerns that it looked like necrophilia. Universal voluntarily withdrew the film from Sweden because of the extensive cuts demanded, and \"Bride\" was rejected outright by Trinidad, Palestine, and Hungary. Additionally, Japanese censors objected to the scene in which Pretorius chases his miniature Henry VIII with tweezers, asserting that it constituted \"making a fool out of a king\".\nReception.\n\"Bride of Frankenstein\" premiered on April 19, 1935 at the Orpheum Theater in San Francisco, and went into general release the next day. The film was profitable for Universal, with a 1943 report showing that it had earned approximately $2 million, a profit of about $950,000.\nThe film was critically praised upon its release, although some reviewers did qualify their opinions based on the film's being in the horror genre. The \"New York World-Telegram\" called the film \"good entertainment of its kind\". The \"New York Post\" described it as \"a grotesque, gruesome tale which, of its kind, is swell\". \"The Hollywood Reporter\" similarly called the film \"a joy for those who can appreciate it\".\n\"Variety\" did not so qualify its review: \"[It is] one of those rare instances where none can review it, or talk about it, without mentioning the cameraman, art director, and score composer in the same breath as the actors and director\". \"Variety\" also praised the cast, writing that \"Karloff manages to invest the character with some subtleties of emotion that are surprisingly real and touching ... Thesiger as Dr. Pretorious [is] a diabolic characterization if ever there was one ... Lanchester handles two assignments, being first in a preamble as author Mary Shelley and then the created woman. In latter assignment she impresses quite highly\".\nIn another unqualified review, \"Time\" wrote that the film had \"a vitality that makes their efforts fully the equal of the original picture ... Screenwriters Hurlbut &amp; Balderston and Director James Whale have given it the macabre intensity proper to all good horror pieces, but have substituted a queer kind of mechanistic pathos for the sheer evil that was \"Frankenstein\"\". The \"Oakland Tribune\" concurred it was \"a fantasy produced on a rather magnificent scale, with excellent stagecraft and fine photographic effects\". While the \"Winnipeg Free Press\" thought that the electrical equipment might have been better suited to Buck Rogers, nonetheless the reviewer praised the film as \"exciting and sometimes morbidly gruesome\", declaring that \"all who enjoyed \"Frankenstein\" will welcome his \"Bride\" as a worthy successor\". \"The New York Times\" called Karloff \"so splendid in the role that all one can say is 'he is the Monster'\". The \"Times\" praised the entire principal cast and Whale's direction in concluding that \"Bride\" is \"a first-rate horror film\", and presciently suggested that \"the Monster should become an institution, like Charlie Chan\".\nThe film's reputation has persisted and grown in the decades since its release. In 1998, \"Bride of Frankenstein\" was added to the United States National Film Registry, having been deemed \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\". Frequently identified as James Whale's masterpiece, the film is lauded as \"the finest of all gothic horror movies\". \"Time\" rated \"Bride of Frankenstein\" in its \"All-Time 100 Movies\", in which critics Richard Corliss and Richard Schickel overruled the magazine's original review to declare the film \"one of those rare sequels that is infinitely superior to its source\". Roger Ebert of \"The Chicago Sun-Times\" added \"Bride of Frankenstein\" to his list of The Great Movies in 1999. He described it as \"the best of the Frankenstein movies--a sly, subversive work that smuggled shocking material past the censors by disguising it in the trappings of horror. Some movies age; others ripen.\" Ebert also added how Lanchester's character provided \"one of the immortal images of the cinema with lightning-like streaks of silver in her weirdly towering hair\".\nIn 2008, \"Bride\" was selected by \"Empire\" magazine as one of \"The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time\". Also that year, the \"Boston Herald\" named it the second greatest horror film after \"Nosferatu\". In 2016, James Charisma of \"Playboy\" ranked the film #7 on a list of \"15 Sequels That Are Way Better Than The Originals\". \"Entertainment Weekly\" considers the film superior to \"Frankenstein\".\nAwards.\n\"Bride\" was nominated for one Academy Award, for Sound Recording (Gilbert Kurland).\nInterpretations.\nChristian imagery.\nChristian imagery appears throughout the film. In addition to the scenes of the Monster trussed in a cruciform pose and the crucified figure of Jesus in the graveyard, the hermit has a crucifix on the wall of his hut \u2013 which, to Whale's consternation, editor Ted Kent made glow during a fade-out \u2013 and the Monster consumes the Christian sacraments of bread and wine at his \"last supper\" with the hermit. Horror scholar David J. Skal suggests that Whale's intention was to make a \"direct comparison of Frankenstein's monster to Christ\". Film scholar Scott MacQueen, noting Whale's lack of any religious convictions, disputes the notion that the Monster is a Christ-figure. Rather, the Monster is a \"mockery of the divine\" since, having been created by Man rather than God, it \"lacks the divine spark\". In crucifying the Monster, he says, Whale \"pushes the audience's buttons\" by inverting the central Christian belief of the death of Christ followed by the resurrection. The Monster is raised from the dead first, then crucified.\nGay reading.\nIn the decades since its release, modern film scholars have noted the possible gay interpretations of the film. Director James Whale was openly gay, and some of the actors in the cast, including Ernest Thesiger and, according to rumor, Colin Clive, were respectively gay or bisexual. Although James Curtis, Whale's biographer, rejects the notion that Whale would have identified with the Monster from a homosexual perspective, scholars have perceived a gay subtext suffused through the film, especially a camp sensibility, particularly embodied in the character of Pretorius and his relationship with Henry.\nGay film historian Vito Russo, in considering Pretorius, stops short of identifying the character as gay, instead referring to him as \"sissified\", \"sissy\" itself being Hollywood code for \"homosexual\". Pretorius serves as a \"gay Mephistopheles\", a figure of seduction and temptation, going so far as to pull Frankenstein away from his bride on their wedding night to engage in the unnatural act of creating non-procreative life. A novelization of the film published in the United Kingdom made the implication clear, having Pretorius say to Frankenstein: \"Be fruitful and multiply. Let us obey the Biblical injunction: you of course, have the choice of natural means; but as for me, I am afraid that there is no course open to me but the scientific way\".\nThe Monster, whose affections for the male hermit and the female Bride he discusses with identical language (\"friend\") has been interpreted as sexually \"unsettled\" and bisexual. Gender studies author Elizabeth Young writes: \"He has no innate understanding that the male-female bond he is to forge with the bride is assumed to be the primary one or that it carries a different sexual valence from his relationships with [Pretorius and the hermit]: all affective relationships are as easily 'friendships' as 'marriages'\". Indeed, his relationship with the hermit has been interpreted as a same-sex marriage that heterosexual society will not tolerate: \"No mistake \u2013 this is a marriage, and a viable one ... But Whale reminds us quickly that society does not approve. The monster \u2013 the outsider \u2013 is driven from his scene of domestic pleasure by two gun-toting rubes who happen upon this startling alliance and quickly, instinctively, proceed to destroy it\", writes cultural critic Gary Morris for \"Bright Lights Film Journal\". The creation of the Bride scene, Morris continues, is \"Whale's reminder to the audience \u2013 his Hollywood bosses, peers, and everyone watching \u2013 of the majesty and power of the homosexual creator\".\nFilmmaker Curtis Harrington, a friend and confidant of Whale's, dismissed this as \"a younger critic's evaluation. All artists do work that comes out of the unconscious mind and later on you can analyze it and say the symbolism may mean something, but artists don't think that way and I would bet my life that James Whale would never have had such concepts in mind\". Specifically in response to the \"majesty and power\" reading, Harrington stated: \"My opinion is that's just pure bullshit. That's a critical interpretation that has nothing to do with the original inspiration\". He concludes: \"I think the closest you can come to a homosexual metaphor in his films is to identify that certain sort of camp humor\". Whale's companion David Lewis stated flatly that Whale's sexual orientation was \"not germane\" to his filmmaking: \"Jimmy was first and foremost an artist, and his films represent the work of an artist \u2013 not a gay artist, but an artist\".\nHome media.\nIn 1985, MCA Home Video released \"Bride of Frankenstein\" on LaserDisc. In the 1990s, MCA/Universal Home Video released the film on VHS as part of the \"Universal Monsters Classic Collection\", a series of releases of Universal Classic Monsters films.\nIn 1999, Universal released \"Bride of Frankenstein\" on VHS and DVD as part of the \"Classic Monster Collection\". In April 2004, Universal released \"Frankenstein: The Legacy Collection\" on DVD as part of the \"Universal Legacy Collection\". This two-disc release includes \"Bride of Frankenstein\", as well as the original \"Frankenstein\", \"Son of Frankenstein\", and \"The House of Frankenstein\".\nIn 2012, \"Bride of Frankenstein\" was released on Blu-ray as part of the \"Universal Classic Monsters: The Essential Collection\" box set, which also includes a total of nine films from the Universal Classic Monsters series. In 2014, Universal released \"Frankenstein: Complete Legacy Collection\" on DVD. This set contains eight films: \"Frankenstein\", \"Bride of Frankenstein\", \"Son of Frankenstein\", \"Ghost of Frankenstein\", \"Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man\", \"The House of Frankenstein\", \"House of Dracula\", and \"Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein\". In 2015, the six-film \"Universal Classic Monsters Collection\" was released on DVD. In 2016, \"Bride of Frankenstein\" received a Walmart-exclusive Blu-ray release featuring a glow-in-the-dark cover. That same year, the \"Complete Legacy Collection\" was released on Blu-ray. In September 2017, \"Bride of Frankenstein\" received a Best Buy-exclusive SteelBook Blu-ray release with cover artwork by Alex Ross.\n\"Bride of Frankenstein\" was included in the \"Universal Classic Monsters: Complete 30-Film Collection\" Blu-ray box set in August 2018. This box set also received a DVD release.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73376", "revid": "47137695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73376", "title": "Bringing Up Baby", "text": "1938 film by Howard Hawks\nBringing Up Baby is a 1938 American screwball comedy film directed by Howard Hawks, and starring Katharine Hepburn and Cary Grant. It was released by RKO Radio Pictures. The film tells the story of a paleontologist in a number of predicaments involving a scatterbrained heiress and a leopard named Baby. The screenplay was adapted by Dudley Nichols and Hagar Wilde from a short story by Wilde which originally appeared in \"Collier's Weekly\" magazine in April 1937.\nThe script was written specifically for Hepburn, and tailored to her personality. Filming began in September 1937 and wrapped in January 1938, behind schedule and over budget. Production was frequently delayed by Hepburn and Grant's uncontrollable laughing fits. Hepburn struggled with her comedic performance and was coached by another cast member, vaudeville veteran Walter Catlett. A tame leopard named Nissa was used during the shooting and played two roles in the film; Nissa's trainer stood off-screen with a whip for all of its scenes.\n\"Bringing Up Baby\" had the reputation of a flop upon its release, although it eventually made a small profit after its re-release in the early 1940s. Labeled \"box office poison\" by the Independent Theatre Owners of America, Hepburn saw her career wane until \"The Philadelphia Story\" two years later. \"Bringing Up Baby\"'s reputation began to grow during the 1950s when it was shown on television gaining acclaim for its perfectly timed over-the-top screwball comedy. In 1990 it was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\", and has appeared on a number of greatest-films rankings, including the American Film Institute's 100 Years...100 Movies list.\nPlot.\nDavid Huxley is a mild-mannered paleontologist. For the past four years, he has been assembling the skeleton of a \"Brontosaurus\" but is missing one bone: the intercostal clavicle. Adding to his stress is his impending marriage to Alice Swallow and the need to impress Elizabeth Random, who is considering a million-dollar donation to his museum. The day before his wedding, David meets Susan Vance by chance on a golf course. She plays his ball, oblivious that she has made a mistake. Susan is a free-spirited, somewhat scatterbrained, young lady, unfettered by logic. These qualities soon embroil David in several frustrating incidents.\nSusan's brother Mark has sent her a tame leopard named Baby from Brazil. Its tameness is helped by hearing the song \"I Can't Give You Anything but Love, Baby\". Susan thinks David is a zoologist, and manipulates him into accompanying her in taking Baby to her farm in Connecticut. Complications arise when Susan falls in love with him, and she tries to keep him at her house as long as possible, even hiding his clothes, to prevent his imminent marriage.\nDavid's prized intercostal clavicle is delivered, but Susan's aunt's dog George takes it and buries it somewhere. When Susan's aunt arrives, she discovers David in a negligee. To David's dismay, she turns out to be Elizabeth Random. A second message from Mark makes clear the leopard is for Elizabeth, as she always wanted one. Baby and George, who have befriended one another, run off. The zoo is called to help capture Baby. Susan and David race to find Baby before the zookeepers do and, mistaking a dangerous leopard from a nearby circus for Baby, they let it out of its cage.\nDavid and Susan are jailed by a befuddled town policeman, Constable Slocum, for acting strangely at the house of Dr. Fritz Lehman, where they have cornered the circus leopard, thinking it is Baby. When Slocum does not believe their story, Susan tells him they are members of the \"Leopard Gang\"; she calls herself \"Swingin' Door Susie\", and David \"Jerry the Nipper\". Eventually, when everyone's identity has been cleared up, Susan\n(who earlier escaped out a window) returns, dragging a leopard on a rope. When she realizes this is not Baby but the highly irritated circus leopard, David saves Susan, using a chair to shoo the big cat into a cell.\nSeveral weeks later, Susan finds David, who has been jilted by Alice because of her, working on his \"Brontosaurus\" reconstruction at the museum. After giving him the missing bone (which she found by trailing George for three days), and against his warnings, Susan climbs a tall ladder next to the dinosaur to be closer to him. She tells David that her aunt has given her the million dollars to donate to the museum, but David is more interested in telling her that the day spent with her was the best day of his life. They declare their love for each other, and Susan, distracted by the moment, unconsciously swings the ladder further from side to side. As they talk, and the ladder sways more and more with each swing, Susan and David finally notice that Susan is in danger. Frightened, she climbs onto the skeleton, eventually causing it to collapse. David grabs her hand before she falls, lifts her onto the platform, and, surveying the fallen dinosaur, halfheartedly complains about the loss of his years of work on his \"Brontosaurus\" as she talks him into forgiving her. Resigning himself to a future of chaos, David embraces Susan.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Katharine Hepburn as Susan Vance\nUncredited\nAnimals\nProduction.\nDevelopment and writing.\nIn March 1937 Howard Hawks signed a contract at RKO for an adaptation of Rudyard Kipling's \"Gunga Din\", which had been in pre-production since the previous fall. When RKO was unable to borrow Clark Gable, Spencer Tracy and Franchot Tone from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, the adaptation was delayed and Hawks began looking for a new project. In April he read a short story by Hagar Wilde in \"Collier's\" magazine called \"Bringing Up Baby\" and immediately wanted to make a film from it, as it had made him laugh out loud. RKO bought the screen rights in June for $1,004, and Hawks worked briefly with Wilde on the film's treatment. Wilde's short story differed significantly from the film: David and Susan are engaged, he is not a scientist and there is no dinosaur, intercostal clavicle or museum. However, Susan gets a pet panther from her brother Mark to give to their Aunt Elizabeth; David and Susan must capture the panther in the Connecticut wilderness with the help of Baby's favorite song, \"I Can't Give You Anything but Love, Baby\".\nHawks then hired screenwriter Dudley Nichols, best known for his work with director John Ford, for the script. Wilde would develop the characters and comedic elements of the screenplay, while Nichols would take care of the story and structure. Hawks worked with the two writers during summer 1937, and they came up with a 202-page script. Wilde and Nichols wrote several drafts together, beginning a romantic relationship and co-authoring the Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers film \"Carefree\" a few months later. The \"Bringing Up Baby\" script underwent several changes, and at one point there was an elaborate pie fight, inspired by Mack Sennett films. Major Applegate had an assistant and food taster named Ali (intended to be played by Mischa Auer), but this character was replaced with gardener Aloysius Gogarty. The final draft had several scenes in the middle of the film in which David and Susan declare their love for each other which Hawks cut during production.\nNichols was instructed to write the film for Hepburn, with whom he had worked on John Ford's \"Mary of Scotland\" (1936). Barbara Leaming alleged that Ford had an affair with Hepburn, and claims that many of the characteristics of Susan and David were based on Hepburn and Ford. Nichols was in touch with Ford during the screenwriting, and the film included such members of the John Ford Stock Company as Ward Bond, Barry Fitzgerald, D'Arcy Corrigan and associate producer Cliff Reid. Ford was a friend of Hawks, and visited the set. The round glasses Grant wears in \"Bringing Up Baby\" are reminiscent of Harold Lloyd and of Ford.\nPrincipal photography was scheduled to begin on September 1, 1937 and wrap on October 31, but was delayed for several reasons. Production had to wait until mid-September to clear the rights for \"I Can't Give You Anything but Love, Baby\" for $1,000. In August Hawks hired gag writers Robert McGowan and Gertrude Purcell for uncredited script rewrites, and McGowan added a scene inspired by the comic strip \"Professor Dinglehoofer and his Dog\" in which a dog buries a rare dinosaur bone. RKO paid King Features $1,000 on September 21 to use the idea.\nCasting.\nAfter briefly considering Hawks's cousin Carole Lombard for the role of Susan Vance, the producers chose Katharine Hepburn to play the wealthy New Englander because of her background and similarities to the character. RKO agreed to the casting, but had reservations because of Hepburn's salary and lack of box-office success for several years. Producer Lou Lusty said, \"You couldn't even break even, if a Hepburn show cost eight hundred grand.\" Hawks and producer Pandro S. Berman could not agree on whom to cast in the role of David Huxley. Hawks initially wanted silent-film comedian Harold Lloyd; Berman rejected Lloyd and Ronald Colman, offering the role to Robert Montgomery, Fredric March and Ray Milland, all of whom turned it down.\nHawks' friend Howard Hughes finally suggested Cary Grant for the role. Grant had just finished shooting his breakthrough romantic comedy \"The Awful Truth\" (1937), and Hawks may have seen a rough cut of the unreleased film. At the time Grant had a non-exclusive, four-picture deal with RKO at $50,000 per film, but Grant's manager used his casting in \"Bringing Up Baby\" to renegotiate his contract, earning him $75,000 plus the bonuses Hepburn was receiving. Grant was concerned about being able to play an intellectual character and took two weeks to accept the role, despite the new contract. Hawks built Grant's confidence by promising to coach him throughout the production, instructing him to watch Harold Lloyd films for inspiration. Grant often met with Howard Hughes to discuss his character, which he said helped his performance.\nHawks obtained character actors Charlie Ruggles on loan from Paramount Pictures for Major Horace Applegate and Barry Fitzgerald on loan from The Mary Pickford Corporation to play Aloysius Gogarty. Hawks cast Virginia Walker as Alice Swallow, David's fianc\u00e9e; Walker was under contract to him and later married his brother William Hawks. As Hawks could not find a panther that would work for the film, Baby was changed to a leopard so they could cast the trained leopard Nissa, who had worked in the industry for eight years, making several B-movies.\nFilming.\nShooting began September 23, 1937 and was scheduled to end November 20, on a budget of $767,676. Filming began in-studio with the scenes in Susan's apartment, moving to the Bel Air Country Club in early October for the golf-course scenes. The production had a difficult start due to Hepburn's struggles with her character and her comedic abilities. She frequently overacted, trying too hard to be funny, and Hawks asked vaudeville veteran Walter Catlett to help coach her. Catlett acted out scenes with Grant for Hepburn, showing her that he was funnier when he was serious. Hepburn understood, acted naturally and played herself for the rest of the shoot; she was so impressed by Catlett's talent and coaching ability that she insisted he play Constable Slocum.\nMost shooting was done at the Arthur Ranch in the San Fernando Valley, which was used as Aunt Elizabeth's estate for interior and exterior scenes. Beginning at the Arthur Ranch shoot, Grant and Hepburn often ad-libbed their dialogue and frequently delayed production by making each other laugh. The scene where Grant frantically asks Hepburn where his bone is, was shot from 10 am until well after 4 pm because of the stars' laughing fits. After one month of shooting Hawks was seven days behind schedule. During the filming, Hawks would refer to four different versions of the script and make frequent changes to scenes and dialogue. His leisurely attitude on set and shutting down production to see a horse race contributed to the lost time. He took twelve days to shoot the Westlake jail scene instead of the scheduled five. Hawks later facetiously blamed the setbacks on his stars' laughing fits and having to work with two animal actors.\nThe terrier George was played by Skippy, known as Asta in \"The Thin Man\" film series and co-starring with Grant (as Mr. Smith) in \"The Awful Truth\". Both the leopards in the story were played by Nissa, a trained leopard supervised by its trainer Olga Celeste, who stood by with a whip during shooting. At one point, when Hepburn spun around and caused her skirt to twirl, Nissa lunged at her and had to be subdued by Celeste cracking her whip. Nevertheless, Hepburn was unafraid of the leopard and wore heavy perfume to keep Nissa calm. Grant, however, was terrified; most scenes of the two interacting are done in close-up with a stand-in. Hepburn played upon his fear by throwing a toy leopard through the roof of Grant's dressing room during production. There were several news reports about Hawks's difficulty filming the live leopard, and the potential danger to highly valuable actors, so some scenes required rear-screen projection.\nHawks and Hepburn had a confrontation one day during shooting. While Hepburn was chatting with a crew member, Hawks yelled \"Quiet!\" until the only person still talking was Hepburn. When Hepburn paused and realized that everyone was looking at her, she asked what was the matter. Hawks asked her if she was finished imitating a parrot. Hepburn took Hawks aside, telling him never to talk to her like that again since she was old friends with most of the crew. When Hawks (an even older friend of the crew) asked a lighting tech whom he would rather drop a light on, Hepburn agreed to behave on set. A variation of this scene, with Grant yelling \"Quiet!\", was incorporated into the film.\nThe Westlake Street set was shot at 20th Century Fox Studios. Filming was eventually completed on January 6, 1938, with the scenes outside Mr. Peabody's house. RKO producers expressed concern about the delays and expense, coming in 40 days behind schedule and $330,000 over budget, and also disliked Grant's glasses and Hepburn's hair. The final production cost was $1,096,796.23, primarily due to overtime clauses in Hawks's, Grant's and Hepburn's contracts. While cost for sets and props was only $5,000 over budget, all the actors (including Nissa and Skippy) were paid approximately double their initial salaries. Hepburn's salary rose from $72,500 to $122,000, Grant's from $75,000 to $123,000 and Hawks's from $88,000 to $203,000; Hawks would receive an additional $40,000 to terminate his RKO contract on March 21, 1938.\nPost-production and previews.\nHawks's editor George Hively cut the film during its production, and final prints were made a few days after shooting ended. The first cut (10,150 feet long) was sent to the Hays Office in mid-January 1938. Despite several double entendres and sexual references the Office passed the film, overlooking Grant saying he \"went gay\" or Hepburn's reference to George urinating. The censor's only objections were to the scene where Hepburn's dress is torn, and references to politicians (such as Al Smith and Jim Farley). By February 18, the film was trimmed to 9,204 feet.\nAs is typical for a Hawks comedy, \"Bringing Up Baby\" is fast paced, despite being filmed primarily in long medium shots, with little cross-cutting. Hawks later told Peter Bogdanovich, \"You get more pace if you pace the actors quickly within the frame rather than cross cutting fast\". The musical score is minimal, primarily consisting of Grant and Hepburn singing \"I Can't Give You Anything but Love, Baby\". Musical director Roy Webb arranged an instrumental version of the song to play over the opening and closing credits, and the Ritz scene features incidental music.\n\"Bringing Up Baby\" had two advance previews in January 1938, where it received either \"A\" or \"A+\" scores on audience-feedback cards. Producer Pandro S. Berman wanted to cut five more minutes, but relented when Hawks, Grant and Cliff Reid objected. At the second preview, the film received rave reviews and RKO expected a hit.\nReception.\nCritical response.\n\"Bringing Up Baby\" received good advance reviews. Otis Ferguson of \"The New Republic\" found the film to be very funny, and praised Hawks's direction. \"Variety\" was similarly appreciative, singling out Hawks' pacing and direction, calling Hepburn's performance \"one of her most invigorating screen characterizations\" and saying Grant \"performs his role to the hilt\"; their only criticism was the length of the jail scene. \"Film Daily\" called it \"literally a riot from beginning to end, with the laugh total heavy and the action fast.\" \"Harrison's Reports\" thought the film \"An excellent farce\" with \"many situations that provoke hearty laughter,\" and John Mosher of \"The New Yorker\" wrote that both stars \"manage to be funny\" and that Hepburn had never \"seemed so good-natured.\" However, Frank S. Nugent of \"The New York Times\" disliked the film, considering it derivative and clich\u00e9-ridden, a rehash of dozens of other screwball comedies of the period. He labeled Hepburn's performance \"breathless, senseless, and terribly, terribly fatiguing\", and added, \"If you've never been to the movies, \"Bringing Up Baby\" will be new to you\u00a0\u2013 a zany-ridden product of the goofy-farce school. But who hasn't been to the movies?\"\nOn review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 97% based on 68 reviews, with an average rating of 9/10. The site's critical consensus reads: \"With Katharine Hepburn and Cary Grant at their effervescent best, \"Bringing Up Baby\" is a seamlessly assembled comedy with enduring appeal.\" On Metacritic, the film holds a weighted average score of 91 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nBox office.\nAt the box office \"Bringing Up Baby\" was successful in some parts of the United States, but less so in others. It premiered on February 16, 1938 at the Golden Gate Theatre in San Francisco, where it was a hit, likewise in Los Angeles, Portland, Denver, Cincinnati and Washington, D.C.. However it was a financial disappointment in the Midwest, as well as most other cities. To RKO's chagrin, the film's premiere in New York City on March 3 at Radio City Music Hall made only $70,000, and it was pulled after one week in favor of \"Jezebel\" with Bette Davis. During its first run, \"Bringing Up Baby\" made $715,000 domestically and $394,000 in foreign markets for a total of $1,109,000. Its reissue in 1940 and 1941 made an additional $95,000 in the U.S. and $55,000 abroad. Following its second run, the film turned out a profit of $163,000.\nDue to the perceived failure of \"Bringing Up Baby\" commercially, Hawks was released early from his two-film contract with RKO, and \"Gunga Din\" was handed over to George Stevens. Hawks later said the film \"had a great fault and I learned an awful lot from that. There were \"no\" normal people in it. Everyone you met was a screwball and since that time I learned my lesson and don't intend ever again to make everybody crazy.\" The director went on to work with RKO on three films over the next decade. Long before \"Bringing Up Baby\"'s release, Hepburn had been branded \"box office poison\" by Harry Brandt (president of the Independent Theatre Owners of America) and thus was allowed to buy out her RKO contract for $22,000. However, many critics marveled at her new skill at low comedy; \"Life\" magazine called her \"the surprise of the picture\". Hepburn's former boyfriend Howard Hughes bought RKO in 1948 and sold it in 1955, but retained the copyright to \"Bringing Up Baby\" (and five other films).\nThemes and interpretations.\nSeveral commentators have written that \"Bringing Up Baby\" blurs or reverses stereotypical gender roles assigned to men and women. The bumbling, \"sexless\" workaholic David is pursued and eventually won over by the anarchic, confident Susan. This is contrasted by David's fianc\u00e9 Alice, who \"dismisses sexuality and reproduction in favor of work.\" Academics Robin L. Murray and Joseph K. Heumann write, \"The bone and leopard are not only real, but they also represent elements missing from David's urban life as resident museum paleontologist and Alice's fianc\u00e9: sex and children.\" By the end of the film, they note, \"Instead of returning to his original role intact, David declares his love for Susan, even as his brontosaurus tumbles to the ground, signifying the success of Susan's reeducation of him. Not only has she crushed his glasses to enhance his beauty, but she has also demolished his work.\"\nMurray and Heumann argue that the film's narrative \"promotes a cynical view of marriage and a rational urban society\", an element that film critic Sheila O'Malley characterizes as common in Hawks's filmography. \"Marriage barely exists in Hawks's films, and when it does show up, it's not exactly a blessing,\" O'Malley writes, \"[...] \"Bringing Up Baby\" may end in an embrace, but it is impossible to imagine David and Susan in a conventional domestic relationship.\" Over the course of the film, O'Malley adds, \"David becomes a real person. Alice dumps him, saying, 'You showed yourself up in your true colors. You're just a butterfly.' Alice, of course, misses the point, [...] A butterfly doesn't symbolize irresponsibility. A butterfly symbolizes transformation. Susan forces David out of his chrysalis, and he emerges into the limitless night air, where a man can breathe, where a woman not only loves him but returns his bone to him, at last.\"\nMurray and Heumann write that the film also contains themes of exploitation, and the impact of colonialism and the removing of animals from their natural habitats:\nFocusing on the unlikely pairing of zany heiress Susan and befuddled paleontologist David, \"Bringing Up Baby\" broaches multiple ecocritical questions: Does a natural history museum and its paleontologist David deserve a $1 million donation from Susan's Aunt Elizabeth (May Robson)? Is a rational woman like David's fianc\u00e9 Alice (Virginia Walker) more or less appealing than an irrational but sexualized Susan? Should wild creatures be extracted and domesticated from colonized jungles? And does reconstructed nature trump the natural landscape of the gendered body?\nUse of \"gay\".\nIt has been debated whether \"Bringing Up Baby\" is the first fictional work (apart from pornography) to use the word \"gay\" in a homosexual context. In one scene, Cary Grant's character is wearing a woman's marabou-trimmed negligee; when asked why, he replies exasperatedly \"Because I just went gay all of a sudden!\" (leaping into the air at the word \"gay\"). As the term \"gay\" was not widely familiar to the general public until the Stonewall riots in 1969, it is questioned whether the word is used by Grant in its original sense (meaning happy) or is an intentional, joking reference to homosexuality.\nThe line in the film was an ad-lib by Grant, and was not in the script. According to Vito Russo in \"The Celluloid Closet\" (1981, revised 1987), the script originally had Grant's character say \"I...I suppose you think it's odd, my wearing this. I realize it looks odd...I don't usually...I mean, I don't own one of these\". Russo suggests that this indicates that people in Hollywood (at least in Grant's circles) were familiar with the slang connotations of the word; however, there is no record that Grant or anyone involved with the film ever discussed the matter publicly.\nLegacy.\nFollowing \"Bringing Up Baby\", Grant and Hepburn would collaborate again on \"Holiday\" (1938) and \"The Philadelphia Story\" (1940). These three films belong to a sub-genre of screwball comedy known as the comedy of remarriage, described by philosopher Stanley Cavell as Hollywood's crowning achievement. Cavell noted that \"Bringing Up Baby\" was made in a tradition of romantic comedy that harked back to ancient Rome and Shakespeare. In particular, Shakespeare's \"Much Ado About Nothing\" and \"As You Like It\" have been cited as an influence on the film and on screwball comedy in general, with their \"haughty, self-sufficient men, strong women and fierce combat of words and wit.\" Hepburn's character has been cited as an early example of the Manic Pixie Dream Girl film archetype.\nThe popularity of \"Bringing Up Baby\" increased after it was shown on television during the 1950s, and by the 1960s film analysts (including the writers at \"Cahiers du Cinema\" in France) affirmed its quality. In a rebuttal of fellow \"New York Times\" critic Nugent's scathing review at the time of release, A. O. Scott has said that you'll \"find yourself amazed at its freshness, its vigor, and its brilliance-qualities undiminished after sixty-five years, and likely to withstand repeated viewings.\" Leonard Maltin stated that it is now \"considered the definitive screwball comedy, and one of the fastest, funniest films ever made; grand performances by all.\"\n\"Bringing Up Baby\" has been adapted several times. Hawks recycled the nightclub scene in which Hepburn's dress is torn and Grant walks behind her in the 1964 comedy, \"Man's Favorite Sport\". Peter Bogdanovich's 1972 film \"What's Up, Doc?\", starring Barbra Streisand, was intended as an homage to \"Bringing Up Baby\", and has contributed to its reputation. The coat-ripping scene in \"What's Up, Doc?\" was based on the scene in which Grant's coat and Hepburn's dress are torn in \"Bringing Up Baby\". The 1987 film \"Who's That Girl?\", starring Madonna, is also loosely based on \"Bringing Up Baby\", while the 1985 French film \"One Woman or Two\", starring G\u00e9rard Depardieu, is a rework of the film.\nIn 1990 \"Bringing Up Baby\" was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". \"Entertainment Weekly\" voted the film 24th on its list of greatest films. In 2000, readers of \"Total Film\" magazine voted it the 47th-greatest comedy film of all time. \"Premiere\" ranked Cary Grant's performance as Dr. David Huxley 68th on its list of 100 all-time greatest performances, and ranked Susan Vance 21st on its list of 100 all-time greatest movie characters.\nThe American Film Institute has ranked \"Bringing Up Baby\" 88th on its 100 greatest American films of all time list, and named it the 14th-funniest American film of all time. It was also ranked 51st on the 100 Passions list, and nominated for the AFI's 10 Top 10 romantic comedy list as was the quote \"It isn't that I don't like you, Susan, because after all, in moments of quiet, I'm strangely drawn toward you; but, well, there haven't been any quiet moments!\" for the AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes list. The National Society of Film Critics also included \"Bringing Up Baby\" on their \"100 Essential Films\", considering it to be arguably Howard Hawks's best film.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "73377", "revid": "37740198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73377", "title": "New Caledonia/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "73379", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73379", "title": "Britcom", "text": ""}
{"id": "73380", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73380", "title": "Broken Blossoms", "text": "1919 film by D. W. Griffith\nBroken Blossoms or The Yellow Man and the Girl, often referred to simply as Broken Blossoms, is a 1919 American silent melodrama film directed by D. W. Griffith. It was distributed by United Artists and premiered on May 13, 1919. It stars Lillian Gish, Richard Barthelmess, and Donald Crisp, and tells the story of young girl, Lucy Burrows, who is abused by her alcoholic prizefighting father, Battling Burrows, and meets Cheng Huan, a kind-hearted Chinese man who falls in love with her. It was the first film distributed by United Artists. It is based on Thomas Burke's short story \"The Chink and the Child\" from the 1916 collection \"Limehouse Nights\". In 1996, \"Broken Blossoms\" was included in the annual selection of 25 motion pictures to be added to the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress.\nPlot.\nCheng Huan leaves his native China because he \"dreams to spread the gentle message of Buddha to the Anglo-Saxon lands.\" His idealism fades as he is faced with the brutal reality of London's gritty inner-city. However, his mission is finally realized in his devotion to the \"broken blossom\" Lucy Burrows, the beautiful but unwanted and abused daughter of boxer Battling Burrows.\nAfter being beaten and discarded one evening by her raging father, Lucy finds sanctuary in Cheng's home, the beautiful and exotic room above his shop. As Cheng nurses Lucy back to health, the two form a bond as two unwanted outcasts of society. All goes astray for them when Lucy's father gets wind of his daughter's whereabouts and in a drunken rage drags her back to their home to punish her. Fearing for her life, Lucy locks herself inside a closet to escape her contemptuous father.\nBy the time Cheng arrives to rescue Lucy, whom he so innocently adores, it is too late. Lucy's lifeless body lies on her modest bed as Battling has a drink in the other room. As Cheng gazes at Lucy's youthful face which, in spite of the circumstances, beams with innocence and even the slightest hint of a smile, Battling enters the room to make his escape. The two stand for a long while, exchanging spiteful glances, until Battling lunges for Cheng with a hatchet, and Cheng retaliates by shooting Burrows repeatedly with his handgun. After returning to his home with Lucy's body, Cheng builds a shrine to the Buddha and takes his own life with a knife to the chest.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Lillian Gish as Lucy Burrows\nProduction and style.\nUnlike Griffith's more extravagant earlier works like \"The Birth of a Nation\" or \"Intolerance\", \"Broken Blossoms\" is a small-scale film that uses controlled studio environments, to create a more intimate \"impressionistic\" effect, reminiscent of the \"impressionist school of painting\". Shot entirely in the studio, \"Broken Blossoms\" is notable in that most of Hollywood productions at the time \"relied heavily on location work to provide any kind of effective atmosphere\". The visual style of \"Broken Blossoms\" emphasizes the seedy Limehouse streets with their dark shadows, drug addicts, and drunkards, contrasting them with the beauty of Cheng and Lucy's innocent attachment as expressed by Cheng's decorative apartment. Conversely, the Burrows' bare cell reeks of oppression and hostility. Film critic and historian Richard Schickel goes so far as to credit this gritty realism with inspiring \"the likes of Pabst, Stiller, von Sternberg, and others, [and then] re-emerging in the United States in the sound era, in the genre identified as Film Noir\".\nGriffith was known for his willingness to collaborate with his actors and on many occasions join them in research outings. As such, \"Broken Blossoms\" is \"the fusion of directorial and acting style.\"\nGriffith was unsure of his final product and took several months to complete the editing, saying: \"I can't look at the damn thing; it depresses me so.\"\nBox office.\nThe film was originally made for Famous Players\u2013Lasky. The company sold it to the newly founded United Artists for $250,000. The film turned out to be a hit at the box office and earned a profit of $700,000. It was the first film ever distributed by United Artists.\nReception.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe enthusiasm which \"Broken Blossoms\" awakened in 1919 can hardly be overstated; Griffith was everywhere felt to have opened up new dimensions in the cinema and raised it to a level of great tragic art.\nEdward Wagenknecht, \"The Movies in the Age of Innocence\" (1962)\n\"Broken Blossoms\" premiered in May 1919, at George M. Cohan's Theatre in New York City as part of the D. W. Griffith Repertory Season. According to Lillian Gish's autobiography, theaters were decorated with flowers, moon lanterns and beautiful Chinese brocaded draperies for the premiere. Critics and audiences were pleased with Griffith's follow-up film to his 1916 epic \"Intolerance\". Contrasting with \"Intolerance\"'s grand story, set and length, Griffith charmed audiences by the delicacy with which \"Broken Blossoms\" handled such a complex subject.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Reviewers found it \"Surprising in its simplicity\"...the acting seemed nine days' wonder \u2013 no one talked of anything but Lillian's smile, Lillian turned like a tormented animal in a trap, of Barthelmess' convincing restraint. Few pictures have enjoyed greater or more lasting succ\u00e8s d'estime.\"\nThe scenes of child abuse nauseated backers when Griffith gave them a preview of the film; according to Lillian Gish in interviews, a \"Variety\" reporter invited to sit in on a second take left the room to vomit.\nToday, \"Broken Blossoms\" is widely regarded as one of Griffith's finest works. In 2012, the film received five critics' votes and one director's vote in the British Film Institute's decennial \"Sight &amp; Sound\" poll. Roger Ebert was a longtime champion of the film, having added it to his \"Great Movies\" series; and in 1996, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nReview aggregation site \"They Shoot Pictures, Don't They\" has since found \"Broken Blossoms\" to be the 261st most acclaimed film in history.\n\"Unbroken Blossoms\", a play about the making of the film told from the perspective of the two Chinese American consultants hired to work on the project, premiered at East West Players in Summer 2024.\nThemes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf Lillian Gish's performance in \"Broken Blossoms\" is to be counted among her greatest film roles, then the performance of Richard Barthelmess is her perfect complement. Cheng Huan is portrayed as a deeply reverent and compassionate man, whose love for peace is equaled only by his love for beauty. He finds both qualities when he shelters Lucy from the savageries of Burrows. In the end he is corrupted by the forces that surround him...Too late to save Lucy, too late to save even himself, he throws himself into an uneven struggle with determination and courage, the final and ultimate sacrifice to Lucy and their spiritual happiness.\nFilm historian Paul O'Dell, \"Griffith and the Rise of Hollywood\" (1970)\nCruelty and injustice against the innocent are a recurring theme in Griffith's films and are graphically portrayed here. The introductory card says, \"We may believe there are no Battling Burrows, striking the helpless with brutal whip \u2014 but do we not ourselves use the whip of unkind words and deeds? So, perhaps, Battling may even carry a message of warning.\"\n\"Broken Blossoms\" was released during a period of strong anti-Chinese feeling in the U.S., a fear known as the Yellow Peril. The phrase \"Yellow Peril\" was common in the U.S. newspapers owned by William Randolph Hearst. It was also the title of a popular book by an influential U.S. religious figure, G. G. Rupert, who published \"The Yellow Peril; or, Orient vs. Occident\" in 1911. Griffith changed Burke's original story to promote a message of tolerance. In Burke's story, the Chinese protagonist is a sordid young Shanghai drifter pressed into naval service, who frequents opium dens and brothels; in the film, he becomes a Buddhist missionary whose initial goal is to spread the word of Buddha and peace (although he is also shown frequenting opium dens when he is depressed). Even at his lowest point, he still prevents his gambling companions from fighting.\nLiterary critic Edward Wagenknecht places \"Broken Blossoms\" thematically among the works of Shakespeare and the ancient Greek dramatists, \"who wrought their material out of sordid material.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Broken Blossom\" might have been merely a subtly lighted, skillfully directed slum melodrama [but] was lifted into a world of aesthetic purity and clarity, so that the audience went away uplifted as well as terrified.\nThe \"closet scene\".\nThe most-discussed scene in \"Broken Blossoms\" is Lillian Gish's \"closet\" scene. Here Gish performs Lucy's horror by writhing in the claustrophobic space like a tortured animal who knows there is no escape. There is more than one anecdote about the filming of the \"closet\" scene, Richard Schickel writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is heartbreaking \u2013 yet for the most part quite delicately controlled by the actress. Barthelmess reports that her hysteria was induced by Griffith's taunting of her. Gish, on her part, claims that she improvised the child's tortured movements on the spot and that when she finished the scene there was a hush on stage, broken finally by Griffith's exclamation, \"My God, why didn't you warn me you were going to do that?\" The scene is also used to demonstrate Griffith's uncanny ability to create an aural effect with only an image. Gish's screams apparently attracted such a crowd outside the studio that people needed to be held back.\nRemakes.\nA UK remake, also titled \"Broken Blossoms\", followed in 1936. It was remade in Japan twice, both set in Yokohama's Chinatown. A 1959 version was known as \u6226\u5834\u306e\u306a\u3067\u3057\u3053 (Senj\u014d no Nadeshiko, Nadeshiko on the Battlefield), directed by Teruo Ishii for Shintoho.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73382", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73382", "title": "Carmen Jones", "text": "1943 Broadway musical\nCarmen Jones is a 1943 Broadway musical with music by Georges Bizet (orchestrated for Broadway by Robert Russell Bennett) and lyrics and book by Oscar Hammerstein II which was performed at The Broadway Theatre. Conceptually, it is Bizet's opera \"Carmen\" updated to a World War II-era, African-American setting. Bizet's opera was, in turn, based on the 1846 novella by Prosper M\u00e9rim\u00e9e. The Broadway musical was produced by Billy Rose, using an all-black cast, and directed by Hassard Short. Robert Shaw prepared the choral portions of the show.\nThe original Broadway production starred Muriel Smith (alternating with Muriel Rahn) in the title role. The original Broadway cast members were nearly all new to the stage; Kennedy and Muir each wrote that on the first day of rehearsal only one member had ever been on a stage before this musical.\nThe 1954 film was adapted by Hammerstein and Harry Kleiner. It was directed by Otto Preminger and starred Dorothy Dandridge and Harry Belafonte.\nThe musical has been revived in London, running for a season in 1991 at Old Vic and most recently in Royal Festival Hall in the Southbank Centre in 2007.\nIn 2018, it was revived off-Broadway at the Classic Stage Company under the direction of John Doyle and Anika Noni Rose in the title role.\nPlot.\nParachute maker Carmen Jones makes a play for a \"fly boy\" Air Force man, Joe, who is in love with sweet Cindy Lou and about to marry her on a day pass when Carmen gets into a fight with another woman.\nJoe's pass is cancelled in order for him to drive her to the next town to be handed over to the non-military police. Instead, Carmen charms him and escapes, and he is put in the stockade for not delivering her to the authorities.\nWhile Carmen waits for Joe to be released from military prison, she hangs around Billy Pastor's jive cafe where she encounters boxer Husky Miller, who is instantly besotted with Carmen, calling her \"heatwave\".\nCarmen initially is uninterested, but her friends Frankie and Mert know that their invitation from Husky's manager to see him fight in Chicago depends on Carmen's being there, too.\nJoe, having been released from the stockade, turns up at the cafe the same evening. At first, his prospects seem to be looking up, as his connections have put Joe back on track for aviator school. Carmen lays down a guilt trip, protesting that a long-distance relationship with Joe away at school just isn't what she had in mind. He immediately gets into a fight with his sergeant, who is making a move on Carmen, as well as putting pressure on Joe. Starting the fight would have been enough to put Joe back in military prison for years, but the fight goes badly, and the sergeant ends up apparently dead. Carmen makes Joe hide the body because desertion seems better than a lengthy sentence.\nThe train ticket to Chicago originally given to Carmen offers them a way of avoiding the MPs. After a few days hiding in a seedy hotel with no money and no future with Joe, Carmen pays a visit to her two friends, now covered in diamonds and furs, at Husky's training camp. She only is looking for a loan, but they try to draw her to give up Joe and \"go with the money\" by staying with Husky.\nLater, at Husky's apartment, Frankie reads Carmen's \"cards\", and reveals the nine of spades - the card of death. In the belief that her days are numbered, Carmen gives in to Husky's advances, abandoning Joe for the luxurious life Husky can offer her.\nCindy Lou comes to look for Joe, but he is still in love with Carmen and spurns Cindy Lou. The night of Husky's title fight, Joe tries to convince Carmen to return to him, but when she rejects him, he kills her, thus making the card's prophecy a reality.\nMusic.\nOscar Hammerstein II heavily adapted the libretto for Georges Bizet's opera \"Carmen\" from the original French for his Broadway production. Arts and Entertainment Editor Elisabeth Vincentelli clarifies: \"The music was pretty much left intact, but Hammerstein transferred the action to World War II America. Carmen's tobacco factory became Carmen Jones' parachute factory, bullfighter Escamillo became boxer Husky Miller, and so on. As if this weren't enough, there also was the 'small' detail of casting the show only with African-Americans...many of the show's songs retain a surprising impact. The feverish intensity of 'Beat Out dat Rhythm on a Drum', for instance, hasn't dimmed over the years, and the song's been covered by a wide variety of performers, from Pearl Bailey and Marc Almond to Mandy Patinkin.\" The majority of the actors performing the songs in the film \"Carmen Jones\" were dubbed. Even singer Harry Belafonte was dubbed by LeVern Hutcherson, and Dorothy Dandridge was dubbed by Marilyn Horne (long before Horne became a well-known opera singer).\nSongs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73383", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73383", "title": "Type--metaphysics", "text": ""}
{"id": "73384", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73384", "title": "Gideon", "text": "Character in the biblical Book of Judges\nGideon (; ) also named Jerubbaal ( ) and Jerubbesheth (| ) was a \"shope\u1e6d\" (\"judge\"), military leader, and prophet whose calling and victory over the Midianites is described in Judges 6\u20138 in the Hebrew Bible.\nGideon was the son of Joash, from the Abiezrite clan in the tribe of Manasseh, and lived in Ephra (Ophrah). As a leader of the Israelites, he won a decisive victory over a Midianite army despite a vast numerical disadvantage, leading a troop of 300 men.\nArchaeologists in southern Israel have found a 3,100-year-old fragment of a jug with five letters written in ink that appear to represent the name Jerubbaal, or Yeruba'al.\nNames.\nThe nineteenth-century Strong's Concordance derives the name \"Jerubbaal\" from \"Baal will contend\", in accordance with the folk etymology, given in . According to biblical scholar Lester Grabbe (2007), \"[Judges] 6.32 gives a nonsensical etymology of his name; it means something like 'Let Baal be great.'\"\nLikewise, where Strong gave the meaning \"hewer\" to the name Gideon, Biblical scholar Simon John DeVries (1975) suggests the etymology \"driver\".\nThe \"besheth\" part of the name \"Jerubbesheth\" () means \"shame\". This a pious editorialization of \"Baal\", as is also found in the names of Saul's son Ish-bosheth and grandson Mephibosheth.\nBiblical narrative.\nAs is the pattern throughout the Book of Judges, the Israelites again turned away from Yahweh after 40 years of peace brought by Deborah's victory over Canaan; as punishment, the Midianites, Amalekites and other Bedouin peoples harried Israel for seven years.\nCalling.\nGod chose Gideon, a young man from the tribe of Manasseh, to free the people of Israel and to condemn their idolatry. The Angel of the Lord, or \"the Lord's angelic messenger\" came \"in the character ... of a traveller who sat down in the shade [of the terebinth tree] to enjoy a little refreshment and repose\" and entered into conversation with Gideon. The narrative has echoes of the meeting between Abraham and the visitors who came to him at Mamre and promised Abraham and Sarah, in their old age, that they would have a son according to . The angel greeted Gideon: \"The Lord is with you, you mighty man of valor!\" according to Judges 6:12.\nGideon requested proof of God's will by three miracles: firstly, a sign from the angel, in which the angel appeared to Gideon and caused fire to shoot up out of a rock in verses 11\u201322, and then two signs involving a fleece, performed on consecutive nights and the exact opposite of each other. Gideon woke up to his fleece covered in dew, but the surrounding ground was dry; the next morning, his fleece was dry, but the surrounding ground was covered in dew according to verses 36\u201340.\nOn God's instruction, Gideon destroyed the town's altar to Baal and the symbol of the goddess Asherah beside it, receiving the byname of \"Jerubbaal\" according to Judges 6:32: \"That day they named him Jerubbaal, meaning 'Let Baal contend with him,' since he tore down his altar.\"\nGathering an army.\nGideon then sent out messengers to gather men from the tribes of Asher, Zebulun, and Naphtali, as well as his own tribe of Manasseh, in order to meet an armed force of Midian and Amalek that had crossed the Jordan River. Gideon's force encamped at En Harod, while the Midianites camped near the \"Hill of Moreh\" in Judges 7, verse 1.\nGod informed Gideon that the men he had gathered were too many: with so many men, the Israelites might claim the victory as their own rather than crediting God. God first instructed Gideon to send home those men who were afraid. Gideon invited any man who wanted to leave to do so; 22,000 men returned home, and 10,000 remained. God then told Gideon that this number was still too many and instructed Gideon to bring the men to the water to drink. God commanded Gideon to separate those who had bowed down on their knees to drink like dogs, and those who lapped the water from their hands. Only the 300 men who had lapped the water from their cupped hands were allowed to remain in verses 4\u20137.\nNight attack.\nDuring the night, God instructed Gideon to approach the Midianite camp. There, Gideon overheard a Midianite man tell a friend of a dream in which \"a loaf of barley bread tumbled into the camp of Midian\", causing their tent or camp to collapse. This was interpreted as meaning that God had given the Midianites over to Gideon. Gideon returned to the Israelite camp and gave each of his men a shofar and a clay jar with a torch hidden inside. Divided into three companies, Gideon and his 300 men marched on the enemy camp. He instructed them to blow the trumpet, give a battle cry and light torches, simulating an attack by a large force. As they did so, the Midianite army fled.\nGideon sent messengers ahead into Israel calling for the Ephraimites to pursue the retreating Midianites and two of their leaders, Oreb and Zeeb. Gideon and the three hundred pursued Zebah and Zalmunna, the two Midianite kings. When he had asked for provisions in his pursuit, the men of Succoth and Peniel refused and taunted Gideon. After capturing the two kings, Gideon punished the men of Succoth, and pulled down the tower of Peniel killing all the men there. Gideon invited his eldest son, Jether, to slay Zebah and Zalmunna, but being still young at the time, he did not have the confidence to carry out his father's request, so Zebah and Zalmunna called on Gideon to perform the deed himself. Gideon then killed Zebah and Zalmunna as justice for the death of his brothers (). The place where Gideon slew Oreb after the defeat of the Midianites was called the \"Rock of Oreb\". It was probably the place now called Orbo, on the east of Jordan, near Bethshean. Zeeb was killed at \"the wine press of Zeeb\".\nSubsequent events.\nThe Israelites invited Gideon to become their king and to found a dynasty, but he refused, telling them that only God was their ruler.\nGideon went on to make an \"ephod\" out of the gold won in battle. As a sign of what ADONAI had done for them. Gideon had 70 sons from the many women he took as wives. He also had a Shechemite concubine who bore him a son whom he named Abimelech, which means \"my father is king\".\nThere was peace in Israel for 40 years during the life of Gideon. As soon as Gideon died of old age, the Israelites again turned to worship the false god Baal Berith and ignored the family of Gideon (). Gideon was succeeded for a brief time as ruler of Shechem by his son Abimelech.\nRabbinic commentary.\nAccording to Louis Ginzberg's Midrash anthology \"The Legends of the Jews\": \"Elated by the victory over Sisera, Israel sang a hymn of praise, the song of Deborah, and God, to reward them for their pious sentiments, pardoned the transgression of the people. But they soon slipped back into the old ways, and the old troubles harassed them. Their back-sliding was due to the witchcraft of a Midianite priest named Aud. He made the sun shine at midnight, and so convinced the Israelites that the idols of Midian were mightier than God, and God chastised them by delivering them into the hands of the Midianites. They worshipped their own images reflected in the water, and they were stricken with dire poverty. They could not bring so much as a meal offering, the offering of the poor. On the eve of one Passover, Gideon uttered the complaint: \"Where are all the wondrous works which God did for our fathers in this night, when he slew the first-born of the Egyptians, and Israel went forth from slavery with joyous hearts?\" God appeared unto him, and said: \"Thou who art courageous enough to champion Israel, thou art worthy that Israel should be saved for thy sake.\"\nTo explain why the men who brought water to their mouths with their hands were chosen to fight, while the others who lapped the water directly or bowed down were not chosen, some writers explain that lapping directly is disgraceful and similar to a dog, while bowing down resembles idolatry. Those who were faithful were allowed to depart.\nAccording to \"The Legends of the Jews\": \"...In the high priest's breastplate, Joseph was represented among the twelve tribes by Ephraim alone, not by Manasseh, too. To wipe out this slight upon his own tribe, Gideon made an ephod bearing the name of Manasseh. He consecrated it to God, but after his death homage was paid to it as an idol. In those days the Israelites were so addicted to the worship of Beelzebub that they constantly carried small images of this god with them in their pockets, and every now and then they were in the habit of bringing the image forth and kissing it fervently. Of such idolaters were the vain and light fellows who helped Abimelech, the son of Gideon by his concubine from Shechem, to assassinate the other sons of his father. But God is just. As Abimelech murdered his brothers upon a stone, so Abimelech himself met his death through a millstone. It was proper, then, that Jotham, in his parable, should compare Abimelech to a thorn-bush, while he characterized his predecessors, Othniel, Deborah, and Gideon, as an olive-tree, or a fig-tree, or a vine. This Jotham, the youngest of the sons of Gideon, was more than a teller of parables. He knew then that long afterward the Samaritans would claim sanctity for Mount Gerizim, on account of the blessing pronounced from it upon the tribe. For this reason he chose Gerizim from which to hurl his curse upon Shechem and it inhabitants.\" \"Tan B 1 103. The parable of Jotham is said to refer to the prominent judges: Othniel [=Olive tree], Deborah [=fig tree], Gideon [=vine], and Elimelech [=bramble]. Tan. also states that Abimelech reigned for three years, as a reward for the modesty of his father Gideon, who in a \"tripartite\" sentence refused the royal crown offered him by his people; see Jud. 8.23. Abimelech, in contrast to his father [Jud.8.27], was very greedy for riches, and his end therefore came speedily; Aggadat Bereshit 26, 54., see also ibid., 52-53 where Abimelech's wickedness and greed was contrasted with the piety and liberality of his namesake Abimelech, the King of Getar. The ingratitude of the Israelites who permitted Abimelech to murder the children of their benefactor Gideon was counted unto them as though they had forsaken God; ingratitude is as grave a sin as idolatry; Yelammedenu in Yalkut II, 64.\"\nTextual history.\nIn the early twentieth century, the text of Judges 6\u20138 was regarded by the \"critical school\" as a composite narrative, combining Jahwist, Elohist and Deuteronomic sources, with further interpolations and editorial comments of the Second Temple period. According to this approach, the D source or (D) material has an overwhelming presence in Judges 6\u20138. The earlier source material used is present. However, the message and theological view has the style of the Deuteronomistic school of Authors. The core (Jahwist) narrative consists of Gideon wishing to avenge the death of his brothers, gathering 300 men of his own clan and pursuing the Midianite chiefs Zebah and Zalmunna, slaying them and consecrating an idol (\"ephod\") made from the spoils of war, which makes his city of Ophrah the seat of an oracle and giving Gideon himself the status of a rich chief with a large harem (Judges 8:4\u201310a, 11\u201321, 24\u201327a, 29\u201332).\nHowever, other scholars see the story as a single narrative, whose author made allusions to various Pentateuchal passages that he was familiar with. The story also contains consistent thematic elements which suggest a unified composition.\nEmil G. Hirsch alleged a historical nucleus in the narrative, reflecting the struggle of the tribe of Manasseh with hostile Bedouins across the Jordan, along with \"reminiscences of tribal jealousies on the part of Ephraim\" in the early period of Hebrew settlement, later conflated with the religious context of connecting Yahweh with the shrine at Ophrah.\nG. A. Cooke, writing in the Cambridge Bible for Schools and Colleges notes the discontinuity between Ephraimite anger towards Gideon shown in and the proposition of kingship over [all] Israel, and therefore concludes that \"these verses appear to come from a [secondary] source\".\nAccording to Yairah Amit, Mark S. Smith, and Simon John De Vries, the use of both names \"Gideon\" and \"Jerubbaal\" reflects two originally independent sets of stories combined by an editor who wishes them to be seen as referring to a single character. The name Jerubbaal given to Gideon is originally a theophoric name meaning \"Baal strives\", but it was later given the interpretation of \"let Baal strive against him\" in order to avoid conflict with the more rigorous development of the religion of Yahweh in later centuries.\nChristian reception.\nIn the New Testament, Gideon is mentioned in chapter 11 of the Epistle to the Hebrews as an example of a man of faith, one of several \"heroes of faith\" mentioned there:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Time would fail me to tell of Gideon [and others] who through faith subdued kingdoms, worked righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, became valiant in battle, turned to flight the armies of the aliens.\nGideon is regarded as a saint by the Eastern Orthodox Church and Catholic Church. He is also commemorated, together with the other righteous figures of the Old Testament, on the Sunday before Christmas (Fourth Sunday of Advent). He is commemorated as one of the Saints of the Armenian Apostolic Church on July 30, and in the Roman Martyrology on September 26.\nIn the Protestant Reformation, the Gideon narrative was employed in polemics against the Catholic clergy. Hans von R\u00fcte's \"Gideon\" (1540) compares the removal of saints' relics from churches to Gideon's destruction of Baal's altar.\nGideons International is an American organization dedicated to Christian evangelism, founded in 1899, dedicated to the distribution of free Bibles. The organization's logo represents a two-handled pitcher and torch, symbolizing the implements used by Gideon to scare the Midianite army.\nCultural references.\nThe Gideons International, an evangelical Christian organization known for distributing Bibles, takes its name from Gideon:\nGideon was a man who was willing to do exactly what God wanted him to do, regardless of his own judgment as to the plans or results. Humility, faith, and obedience were his great elements of character. This is the standard that The Gideons International is trying to establish in all its members, each man to be ready to do God's will at any time, at any place, and in any way that the Holy Spirit leads.\nOrigin of the phrase \"putting out a fleece\".\nThe origin of the phrase \"putting out a fleece\" is a reference to the story of Gideon meaning to look for a sign from God before undertaking some action or carrying out some plan.\nMilitary references.\nMuch like the 300 Spartans at Thermopylae, Gideon has become symbolic of military success of a small elite force against overwhelming numerical odds. The 12th-century \"Poem of Almer\u00eda\" invokes \"the strength of Samson and the sword of Gideon\" in the context of the Reconquista of Almer\u00eda led by Ponce Giraldo de Cabrera (1147). Benedikt Gletting (16th century) invokes the \"Sword of Gideon\" in a call for a pious and confident defense of the Old Swiss Confederacy against the threat of the Franco-Ottoman alliance. The Gideon narrative was invoked by Covenanter commander Archibald Strachan prior to Battle of Carbisdale (1650). The Gideon Force was a small British-led special force in the East African Campaign during World War II. El Junquito raid code-named Operation Gideon in 2018 and Operation Gideon (2020) were dissident military operations in Venezuela. Israel launched an offensive called \"Operation Gideon's Chariots\" in May 2025 during the Gaza war (2023\u2013present).\nArchaeological evidence.\nA five-letter inscription appearing to represent the name Jerubbaal (another name used in the Hebrew Bible for Gideon) was discovered on a 3100-year old fragment of a jug in Israel. According to Smithsonian Magazine, \"the artifact's age lines up with the time period depicted in the Book of Judges.\"\nReferences.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73385", "revid": "20444050", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73385", "title": "Castro Street", "text": "Castro Street may refer to:\n* Castro Street Station, a Muni Metro underground station at the junction of Castro and Market streets in San Francisco\n* Castro Street Fair, a street fair in the Castro neighborhood\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "73388", "revid": "383280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73388", "title": "Cat People", "text": "Cat People may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "73389", "revid": "7061136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73389", "title": "Baphetidae", "text": "Extinct family of tetrapodomorphs\nBaphetidae is an extinct family of stem-tetrapods. Baphetids were large labyrinthodont predators of the Late Carboniferous period (Namurian through Westphalian) of Europe. Fragmentary remains from the Early Carboniferous of Canada have been tentatively assigned to the group. The phylogenetic relationships of baphetids is uncertain; while many studies have placed the group as a close relative of Amniota, other analyses have found Baphetidae to be a more basal clade of early stem tetrapods. Baphetids were among the first of the Carboniferous fossil tetrapods to be found and were originally described in 1850 by John William Dawson. The baphetids have been referred to the family Loxommatidae, but this group was later shown to be a junior synonym of Baphetidae, which was named earlier in 1865. Baphetids are known mainly from skulls; very little postcranial material has been found.\nPalaeobiology.\nThe presence of lateral lines and the long rows of needle-like teeth show that most were fish-eaters. Their development was likely amphibian, though no larval fossils are known. Their best-known characteristic was a curious, keyhole-shaped orbit formed by excavation of the lacrimal and prefrontal bones in front of the eye. It has been suggested that this space accommodated a salt gland or some kind of electrosensory organ. Perhaps the better hypothesis is that the space allowed room for the contraction of an enlarged pterygoideus muscle. In that case, this skull modification would represent an early form of skull fenestration for jaw muscles.\nThe skull is shallow. Unlike the better-known embolomeres, the baphetid cheek and skull roof are sutured together. There is a strongly embayed spiracular (\"otic\") notch, but the stapes is distally broad, which seems to rule out a sensitive hearing apparatus. The palate is closed\u2014a primitive character, but very different from the temnospondyls. The coronoids bear no teeth or denticles, while the dentary has a double tooth row.\nSince the taxon is based almost exclusively on skulls, the body is very poorly known. It is often said that the body was crocodile-like, but this appears to be largely supposition. \nIt is not clear whether all of the genera assigned to this group are really closely related. The traditional four genera of baphetids (\"Loxomma\", \"Baphetes\", \"Megalocephalus\", and \"Spathicephalus\") have recently been supplemented by \"Eucritta\", a somewhat different form. It has also been suggested that \"Crassigyrinus\" may be closely related.\nTaxonomy.\nBaphetids were first described by Edward Drinker Cope when he erected the family Baphetidae in 1865 for \"Baphetes\". Richard Lydekker named Loxomatinae in 1889 for \"Loxomma\", which later became known as Loxommatidae. D. M. S. Watson described the group as Loxommidae in 1917. Later studies have shown \"Baphetes\" and \"Loxomma\" to be close relatives within the same family, and because Baphetidae was named before Loxommatidae, it has seniority and is the valid name of the group.\nPhylogeny.\nBaphetids have been previously considered primitive temnospondyls and more recently batrachosaurs (reptile-like amphibia). It is likely, however, that they represent one more of a number of early Carboniferous tetrapodomorph radiations. Computer-assisted phylogenetic analyses of a data matrix using characteristics of most of the major groups of terrestrial vertebrates place the baphetids close to the ancestry of amniotes.\nWith the reinterpretation of the Ichthyostegalia as aquatic forms, baphetids are good candidates for the spot of first labyrinthodont group to actually spend substantial time on land. If so, baphetids may be a rather important taxon\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73390", "revid": "5128741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73390", "title": "Residue theorem", "text": "Concept of complex analysis\nIn complex analysis, the residue theorem, sometimes called Cauchy's residue theorem, is a powerful tool to evaluate line integrals of analytic functions over closed curves; it can often be used to compute real integrals and infinite series as well. It generalizes the Cauchy integral theorem and Cauchy's integral formula. The residue theorem should not be confused with special cases of the generalized Stokes' theorem; however, the latter can be used as an ingredient of its proof.\nStatement of Cauchy's residue theorem.\nThe statement is as follows:\nResidue theorem: Let formula_1 be a simply connected open subset of the complex plane containing a finite list of points formula_2 formula_3 and a function formula_4 holomorphic on formula_5 Letting formula_6 be a closed rectifiable curve in formula_7 and denoting the residue of formula_4 at each point formula_9 by formula_10 and the winding number of formula_6 around formula_9 by formula_13 the line integral of formula_4 around formula_6 is equal to formula_16 times the sum of residues, each counted as many times as formula_6 winds around the respective point:\nformula_18\nIf formula_6 is a positively oriented simple closed curve, formula_20 is formula_21 if formula_9 is in the interior of formula_6 and formula_24 if not, therefore\nformula_25\nwith the sum over those formula_9 inside formula_27\nThe relationship of the residue theorem to Stokes' theorem is given by the Jordan curve theorem. The general plane curve \u03b3 must first be reduced to a set of simple closed curves formula_28 whose total is equivalent to formula_6 for integration purposes; this reduces the problem to finding the integral of formula_30 along a Jordan curve formula_31 with interior formula_32 The requirement that formula_4 be holomorphic on formula_34 is equivalent to the statement that the exterior derivative formula_35 on formula_5 Thus if two planar regions formula_37 and formula_38 of formula_1 enclose the same subset formula_40 of formula_41 the regions formula_42 and formula_43 lie entirely in formula_7 hence\nformula_45\nis well-defined and equal to zero. Consequently, the contour integral of formula_30 along formula_47 is equal to the sum of a set of integrals along paths formula_48 each enclosing an arbitrarily small region around a single formula_49 \u2014 the residues of formula_4 (up to the conventional factor formula_16 at formula_52 Summing over formula_53 we recover the final expression of the contour integral in terms of the winding numbers formula_54\nIn order to evaluate real integrals, the residue theorem is used in the following manner: the integrand is extended to the complex plane and its residues are computed (which is usually easy), and a part of the real axis is extended to a closed curve by attaching a half-circle in the upper or lower half-plane, forming a semicircle. The integral over this curve can then be computed using the residue theorem. Often, the half-circle part of the integral will tend towards zero as the radius of the half-circle grows, leaving only the real-axis part of the integral, the one we were originally interested in.\nExamples.\nAn integral along the real axis.\nThe integral\nformula_55\narises in probability theory when calculating the characteristic function of the Cauchy distribution. It resists the techniques of elementary calculus but can be evaluated by expressing it as a limit of contour integrals.\nSuppose \"t\" &gt; 0 and define the contour C that goes along the real line from \u2212\"a\" to a and then counterclockwise along a semicircle centered at 0 from a to \u2212\"a\". Take a to be greater than 1, so that the imaginary unit i is enclosed within the curve. Now consider the contour integral\nformula_56\nSince \"e\"\"itz\" is an entire function (having no singularities at any point in the complex plane), this function has singularities only where the denominator \"z\"2 + 1 is zero. Since \"z\"2 + 1 = (\"z\" + \"i\")(\"z\" \u2212 \"i\"), that happens only where \"z\" = \"i\" or \"z\" = \u2212\"i\". Only one of those points is in the region bounded by this contour. Because \"f\"(\"z\") is\nformula_57\nthe residue of \"f\"(\"z\") at \"z\" = \"i\" is\nformula_58\nAccording to the residue theorem, then, we have\nformula_59\nThe contour C may be split into a straight part and a curved arc, so that\nformula_60\nand thus\nformula_61\nUsing some estimations, we have\nformula_62\nand\nformula_63\nThe estimate on the numerator follows since \"t\" &gt; 0, and for complex numbers z along the arc (which lies in the upper half-plane), the argument \u03c6 of z lies between 0 and \u03c0. So,\nformula_64\nTherefore,\nformula_65\nIf \"t\" &lt; 0 then a similar argument with an arc \"C\"\u2032 that winds around \u2212\"i\" rather than \"i\" shows that\nformula_66\nand finally we have\nformula_67\nEvaluating zeta functions.\nThe fact that \"\u03c0\" cot(\"\u03c0z\") has simple poles with residue 1 at each integer can be used to compute the sum\nformula_68\nConsider, for example, \"f\"(\"z\") = \"z\"\u22122. Let \u0393\"N\" be the rectangle that is the boundary of [\u2212\"N\" \u2212 , \"N\" + ]2 with positive orientation, with an integer N. By the residue formula,\nformula_69\nThe left-hand side goes to zero as \"N\" \u2192 \u221e since formula_70 is uniformly bounded on the contour, thanks to using formula_71 on the left and right side of the contour, and so the integrand has order formula_72 over the entire contour. On the other hand,\nformula_73 where the Bernoulli number formula_74\n(In fact, cot() = \u2212.) Thus, the residue Res\"z\"=0 is \u2212. We conclude:\nformula_75\nwhich is a proof of the Basel problem.\nThe same argument works for all formula_76 where formula_77 is a positive integer, giving usformula_78The trick does not work when formula_79, since in this case, the residue at zero vanishes, and we obtain the useless identity formula_80.\nEvaluating Eisenstein series.\nThe same trick can be used to establish the sum of the Eisenstein series:formula_81\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Proof\nPick an arbitrary formula_82. As above, define\nformula_83\nBy the Cauchy residue theorem, for all formula_84 large enough such that formula_85 encircles formula_86,\nformula_87\nIt remains to prove the integral converges to zero. Since formula_88 is an even function, and formula_85 is symmetric about the origin, we have formula_90, and so\nformula_91\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73391", "revid": "21035594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73391", "title": "Vernation", "text": "New leaf or frond development in botany\nVernation or leafing is the formation of new leaves or fronds. In plant anatomy, it is the arrangement of leaves in a bud.\nIn pine species, new leaves are short and encased in sheaths. Each leaf bundle consists of two to five needles. All the leaves on one section of branch grow in length together. In cabbage species, new leaves are folded over, each covered by the previous leaf.\nName.\nThe term \"vernation\" is borrowed from New Latin , the act of being verdant or flourishing (). It is cognate with (Latin for \"spring\") and (\"vernal\").\nCircinate vernation.\nCircinate vernation is the manner in which most fern fronds emerge. As the fern frond is formed, it is tightly curled so that the tender growing tip of the frond (and each subdivision of the frond) is protected within a coil. At this stage it is called a crozier (after the shepherd's crook) or fiddlehead (after the scrollwork at the top of a violin). As the lower parts of the frond expand and toughen up, they begin to photosynthesize, supporting the further growth and expansion of the frond. By photosynthesizing, the frond increases the amount of solute inside the frond, which lowers the internal water gradient and facilitates an increase in volume that forces uncoiling. In the case of many fronds, long hairs or scales provide additional protection to the growing tips before they are fully uncoiled. Circinate vernation may also be observed in the extension of leaflets, in the compound leaves of cycads. Circinate vernation is also typical of the carnivorous plant family Droseraceae, for example see of \u00a0\"Drosera filiformis\". It is also seen in the related genera \"Drosophyllum\" and \"Triphyophyllum\", and in the much more distantly related \"Byblis\"; however in these three genera, the leaves are coiled \"outwards\" towards the abaxial surface of the leaf (reverse circinate vernation): this appears to be unique to these three plants among the angiosperms. \nConvolute vernation.\nThe process of convolute vernation involves the wrapping of one margin of the leaf's blade over the other. This folding mechanism makes the emerging leaf look like a tube. \nInvolute vernation.\nIn involute vernation both margins on opposing sides of the leaf are rolled up towards the upper (axial) surface of the leaf, forming two tubes that may meet at the midrib of the leaf.\nRevolute vernation.\nRevolute vernation is the opposite of involute vernation: the margins of the leaf are rolled up towards the under (abaxial) surface of the leaf.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73392", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73392", "title": "Chan Is Missing", "text": "1982 film by Wayne Wang\nChan Is Missing is a 1982 American independent comedy-drama film directed, co-written, produced and edited by Wayne Wang. It is his solo directorial debut. The film, which is shot in black-and-white, is plotted as a mystery with noir undertones, and its title is a play on the Charlie Chan film series, which focuses on a fictional Chinese immigrant detective in Honolulu. It is widely recognized as the first Asian-American feature narrative film to gain both theatrical distribution and critical acclaim outside of the Asian American community.\n\"Chan Is Missing\" turns the Charlie Chan detective trope on its head by making \"Chan\" the missing person that the film's two protagonists, Jo (Wood Moy) and Steve (Marc Hayashi), search for. In the process of trying to locate Chan, a fractured, even contradictory portrait of him emerges, mirroring the complexities of the polyglot Chinese American community that Chan's character allegorizes.\nIn 1995, \"Chan Is Missing\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nJo is a taxi driver in Chinatown, San Francisco who, with his nephew Steve, is seeking to purchase a cab license. Jo's friend Chan Hung was the go-between for the transaction but has disappeared, taking Jo's money. The two men search for Chan by speaking with various Chinatown locals, each of whom has a different impression of Chan's personality and motivations. The portrait that is created is incomplete and, at times, contradictory.\nAs the mystery behind Chan's disappearance deepens, Jo becomes paranoid that Chan may be involved in the death of a man killed during a \"flag-waving incident\" between opposing supporters of the People's Republic of China (mainland China) and the Republic of China (Taiwan).\nIn the end, Chan remains missing but, through his daughter, returns Jo and Steve's money. Jo, holding a photo of Chan where his face is completely obscured, eventually accepts that Chan is an enigma, saying in a voiceover, \"here's a picture of Chan Hung but I still can't see him.\"\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Wood Moy as Jo\nSource:\nThemes and analysis.\nChinese America and absence\nThe absence, ambiguity, and lack of definite character in the film are central themes in \"Chan Is Missing\", and reflect how the film takes on the challenge of being an early Chinese/Asian American feature narrative. \"Chan Is Missing\" is able to use the absence of Chan to fill that space with a series of a broad and complicated portrait of San Francisco's Chinese American community. According to Diane Mei Lin Mark, who wrote the framing essay for the movie's published screenplay, \"this very presentation of diversity among Chinese American characters in a film is a concept largely untested in American movies.\" The diversity is addressed in the film in at least two ways. First, there is Chan himself, who every character seems to have a different impression of. In a voiceover monologue at the end of the film, Jo explains, \"Steve thinks that Chan Hung is slow-witted, but sly when it comes to money. Jenny thinks that her father is honest and trustworthy. Mrs. Chan thinks her husband is a failure because he isn't rich. Amy thinks he's a hard-headed political activist...Presco thinks he's an eccentric who likes mariachi music.\" Chan, it would seem, is meant to stand in for the Chinese American community as a whole.\nSecond, there is also an eclectic cast of other Chinese American characters that Steve and Jo encounter while looking for Chan. That includes Henry, the cook, who wears a Samurai Night Fever T-shirt while singing \"Fry Me to the Moon\" as he stir-fries in the kitchen. Both Chan and the film's characters suggest that Chinese America, is also impossible to easily summarize or characterize.\nFilm scholar Peter Feng suggests that \"Chan Is Missing\" can be understood via the metaphor of a doughnut: \"Each character...holds a doughnut that contains the possibilities of for Chinese American identity in its center. Each of the film's characters only serve to widen that hole, thus widening the space for spectatorial subjectivity and by extension, Asian American subjectivity.\"\nSound and language\nSound is strategically deployed throughout the film to enhance the atmosphere. As Jo begins to suspect that Chan might be involved in a murder cover-up, Jo's paranoia is echoed through an explicitly ominous score. There is also a scene where Jo and Steve go to the Manilatown Center, and during their conversation with a Center employee (Presco), the camera moves from the men to focusing on a loudspeaker and loud, ambient noise in the scene obscures their conversation. This un-joining of the speaker and subject leaves the viewer disoriented, which only adds to the general mystery of the film and its plot. A similar scene happens when Jo speaks with Chan's wife and her home and loud music is also used to obscure their conversation.\nIn the original theatrical version of \"Chan Is Missing\", there are no subtitles provided for scenes where characters are either speaking in Mandarin or Cantonese. This is a common technique in Wang's film. As he told an interviewer regarding his 2008 film, \"A Thousand Years of Good Prayers\", \"I didn\u2019t want subtitles because the audience should experience what those two are experiencing and not have any more information. Yet you could still understand. Sometimes the specifics of a language are not as important as the music of the language and the body language of the language.'\nRelease.\nWayne Wang's primary distribution goal was to have the film, \"play at festivals and college campuses\", and as one of the first Asian American feature films, audience reactions to it spanned a spectrum of responses, sometimes dependent on the ethnicity of the viewer. One Chinese American viewer claimed the movie was written for a white audience because \"\u2026there being so much explaining, so many footnotes...\" says Lem. Also according to Sterrit we see that \"\u2026its initial audience has not been an ethnic one, Chinese viewers are being wooed through newspaper ads\u2026\" Furthermore, the Asians were \u2018wooed\u2019 to watch the film by the white reviewers who reviewed the movie in the Asian press, therefore raising questions about whom the film catered to. Peter X Feng believes the success of this movie was through \"the art-house audiences and brought the Asian Americans into the theaters.\" He also states that \"reviews in the Asian American press often simply advertise the screenings; but the lengthier reviews usually refer to how white reviewers see Chinese Americans and how Asian American texts are received by non-Asian audiences.\"\nWang arranged for the film to be screened at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) where it premiered as part of the New Directors/New Films series on April 24, 1982.\nCritical reception.\n\"Chan is Missing\" is highly acclaimed. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 96% based on 49 reviews with the consensus: \"An entertaining mystery that's also rich in setting and character detail, \"Chan is Missing\" suggests thrilling potential from director/co-writer Wayne Wang.\"\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" awarded the film 3 out of 4 stars and wrote that the film is \"whimsical treasure of a film that gives us a real feeling for the people of San Francisco's Chinatown\" and it \"has already become something of a legend because of the way it was filmed\" that it demonstrates a \"warm, low-key, affectionate and funny look at some real Chinese-Americans\" and went to say \"almost without realizing it, we are taken beyond the plot into the everyday lives of these people.\"\nVincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" said in his review that \"Chan Is Missing is not only an appreciation of a way of life that few of us know anything about; it's a revelation of a marvelous, completely secure new talent.\"\nA review by Dennis Schwartz stated that, \"It's breezy and warmly done, a low-key comedy that takes you into an ethnic group that has rarely been captured on film in such a revealing way. A true Indy film, and a delight.\"\nThe film won 'Best Experimental/Independent Film' at the 1982 Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards.\nPreservation.\nIn 1995, \"Chan Is Missing\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73395", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73395", "title": "The Cheat (1915 film)", "text": "1915 film by Cecil B. DeMille\nThe Cheat is a 1915 American silent drama film directed by Cecil B. DeMille, starring Fannie Ward, Sessue Hayakawa, and Jack Dean, Ward's real-life husband.\nPlot.\nEdith Hardy is a spoiled society woman who continues to buy expensive clothes even when her husband, Richard, tells her all his money is sunk into a stock speculation and he can't pay her bills until the stock goes up. She even delays paying her maid her wages, and the embarrassed Richard must do so. Edith is also the treasurer of the local Red Cross fund drive for Belgian refugees, which holds a gala dance at the home of Hishuru Tori, a rich Japanese ivory merchant (or, in the 1918 re-release, Haka Arakau, a rich Burmese ivory merchant). He is an elegant and dangerously sexy man, to whom Edith seems somewhat drawn; he shows her his roomful of treasures, and stamps one of them with a heated brand to show that it belongs to him.\nA society friend of the Hardys tells Edith that Richard's speculation will not be profitable and he knows a better one; he then offers to double her money in one day if she gives it to him to invest in the suggested enterprise. Edith, wanting to live lavishly and unwilling to wait for Richard to realize his speculation, takes the $10,000 the Red Cross has raised from her bedroom safe and gives it to the society friend.\nThe next day, however, her horrified friend tells her his tip was worthless and her money is completely lost. The Red Cross ladies have scheduled the handover of the money to the refugee fund for the day after that. Edith goes to Tori/Arakau to beg for a loan of the money, and he agrees to write her a check in return for her sexual favours the next day. She reluctantly agrees to this, takes his check and is able to give the money to the Red Cross. Then Richard announces elatedly that his investments have paid off and they are very rich. Edith asks him for $10,000, saying it is for a bridge debt, and he writes her a check for the amount with no reproof.\nShe takes it to Tori/Arakau, but he says she cannot buy her way out of their bargain. When she struggles against his advances, he takes his heated brand used to mark his possessions and brands her with it on the shoulder. In their struggle after that, she finds a gun on the floor and shoots him. She runs away just as Richard, hearing the struggle, bursts into the house. He finds the check he wrote to his wife there. Tori/Arakau is only wounded in the shoulder, not killed; when his servants call the police, Richard declares that he shot him, and Tori/Arakau does not dispute this.\nEdith pleads with Tori/Arakau not to press charges, but he refuses to spare Richard. She visits Richard in his jail cell and confesses everything, and he orders her not to tell anyone else and let him take the blame. At the crowded trial, both he and Tori/Arakau, his arm in a sling, testify that he was the shooter but will not say why. The jury finds Richard guilty.\nThis is too much for Edith, and she rushes to the witness stand and shouts that she shot Tori/Arakau \"and this is my defense\". She bares her shoulder and shows everyone in the courtroom the brand on her shoulder. The male spectators are infuriated and rush to the front, clearly intending to lynch Tori/Arakau. The judge protects him and manages to hold them off. He then sets aside the verdict, and the prosecutor withdraws the charges. Richard lovingly and protectively leads the chastened Edith from the courtroom.\nProduction and release.\n\"The Cheat\" featured art direction by Wilfred Buckland.\nUpon its release, \"The Cheat\" was both a critical and commercial success. The film's budget was $17,311. It grossed $96,389 domestically and $40,975 in the overseas market. According to Scott Eyman's \"Empire of Dreams: The Epic Life of Cecil B. DeMille\", the film cost $16,540 to make, and grossed $137,364.\nUpon its release, the character of Hishuru Tori was described as a Japanese ivory merchant. Japanese Americans protested against the film for portraying a Japanese person as sinister. In particular, a Japanese newspaper in Los Angeles, \"Rafu Shimpo\", waged a campaign against the film and heavily criticized Hayakawa's appearance. When the film was re-released in 1918, the character of Hishuru was renamed \"Haka Arakau\" and described in the title cards as a \"Burmese ivory king\". The change of the character's name and nationality were done because Japan was an American ally at the time. Robert Birchard, author of the book \"Cecil B. DeMille's Hollywood\", surmised that the character's nationality was changed to Burmese because there were \"not enough Burmese in the country to raise a credible protest.\" Despite the changes, the film was banned in the United Kingdom and was never released in Japan.\nThe film inspired French film critics to coin the term \"photogenie\" to specify cinema's medium-specific qualities and was filmed with innovative usage of lighting that helped raise awareness of film as a serious art form.\nCritical reception.\n\"Moving Picture World\" gave it a glowing review: Space bids me be brief. I cannot, however, omit words of unqualified praise for Fanny Ward, whose impersonation of the social butterfly with the singed wings was a masterly performance. The lighting effects must be mentioned, too. They are beyond all praise in their art, their daring and their originality. There are those deft and subtle touches that we find all the Lasky pictures possess--only here they crowd upon one another. What a delicate but powerful effect was the omission of the bars in the prison scene. The shadow of the bars, the sombre light, the bent head of the prisoner silhouetted against the bare wall--this is but one of the numerous happy touches. \"The Cheat\" is worth advertising to the limit. It is one feature in a hundred.\nAccolades.\nThe film was nominated for the American Film Institute's 2001 list AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills. It was also nominated in the 2007 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) list.\nRemakes and adaptations.\nThe film was remade in 1923, with George Fitzmaurice as director and Pola Negri and Jack Holt starring. In 1931, Paramount again remade \"The Cheat\", with Broadway mogul George Abbott as director and starring Tallulah Bankhead.\n\"The Cheat\" was also remade in France as \"Forfaiture\" (1937) directed by Marcel L'Herbier. This version, however, makes significant changes to the original story, even though Hayakawa was cast once again as the sexually predatory Asian man.\nAn operatic adaptation of the story, \"La Forfaiture\", with music by Camille Erlanger and a libretto by Andr\u00e9 de Lorde and Paul Milliet, premiered at the Op\u00e9ra-Comique in 1921. The first opera to be based on a film scenario, it was not a success, playing only three times.\nPreservation and availability.\nIn 1993, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.\nCopies of \"The Cheat\" are held by: \n\"The Cheat\", which is now in public domain, was released on DVD in 2002 with another DeMille film \"Manslaughter\" (1922) by Kino International.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73397", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73397", "title": "Air Portugal", "text": ""}
{"id": "73398", "revid": "3046099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73398", "title": "Chulas Fronteras", "text": "1976 documentary film by Les Blank\nChulas Fronteras is a 1976 American documentary film which tells the story of the norte\u00f1o or conjunto music which is played on both sides of the Mexico\u2013Texas border. It was directed by Les Blank. A CD soundtrack of the music played in the film is also available, under the same title.\nIn 1993, this film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73401", "revid": "39228190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73401", "title": "City Lights", "text": "1931 American silent film\nCity Lights is a 1931 American synchronized sound romantic comedy-drama film written, produced, directed by, and starring Charlie Chaplin. While the film has no audible dialog, it was released with a synchronized musical score with sound effects. The story follows the misadventures of Chaplin's Tramp as he falls in love with a blind woman (Virginia Cherrill) and develops a turbulent friendship with an alcoholic millionaire (Harry Myers).\nAlthough talking pictures (or films with recorded dialogue) were on the rise when Chaplin started developing the script in 1928, he decided to continue working without dialogue only incorporating sound with the use of a synchronized musical score with sound effects. Filming started in December 1928 and ended in September 1930. \"City Lights\" marked the first time Chaplin composed the film score to one of his productions and it was written in six weeks with Arthur Johnston. The main theme, used as a leitmotif for the blind flower girl, is the song \"La Violetera\" (\"Who'll Buy my Violets\") from Spanish composer Jos\u00e9 Padilla. Chaplin lost a lawsuit to Padilla for not crediting him.\n\"City Lights\" was immediately successful upon release on March 7, 1931, with positive reviews and worldwide rentals of more than $4 million. Today, many critics consider it not only the highest accomplishment of Chaplin's career, but one of the greatest films of all time. Chaplin biographer Jeffrey Vance believes \"\"City Lights\" is not only Charles Chaplin's masterpiece; it is an act of defiance\" as it premiered four years into the era of sound films which began with the premiere of \"The Jazz Singer\" (1927). In 1991, the Library of Congress selected \"City Lights\" for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". In 2007, the American Film Institute ranked it 11th on its list of the best American films ever made. In 1949, the critic James Agee called the film's final scene \"the greatest single piece of acting ever committed to celluloid\".\nPlot.\nThe unveiling of a new monument to \"Peace and Prosperity\" reveals the Little Tramp asleep in the lap of one of the sculpted figures. He escapes the assembly's fury and roams the city.\nThe Tramp encounters a flower girl on a street corner. He is instantly smitten and realizes she is blind while buying a flower from her. The woman mistakes him for a wealthy man when the door of an automobile slams shut as he departs.\nThat evening, the Tramp saves a drunken millionaire from suicide. The millionaire takes the Tramp, his new best friend, back to his mansion for champagne, then to a party. After helping the millionaire home the next morning, he sees the flower girl en route to her street corner. He gets some money from the millionaire, buys all her flowers and drives her home in the millionaire's car. After the Tramp leaves, the flower girl tells her grandmother about her kind, wealthy friend. Meanwhile, the Tramp returns to the mansion, where the millionaire\u00a0\u2013 now sober\u00a0\u2013 does not remember him and throws him out. Later that day, the millionaire is once again intoxicated and, seeing the Tramp on the street, invites him home for a lavish party. However, the millionaire is sober again the next morning and again kicks the Tramp out.\nFinding that the woman is not at her usual corner, the Tramp goes to her apartment and overhears a doctor telling the grandmother that she has a fever. Determined to help, the Tramp takes a job as a street sweeper. On his lunch break, he brings her groceries. To entertain her, he reads a newspaper aloud, including a story about a Viennese doctor's blindness cure. \"Wonderful, then I'll be able to see you,\" says the woman. He also finds an eviction notice the woman's grandmother has hidden. As he leaves, he pledges to pay the rent. However, he is fired for frequently being late. \nA boxer convinces him to fight in a fixed match and split the prize money. However, the boxer is replaced at the last minute by a no-nonsense fighter who knocks the Tramp out despite the Tramp's nimble evasions.\nThe Tramp encounters the drunken millionaire again and is invited to the mansion. He relates the flower girl's plight and receives money for her operation. Burglars knock the millionaire out and take the rest of his money. The police find the Tramp with the money given to him by the millionaire, who, because of the knock on the head, does not remember donating it. The Tramp evades the police long enough to give the money to the flower girl, telling her he will be going away for a time; he is arrested and imprisoned.\nWhen the Tramp is released months later, he goes to the flower girl's customary street corner but does not find her. The woman\u00a0\u2013 her sight restored\u00a0\u2013 now runs a flower shop with her grandmother. However, she still remembers the mysterious benefactor, whom she mistakes for a wealthy customer. The Tramp happens by the shop, where the woman is arranging flowers in the window. She watches him get taunted by newspaper boys. He stoops to pick up a discarded flower and turns to the shop's window. He suddenly sees the woman, who has been watching him. At the sight of her, he momentarily freezes, but then breaks into a broad smile. The woman giggles to her employee, \"I've made a conquest!\" She offers him a fresh flower and a coin. Embarrassed, the Tramp begins to shuffle away, but the woman again offers the flower, which the Tramp shyly accepts. She takes his hand and presses the coin into it, then abruptly stops. She runs her fingers along his arm and shoulder, then gasps, \"You?\" The Tramp nods and asks, \"You can see now?\" She replies, \"Yes, I can see now\", and presses his hand to her heart with a tearful smile. As the film fades, the Tramp smiles back.\nCast.\nUncredited Cast\nProduction.\nPre-production.\nChaplin's feature \"The Circus\", released in 1928, was his last film before the motion picture industry embraced sound recording and brought the silent movie era to a close. As his own producer and distributor (part owner of United Artists), Chaplin could still conceive \"City Lights\" as a silent film. Technically the film was a crossover, as its soundtrack had synchronized music and sound effects but no spoken dialogue. The dialogue was presented on intertitles. Chaplin was first contacted by inventor Eugene Augustin Lauste in 1918 about making a sound film, but he never ended up meeting with Lauste. Chaplin was dismissive about \"talkies\" and told a reporter that he would \"give the talkies three years, that's all.\" He was also concerned about how to adjust the Little Tramp to sound films.\nIn early 1928, Chaplin began writing the script with Harry Carr. The plot gradually grew from an initial concept Chaplin had considered after the success of \"The Circus\", where a circus clown goes blind and has to conceal his handicap from his young daughter by pretending that his inability to see is an on-going series of pratfalls. This inspired the Blind Girl. The first scenes Chaplin thought up were of the ending, where the newly cured blind girl sees the Little Tramp for the first time. A highly detailed description of the scene was written, as Chaplin considered it to be the center of the entire film.\nFor a subplot, Chaplin first considered a character even lower on the social scale, a black newsboy. Eventually he opted for a drunken millionaire, a character previously used in the 1921 short \"The Idle Class\". The millionaire plot was based on an old idea Chaplin had for a short in which two millionaires pick up the Little Tramp from the city dump and show him a good time in expensive clubs before dropping him back off at the dump, so when he woke up, the Tramp would not know if it was real or a dream. This was rewritten into a millionaire who is the Tramp's friend when drunk but does not recognize him when sober.\nChaplin officially began pre-production of the film in May 1928 and hired Australian art director Henry Clive to design the sets that summer. Chaplin eventually cast Clive in the role of the millionaire. Although the film was originally set in Paris, the art direction is inspired by a mix of several cities. Robert Sherwood said that \"it is a weird city, with confusing resemblances to London, Los Angeles, Naples, Paris, Tangiers and Council Bluffs. It is no city on earth and it is all cities.\"\nOn August 28, 1928, Chaplin's mother Hannah Chaplin died at the age of 63. Chaplin was distraught for several weeks and pre-production did not resume until mid fall of 1928. Psychologist Stephen Weissman has hypothesized that \"City Lights\" is highly autobiographical, with the blind girl representing Chaplin's mother, while the drunken millionaire represents Chaplin's father. Weissman also compared many of the film's sets with locations from Chaplin's real childhood, such as the statue in the opening scene resembling St. Mark's Church on Kennington Park Road and Chaplin referring to the waterfront set as the Thames Embankment.\nChaplin had interviewed several actresses to play the blind flower girl but was unimpressed with them all. While seeing a film shoot with bathing women in a Santa Monica beach, he found a casual acquaintance, Virginia Cherrill. Cherrill waved and asked if she would ever get the chance to work with him. After a series of poor auditions from other actresses, Chaplin eventually invited her to do a screen test. She was the first actress to subtly and convincingly act blind on camera due to her near-sightedness, and Cherrill signed a contract on November 1, 1928.\nPrincipal photography.\nFilming for \"City Lights\" officially began on December 27, 1928, after Chaplin and Carr had worked on the script for almost an entire year. On the set, Chaplin was noted for doing many more \"takes\" than other directors at the time. Production began with the first scene at the flower stand where the Little Tramp first meets the Blind Flower Girl. The scene took weeks to shoot, and Chaplin first began to have second thoughts about casting Cherrill. Years later, Cherrill said, \"I never liked Charlie and he never liked me.\" In his autobiography, Chaplin took responsibility for his on-set tensions with Cherrill, blaming the stress of making the film for the conflict. \"I had worked myself into a neurotic state of wanting perfection\", he remembered. Filming the scene continued until February 1929 and again for ten days in early April before Chaplin put the scene aside to be filmed later. He then shot the opening scene of the Little Tramp waking up in a newly unveiled public statue. This scene involved up to 380 extras and was especially stressful for Chaplin to shoot. During this part of shooting, construction was being done at Chaplin Studios because the city of Los Angeles had decided to widen La Brea Avenue and Chaplin was forced to move several buildings away from the road.\nChaplin then shot the sequence where the Little Tramp first meets the millionaire and prevents him from committing suicide. During filming, Henry Clive suddenly decided that he did not want to jump into the tank of cold water in the scene, causing Chaplin to storm off the set and fire Clive. He was quickly replaced by Harry Myers, whom Chaplin had known while under contract at Keystone Studios. Chaplin finished shooting the sequence on July 29, 1929, with exteriors at Pasadena Bridge. Chaplin then shot a sequence that was eventually cut from the film involving the Little Tramp attempting to retrieve a stick that was stuck in a grate. The scene included a young Charles Lederer; Chaplin later praised the scene, but insisted that it needed to be cut. He then continued filming the scenes with the millionaire until September 29, 1929.\nIn November, Chaplin began working with Cherrill again in some of the Flower Girl's less dramatic scenes. While waiting for her scenes for several months, Cherrill had become bored and openly complained to Chaplin. During the filming of one scene, Cherrill asked Chaplin if she could leave early so that she could go to a hair appointment. Chaplin fired Virginia Cherrill and replaced her with Georgia Hale, Chaplin's co-star in \"The Gold Rush\". Although Chaplin liked her screen test, even he realized he had shot far too much already to reshoot all of the flower girl's scenes. Chaplin also briefly considered sixteen-year-old actress Violet Krauth, but he was talked out of this idea by his collaborators. Chaplin finally re-hired Cherrill to finish \"City Lights\". She demanded and got a raise to $75 per week. Approximately seven minutes of test footage of Hale survives and is included on the DVD release; excerpts were first seen in the documentary \"Unknown Chaplin\" along with an unused opening sequence.\nChaplin then cast Florence Lee as the Blind Girl's grandmother and shot scenes with Cherrill and Lee for five weeks. In late 1929, Chaplin re-shot the first Flower Shop scene with Cherrill. This time, the scene was completed in six days and Chaplin was happy with Cherrill's performance. Chaplin had been shooting the film for a year and was only a little more than half way finished. From March to April 1930, Chaplin shot the scenes inside of the millionaire's house at the Town House on Wilshire Boulevard. He hired Joe Van Meter and Albert Austin, whom he had known since his days working for Fred Karno, as the burglars. In the late spring of 1930, Chaplin shot the last major comedy sequence: the boxing match. Chaplin hired Keystone actor Hank Mann to play the Tramp's opponent. Chaplin took four days to rehearse, and then six to shoot it, between June 23 and 30. Chaplin was initially nervous over the attendance for this scene so he invited his friends to be extras. Over 100 extras were present. Chaplin's performance in the scene was so humorous that more people arrived daily to be extras.\nIn July and August, Chaplin finished up six weeks of smaller scenes, including the two scenes of the Tramp being harassed by newsboys, one of whom was played by a young Robert Parrish.\nIn September 1930, Chaplin finished the shooting of the iconic final scene which took six days. Chaplin said that he was happy with Cherrill's performance in the scene, and that she had eventually understood the role. When talking about his directing style on set, Chaplin stated that \"everything I do is a dance. I think in terms of dance. I think more so in \"City Lights\".\"\nFrom October to December 1930, Chaplin edited the film and created the title cards. When he completed the film, silent films had become generally unpopular. But \"City Lights\" was one of the great financial and artistic successes of Chaplin's career, and it was his personal favorite of his films. Especially fond of the final scene, he said, \"[I]n \"City Lights\" just the last scene\u00a0... I'm not acting\u00a0... Almost apologetic, standing outside myself and looking\u00a0... It's a beautiful scene, beautiful, and because it isn't over-acted.\"\nThe amount of film used for the project was uncharacteristic for the time and was a sign of the long production process. Chaplin shot 314,256 feet of film, and the completed film ran 8,093 feet. This made a shooting ratio of approximately 38.8 feet of film for each foot of film that made it in the final version.\nMusic.\n\"City Lights\" marked the first time Chaplin composed the film score to one of his productions. While Chaplin preferred his films to have live sound, by the 1930s most theaters had gotten rid of their orchestras. Many of his critics claimed he was doing it to grab more credit. Chaplin, whose parents and many members of the Chaplin family were musicians, was struggling with the professional musicians he hired and took it upon himself to compose the score. It was written in six weeks with Arthur Johnston and included over one hundred musical cues. Chaplin told a reporter that \"I really didn't write it down. I la-laed and Arthur Johnston wrote it down, and I wish you would give him credit because he did a very good job. It is all simple music, you know, in keeping with my character.\" The intention was to have a score that would translate the characters' emotions through its melodies. The score was recorded in five days with musical arranger Alfred Newman.\nThe main theme used as a leitmotif for the blind flower girl is the song \"La Violetera\" (\"Who'll Buy my Violets\") from Spanish composer Jos\u00e9 Padilla. Chaplin was unable to secure the original song performer, Raquel Meller, in the lead role, but used her song anyway as a major theme. Chaplin lost a lawsuit to Padilla (which took place in Paris, where Padilla lived) for not crediting him. Some modern editions released for video include a new recording by Carl Davis.\nRelease, reception, and legacy.\nTwo weeks prior to the premiere, Chaplin decided to have an unpublicized preview at Los Angeles' Tower Theatre. It went poorly, attracting a small and unenthusiastic crowd. Better results were seen at the gala premiere on January 30, 1931, at the Los Angeles Theater. Albert Einstein and his wife were the guests of honor, and the film received a standing ovation. It next premiered at the George M. Cohan Theater in New York where Chaplin closely supervised the release, spending the day doing interviews, and previously spending $60,000 on the advertising, as he was frustrated with what UA's publicists had come up with. Chaplin demanded half of the total gross, and considering audiences would be more attracted by the film itself than its technology, he demanded higher ticket prices compared to talkies.\nChaplin was nervous about the film's reception because silent films were becoming obsolete by then, and the preview had undermined his confidence. Nevertheless, \"City Lights\" became one of Chaplin's most financially successful and critically acclaimed works. Following the good reception by American audiences, with estimated theatrical rentals of $2 million, a quarter of which came from its 12-week run at the Cohan, Chaplin went on a sixteen-day world tour between February and March 1931, starting with a premiere at London's Dominion Theatre on February 27. The film was enthusiastically received by Depression-era audiences, earning $4.25 million in worldwide rentals during its initial release.\nReviews were mostly positive. A film critic for the \"Los Angeles Examiner\" said that \"not since I reviewed the first Chaplin comedies way back in the two-reel days has Charlie given us such an orgy of laughs.\" \"The New York Times\" reviewer Mordaunt Hall considered it \"a film worked out with admirable artistry\". \"Variety\" declared it was \"not Chaplin's best picture\" but that certain sequences were \"hilarious\". \"The New Yorker\" wrote that it was \"on the order of his other [films], perhaps a little better than any of them\" and that it gave an impression \"not often\u2014oh, very seldom\u2014found in the movies; an indefinable impression perhaps best described as a quality of charm.\" On the other hand, Alexander Bakshy of \"The Nation\" was highly critical of \"City Lights\", objecting to the silent format and over-sentimentality and describing it as \"Chaplin's feeblest\".\nThe popularity of \"City Lights\" endured, with the film's re-release in 1950 again positively received by audiences and critics. In 1949, the critic James Agee wrote in \"Life\" magazine, that the final scene was the \"greatest single piece of acting ever committed to celluloid.\" Richard Meryman called the final scene one of the greatest moments in film history. Charles Silver, Curator of Film at the Museum of Modern Art, stated that the film is so highly regarded because it brought forth a new level of lyrical romanticism that had not appeared in Chaplin's earlier works. He adds that like all romanticism, it is based in the denial of the real world around it. When the film premiered, Chaplin was much older, he was in the midst of another round of legal battles with former spouse Lita Grey, and the economic and political climate of the world had changed. Chaplin uses the Girl's blindness to remind the Tramp of the precarious nature of romanticism in the real world, as she unknowingly assaults him multiple times. Film.com critic Eric D. Snider said that by 1931, most Hollywood filmmakers either embraced sound films, resigned themselves to their inevitability, or just gave up making movies, yet Chaplin held firm with his vision in this project. He also noted that few in Hollywood had the clout to make a silent film at that late date, let alone do it well. One reason was that Chaplin knew the Tramp could not be adapted to talking movies and still work.\nSeveral well-known directors have praised \"City Lights\". Orson Welles said it was his favorite film. In a 1963 interview in the American magazine \"Cinema\", Stanley Kubrick rated \"City Lights\" as fifth among his top ten films. In 1972, the renowned Russian director Andrei Tarkovsky placed \"City Lights\" as fifth among his top ten and said of Chaplin, \"He is the only person to have gone down into cinematic history without any shadow of a doubt. The films he left behind can never grow old.\" The acclaimed French filmmaker Robert Bresson placed this film as first and second on his top ten films of all time. George Bernard Shaw called Chaplin \"the only genius to come out of the movie industry\". Celebrated Italian director Federico Fellini often praised this film, and his \"Nights of Cabiria\" refers to it. In the 2003 documentary \"Charlie: The Life and Art of Charles Chaplin\", Woody Allen said it was Chaplin's best picture. Allen is said to have based the final scene of his 1979 film \"Manhattan\" on its final scene. Chaplin biographer Jeffrey Vance has summarized all the best criticism and all the notable filmmakers who have singled out \"City Lights\" as their favorite Chaplin film throughout the decades in the Criterion Collection audio commentary track for the film. Vance has written that among all the praise afforded the film can be added that \"City Lights also holds the distinction of being Chaplin's own favorite of all his films.\" Canadian-American ambient rock band Vision Eternel based the artwork of its 2024 extended play, \"Echoes from Forgotten Hearts\", on \"City Light\"'s film poster.\nFrench experimental musician and film critic Michel Chion has written an analysis of \"City Lights\", published as \"Les Lumi\u00e8res de la ville\". Slavoj \u017di\u017eek used the film as a primary example in his essay \"Why Does a Letter Always Arrive at Its Destination?\". Film critic Roger Ebert of \"Chicago Sun-Times\" gave the film four stars out of four writing the film \"contains the slapstick, the pathos, the pantomime, the effortless physical coordination, the melodrama, the bawdiness, the grace, and, of course, the Little Tramp--the character said, at one time, to be the most famous image on earth.\" He added the film in his Great Movies list. Chaplin's original \"Tramp\" suit from the film was donated by him to the Museum of Natural History of Los Angeles County.\n\"City Lights\" was released as a dual-format Blu-ray and DVD by the Criterion Collection in 2013, both of which include trailers of the film, archival footage from production, and an audio commentary track by Chaplin biographer and scholar Jeffrey Vance, among others. The new cover was illustrated by Canadian cartoonist Seth.\nAccolades.\nIn 1952, \"Sight and Sound\" magazine revealed the results of its first poll for \"The Best Films of All Time\"; \"City Lights\" was voted #2, after Vittorio DeSica's \"Bicycle Thieves\". In 2002, \"City Lights\" ranked 45th on the critics' list. That same year, directors were polled separately and ranked the film as 19th overall.\nIn 1991, the Library of Congress selected \"City Lights\" for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". In 2007, the American Film Institute's tenth anniversary edition of \"100 Years... 100 Movies\" ranked \"City Lights\" as the 11th greatest American film of all time, an improvement over the 76th position on the original list. AFI also chose the film as the best romantic comedy of American cinema in 2008's \"10 Top 10\". The Tramp was number 38 on AFI's list of the 50 Best Heroes, and the film ranked at 38th among the funniest films, 10th among the greatest love stories, and 33rd on the most inspiring films. The film's original 1931 poster, illustrated by Hap Hadley, was ranked 52nd on the AFI's list \"Top 100 American Movie Poster Classics\" in 2003.\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\n\"The Village Voice\" ranked the film at number 37 in its Top 250 \"Best Films of the Century\" list in 1999, based on a poll of critics. The film was included in \"Time\"'s All-Time 100 best movies list in 2005. In 2006, \"Premiere\" issued its list of \"The 100 Greatest Performances of all Time\", putting Chaplin's performance as \"The Tramp\" at No. 44. \"City Lights\" was ranked seventeenth on \"Cahiers du cin\u00e9ma\"'s 100 Greatest Films, a 2008 poll of 78 film historians and critics organized by Claude-Jean Philippe. In the 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls, it was ranked the 50th-greatest film ever made in the critics' poll and 30th in the directors' poll. In the earlier 2002 version of the list the film ranked 45th among critics and 19th among directors. In 2015, \"City Lights\" ranked 18th on BBC's \"100 Greatest American Films\" list, voted on by film critics from around the world. The film was voted at No. 21 on the list of \"The 100 greatest comedies of all time\" by a poll of 253 film critics from 52 countries conducted by the BBC in 2017. In 2021 the film ranked 16th on \"Time Out\" magazine's list of \"The 100 best movies of all time\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73402", "revid": "3848144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73402", "title": "Sullivan's Travels", "text": "1941 film by Preston Sturges\nSullivan's Travels is a 1941 American comedy film written and directed by Preston Sturges. A satire of the film industry, it follows a famous Hollywood comedy director (Joel McCrea) who, longing to make a socially relevant drama, sets out to live as a tramp to gain life experience for his forthcoming film. Along the way he unites with a poor aspiring actress (Veronica Lake) who accompanies him. The title is a reference to \"Gulliver's Travels\", the 1726 novel by satirist Jonathan Swift about another journey of self-discovery.\n\"Sullivan's Travels\" received a mixed reception from critics upon its release. \"The New York Times\" described it as \"the most brilliant picture yet this year\", praising Sturges's mix of escapist fun with underlying significance, and ranked it as one of the ten best films of 1941. But \"The Hollywood Reporter\" said that it lacked the \"down to earth quality and sincerity which made [Sturges's] other three pictures of 1941 \u2013 \"The Great McGinty\", \"The Lady Eve\", and \"Christmas in July\" \u2013 \"a joy to behold\".\nOver time, the film's reputation has improved tremendously. Media historian Hal Erickson classified it as a \"classic\", \"one of the finest movies about movies ever made\" and a \"masterpiece\". In 1990, \"Sullivan's Travels\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nPlot.\nJohn L. Sullivan is a popular young Hollywood director of profitable but shallow comedies. Dissatisfied with making such films as \"Ants in Your Plants of 1939\", he tells his studio boss, Mr. LeBrand, that he wants his next project to be a serious exploration of the plight of the downtrodden based on the novel \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\" LeBrand wants him to direct another lucrative comedy instead, but Sullivan refuses. He wants to \"know trouble\" firsthand, and plans to travel as a tramp so he can make a film that truly depicts the sorrows of humanity. His British butler and valet both openly question the wisdom of his plan.\nSullivan dresses as a hobo and takes to the road, followed by staff in a bus imposed on him for his own safety by the studio. Nobody is happy with the arrangement, and Sullivan, after trying to lose the bus in a fast-paced car chase, eventually persuades his guardians to leave him alone and arranges to rendezvous with them later in Las Vegas. However, he soon returns to Los Angeles. There, in a diner, Sullivan meets a struggling young actress who has failed to make it in Hollywood and is just about to give up and go home. She believes he is a penniless tramp and buys him breakfast.\nIn return for her kindness, Sullivan retrieves his car from his estate and gives her a ride. He neglects to tell his servants that he has returned, so they report the car stolen. Sullivan and the girl are briefly apprehended by police, but are released after things are cleared up. He and the girl go to his palatial mansion. After seeing how wealthy he is, she shoves him into his swimming pool for deceiving her. However, when he insists on trying again, she goes with him, over his objections, disguised as a boy.\nThis time Sullivan succeeds. After riding in a cattle car, eating in soup kitchens and sleeping in homeless shelters with the girl (where someone steals his shoes), Sullivan finally decides he has had enough. His experiment is publicized by the studio as a huge success. The girl wants to stay with him, but Sullivan reveals to her that he is married, lovelessly, to someone else, having been advised to do so solely to reduce his taxes. Worse, the plan backfired, with Sullivan's joint returns higher than when he was single and his wife having an affair with his business manager.\nSullivan decides to thank the homeless for the insights he has gained by handing out $5 bills. At a train yard, a man knocks Sullivan unconscious, steals his money and shoes, and dumps him in a departing boxcar. While escaping with Sullivan's money, the thief gets run over by another train. When the mangled body is found, the ID cards sewn into the stolen shoes identify the deceased as Sullivan.\nSullivan wakes up in another city, with no memory of who he is or how he got there. A yard bull finds him and accosts him for illegally entering the rail yard. In his dazed state, Sullivan hits the man with a rock, earning himself a six-year sentence of hard labor in a work camp. He gradually regains his memory. In the camp, he attends a showing of Walt Disney's 1934 \"Playful Pluto\" cartoon, a rare treat for the prisoners, and is surprised to find himself laughing along with the rest of them.\nUnable to convince anybody either that he is Sullivan or communicate with the outside world, he comes up with a solution: after learning of his unsolved \"killing\" on the front page of an old newspaper, he confesses to being the murderer. When his picture makes the front page, he is recognized and released. His \"widow\" has married his business manager, meaning she will have to grant him a divorce or be charged with bigamy. Sullivan's boss finally tells him he can make \"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\" Sullivan confesses he has changed his mind; he now wants to continue making comedies, having seen firsthand the joy they bring to the downtrodden.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Joel McCrea as John L. Sullivan\nThemes.\nThe film's primary theme is best summed up in the last line of dialogue as spoken by Sullivan: \"There's a lot to be said for making people laugh. Did you know that's all some people have? It isn't much, but it's better than nothing in this cockeyed caravan.\"\nThe scene in which the prisoners are taken to watch the 1934 Disney cartoon \"Playful Pluto\" takes place in a Southern black church; the film treats the African-American characters there with a level of respect unusual in films of the period. The Secretary of the NAACP, Walter White, wrote to Sturges:\nI want to congratulate and thank you for the church sequence in \"Sullivan's Travels\". This is one of the most moving scenes I have seen in a moving picture for a long time. But I am particularly grateful to you, as are a number of my friends, both white and colored, for the dignified and decent treatment of Negroes in this scene. I was in Hollywood recently and am to return there soon for conferences with production heads, writers, directors, and actors and actresses in an effort to induce broader and more decent picturization of the Negro instead of limiting him to menial or comic roles. The sequence in \"Sullivan's Travels\" is a step in that direction and I want you to know how grateful we are.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nParamount purchased Sturges's script for \"Sullivan's Travels\" for $6,000. He wrote the film as a response to the \"preaching\" he found in other comedies \"which seemed to have abandoned the fun in favor of the message.\"\nThe film as released opens with a dedication:To the memory of those who made us laugh: the motley mountebanks, the clowns, the buffoons, in all times and in all nations, whose efforts have lightened our burden a little, this picture is affectionately dedicated. This was originally intended to be spoken by Sullivan. Sturges wanted the film to begin with the prologue: \"This is the story of a man who wanted to wash an elephant. The elephant darn near ruined him.\" Paramount contracted with the Schlesinger Corp., who made the Warner Bros. \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" cartoons, to make an animated main title sequence, but this was not used in the film, if it was ever actually produced.\nThe censors at the Hays Office had objections to the script they received. They felt that the word \"bum\" would be rejected by British censors, and warned that there should be no \"suggestion of sexual intimacy\" between Sullivan and The Girl in the scenes in which they are sleeping together at the mission.\nCasting.\nSturges wrote the film with Joel McCrea in mind, but found the female lead\u2014Veronica Lake\u2014through the casting process. Before Lake was cast, Barbara Stanwyck was considered, as well as Frances Farmer.\nFilming.\n\"Sullivan's Travels\" went into production on May 12, 1941, and wrapped on July 22. Location shooting took place in Canoga Park, San Marino, Castaic and at Lockheed Air Terminal.\nLake was six months pregnant at the beginning of production, a fact she did not disclose to Sturges until filming began. Sturges was so furious that, according to Lake, he had to be physically restrained. Sturges consulted with Lake's doctor to see if she could perform the part, and hired former Tournament of Roses queen Cheryl Walker as Lake's double. Costume designer Edith Head was tasked to find ways of concealing Lake's pregnancy. Reportedly, Lake was disliked by a few of her co-stars. McCrea refused to work with her again, and subsequently turned down a lead role with her in \"I Married a Witch\". Fredric March, who took the latter part, did not much enjoy working with Lake, either. However, McCrea got along famously with Sturges, and afterward presented him with a watch engraved \"for the finest direction I've ever had.\" Sturges' assistant director, Anthony Mann, also was influenced heavily by his experience on the production.\nThere were some minor problems during filming. Sturges had wanted to use a clip from a Charlie Chaplin film for the church scene, but was turned down by Chaplin and the Disney cartoon substituted instead. Lake does parody Chaplin's \"Little Tramp\" character earlier in the film. Also, the poverty montage was scheduled to take three hours to film, but took seven hours. The film cost $689,000 to produce, some $86,000 over budget.\nRelease and reception.\nThe film was given a pre-screening for critics on December 4, 1941, before premiering in Jackson, Tennessee on December 29, 1941. Its Hollywood premiere occurred on February 12, 1942, at the Los Angeles Paramount Theatre.\nWhen the film was released, the U.S. Office of Censorship declined to approve it for export overseas during wartime, because of the \"long sequence showing life in a prison chain gang which is most objectionable because of the brutality and inhumanity with which the prisoners are treated.\" This conformed with the office's standing policy of not exporting films that could be used for propaganda purposes by the enemy. The producers of the film declined to make suggested changes that could have altered the film's status.\nCritical response.\n\"Sullivan's Travels\" was not immediately successful at the box office as were earlier Sturges films such as \"The Great McGinty\" and \"The Lady Eve\", and received mixed critical reception. Although the review in \"The New York Times\" called the film \"the most brilliant picture yet this year\" and praised Sturges' mix of escapist fun with underlying significance, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" said that it lacked the \"down to earth quality and sincerity which made [Sturges's] other three pictures a joy to behold\" and that \"Sturges...fails to heed the message that writer Sturges proves in his script. Laughter is the thing people want\u2014not social studies.\" \"The New Yorker\"'s review said that \"anyone can make a mistake, Preston Sturges, even. The mistake in question is a pretentious number called \"Sullivan's Travels\".\" Nevertheless, the \"Times\" named it as one of the ten best films of 1941, and the National Board of Review nominated it as best picture of the year.\nOver time, the reputation of the film has improved tremendously, and it is now considered a classic; at least one reviewer called it Sturges's \"masterpiece\" and \"one of the finest movies about movies ever made.\" On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 100% based on 41 reviews, with an average rating of 8.7/10.\nIn 2020, \"Diabolique Magazine\" described Lake's character as \"captivating, magical, and extremely sexy, whether sitting on McCrea's lap in a bathrobe and combing his hair or walking along the road in a hobo overcoat ... She wasn't great with all her dialogue but Sturges made her spit it out at rapid-fire pace and protected her limitations. It's a performance for the ages.\"\nHome media.\n\"Sullivan's Travels\" was released on video in the United States on March 16, 1989, and re-released on June 30, 1993. The film was re-released in the United Kingdom with a restored print on May 12, 2000.\nThe Criterion Collection issued a special edition DVD of the film on August 21, 2001, before reissuing a newly restored version of the film both DVD and Blu-ray in 2015.\nLegacy.\nIn 1990, \"Sullivan's Travels\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\" In 2000, the American Film Institute listed the film at No. 39 on AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs. In 2006, it was ranked No. 25 on AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers. In 2007, it was ranked at No. 61 on the anniversary edition of their 100 Years...100 Movies.\nThe Writers Guilds of America voted the screenplay for \"Sullivan's Travels\" as the 29th greatest ever written, as well as the 35th funniest. The film's poster was ranked as No. 19 of \"The 25 Best Movie Posters Ever\" by \"Premiere\". A 2010 special issue of \"Trains\" magazine ranked \"Sullivan's Travels\" 25th among the 100 greatest train films.\n\"O Brother, Where Art Thou?\", the fictional book that Sullivan wants to adapt for the screen, was used as the title of the 2000 film of the same name by the Coen brothers.\nIn 2022, the film was ranked joint 243rd in the Sight &amp; Sound Greatest Films of All Time poll, tied with 21 other films.\nAdaptations.\nOn November 9, 1942, \"Lux Radio Theatre\" broadcast a radio adaptation of \"Sullivan's Travels\" with Ralph Bellamy in the lead role and Veronica Lake reprising her role.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73405", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73405", "title": "Civilization (film)", "text": "1916 film\nCivilization is a 1916 American pacifist drama film produced by Thomas H. Ince, written by C. Gardner Sullivan and Edward Sloman, and directed by Ince, Reginald Barker and Raymond B. West. The story involves a submarine commander who refuses to fire at a civilian ocean liner supposedly carrying ammunition for his country's enemies. The film was a big-budget spectacle that was compared to both \"The Birth of a Nation\" and the paintings of Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Millet. The film was a popular success and was credited by the Democratic National Committee with helping to re-elect Woodrow Wilson as the U.S. president in 1916. The film was one of the early movies to depict Jesus Christ as a character, leading some to criticize the depiction as in \"poor taste.\"\n\"Civilization\" is sometimes viewed as one of the first anti-war films. In 1999, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPrologue.\nThe film opened with a lengthy prologue. In some theaters, the prologue was performed by live actors and an orchestra. It included music composed by Victor Schertzinger and depicted a peaceful country home, with hills in the distance, a stream and clouds floating peacefully through the sky. Suddenly, the boom of a cannon is heard, artillery guns belch fire, and a Zeppelin flies over the city dropping bombs. In the smoke, \"Civilization\" is depicted kneeling pleadingly at the feet of a menacing \"God of War.\" Soldiers are seen retreating before deadly gas. Against these scenes, the film's title cards express the film's anti-war message, concluding with the following comments:\nToday, the great sorrowful eyes of this same Son of God gaze down upon blackened fields, where the mangled bodies of men are strewn as grains of wheat, upon flaming shattered hamlets and stricken firesides. As He listens to the screaming of the shells, the crashing of monstrous guns, all the ghastly symphony of the reddest war mankind has ever known, His heart must recognize the bitter truth in the statement of one of the world's foremost educators\u2014 That in nineteen centuries Civilization has failed to accept honestly the teachings of Jesus Christ. This is an allegorical story of a war that has laughed at the world's flaunting boast of a higher progress. It does not concern itself as to which side is in the right or wrong, but deals with those ranks which are paying, the grim penalty\u2014the ranks of Humanity. If the awful trail of battle stretches vividly through the scenes of the narrative, it is in the hope that a shocked and appalled world may henceforth devote itself more earnestly in the cause of peace. Let our Civilization not be a mockery of our cherished ideals, but rather a synonym of that glorious work\u2014Humanity. Dedicated to that vast, pitiful army whose tears have girdled the universe\u2014the mothers of the dead.\nPlot.\nThe film opens with the outbreak of a war in the previously peaceful kingdom of Wredpryd. Count Ferdinand is the inventor of a new submarine who is assigned to command the new ship in battle. The King of Wredpryd orders the Count to sink the \"ProPatria\" (\"for my country\"), a civilian ship that is believed to be carrying munitions as well as civilian passengers. In his mind's eye, the Count sees a vision of what would happen if he sent a torpedo crashing into the liner, and he recoils. He refuses to follow his orders, saying he is \"obeying orders -- from a Higher Power.\" Realizing his crew will carry out the orders, the Count fights with the crew and blows up his submarine, sending it to the bottom of the sea.\nThe Count's soul descends into purgatory, where he encounters Jesus. Jesus announces that the Count can find redemption by returning to the living world as a voice for peace. Jesus tells the Count \"Peace to thee, child, for in thy love for humanity is thy redemption. In thy earthly body will I return, and with thy voice plead for peace. Much evil is being wrought in my name.\"\nThe Count returns to life and is stoned and reviled by his countrymen. He is put on trial by the king, a modern Pontius Pilate, and is sentenced to death. Five thousand women gather at the palace singing a song of peace and pleading with the king to end the war. The mothers' plea inspires the king to visit the cell of the condemned Count. The Count is found dead in his cell, and Jesus emerges from the Count's body and takes the king on a tour of the battlefields. Jesus asks \"See here thy handiwork? Under thy reign, thy domain hath become a raging hell!\" In the film's most famous scene, Jesus walks through the battlefields amid the carnage of war.\nThe signing of a peace treaty follows, and the closing scenes depicts the happiness in store for the returning soldiers.\nProduction.\n\"Civilization\" was a big budget spectacle from Thomas H. Ince. It was in production for nearly a year and advertised to have cost $1,000,000 to make but actually cost only $100,000 and returned $800,000.\nC. Gardner Sullivan, The film's screenwriter, said he received the inspiration for the film on Easter Sunday morning in 1915. He wrote an outline on a single piece of typewriter paper, originally calling it \"The Mothers of Men.\" Sullivan showed the outline to Ince, and Ince decided it was worth investing $1 million.\nIn April 1916, the \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote:\nThe next large feature looming on the horizon is the Ince photoplay, \"Civilization\"...It was nearly a year in the making, and is the most pretentious of the Ince features. Many hundreds of persons took part, and it is said that the film contains some of the most beautiful photography ever shown on the screen.\nAt the time of its release, it was described as \"the ultimate achievement of the Ince studios.\" \nThe film included large scale battle scenes, scenes of naval battles, trench warfare, aerial battles, and the resulting devastation. Ships from the United States Navy were utilized in the scenes depicting sea battles. Advertising for the film (\"pictured at right\") boasted of the extravagant expense incurred in presenting the spectacle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeorge Fisher was given the daunting role of playing \"The Christ\" in \"Civilization\". He was \"the first cinema actor to portray Christ for the screen.\" At the time of the film's release, Fisher told the \"Los Angeles Times\" that, to get in the proper mood for the role, \"he lived the life of a recluse, spending his time in study and meditation.\" He expressed his hope that the film's message would be heard:\nI can say in truth that the playing of this part has affected my whole life and the impressions will never leave me. I have tried earnestly and sincerely, with a deep prayer in my heart, to bring a message to the world, one which will reach, perhaps, millions. Now my only wish is that whoever may witness the performances of \"Civilization\" will realize only the truth and beauty of the message.\nThe premiere was held at the Majestic Theatre in Los Angeles on April 17, 1916.\nPopular response.\nThe film was a popular success when it was released in 1916. The Democratic National Committee credited the film with helping to re-elect President Woodrow Wilson in 1916. After the United States's entry into World War I, the film was pulled from distribution.\nFilm director Yasujir\u014d Ozu claimed that he first decided to become a film director when watching \"Civilization\".\nCritical reaction.\nAmong critics, the reaction was mixed.\nPositive reviews.\nIn La Crosse, Wisconsin, a newspaper reviewer called it a \"masterpiece\" and the \"Biggest Spectacle in History of Motion Pictures,\" surpassing even D.W. Griffith's \"The Birth of a Nation\":\nThe photoplay and the spoken drama will be united for the first time in...the million dollar masterpiece of Thomas H. Ince...\"Civilization\" is an encyclopedia of the emotions. It is inevitable to compare such a picture, epic in its scope, including battles and the upheaval of a nation, to a similar picture, Griffith's \"Birth of a Nation\". Ince has excelled his predecessor in the art of suggestion. In the vivid battle scenes of \"Civllization\", there are four suggestive flashes for every one Griffith gave us. The conception is classically correct. No theater could be conceived that would be adequate in space or speed of action to carry across to an audience what was conveyed in this film.\nIn Indiana, a reviewer emphasized the film's spectacular effects and its depiction of Jesus:\n'If Christ Should Visit Verdun' would make a good subtitle for \"Civilization\", for that is really its theme...Pictorially, and in the spectacular effects that can be achieved within range of the camera, as well as in the sheer beauty of many of its scenes, it is a masterpiece indeed. Days of peace in the little town of Wrepryd, which is its locale, and in the peaceful country thereabout, might have been posed by the artist Millet, so strikingly do they stand out.\nIn Fairbanks, Alaska, a reviewer wrote that, if the film had been shown to the people of Europe before the war started there would have been no war:\n\"Civilization\" is worth $1.50 today, tomorrow, or at any time. It is a masterpiece\u2014a picture that grips and thrills. It preaches a powerful sermon and preaches it in a way that makes it interesting...After seeing \"Civilization\" one can truthfully say that had Henry Ford produced a film like this one that Ince directed, and sent it broadcast throughout the civilized world as an argument against war, he would have accomplished more for universal peace than did his famous 'peace expedition.' He would have reached the great mass of people who have but a faint recollection of the horrors of war, and would have showed them the pain and the suffering and the sorrow that war brings with it. Had such a picture as \"Civilization\" been shown to the people of Europe before the war started there would have been no war.\nNegative reviews.\nHenry Christeen Warnack in the \"Los Angeles Times\" was troubled by the depiction of The Christ and wrote that the film \"is not daring, it is only poor taste.\" He opined that it was offensive to the beliefs of Christians, Jews and atheists alike:\n[T]he play will...be popular with everybody with the exception of three classes: It will probably prove offensive to Christians because they are likely to think of it as irreverent; to the Hebrew it will seem mystical and exaggerated; the non-church-goer will find it absurd and undramatic. Outside of the Christian, the Jew and the unbeliever, I haven't the sligthest [\"sic?\"] doubt of its appeal.\nWarnack concluded his review as follows:\nThis violation of good taste and this error in judgment belong to the misconception of the story...Realizing the vast sum of money and the huge investment of talent and good faith that have been expended in this pretentious film, it is with deep regret that I am compelled to report it as a disappointment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73407", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73407", "title": "O Brother, Where Art Thou", "text": ""}
{"id": "73408", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73408", "title": "To Kill a Mockingbird", "text": "1960 novel by Harper Lee\nTo Kill a Mockingbird is a 1960 Southern Gothic novel by American author Harper Lee. It became instantly successful after its release; in the United States, it is widely read in high schools and middle schools. \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" won the Pulitzer Prize a year after its release, and it has become a classic of modern American literature. The plot and characters are loosely based on Lee's observations of her family, her neighbors and an event that occurred near her hometown of Monroeville, Alabama, in 1936, when she was ten.\nDespite dealing with the serious issues of rape and racial inequality, the novel is renowned for its warmth and humor. Atticus Finch, the narrator's father, has served as a moral hero for many readers and as a model of integrity for lawyers. The historian Joseph Crespino explains, \"In the twentieth century, \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" is probably the most widely read book dealing with race in America, and its main character, Atticus Finch, the most enduring fictional image of racial heroism.\" As a Southern Gothic novel and \"Bildungsroman\", the primary themes of \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" involve racial injustice and the destruction of innocence. Scholars have noted that Lee also addresses issues of class, courage, compassion, and gender roles in the Deep South. Lessons from the book emphasize tolerance and decry prejudice. Despite its themes, \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" has been subject to campaigns for removal from public classrooms, often challenged for its use of racial epithets. In 2006, British librarians ranked the book ahead of the Bible as one \"every adult should read before they die\".\nReaction to the novel varied widely upon publication. Despite the number of copies sold and its widespread use in education, literary analysis of it is sparse. Author Mary McDonough Murphy, who collected individual impressions of \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" by several authors and public figures, calls the book \"an astonishing phenomenon\". It was adapted into an Academy Award-winning film in 1962 by director Robert Mulligan, with a screenplay by Horton Foote. Since 1990, a play based on the novel has been performed annually in Harper Lee's hometown.\n\"To Kill a Mockingbird\" was Lee's only published book until \"Go Set a Watchman\", an earlier draft of \"To Kill a Mockingbird\", was published on July 14, 2015. Lee continued to respond to her work's impact until her death in February 2016. She was very guarded about her personal life, and gave her last interview to a journalist in 1964.\nBiographical background and publication.\nBorn in 1926, Harper Lee grew up in the Southern town of Monroeville, Alabama, where she became a close friend of soon-to-be-famous writer Truman Capote. She attended Huntingdon College in Montgomery (1944\u201345), and then studied law at the University of Alabama (1945\u201349). While attending college, she wrote for campus literary magazines: \"Huntress\" at Huntingdon and the humor magazine \"Rammer Jammer\" at the University of Alabama. At both colleges, she wrote short stories and other works about racial injustice, a rarely mentioned topic on such campuses at the time. In 1950, Lee moved to New York City, where she worked as a reservation clerk for British Overseas Airways Corporation; there, she began writing a collection of essays and short stories about people in Monroeville. Hoping to be published, Lee presented her writing in 1957 to a literary agent recommended by Capote. An editor at J. B. Lippincott, who bought the manuscript, advised her to quit the airline and concentrate on writing.\nDonations from friends allowed her to write uninterrupted for a year. After finishing the first draft and returning it to Lippincott, the manuscript, at that point titled \"Go Set a Watchman\", fell into the hands of Therese von Hohoff Torrey, known professionally as Tay Hohoff. Hohoff was impressed: \"[T]he spark of the true writer flashed in every line,\" she would later recount in a corporate history of Lippincott, but as Hohoff saw it, the manuscript was by no means fit for publication. It was, as she described it, \"more a series of anecdotes than a fully conceived novel.\" During the following two and a half years, she led Lee from one draft to the next until the book finally achieved its finished form.\nAfter the \"Watchman\" title was rejected, it was re-titled \"Atticus\" but Lee renamed it \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" to reflect that the story went beyond a character portrait. The book was published on July 11, 1960. The editorial team at Lippincott warned Lee that she would probably sell only several thousand copies. In 1964, Lee recalled her hopes for the book when she said,\nI never expected any sort of success with 'Mockingbird.'\u00a0...\u00a0I was hoping for a quick and merciful death at the hands of the reviewers but, at the same time, I sort of hoped someone would like it enough to give me encouragement. Public encouragement. I hoped for a little, as I said, but I got rather a whole lot, and in some ways this was just about as frightening as the quick, merciful death I'd expected.\nInstead of a \"quick and merciful death\", \"Reader's Digest Condensed Books\" chose the book for reprinting in part, which gave it a wide readership immediately. Since the original publication, the book has never been out of print.\nPlot summary.\nThe story, told by Jean Louise \"Scout\" Finch, takes place during three years (1933\u201335) of the Great Depression in the fictional town of Maycomb, Alabama, the seat of Maycomb County. Scout, who is six years old at the beginning of the book, lives with her older brother Jeremy, nicknamed Jem, and their widowed father Atticus, a middle-aged lawyer. They also have a black cook, Calpurnia, who has been with the family for many years and helps Atticus raise the two children.\nJem and Scout befriend a boy named Charles Baker Harris, nicknamed Dill, who visits Maycomb to stay with his aunt each summer. The three children are terrified, yet fascinated, by their neighbor, the reclusive Arthur \"Boo\" Radley. The adults of Maycomb are hesitant to talk about Boo, and many of them have not seen him for many years. The children feed one another's imagination with rumors about his appearance and reasons for remaining hidden, and they fantasize about how to get him out of his house. After two summers of friendship with Dill, Scout and Jem find that someone is leaving them small gifts in a tree outside the Radley place. Several times the mysterious Boo makes gestures of affection to the children, but, to their disappointment, he never appears in person. One day, Boo's elder brother appears and abruptly encloses the hiding place where Boo had left carved figurines and trinkets for the children.\nJudge Taylor appoints Atticus to defend Tom Robinson, a black man who has been accused of raping a young white woman, Mayella Ewell. Although many of Maycomb's citizens disapprove, Atticus agrees to defend Tom to the best of his ability. Other children taunt Jem and Scout for Atticus's actions, calling him a \"nigger-lover\". Scout is tempted to stand up for her father's honor by fighting, even though he has told her not to. One night, Atticus faces a group of men intent on lynching Tom. Scout, Jem, and Dill unexpectedly show up, and Scout inadvertently breaks the mob mentality by recognizing and talking heart-to-heart to a classmate's father, causing the would-be lynchers to disperse.\nAtticus does not want Jem and Scout to be present at Tom Robinson's trial. No seat is available on the main floor, but the Rev. Sykes, the pastor of Calpurnia's church, invites Jem, Scout and Dill to watch from the colored balcony. Atticus establishes that Mayella Ewell and her father, Bob, are lying. It is revealed that Mayella made sexual advances toward Tom, resulting in her being beaten by her father. The townspeople refer to the Ewells as \"white trash\" who are not to be trusted, but the jury convicts Tom regardless. Jem's faith in justice is badly shaken. Atticus is hopeful that he can get the verdict overturned, but Tom cannot look at him in the face before being led away. Within 24 hours of the town's attempt to lynch Tom and the close of the trial, it is reported that Tom had tried to escape from prison. He was shot and killed. \nDespite Tom's having been convicted and killed, Bob Ewell ends up feeling humiliated by the events of the trial. Atticus explains that he destroyed Ewell's last shred of credibility. Ewell vows revenge, spitting in Atticus' face, trying to break into the judge's house and menacing Tom Robinson's widow. Finally, when Jem and Scout are walking home on a dark night after a school pageant, Ewell violently assaults Jem. Jem suffers a fractured arm and is knocked unconscious in the struggle, but amid the confusion, someone comes to the children's rescue. The mysterious man carries Jem home, where Scout realizes that he is Boo Radley.\nSheriff Tate arrives at the Finch home, after having discovered Ewell dead from a knife wound. Atticus believes that Jem was responsible, but Tate is certain it was Boo. The sheriff tells Atticus that in order to protect Boo, he will report that Ewell simply fell on his own knife during the attack. Boo asks Scout to walk him home, and she readily agrees. After she says goodbye to him at his front door, he disappears, never to be seen again by Scout. While standing on the Radley porch, Scout imagines life from Boo's perspective.\nAutobiographical elements.\nLee said that \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" is not an autobiography, but rather an example of how an author \"should write about what he knows and write truthfully\". Nevertheless, several people and events from Lee's childhood parallel those of the fictional Scout. Amasa Coleman Lee, Lee's father, was an attorney similar to Atticus Finch. In 1919, he defended two black men accused of murder. After they were convicted, hanged and mutilated, he never took another criminal case. Lee's father was also the editor and publisher of the Monroeville newspaper. Although more of a proponent of racial segregation than Atticus, he gradually became more liberal in his later years. Though Scout's mother died when she was a baby, Lee was 25 when her mother, Frances Cunningham Finch, died. Lee's mother was prone to a nervous condition that rendered her mentally and emotionally absent.\nLee modeled the character of Dill on Truman Capote, her childhood friend known then as Truman Persons. Just as Dill lived next door to Scout during the summer, Capote lived next door to Lee with his aunts while his mother visited New York City. Like Dill, Capote had an impressive imagination and a gift for fascinating stories. Both Lee and Capote loved to read, and were atypical children in some ways: Lee was a scrappy tomboy who was quick to fight, and Capote was ridiculed for his advanced vocabulary and lisp. She and Capote made up and acted out stories they wrote on an old Underwood typewriter that Lee's father gave them. They became good friends when both felt alienated from their peers; Capote called the two of them \"apart people\". In 1960, Capote and Lee traveled to Kansas together to investigate the multiple murders that were the basis for Capote's nonfiction novel \"In Cold Blood\".\nDown the street from the Lees lived a family whose house was always boarded up; they served as the models for the fictional Radleys. The son of the family got into some legal trouble and the father kept him at home for 24\u00a0years out of shame. He was hidden until virtually forgotten; he died in 1952.\nThe origin of Tom Robinson is less clear, although many have speculated that his character was inspired by several models. When Lee was 10\u00a0years old, a white woman near Monroeville accused a black man named Walter Lett of raping her. The story and the trial were covered by her father's newspaper, which reported that Lett was convicted and sentenced to death. After a series of letters appeared claiming Lett had been falsely accused, his sentence was commuted to life in prison. He died there of tuberculosis in 1937. Scholars believe that Robinson's difficulties reflect the notorious case of the Scottsboro Boys, in which nine black men were convicted of raping two white women on negligible evidence. However, in 2005, Lee stated that she had in mind something less sensational, although the Scottsboro case served \"the same purpose\" to display Southern prejudices. Emmett Till, a black teenager who was murdered for allegedly flirting with a white woman in Mississippi in 1955, and whose death is credited as a catalyst for the Civil Rights Movement, is also considered a model for Tom.\nStyle.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe narrative is very tough, because [Lee] has to both be a kid on the street and aware of the mad dogs and the spooky houses and have this beautiful vision of how justice works and all the creaking mechanisms of the courthouse. Part of the beauty is that she... trusts the visual to lead her, and the sensory.\n\u2014Allan Gurganus\nThe strongest element of style noted by critics and reviewers is Lee's talent for narration, which in an early review in \"Time\" was called \"tactile brilliance\". Writing a decade later, another scholar noted, \"Harper Lee has a remarkable gift of story-telling. Her art is visual, and with cinematographic fluidity and subtlety we see a scene melting into another scene without jolts of transition.\" Lee combines the narrator's voice of a child observing her surroundings with a grown woman's reflecting on her childhood, using the ambiguity of this voice combined with the narrative technique of flashback to play intricately with perspectives. This narrative method allows Lee to tell a \"delightfully deceptive\" story that mixes the simplicity of childhood observation with adult situations complicated by hidden motivations and unquestioned tradition. However, at times the blending causes reviewers to question Scout's preternatural vocabulary and depth of understanding. Both Harding LeMay and the novelist and literary critic Granville Hicks expressed doubt that children as sheltered as Scout and Jem could understand the complexities and horrors involved in the trial for Tom Robinson's life.\nWriting about Lee's style and use of humor in a tragic story, scholar Jacqueline Tavernier-Courbin states: \"Laughter\u00a0... [exposes] the gangrene under the beautiful surface but also by demeaning it; one can hardly\u00a0... be controlled by what one is able to laugh at.\" Scout's precocious observations about her neighbors and behavior inspired National Endowment of the Arts director David Kipen to call her \"hysterically funny\". To address complex issues, however, Tavernier-Courbin notes that Lee uses parody, satire, and irony effectively by using a child's perspective. After Dill promises to marry her, then spends too much time with Jem, Scout reasons the best way to get him to pay attention to her is to beat him up, which she does several times. Scout's first day in school is a satirical treatment of education; her teacher says she must undo the damage Atticus has wrought in teaching her to read and write, and forbids Atticus from teaching her further. Lee treats the most unfunny situations with irony, however, as Jem and Scout try to understand how Maycomb embraces racism and still tries sincerely to remain a decent society. Satire and irony are used to such an extent that Tavernier-Courbin suggests one interpretation for the book's title: Lee is doing the mocking\u2014of education, the justice system, and her own society\u2014by using them as subjects of her humorous disapproval.\nCritics also note the entertaining methods used to drive the plot. When Atticus is out of town, Jem locks a Sunday school classmate in the church basement with the furnace during a game of Shadrach. This prompts their black housekeeper Calpurnia to escort Scout and Jem to her church, which allows the children a glimpse into her personal life, as well as Tom Robinson's. Scout falls asleep during the Halloween pageant and makes a tardy entrance onstage, causing the audience to laugh uproariously. She is so distracted and embarrassed that she prefers to go home in her ham costume, which saves her life.\nGenres.\nScholars have characterized \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" as both a Southern Gothic and a \"Bildungsroman\". The grotesque and near-supernatural qualities of Boo Radley and his house, and the element of racial injustice involving Tom Robinson, contribute to the aura of the Gothic in the novel. Lee used the term \"Gothic\" to describe the architecture of Maycomb's courthouse and in regard to Dill's exaggeratedly morbid performances as Boo Radley. Outsiders are also an important element of Southern Gothic texts and Scout and Jem's questions about the hierarchy in the town cause scholars to compare the novel to \"Catcher in the Rye\" and \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\". Despite challenging the town's systems, Scout reveres Atticus as an authority above all others, because he believes that following one's conscience is the highest priority, even when the result is social ostracism. However, scholars debate about the Southern Gothic classification, noting that Boo Radley is, in fact, human, protective, and benevolent. Furthermore, in addressing themes such as alcoholism, incest, rape, and racial violence, Lee wrote about her small town realistically rather than melodramatically. She portrays the problems of individual characters as universal underlying issues in every society.\nAs children coming of age, Scout and Jem face hard realities and learn from them. Lee seems to examine Jem's sense of loss about how his neighbors have disappointed him more than Scout's. Jem says to their neighbor Miss Maudie the day after the trial, \"It's like bein' a caterpillar wrapped in a cocoon\u00a0... I always thought Maycomb folks were the best folks in the world, least that's what they seemed like\". This leads him to struggle with understanding the separations of race and class. Just as the novel is an illustration of the changes Jem faces, it is also an exploration of the realities Scout must face as an atypical girl on the verge of womanhood. As one scholar writes, \"\"To Kill a Mockingbird\" can be read as a feminist Bildungsroman, for Scout emerges from her childhood experiences with a clear sense of her place in her community and an awareness of her potential power as the woman she will one day be.\"\nThemes.\nDespite the novel's immense popularity upon publication, it has not received the close critical attention paid to other modern American classics. Don Noble, the editor of a book of essays about the novel, estimates that the ratio of sales to analytical essays may be a million to one. Christopher Metress writes that the book is \"an icon whose emotive sway remains strangely powerful because it also remains unexamined\". Noble suggests it does not receive academic attention because of its consistent status as a best-seller (\"If that many people like it, it can't be any good.\") and that general readers seem to feel they do not require analytical interpretation.\nHarper Lee had remained famously detached from interpreting the novel since the mid-1960s. However, she gave some insight into her themes when, in a rare letter to the editor, she wrote in response to the passionate reaction her book caused:Surely it is plain to the simplest intelligence that \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" spells out in words of seldom more than two syllables a code of honor and conduct, Christian in its ethic, that is the heritage of all Southerners.\nSouthern life and racial injustice.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the 33 years since its publication, [\"To Kill a Mockingbird\"] has never been the focus of a dissertation, and it has been the subject of only six literary studies, several of them no more than a couple of pages long.\n\u2014Claudia Johnson in \"To Kill a Mockingbird: Threatening Boundaries\", 1994\nWhen the book was released, reviewers noted that it was divided into two parts, and opinion was mixed about Lee's ability to connect them. The first part of the novel concerns the children's fascination with Boo Radley and their feelings of safety and comfort in the neighborhood. Reviewers were generally charmed by Scout and Jem's observations of their quirky neighbors. One writer was so impressed by Lee's detailed explanations of the people of Maycomb that he categorized the book as Southern romantic regionalism. This sentimentalism can be seen in Lee's representation of the Southern caste system to explain almost every character's behavior in the novel. Scout's Aunt Alexandra attributes Maycomb's inhabitants' faults and advantages to genealogy (families that have gambling streaks and drinking streaks), and the narrator sets the action and characters amid a finely detailed background of the Finch family history and the history of Maycomb. This regionalist theme is further reflected in Mayella Ewell's apparent powerlessness to admit her advances toward Tom Robinson, and Scout's definition of \"fine folks\" being people with good sense who do the best they can with what they have. The South itself, with its traditions and taboos, seems to drive the plot more than the characters.\nThe second part of the novel deals with what book reviewer Harding LeMay termed \"the spirit-corroding shame of the civilized white Southerner in the treatment of the Negro\". In the years following its release, many reviewers considered \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" a novel primarily concerned with race relations. Claudia Durst Johnson considers it \"reasonable to believe\" that the novel was shaped by two events involving racial issues in Alabama: Rosa Parks' refusal to yield her seat on a city bus to a white person, which sparked the Montgomery bus boycott, and the 1956 riots at the University of Alabama after Autherine Lucy and Polly Myers were admitted (Myers eventually withdrew her application and Lucy was expelled, but reinstated in 1980). In writing about the historical context of the novel's construction, two other literary scholars remark: \"\"To Kill a Mockingbird\" was written and published amidst the most significant and conflict-ridden social change in the South since the Civil War and Reconstruction. Inevitably, despite its mid-1930s setting, the story told from the perspective of the 1950s voices the conflicts, tensions, and fears induced by this transition.\"\nScholar Patrick Chura, who suggests Emmett Till was a model for Tom Robinson, enumerates the injustices endured by the fictional Tom that Till also faced. Chura notes the icon of the black rapist causing harm to the representation of the \"mythologized vulnerable and sacred Southern womanhood\". Any transgressions by black males that merely hinted at sexual contact with white females during the time the novel was set often resulted in a punishment of death for the accused. Tom Robinson's trial was juried by poor white farmers who convicted him despite overwhelming evidence of his innocence, as more educated and moderate white townspeople supported the jury's decision. Furthermore, the victim of racial injustice in \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" was physically impaired, which made him unable to commit the act he was accused of, but also crippled him in other ways. Roslyn Siegel includes Tom Robinson as an example of the recurring motif among white Southern writers of the black man as \"stupid, pathetic, defenseless, and dependent upon the fair dealing of the whites, rather than his own intelligence to save him\". Although Tom is spared from being lynched, he is killed with excessive violence during an attempted escape from prison, being shot seventeen times.\nThe theme of racial injustice appears symbolically in the novel as well. For example, Atticus must shoot a rabid dog, even though it is not his job to do so. Carolyn Jones argues that the dog represents prejudice within the town of Maycomb, and Atticus, who waits on a deserted street to shoot the dog, must fight against the town's racism without help from other white citizens. He is also alone when he faces a group intending to lynch Tom Robinson and once more in the courthouse during Tom's trial. Lee even uses dreamlike imagery from the mad dog incident to describe some of the courtroom scenes. Jones writes, \"[t]he real mad dog in Maycomb is the racism that denies the humanity of Tom Robinson\u00a0... When Atticus makes his summation to the jury, he literally bares himself to the jury's and the town's anger.\"\nClass.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOne of the amazing things about the writing in \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" is the economy with which Harper Lee delineates not only race\u2014white and black within a small community\u2014but class. I mean \"different kinds\" of black people and white people both, from poor white trash to the upper crust\u2014the whole social fabric.\n\u2014Lee Smith\nIn a 1964 interview, Lee remarked that her aspiration was \"to be\u00a0... the Jane Austen of South Alabama.\" Both Austen and Lee challenged the social status quo and valued individual worth over social standing. When Scout embarrasses her poorer classmate, Walter Cunningham, at the Finch home one day, Calpurnia, their black cook, chastises and punishes her for doing so. Atticus respects Calpurnia's judgment, and later in the book even stands up to his sister, the formidable Aunt Alexandra, when she strongly suggests they fire Calpurnia. One writer notes that Scout, \"in Austenian fashion\", satirizes women with whom she does not wish to identify. Literary critic Jean Blackall lists the priorities shared by the two authors: \"affirmation of order in society, obedience, courtesy, and respect for the individual without regard for status\".\nScholars argue that Lee's approach to class and race was more complex \"than ascribing racial prejudice primarily to 'poor white trash'\u00a0... Lee demonstrates how issues of gender and class intensify prejudice, silence the voices that might challenge the existing order, and greatly complicate many Americans' conception of the causes of racism and segregation.\" Lee's use of the middle-class narrative voice is a literary device that allows an intimacy with the reader, regardless of class or cultural background, and fosters a sense of nostalgia. Sharing Scout and Jem's perspective, the reader is allowed to engage in relationships with the conservative antebellum Mrs. Dubose; the lower-class Ewells, and the Cunninghams who are equally poor but behave in vastly different ways; the wealthy but ostracized Mr. Dolphus Raymond; and Calpurnia and other members of the black community. The children internalize Atticus' admonition not to judge someone until they have walked around in that person's skin, gaining a greater understanding of people's motives and behavior.\nCourage and compassion.\nThe novel has been noted for its poignant exploration of different forms of courage. Scout's impulsive inclination to fight students who insult Atticus reflects her attempt to stand up for him and defend him. Atticus is the moral center of the novel, however, and he teaches Jem one of the most significant lessons of courage. In a statement that both foreshadows Atticus' motivation for defending Tom Robinson and describes Mrs. Dubose, who is determined to break herself of a morphine addiction, Atticus tells Jem that courage is \"when you're licked before you begin but you begin anyway and you see it through no matter what\".\nCharles J. Shields, who wrote the first book-length biography of Harper Lee, offers the reason for the novel's enduring popularity and impact is that \"its lessons of human dignity and respect for others remain fundamental and universal\". Atticus' lesson to Scout that \"you never really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view\u2014until you climb around in his skin and walk around in it\" exemplifies his compassion. She ponders the comment when listening to Mayella Ewell's testimony. When Mayella reacts with confusion to Atticus' question if she has any friends, Scout offers that she must be lonelier than Boo Radley. Having walked Boo home after he saves their lives, Scout stands on the Radley porch and considers the events of the previous three years from Boo's perspective. One writer remarks, \"...\u00a0[w]hile the novel concerns tragedy and injustice, heartache and loss, it also carries with it a strong sense [of] courage, compassion, and an awareness of history to be better human beings.\"\nGender roles.\nJust as Lee explores Jem's development in coming to grips with a racist and unjust society, Scout realizes what being female means, and several female characters influence her development. Scout's primary identification with her father and older brother allows her to describe the variety and depth of female characters in the novel both as one of them and as an outsider. Scout's primary female models are Calpurnia and her neighbor Miss Maudie, both of whom are strong-willed, independent, and protective. Mayella Ewell also has an influence; Scout watches her destroy an innocent man in order to hide her desire for him. The female characters who comment the most on Scout's lack of willingness to adhere to a more feminine role are also those who promote the most racist and classist points of view. For example, Mrs. Dubose chastises Scout for not wearing a dress and camisole, and indicates she is ruining the family name by not doing so, in addition to insulting Atticus' intentions to defend Tom Robinson. By balancing the masculine influences of Atticus and Jem with the feminine influences of Calpurnia and Miss Maudie, one scholar writes, \"Lee gradually demonstrates that Scout is becoming a feminist in the South, for with the use of first-person narration, she indicates that Scout/Jean Louise still maintains the ambivalence about being a Southern lady she possessed as a child.\"\nAbsent mothers and abusive fathers are another theme in the novel. Scout and Jem's mother died before Scout could remember her, Mayella's mother is dead, and Mrs. Radley is silent about Boo's confinement to the house. Apart from Atticus, the fathers described are abusers. Bob Ewell, it is hinted, molested his daughter, and Mr. Radley imprisons his son in his house to the extent that Boo is remembered only as a phantom. Bob Ewell and Mr. Radley represent a form of masculinity that Atticus does not, and the novel suggests that such men, as well as the traditionally feminine hypocrites at the Missionary Society, can lead society astray. Atticus stands apart as a unique model of masculinity; as one scholar explains: \"It is the job of real men who embody the traditional masculine qualities of heroic individualism, bravery, and an unshrinking knowledge of and dedication to social justice and morality, to set the society straight.\"\nLaws, written and unwritten.\nAllusions to legal issues in \"To Kill a Mockingbird\", particularly in scenes outside of the courtroom, have drawn the attention of legal scholars. Claudia Durst Johnson writes that \"a greater volume of critical readings has been amassed by two legal scholars in law journals than by all the literary scholars in literary journals\". The opening quote by the 19th-century essayist Charles Lamb reads: \"Lawyers, I suppose, were children once.\" Johnson notes that even in Scout and Jem's childhood world, compromises and treaties are struck with each other by spitting on one's palm, and laws are discussed by Atticus and his children: is it right that Bob Ewell hunts and traps out of season? Many social codes are broken by people in symbolic courtrooms: Mr. Dolphus Raymond has been exiled by society for taking a black woman as his common-law wife and having interracial children; Mayella Ewell is beaten by her father in punishment for kissing Tom Robinson; by being turned into a non-person, Boo Radley receives a punishment far greater than any court could have given him. Scout repeatedly breaks codes and laws and reacts to her punishment for them. For example, she refuses to wear frilly clothes, saying that Aunt Alexandra's \"fanatical\" attempts to place her in them made her feel \"a pink cotton penitentiary closing in on [her]\". Johnson states, \"[t]he novel is a study of how Jem and Scout begin to perceive the complexity of social codes and how the configuration of relationships dictated by or set off by those codes fails or nurtures the inhabitants of (their) small worlds.\"\nLoss of innocence.\nSongbirds and their associated symbolism appear throughout the novel. Their family name Finch is also Lee's mother's maiden name. The titular mockingbird is a key motif of this theme, which first appears when Atticus, having given his children air-rifles for Christmas, allows their Uncle Jack to teach them to shoot. Atticus warns them that, although they can \"shoot all the bluejays they want\", they must remember that \"it's a sin to kill a mockingbird\". Confused, Scout approaches her neighbor Miss Maudie, who explains that mockingbirds never harm other living creatures. She points out that mockingbirds simply provide pleasure with their songs, saying, \"They don't do one thing but sing their hearts out for us.\" Writer Edwin Bruell summarized the symbolism when he wrote in 1964, \"'To kill a mockingbird' is to kill that which is innocent and harmless\u2014like Tom Robinson.\" Scholars have noted that Lee often returns to the mockingbird theme when trying to make a moral point.\nTom Robinson is the chief example, among several in the novel, of innocents being carelessly or deliberately destroyed. However, scholar Christopher Metress connects the mockingbird to Boo Radley: \"Instead of wanting to exploit Boo for her own fun (as she does in the beginning of the novel by putting on gothic plays about his history), Scout comes to see him as a 'mockingbird'\u2014that is, as someone with an inner goodness that must be cherished.\" The last pages of the book illustrate this as Scout relates the moral of a story Atticus has been reading to her, and, in allusions to both Boo Radley and Tom Robinson, states about a character who was misunderstood, \"when they finally saw him, why he hadn't done any of those things\u00a0... Atticus, he was real nice,\" to which he responds, \"Most people are, Scout, when you finally see them.\"\nThe novel exposes the loss of innocence so frequently that reviewer R. A. Dave claims that because every character has to face, or even suffer defeat, the book takes on elements of a classical tragedy. In exploring how each character deals with his or her own personal defeat, Lee builds a framework to judge whether the characters are heroes or fools. She guides the reader in such judgments, alternating between unabashed adoration and biting irony. Scout's experience with the Missionary Society is an ironic juxtaposition of women who mock her, gossip, and \"reflect a smug, colonialist attitude toward other races\" while giving the \"appearance of gentility, piety, and morality\". Conversely, when Atticus loses Tom's case, he is last to leave the courtroom, except for his children and the black spectators in the colored balcony, who rise silently as he walks underneath them, to honor his efforts.\nReception.\nDespite her editors' warnings that the book might not sell well, it quickly became a sensation, bringing acclaim to Lee in literary circles, in her hometown of Monroeville, and throughout Alabama. The book went through numerous subsequent printings and became widely available through its inclusion in the Book of the Month Club and editions released by \"Reader's Digest Condensed Books\".\nInitial reactions to the novel were varied. \"The New Yorker\" declared Lee \"a skilled, unpretentious, and totally ingenuous writer\", and \"The Atlantic Monthly\"'s reviewer rated the book \"pleasant, undemanding reading\", but found the narrative voice\u2014\"a six-year-old girl with the prose style of a well-educated adult\"\u2014to be implausible. \"Time\" magazine's 1960 review of the book states that it \"teaches the reader an astonishing number of useful truths about little girls and about Southern life\" and calls Scout Finch \"the most appealing child since Carson McCullers' Frankie got left behind at the wedding\". The \"Chicago Sunday Tribune\" noted the even-handed approach to the narration of the novel's events, writing: \"This is in no way a sociological novel. It underlines no cause\u00a0... \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" is a novel of strong contemporary national significance.\"\nNot all reviewers were enthusiastic. Some lamented the use of poor white Southerners, and one-dimensional black victims, and Granville Hicks labeled the book \"melodramatic and contrived\". When the book was first released, Southern writer Flannery O'Connor commented, \"I think for a child's book it does all right. It's interesting that all the folks that are buying it don't know they're reading a child's book. Somebody ought to say what it is.\" Carson McCullers apparently agreed with the \"Time\" magazine review, writing to a cousin: \"Well, honey, one thing we know is that she's been poaching on my literary preserves.\"\nOne year after its publication \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" had been translated into ten languages. In the years since, it has sold more than 30\u00a0million copies and been translated into more than 40 languages. The novel has never been out of print in hardcover or paperback, and has become part of the standard literature curriculum. A 2008 survey of secondary books read by students between grades 9\u201312 in the U.S. indicates the novel is the most widely read book in these grades. A 1991 survey by the Book of the Month Club and the Library of Congress Center for the Book found that \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" was fourth in a list of books that are \"most often cited as making a difference\". It is considered by some to be the \"Great American Novel\".\nThe 50th anniversary of the novel's release was met with celebrations and reflections on its impact. Eric Zorn of the \"Chicago Tribune\" praises Lee's \"rich use of language\" but writes that the central lesson is that \"courage isn't always flashy, isn't always enough, but is always in style\". Jane Sullivan in the \"Sydney Morning Herald\" agrees, stating that the book \"still rouses fresh and horrified indignation\" as it examines morality, a topic that has recently become unfashionable. Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie writing in \"The Guardian\" states that Lee, rare among American novelists, writes with \"a fiercely progressive ink, in which there is nothing inevitable about racism and its very foundation is open to question\", comparing her to William Faulkner, who wrote about racism as an inevitability. Literary critic Rosemary Goring in Scotland's \"The Herald\" notes the connections between Lee and Jane Austen, stating the book's central theme, that \"one's moral convictions are worth fighting for, even at the risk of being reviled\" is eloquently discussed.\nNative Alabamian sports writer Allen Barra sharply criticized Lee and the novel in \"The Wall Street Journal\" calling Atticus a \"repository of cracker-barrel epigrams\" and the novel represents a \"sugar-coated myth\" of Alabama history. Barra writes, \"It's time to stop pretending that \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" is some kind of timeless classic that ranks with the great works of American literature. Its bloodless liberal humanism is sadly dated\". Thomas Mallon in \"The New Yorker\" criticizes Atticus' stiff and self-righteous demeanor, and calls Scout \"a kind of highly constructed doll\" whose speech and actions are improbable. Although acknowledging that the novel works, Mallon blasts Lee's \"wildly unstable\" narrative voice for developing a story about a content neighborhood until it begins to impart morals in the courtroom drama, following with his observation that \"the book has begun to cherish its own goodness\" by the time the case is over. Defending the book, Akin Ajayi writes that justice \"is often complicated, but must always be founded upon the notion of equality and fairness for all.\" Ajayi states that the book forces readers to question issues about race, class, and society, but that it was not written to resolve them.\nMany writers compare their perceptions of \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" as adults with when they first read it as children. Mary McDonagh Murphy interviewed celebrities including Oprah Winfrey, Rosanne Cash, Tom Brokaw, and Harper's sister Alice Lee, who read the novel and compiled their impressions of it as children and adults into a book titled \"Scout, Atticus, and Boo\".\nThe New York Times announced \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" as the best book of the past 125 years on December 28, 2021.\nAtticus Finch and the legal profession.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI promised myself that when I grew up and I was a man, I would try to do things just as good and noble as what Atticus had done for Tom Robinson.\n\u2014Scott Turow\nOne of the most significant impacts \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" has had is Atticus Finch's model of integrity for the legal profession. As scholar Alice Petry explains, \"Atticus has become something of a folk hero in legal circles and is treated almost as if he were an actual person.\" Morris Dees of the Southern Poverty Law Center cites Atticus Finch as the reason he became a lawyer, and Richard Matsch, the federal judge who presided over the Timothy McVeigh trial, counts Atticus as a major judicial influence. One law professor at the University of Notre Dame stated that the most influential textbook he taught from was \"To Kill a Mockingbird\", and an article in the \"Michigan Law Review\" claims, \"No real-life lawyer has done more for the self-image or public perception of the legal profession,\" before questioning whether \"Atticus Finch is a paragon of honor or an especially slick hired gun\".\nIn 1992, an Alabama editorial called for the death of Atticus, saying that as liberal as Atticus was, he still worked within a system of institutionalized racism and sexism and should not be revered. The editorial sparked a flurry of responses from attorneys who entered the profession because of him and esteemed him as a hero. Critics of Atticus maintain he is morally ambiguous and does not use his legal skills to challenge the racist status quo in Maycomb. However, in 1997, the Alabama State Bar erected a monument to Atticus in Monroeville, marking his existence as the \"first commemorative milestone in the state's judicial history\". In 2008, Lee herself received an honorary special membership to the Alabama State Bar for creating Atticus who \"has become the personification of the exemplary lawyer in serving the legal needs of the poor\".\nSocial commentary and challenges.\n\"To Kill a Mockingbird\" has been a source of significant controversy since its being the subject of classroom study as early as 1963. The book's racial slurs, profanity, and frank discussion of rape have led people to challenge its appropriateness in libraries and classrooms across the United States. The American Library Association reported that \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" was number 21 of the 100 most frequently challenged books of 2000\u20132009. Following parental complaints about the racist language it contains, the novel was removed from classrooms in Virginia in 2016 and Biloxi, Mississippi, where it was described as making people \"uncomfortable\", in 2017. In the Mississippi case, the novel was removed from the required reading list but subsequently made available to interested students with parental consent. Such decisions have been criticised: the American Civil Liberties Union noted the importance of engaging with the novel's themes in places where racial injustice persists. In 2021, a group of teachers in Mukilteo, Washington proposed to take the book off the list of required reading for freshman and off the list of district-approved books to be studied and analyzed in classrooms, arguing that it \"centers on whiteness\". The school board approved the former but not the latter proposal. Becky Little, of The History Channel, and representatives of the Mark Twain House noted that the value of classics lies in their power to \"challenge the way we think about things\" (Twain's \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" has attracted similar controversy). Arne Duncan, who served as Secretary of Education under President Obama, noted that removal of the book from reading lists was evidence of a nation with \"real problems\". In 1966, a parent in Hanover, Virginia, protested that the use of rape as a plot device was immoral. Johnson cites examples of letters to local newspapers, which ranged from amusement to fury; those letters expressing the most outrage, however, complained about Mayella Ewell's attraction to Tom Robinson over the depictions of rape. Upon learning the school administrators were holding hearings to decide the book's appropriateness for the classroom, Harper Lee sent $10 to \"The Richmond News Leader\" suggesting it be used toward the enrollment of \"the Hanover County School Board in any first grade of its choice\". The National Education Association in 1968 placed the novel second on a list of books receiving the most complaints from private organizations\u2014after \"Little Black Sambo\".\nWith a shift of attitudes about race in the 1970s, \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" faced challenges of a different sort: the treatment of racism in Maycomb was not condemned harshly enough. This has led to disparate perceptions that the novel has a generally positive impact on race relations for white readers, but a more ambiguous reception by black readers. In one high-profile case outside the U.S., school districts in the Canadian provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia attempted to have the book removed from standard teaching curricula in the 1990s, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The terminology in this novel subjects students to humiliating experiences that rob them of their self-respect and the respect of their peers. The word 'Nigger' is used 48 times [in] the novel\u00a0... We believe that the English Language Arts curriculum in Nova Scotia must enable all students to feel comfortable with ideas, feelings and experiences presented without fear of humiliation\u00a0... \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" is clearly a book that no longer meets these goals and therefore must no longer be used for classroom instruction.\nFurthermore, despite the novel's thematic focus on racial injustice, its black characters are not fully examined. In its use of racial epithets, stereotyped depictions of superstitious blacks, and Calpurnia, who to some critics is an updated version of the \"contented slave\" motif and to others simply unexplored, the book is viewed as marginalizing black characters. One writer asserts that the use of Scout's narration serves as a convenient mechanism for readers to be innocent and detached from the racial conflict. Scout's voice \"functions as the not-me which allows the rest of us\u2014black and white, male and female\u2014to find our relative position in society\". A teaching guide for the novel published by \"The English Journal\" cautions, \"what seems wonderful or powerful to one group of students may seem degrading to another\". A Canadian language arts consultant found that the novel resonated well with white students, but that black students found it \"demoralizing\". With racism told from a white perspective with a focus on white courage and morality, some have labeled the novel as having a \"white savior complex\", a criticism also leveled at the film adaptation with its white savior narrative. Another criticism, articulated by Michael Lind, is that the novel indulges in classist stereotyping and demonization of poor rural \"white trash\".\nThe novel is cited as a factor in the success of the civil rights movement in the 1960s, in that it \"arrived at the right moment to help the South and the nation grapple with the racial tensions (of) the accelerating civil rights movement\". Its publication is so closely associated with the Civil Rights Movement that many studies of the book and biographies of Harper Lee include descriptions of important moments in the movement, despite the fact that she had no direct involvement in any of them. Civil Rights leader Andrew Young comments that part of the book's effectiveness is that it \"inspires hope in the midst of chaos and confusion\" and by using racial epithets portrays the reality of the times in which it was set. Young views the novel as \"an act of humanity\" in showing the possibility of people rising above their prejudices. Alabama author Mark Childress compares it to the impact of \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\", a book that is popularly implicated in starting the U.S. Civil War. Childress states the novel\ngives white Southerners a way to understand the racism that they've been brought up with and to find another way. And most white people in the South were good people. Most white people in the South were not throwing bombs and causing havoc\u00a0... I think the book really helped them come to understand what was wrong with the system in the way that any number of treatises could never do, because it was popular art, because it was told from a child's point of view.\nDiane McWhorter, Pulitzer Prize-winning historian of the Birmingham campaign, asserts that \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" condemns racism instead of racists, and states that every child in the South has moments of racial cognitive dissonance when they are faced with the harsh reality of inequality. This feeling causes them to question the beliefs with which they have been raised, which for many children is what the novel does. McWhorter writes of Lee, \"for a white person from the South to write a book like this in the late 1950s is really unusual\u2014by its very existence an act of protest.\" Author James McBride calls Lee brilliant but stops short of calling her brave:\nI think by calling Harper Lee brave you kind of absolve yourself of your own racism\u00a0... She certainly set the standards in terms of how these issues need to be discussed, but in many ways I feel\u00a0... the moral bar's been lowered. And that's really distressing. We need a thousand Atticus Finches.\nMcBride also defends the book's sentimentality, and the way Lee approaches the story with \"honesty and integrity\".\nHonors.\nDuring the years immediately following the novel's publication, Harper Lee enjoyed the attention its popularity garnered her, granting interviews, visiting schools, and attending events honoring the book. In 1961, when \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" was in its 41st week on the bestseller list, it was awarded the Pulitzer Prize, stunning Lee. It also won the Brotherhood Award of the National Conference of Christians and Jews in the same year, and the Paperback of the Year award from \"Bestsellers\" magazine in 1962. Starting in 1964, Lee began to turn down interviews, complaining that the questions were monotonous, and grew concerned that the attention she received bordered on the kind of publicity celebrities sought. Since then, she declined to talk with reporters about the book. She also steadfastly refused to provide an introduction, writing in 1995: \"Introductions inhibit pleasure, they kill the joy of anticipation, they frustrate curiosity. The only good thing about Introductions is that in some cases they delay the dose to come. \"Mockingbird\" still says what it has to say; it has managed to survive the years without preamble.\"\nIn 2001, Lee was inducted into the Alabama Academy of Honor. In the same year, Chicago mayor Richard M. Daley initiated a reading program throughout the city's libraries, and chose his favorite book, \"To Kill a Mockingbird\", as the first title of the One City, One Book program. Lee declared that \"there is no greater honor the novel could receive\". By 2004, the novel had been chosen by 25\u00a0communities for variations of the citywide reading program, more than any other novel. David Kipen of the National Endowment of the Arts, who supervised The Big Read, states \"people just seem to connect with it. It dredges up things in their own lives, their interactions across racial lines, legal encounters, and childhood. It's just this skeleton key to so many different parts of people's lives, and they cherish it.\"\nIn 2006, Lee was awarded an honorary doctorate from the University of Notre Dame. During the ceremony, the students and audience gave Lee a standing ovation, and the entire graduating class held up copies of \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" to honor her. Lee was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom on November 5, 2007, by President George W. Bush. In his remarks, Bush stated, \"One reason \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" succeeded is the wise and kind heart of the author, which comes through on every page\u00a0... \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" has influenced the character of our country for the better. It's been a gift to the entire world. As a model of good writing and humane sensibility, this book will be read and studied forever.\"\nAfter remaining at number one throughout the entire five-month-long voting period in 2018, the American public, via PBS's \"The Great American Read\", chose \"To Kill A Mockingbird\" as America's Favorite Book.\nIn 2003, the novel was listed at No. 6 on the BBC's The Big Read after a year-long survey of the British public, the highest ranking non-British book on the list. On November 5, 2019, BBC News listed \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" on its list of the 100 most influential novels. In 2020, the novel was number five on the list of \"Top Check Outs of All Time\" by the New York Public Library.\n\"Go Set a Watchman\".\nAn earlier draft of \"To Kill a Mockingbird\", titled \"Go Set a Watchman\", was controversially released on July 14, 2015. This draft, which was completed in 1957, is set 20 years after the time period depicted in \"To Kill a Mockingbird\" but is not a continuation of the narrative. This earlier version of the story follows an adult Scout Finch who travels from New York City to visit her father, Atticus Finch, in Maycomb, Alabama, where she is confronted by the intolerance in her community. The \"Watchman\" manuscript was believed to have been lost until Lee's lawyer Tonja Carter discovered it, but this claim has been widely disputed. \"Watchman\" contains early versions of many of the characters from \"To Kill a Mockingbird\". According to Lee's agent Andrew Nurnberg, \"Mockingbird\" was originally intended to be the first book of a trilogy: \"They discussed publishing \"Mockingbird\" first, \"Watchman\" last, and a shorter connecting novel between the two.\" This assertion has been discredited, however, by rare-books expert James S. Jaffe, who reviewed the pages at the request of Lee's attorney and found them to be only another draft of \"To Kill a Mockingbird\". Nurnberg's statement was also contrary to Jonathan Mahler's description of how \"Watchman\" was seen as just the first draft of \"Mockingbird\".\nInstances where many passages overlap between the two books, in some case word for word, also refute this assertion. Both books were also investigated with the help of forensic linguistics and their comparative study confirmed that Harper Lee was their sole author.\nOther media.\n1962 film.\nThe book was made into the well-received 1962 film with the same title, starring Gregory Peck as Atticus Finch. The film's producer, Alan J. Pakula, remembered Universal-International executives questioning him about a potential script: \"They said, 'What story do you plan to tell for the film?' I said, 'Have you read the book?' They said, 'Yes.' I said, 'That's the story.'\" The movie was a hit at the box office, quickly grossing more than $20\u00a0million from a $2-million budget. It won three Oscars: Best Actor for Gregory Peck, Best Art Direction-Set Decoration, Black-and-White, and Best Writing, Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium for Horton Foote. It was nominated for five more Oscars including Best Picture, Best Director and Best Actress in a Supporting Role for Mary Badham, the actress who played Scout. At the time, she was the youngest actress nominated in the category.\nLee was pleased with the film, \"In that film the man and the part met\u00a0... I've had many, many offers to turn it into musicals, into TV or stage plays, but I've always refused. That film was a work of art\". Peck met Lee's father, the model for Atticus, before the filming. Lee's father died before the film's release. Lee was so impressed with Peck's performance that she gave him her father's pocket watch, which he had with him the evening he was awarded the Oscar for Best Actor. Years later, he was reluctant to tell Lee that the watch was stolen out of his luggage in London Heathrow Airport. When Peck eventually did tell Lee, she told him, \"Well, it's only a watch\". He said, \"Harper\u2014she feels deeply, but she's not a sentimental person about things\". Lee and Peck shared a friendship long after the movie was made. Peck's grandson was named \"Harper\" in her honor.\nIn May 2005, Lee made an uncharacteristic appearance at the Los Angeles Public Library at the request of Peck's widow Veronique, who said of Lee:\nShe's like a national treasure. She's someone who has made a difference\u00a0... with this book. The book is still as strong as it ever was, and so is the film. All the kids in the United States read this book and see the film in the seventh and eighth grades and write papers and essays. My husband used to get thousands and thousands of letters from teachers who would send them to him.\nPlays.\nThe book was first adapted as a play by Christopher Sergel. This adaptation debuted in 1990 in Monroeville, a town that labels itself \"The Literary Capital of Alabama\". The play runs every May on the county courthouse grounds and townspeople make up the cast. White male audience members are chosen at the intermission to make up the jury. During the courtroom scene, the production moves into the Monroe County Courthouse and the audience is racially segregated. Author Albert Murray said of the relationship of the town to the novel (and the annual performance): \"It becomes part of the town ritual, like the religious underpinning of Mardi Gras. With the whole town crowded around the actual courthouse, it's part of a central, civic education\u2014what Monroeville aspires to be.\"\nSergel's play toured in the UK starting at the West Yorkshire Playhouse in Leeds in 2006, and again in 2011 starting at the York Theatre Royal, both productions featuring Duncan Preston as Atticus Finch. The play also opened the 2013 season at Regent's Park Open Air Theatre in London where it played to full houses and starred Robert Sean Leonard as Atticus Finch, his first London appearance in 22 years. The production returned to the venue to close the 2014 season, prior to a UK tour.\nAccording to a \"National Geographic\" article, the novel is so revered in Monroeville that people quote lines from it like Scripture; however, Harper Lee herself refused to attend any performances, because \"she abhors anything that trades on the book's fame\". To underscore this sentiment, Lee demanded that a book of recipes named \"Calpurnia's Cookbook\" not be published and sold out of the Monroe County Heritage Museum. David Lister in \"The Independent\" states that Lee's refusal to speak to reporters made them desire to interview her all the more, and her silence \"makes Bob Dylan look like a media tart\". Despite her discouragement, a rising number of tourists made Monroeville their destination, hoping to see Lee's inspiration for the book, or Lee herself. Local residents call them \"Mockingbird groupies\", and although Lee was not reclusive, she refused publicity and interviews with an emphatic \"Hell, no!\"\nIn 2018, a new adaptation was written by Aaron Sorkin, debuting on Broadway. The Broadway production was nominated for nine Tony Awards, winning one.\nGraphic novel.\nIn October 2018, Fred Fordham adapted and illustrated the story as a graphic novel. Some of the longer descriptive and commentary passages have been left out - \"the bits that children tend to skip anyway\" as C. J. Lyons says in her review of the graphic novel in the New York Journal of Books), who goes on to say \"the heart of Lee's fictional 1933 Maycomb is faithfully recreated via the art and dialogue\".\nTelevision.\nIn a 2018 episode of \"The Simpsons\", Lisa sees her dad as Atticus Finch."}
{"id": "73411", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73411", "title": "Cops (film)", "text": "1922 film\nCops is a 1922 American two-reel silent comedy film about a young man (Buster Keaton) who accidentally runs afoul of the entire Los Angeles Police Department during a parade and is chased all over town. It was written and directed by Edward F. Cline and Keaton. This very Kafka-esque film was filmed during the rape-and-murder trial of his former collaborator Roscoe \"Fatty\" Arbuckle, a circumstance that may have influenced the short's tone of hopeless ensnarement.\nIt was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in their National Film Registry in 1997.\nPlot.\nThe main character is spurned by his love interest, who wants him to become a businessman. Once he leaves her estate, he ends up acquiring a large amount of money from a businessman's wallet. He uses this money to buy up a comically large amount of furniture and a horse to carry this furniture in a carriage. While moving the furniture around town, he faces a variety of comical issues, such as his horse tiring out and accidentally knocking out a cop with his homemade turn signal. Later, he accidentally joins a police parade. A bomb gets thrown off a rooftop and Keaton's character catches it and unwittingly throws it into the parade. This leads to him being chased by a horde of cops.\nAt the end of the film, Keaton's character manages to lock all the cops in a police station. However, the girl he tried to woo at the beginning of the film (revealed to be the Mayor's daughter) disapproves of his behavior and gives him the cold shoulder. Therefore, he unlocks the police station and is immediately pulled in by the cops. The film ends with the title \"The End\" written on a tombstone with Keaton's pork pie hat propped on it.\nProduction.\nPrior to the film's production, John R. Brinkley, an American quack doctor, had become famous for his xenotransplantation of the testicular glands of goats into humans, claiming his procedure could cure male impotence and enhance virility. \"Cops\" references this in a short sequence in which Keaton's character takes his horse to a \"goat gland specialist\"; when the horse emerges, it has become much faster and more energetic.\nDuring the film's initial release individual states had their own censor boards, which would cut films to meet their state's requirements. Surviving prints of this title bear the Pennsylvania State Board of Censors approval logo; Pennsylvania removed the goat gland sequence, and for decades the footage was missing. Around 1980 a surviving uncut print was located and the sequence was re-inserted into the film. Still, many older prints exist without this sequence restored. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73412", "revid": "47220715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73412", "title": "North by Northwest", "text": "1959 film by Alfred Hitchcock\nNorth by Northwest is a 1959 American spy thriller film produced and directed by Alfred Hitchcock, starring Cary Grant, Eva Marie Saint, and James Mason. The original screenplay written by Ernest Lehman was intended to be the basis for \"the Hitchcock picture to end all Hitchcock pictures\".\n\"North by Northwest\" is a tale of mistaken identity: an innocent man (Grant) is pursued across the United States by agents of a mysterious organization that aims to prevent him from blocking their plan to smuggle microfilm containing government secrets out of the country. It is one of several Hitchcock films featuring a musical score by Bernard Herrmann and an opening title sequence by graphic designer Saul Bass. The film was the first to feature extended use of kinetic typography in its opening credits.\nThe film was released on July 1, 1959, to critical and commercial success. It topped the box office in the United States for seven consecutive weeks. The film was nominated for three Academy Awards and garnered Hitchcock the Silver Shell for Best Director at the San Sebasti\u00e1n Film Festival.\nIt is listed among the canonical Hitchcock films of the 1950s and is widely ranked among the greatest films ever made. In 1995, the Library of Congress selected \"North by Northwest\" for preservation in the National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nA waiter pages George Kaplan at the Oak Room restaurant at the Plaza Hotel in New York City at the request of two well-dressed men. As advertising executive Roger Thornhill summons the same waiter, he is mistaken for Kaplan, kidnapped by the pair, and brought to the estate of Lester Townsend in Glen Cove. Townsend interrogates Thornhill and subsequently arranges to kill him in a staged drunk driving crash; Thornhill survives, but fails to convince the police or his mother of what happened. Returning to the estate, Thornhill learns that Townsend is a United Nations diplomat.\nThornhill and his mother sneak into Kaplan's empty room at the Plaza, where the thugs have followed him. Thornhill heads to the U.N. General Assembly Building to meet Townsend, who turns out to be a completely different man. As he asks him about the man impersonating him, one of the gang's thugs throws a knife into Townsend's back. Townsend collapses in Thornhill's arms, and Thornhill is photographed grabbing at the knife, giving the appearance that he is the murderer. Thornhill flees, attempting to find the real Kaplan.\nThe \"United States Intelligence Agency\" (USIA) realizes that Thornhill has been mistaken for Kaplan, a non-existent agent they created as a decoy to distract their quarries, but its chief, \"the Professor\", decides against rescuing him for fear of compromising their operation.\nThornhill sneaks aboard the luxurious \"20th Century Limited\" train to Chicago without a ticket, where he meets Eve Kendall, who hides him from the police in her stateroom's upper berth. The two establish a relationship\u2014on Kendall's part because she is secretly working with the espionageurs\u2014and she helps him elude a police dragnet. She then tells Thornhill that she has arranged a meeting with Kaplan at a rural bus stop in Indiana. When Thornhill arrives there, he is attacked by a crop duster armed with a machine gun. After being flushed from cover in a cornfield, he attempts to halt a passing tanker truck; the airplane crashes into it and both explode. In the ensuing confusion he steals a bystander's pickup truck. At Kaplan's hotel in Chicago, Thornhill learns that Kaplan had checked out before the time when Kendall claimed to have spoken with him. He goes to her room and confronts her, but she eludes him.\nThornhill tracks Kendall to an art auction, where the Townsend-impersonator\u2014Phillip Vandamm, the ringleader of the group\u2014is purchasing a small primitive statue. Vandamm instructs his henchmen to deal with Thornhill. Thornhill disrupts the auction until police are called to remove him. He confesses to them that he is the fugitive murderer, but the Professor intervenes. At the airport, he tells Thornhill that Kaplan was fictitious and that Eve Kendall is their real agent. Vandamm lives above Mount Rushmore, and the agency thinks he will be leaving the country by plane from there. Thornhill agrees to help maintain Kendall's cover.\nAt the Mount Rushmore visitor center, now playing the role of Kaplan at the USIA's request, Thornhill negotiates for Vandamm's turnover of Kendall to be arrested. Kendall shoots Thornhill with blanks and flees. Afterward, the Professor arranges for Thornhill and Kendall to meet; Thornhill learns that Kendall is to depart on the plane with Vandamm and his right-hand man Leonard. He tries to dissuade her from going, but is knocked unconscious by the Professor's driver and locked in a hospital room.\nThornhill escapes and goes to Vandamm's home to rescue Kendall, where he overhears that the sculpture holds microfilm and that Leonard has discovered the blanks in Kendall's gun. Vandamm indicates that he will dispose of Kendall by throwing her from the plane; Thornhill manages to warn her with a surreptitious note. Vandamm, Leonard, and Kendall head for the plane. Thornhill is momentarily held at gunpoint by the housekeeper until he realizes she is holding Kendall's gun. As Vandamm boards, Kendall takes the sculpture and runs to the pursuing Thornhill, and they flee to the top of Mount Rushmore. As they climb down, they are pursued by Vandamm's men. A park ranger fatally shoots Leonard, and Vandamm is taken into custody by the Professor.\nAs Kendall hangs on by her fingertips, Thornhill reaches down to pull her up. She is next seen\u2014as Mrs. Thornhill\u2014being pulled into an upper berth on a train, which suggestively enters a tunnel.\nCast.\n\"Cast information from Turner Classic Movies Database\" \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Cary Grant as Roger Thornhill\nUncredited cast\nHitchcock's cameo appearances are a signature occurrence in most of his films. In \"North by Northwest\", he is seen getting a bus door slammed in his face, just as his credit appears on the screen. There has been some speculation as to whether he made one of his rare \"second\" appearances, this time at around the 45-minute mark in drag as a woman in a turquoise dress on the train, but in fact, the woman was played by Jesslyn Fax, who went on to appear in many episodes of \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\". She had previously appeared in \"Rear Window\".\nProduction.\nWriting.\nHitchcock often told journalists of an idea that he had about Cary Grant hiding from the villains inside Abraham Lincoln's nose and being given away when he sneezes. He speculated that the film could be called \"The Man on Lincoln's Nose\". Hitchcock sat on the idea, waiting for the right screenwriter to develop it. The original traveling salesman character had been suited to James Stewart, but Lehman changed it to a Madison Avenue advertising executive, a position that he had formerly held.\nJohn Russell Taylor's 1978 biography \"Hitch: The Life and Times of Alfred Hitchcock\" suggests that the story originated after a spell of writer's block during the scripting of another film project:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Alfred Hitchcock had agreed to do a film for MGM and they had chosen an adaptation of the novel \"The Wreck of the Mary Deare\" by Hammond Innes. Composer Bernard Herrmann had recommended that Hitchcock work with his friend Ernest Lehman. After a couple of weeks, Lehman offered to quit saying he didn't know what to do with the story. Hitchcock told him they got along great together and they would just write something else. Lehman said that he wanted to make the ultimate Hitchcock film. Hitchcock thought for a moment then said he had always wanted to do a chase across Mount Rushmore. Lehman and Hitchcock spitballed more ideas: a murder at the United Nations headquarters; a murder at a car plant in Detroit; a final showdown in Alaska. Eventually they settled on the U.N. murder for the opening and the chase across Mount Rushmore for the climax. For the central idea, Hitchcock remembered something an American journalist had told him about spies creating a fake agent as a decoy. Perhaps their hero could be mistaken for this fictitious agent and end up on the run. They bought the idea from the journalist for $10,000.\nLehman repeated this story in the documentary \"\" that accompanied the 2001 DVD release of the film. Screenwriter William Goldman insisted in \"Which Lie Did I Tell?\" that it was Lehman who created \"North by Northwest\" and that many of Hitchcock's ideas were not used. Hitchcock had the idea of the hero being stranded in the middle of nowhere but suggested that the villains try to kill him with a tornado. \"But \"they're\" trying to kill him. How are \"they\" going to work up a cyclone?\" Lehman responded. \"I just can't tell you who said what to whom, but somewhere during that afternoon, the cyclone in the sky became the crop-duster plane.\"\nHitchcock had been working on the story for nearly nine years prior to meeting Lehman. Otis Guernsey was the American journalist who had the idea which influenced Hitchcock, inspired by a true story during World War II when British Intelligence obtained a dead body, invented a fictitious officer who was carrying secret papers, and arranged for the body and misleading papers to be discovered by the Germans as a disinformation scheme called Operation Mincemeat. Guernsey turned his idea into a story about an American salesman who travels to the Middle East and is mistaken for a fictitious agent, becoming \"saddled with a romantic and dangerous identity\".\nGuernsey admitted that his treatment was full of \"corn\" and \"lacking logic\", and he urged Hitchcock to do what he liked with the story. Hitchcock bought the 60 pages for $10,000. In an interview in the book \"Screenwriters on Screenwriting\" (1995), Lehman stated that he had already written much of the screenplay before coming up with critical elements of the climax. An example of the \"corn\" in the finished screenplay was the scene where Roger Thornhill returns to the Townsend estate with the detectives to find everything changed. If Thornhill was indeed a spy, he would have had no reason to return to the estate after his escape the previous night, nor would the criminals be expecting him to return as they obviously did.\nThis was the only Hitchcock film released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Since 1986, it has been owned by Turner Entertainment, as part of the pre-May 1986 MGM film library that it acquired through temporary ownership of MGM.\nProduction costs on \"North by Northwest\" rose when a delay in filming put Cary Grant into the penalty phase of his contract, resulting in his being paid an additional $5,000 per day before shooting even began.\nCasting.\nEva Marie Saint's agent had told her that she had received an invitation to a dinner with Alfred Hitchcock and his family, the first time she and Hitchcock met. Days after the dinner, Saint's mother called her and reminded her that Hitchcock loved casting women wearing beige clothing and white gloves. Following her mother's advice, she met with Hitchcock again, wearing that combination. She credited this for helping her win the role. MGM wanted Cyd Charisse for the role of Eve Kendall. Hitchcock stood by his choice of Saint.\nHitchcock attended the play \"Middle of the Night\" in order to watch a performance by Edward G. Robinson. After being impressed by the performance of Martin Landau, Hitchcock asked to meet him at MGM. Landau arrived and Hitchcock showed him the entirety of the project, including the storyboards. While they were looking at the project, Hitchcock turned and told Landau, \"You're now Leonard.\"\nFilming.\nAt Hitchcock's insistence, the film was made in Paramount's VistaVision widescreen process. The only other VistaVision film made at MGM was \"High Society\".\nThe opening title sequence was created by graphic designer Saul Bass. \"North by Northwest\" was the first film to feature extended use of kinetic typography in its opening credits.\nThe aircraft flying in the aerial chase scene is a Naval Aircraft Factory N3N Canary, better known as the \"Yellow Peril\", a World War II Navy primary trainer sometimes converted for crop-dusting. The aircraft that hits the truck and explodes is a wartime Boeing-Stearman Model 75 trainer, and many of these were used for agricultural purposes until the 1970s. The plane was piloted by Bob Coe, a crop-duster from Wasco, California. Hitchcock placed replicas of square Indiana highway signs in the scene. In 2000, \"The Guardian\" ranked the crop-duster scene at No. 29 on their list of \"The top 100 film moments\". The British film magazine \"Empire\" ranked it as the \"greatest movie moment\" of all time in its August 2009 issue.\nAmong the locations used in the film are:\nCostuming.\nA panel of fashion experts convened by \"GQ\" in 2006 said the gray suit worn by Cary Grant throughout almost the entire film was the best suit in film history, and the most influential on men's style, stating that it has since been copied for Tom Cruise's character in \"Collateral\" and Ben Affleck's character in \"Paycheck\". This sentiment has been echoed by writer Todd McEwen, who called it \"gorgeous\" and wrote a short story, \"Cary Grant's Suit\", that recounts the film's plot, featuring the suit.\nThere is some disagreement as to who tailored the suit; \"Vanity Fair\" magazine claimed it was Norton &amp; Sons of London, although according to \"The Independent\", it was Quintino of Beverly Hills. Another article states that Grant used his Savile Row tailor, Kilgour French and Stanbury for the suit. A label reading \"Quintino\" is visible on one of the suits in the film, but this is because Quintino made duplicate suits for scenes involving more activity or stunts.\nEva Marie Saint's wardrobe for the film was originally entirely chosen by MGM. Hitchcock disliked MGM's selections, and the actress and director went to Bergdorf Goodman in New York to select what she would wear.\nEditing and post-production.\nIn Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut's book-length interview, \"Hitchcock/Truffaut\" (1967), Hitchcock said that MGM wanted \"North by Northwest\" cut by 15 minutes so the film's length would run under two hours. Hitchcock had his agent check his contract, learned that he had absolute control over the final cut, and refused.\nOne of Eva Marie Saint's lines in the dining-car seduction scene was redubbed. She originally said, \"I never make love on an empty stomach\", but it was changed in post-production to \"I never discuss love on an empty stomach\", as the censors considered the original version too risqu\u00e9.\nRelease.\nThe film opened on July 1, 1959, at the United Artists Theatre in Chicago. It had a seven-week run at Radio City Music Hall in August and September 1959. One trailer for \"North by Northwest\" features Hitchcock presenting himself as the owner of Alfred Hitchcock Travel Agency and telling the viewer he has made a motion picture to advertise these wonderful vacation stops. A new 70mm restoration of the film, remastered in 13K resolution from the original VistaVision elements, premiered at the 2024 Tribeca Festival on June 12, 2024, to celebrate the film's 65th anniversary.\nHome media.\n\"North by Northwest\" was released on the Blu-ray Disc format in the United States in November 2009, by Warner Bros. with a 1080p VC-1 encoding. This release is a special 50th-anniversary edition, restored and remastered from original VistaVision elements. A DVD edition was also released. A 65th anniversary 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray was released in 2024 by Warner Bros. Home Entertainment.\nReception.\nBox office.\nIn its opening in Chicago, it grossed $46,000 in its first week and $35,000 the second week. The film grossed $209,000 in its opening week at Radio City Music Hall, setting a record opening week at the theater, as well as its record non-holiday week gross, and went on to gross a record $404,056 in two weeks. Its opening at the Music Hall saw it become the number one film at the US box office, where it remained for its seven weeks at the Music Hall. By the end of August, it had grossed $2,568,000 from 139 engagements ($ in 2024 dollars).\nAccording to MGM records, the film earned theatrical rentals of $5,740,000 in the United States and Canada and $4.1 million elsewhere, resulting in a profit of $837,000.\nCritical reception.\nA contemporary in \"Time\" called the film \"smoothly troweled and thoroughly entertaining\". A. H. Weiler of \"The New York Times\" made it a \"Critic's Pick\" and said it was the \"year's most scenic, intriguing and merriest chase\"; he also complimented the two leads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Cary Grant, a veteran member of the Hitchcock acting varsity, was never more at home than in this role of the advertising-man-on-the-lam. He handles the grimaces, the surprised look, the quick smile, ...\u00a0and all the derring-do with professional aplomb and grace, In casting Eva Marie Saint as his romantic vis-\u00e0-vis, Mr. Hitchcock has plumbed some talents not shown by the actress heretofore. Although she is seemingly a hard, designing type, she also emerges both the sweet heroine and a glamorous charmer.\nPeriod film critic Charles Champlin saw the film as an \"anthology of typical Hitchcockian situations\" and was particularly taken by the scene and suspense in which Grant's character avoids death when attacked by a crop-dusting plane in the cornfields, which he believed was representative of Hitchcock's finest work. \"Sight &amp; Sound\" critic Penelope Houston called it \"the purest piece of entertainment filmmaking\". In 2002 author and journalist Nick Clooney praised Lehman's original story and sophisticated dialogue, calling the film \"certainly Alfred Hitchcock's most stylish thriller, if not his best\".\nThe London edition of \"Time Out\", reviewing the film in 2008, commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Fifty years on, you could say that Hitchcock's sleek, wry, paranoid thriller caught the zeitgeist perfectly: Cold War shadiness, secret agents of power, urbane modernism, the ant-like bustle of city life, and a hint of dread behind the sharp suits of affluence. Cary Grant's Roger Thornhill, the film's sharply dressed ad exec who is sucked into a vortex of mistaken identity, certainly wouldn't be out of place in \"Mad Men\". But there's nothing dated about this perfect storm of talent, from Hitchcock and Grant to writer Ernest Lehman (\"Sweet Smell of Success\"), co-stars James Mason and Eva Marie Saint, composer Bernard Herrmann and even designer Saul Bass, whose opening-credits sequence still manages to send a shiver down the spine.\n\"The Village Voice\" ranked \"North by Northwest\" at No. 49 in its \"Top 250 Best Films of the Century\" list in 1999, based on a poll of critics. \"Entertainment Weekly\" voted it the 44th-greatest film of all time in 1999. The film was voted at No. 28 on the list of \"100 Greatest Films\" by the prominent French magazine \"Cahiers du cin\u00e9ma\" in 2008. In 2010, \"The Guardian\" ranked it as the second-best action and war film of all time. The film ranks at No. 98 in \"Empire\"'s 2011 list of the 500 Greatest Films of All Time. In the British Film Institute's 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls of the greatest films ever made, \"North by Northwest\" was ranked 53rd among critics; \nAs of 2025 \"North by Northwest\" holds a 97% rating on the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, based on 119 reviews, with an average rating of 9.3/10. The site states the critical consensus as: \"Gripping, suspenseful and visually iconic, this late-period Hitchcock classic laid the groundwork for countless action thrillers to follow.\" On\u00a0Metacritic, it has a score of 98 out of 100, based on reviews from 16 critics. In 1998, \"Time Out\" conducted a poll, and \"North by Northwest\" was voted the twelfth greatest film of all time.\n\"North by Northwest\" was ranked 13th in BBC's 2015 list of the 100 greatest American films. In 2022, \"Time Out\" named \"North by Northwest\" the greatest thriller film ever made. The Writers Guild of America ranked the screenplay No. 21 on its 2020 list of 101 Greatest Screenplays ever written. It is ranked the 40th-greatest American film by the American Film Institute. The Sight and Sound Greatest Films of All Time 2022 poll ranked the film 45th among critics.\nAwards.\n\"North by Northwest\" was nominated for three Academy Awards\u2014Best Film Editing (George Tomasini), Best Art Direction \u2013 Set Decoration, Color (William A. Horning, Robert F. Boyle, Merrill Pye, Henry Grace, and Frank R. McKelvy), and Best Original Screenplay (Ernest Lehman)\u2014at the 32nd Academy Awards ceremony. Two of the three awards went instead to \"Ben-Hur\", and the other went to \"Pillow Talk\". The film\u2014and Lehman specifically\u2014also won a 1960 Edgar Award for Best Motion Picture Screenplay. Hitchcock received his second Silver Shell for Best Director award at the San Sebasti\u00e1n International Film Festival. (He was also awarded the Silver Shell the year before for \"Vertigo\".)\nIn 1995, \"North by Northwest\" was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\" In June 2008, the American Film Institute revealed its \"10 Top 10\"\u2014the best 10 films in 10 \"classic\" American film genres\u2014after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. \"North by Northwest\" was acknowledged as the seventh-best film in the mystery genre. It was also listed as No. 40 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies, No. 4 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills, and No. 55 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition).\nThemes and motifs.\nHitchcock planned the film as a change of pace after his dark romantic thriller \"Vertigo\" a year earlier. In his book-length interview \"Hitchcock/Truffaut\" (1967) with Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, Hitchcock said that he wanted to do \"something fun, light-hearted, and generally free of the symbolism permeating his other movies.\" Writer Ernest Lehman has mocked those who look for symbolism in the film. Despite its popular appeal, the film is considered to be a masterpiece for its themes of deception, mistaken identity, and moral relativism in the Cold War era.\nSome have mistaken the title \"North by Northwest\" as having come from a line in \"Hamlet\" (\"I am but mad north-north-west: when the wind is southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw\"), a work also concerned with the shifty nature of reality. However, Hitchcock explained in an interview with Peter Bogdanovich in 1963: \"It's a fantasy. The whole film is epitomized in the title\u2014there is no such thing as north-by-northwest on the compass.\" (The similar \"northwest by north\" is indeed one of 32 points of the compass.)\nLehman states that he used a working title for the film of \"In a Northwesterly Direction\" because the film's action was to begin in New York and climax in Alaska. Then the head of the story department at MGM suggested \"North by Northwest\", but this was still to be a working title\u2014shared with the public as early as June 1958. Other titles were considered, including \"The Man on Lincoln's Nose\", but \"North by Northwest\" was kept because, according to Lehman, \"We never did find a [better] title.\" The Northwest Airlines was worked into the film, reinforcing the title.\nThe film's plot involves a \"MacGuffin\"\u2014a term popularized by Hitchcock\u2014which is a physical object that everyone in the film is chasing, but which has no deep relationship to the plot. Late in \"North by Northwest\", it emerges that the spies are attempting to smuggle microfilm containing government secrets out of the country. The film's protagonist, Roger Thornhill, only becomes involved through a case of mistaken identity (with a spy that does not even exist, \"George Kaplan\"), and only becomes a target for elimination when he becomes a persistent nuisance as a result.\n\"North by Northwest\" has been referred to as \"the first James Bond film\" because of its splashily colorful settings, secret agents, and an elegant, daring, wisecracking leading man opposite a sinister yet strangely charming villain. The crop-duster scene inspired the helicopter chase in \"From Russia with Love\".\nThe film's final shot\u2014that of the train speeding into a tunnel during a romantic embrace onboard\u2014is a famous bit of self-conscious Freudian symbolism reflecting Hitchcock's mischievous sense of humor. In the book \"Hitchcock/Truffaut\" (pp.\u00a0107\u2013108), Hitchcock called it a \"phallic symbol ... probably one of the most impudent shots I ever made\".\nInfluences.\nThe film was very influential on the James Bond films and subsequent action-thriller films, as well as the TV series \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\", where Leo G. Carroll played the same sort of role as the head of a top secret intelligence agency.\nThe film's title is reported to have been the influence for the name of the popular annual live-music festival South by Southwest in Austin, Texas, started in 1987, with the name idea coming from Louis Black, editor and co-founder of the local alternative weekly \"The Austin Chronicle\", as a play on the Hitchcock film title.\nThe third episode of the 14th season of \"Doctor Who\" serial \"The Deadly Assassin\" (1976) includes an homage to \"North by Northwest\", when the Doctor, who like Hitchcock's hero is falsely accused of a politically motivated murder, is attacked by gunfire from a biplane piloted by one of his enemy's henchmen.\nThe 2010 Spanish dark comedy film \"The Last Circus\" pays visual homage to the Mount Rushmore scene in its climactic scene atop a controversial Francoist monument.\nAdaptations.\n\"North by Northwest\" was adapted as a stage play by Carolyn Burns. The adaptation premiered at the Melbourne Theatre Company in 2015.\nAnother stage adaptation, adapted and directed by Emma Rice, opened at the York Theatre Royal in March 2025 before touring the UK, ending with a run at the Alexandra Palace Theatre, London.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "73413", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73413", "title": "A Corner in Wheat", "text": "1909 film\nA Corner in Wheat is a 1909 American short silent film which tells of a greedy tycoon who tries to corner the market in wheat, destroying the lives of the people who can no longer afford to buy bread. It was directed by D. W. Griffith and adapted by Griffith and Frank E. Woods from a novel and a short story by Frank Norris, titled \"The Pit\" and \"A Deal in Wheat\". Griffith may have had a real-life inspiration: six months earlier, James A. Patten had actually cornered the market in wheat, and in some cities, the price of bread doubled from five cents to ten, just as in the movie.\nIn 1994, \"A Corner in Wheat\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nTwo men sow a field by hand, while a third plows. Meanwhile, the \"wheat king\" comes up with idea to corner the market in the grain. He sends his underlings to the wheat pit to buy and sell. He dismisses the pleas of a \"ruined man\" devastated by his business manipulation. \nAs a result, the common folk have to pay double for bread, ten cents a loaf instead of five, or go without. A group of angry men have to be driven back from a baker at gunpoint by policemen. \nThe wheat king celebrates his triumph with a dinner party. He later takes his family and friends on a tour of the grain elevators. However, unseen by anyone, he falls into an elevator and is buried by the grain being poured in. He is finally fished out, but too late (see still photograph above). \nIn the final scene, the same farmer as at the beginning sows his field, though now he is alone.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Frank Powell as The wheat king\nRelease.\nThe film was released on December 13, 1909. Because of an upsurge in political populism, audiences reacted to the film positively. Before \"A Corner in Wheat\", Griffith avoided making political statements in his work. After the film's success, he began to make bolder statements about society and politics, such as famously championing white supremacy in \"The Birth of a Nation\" (1915).\nAnalysis and impact.\nGriffith normally used intercutting (cross-cutting) to depict \"converging lines of action\"; here, however, the three narrative threads\u2014the farmers, the wheat king, and the poor affected by his actions\u2014never interact with each other. Vlada Petri\u0107 states that this \"anticipates Eisenstein's intellectual montage.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73414", "revid": "17216044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73414", "title": "The Cool World", "text": "1963 film by Shirley Clarke\nThe Cool World is a 1963 American drama film directed by Shirley Clarke about African-American life in the Royal Pythons, a youth gang in Harlem. In 1994, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nBackground.\n\"The Cool World\" is a novel published 1959 written by American author Warren Miller. It was a finalist for the National Book Award in 1960.\nPlot.\nThe plot concerns the obsession of Duke (Hampton Clanton), a 15-year-old member of the gang Royal Pythons, to get a gun from a racketeer named Priest (Carl Lee), in order to become the president of the Pythons and a big shot in Harlem. After their friend Littleman's father was forced out of his apartment, the Pythons take over the place and install Luanne, Python president Blood's girlfriend, as resident prostitute. Discovering that Blood is a heroin addict, Duke assumes leadership of the gang and Luanne becomes his girl. During an outing at Coney Island, however, Luanne vanishes, and Duke returns to Harlem alone.\nPriest, who is pursued by his enemies, seeks refuge in the Python headquarter and is allowed to stay. In an ensuing battle with the Wolves, a rival gang, Duke stabs an antagonist. Seeking refuge, he returns to Python headquarter and discovers Priest's corpse. Duke then rushes back home and is apprehended by the police.\nUtilizing first-time actors and true-life ghettos for scenery, Shirley Clarke's film dramatizes the life of young gang bangers in 1960s Harlem and transcends its narrative to deliver a vivid picture of inner city life.\nCast.\n\"The Cool World\" stars real Harlem youth and some real gang members:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Rony Clanton as Hampton Clanton, Duke, a 15-year-old\nProduction.\nThis semi-documentary style movie was produced by soon-to-be documentary filmmaker Frederick Wiseman, directed by Shirley Clarke, and adapted by Clarke and Carl Lee from the 1959 novel \"The Cool World\" by Warren Miller, with original music was by Mal Waldron and cinematography by Baird Bryant\nA play, written by Miller and Robert Rossen based on the novel, was first shown in Philadelphia and then twice at Broadway's Eugene O'Neill Theatre on February 22 and 23, 1960, featuring Raymond St. Jacques, James Earl Jones, Calvin Lockhart, Hilda Simms, and others. The film helped launch Antonio Fargas, Clarence Williams III, Carl Lee, and Gloria Foster, who married Williams three years later.\nRelease and reception.\n\"The Cool World\" debuted September 2, 1963 at the Venice Film Festival with a running time of 125 minutes. It received a standing ovation and was nominated for the festival's Golden Lion award. Following its loss to the Italian film \"Hands over the City\" (1963), \"Variety\" reported that at least one Italian publication, \"Il Messaggero\", decried the judges\u2019 decision.\nEarly reviews were mixed. While \"Variety\" commended Clarke for her achievement and \"The New York Times\" gave a largely positive review, the \"Los Angeles Times\" expressed disappointment, adding that African Americans were better qualified to make films about their people.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds positive reviews from the site's six designated top critics. Richard Brody of \"The New Yorker\" praised the film: \"Clarke's images endow the characters' energies with a sculptural grandeur and embrace street life with a keenly attentive, unsentimental avidity.\" Jonathan Rosenbaum also reviewed it positively: \"It certainly had a visceral impact when it first appeared, helped enormously by Baird Bryant's cinematography and Dizzy Gillespie's score.\"\nCurrently, there is no home video release of the film. Frederick Wiseman owns the rights, and he is unwilling to release a home video version of \"The Cool World\" or to allow Milestone Films to release it among its Shirley Clarke series. Amy Taubin has, in response, called for a boycott of Wiseman's films.\nSoundtrack.\nThe soundtrack to the film was recorded by Dizzy Gillespie and his quintet, and was released as an album of the same name in 1964.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73415", "revid": "10841018", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73415", "title": "Sieve of Eratosthenes", "text": "Ancient algorithm for generating prime numbers\nIn mathematics, the sieve of Eratosthenes is an ancient algorithm for finding all prime numbers up to any given limit.\nIt does so by iteratively marking as composite (i.e., not prime) the multiples of each prime, starting with the first prime number, 2. The multiples of a given prime are generated as a sequence of numbers starting from that prime, with constant difference between them that is equal to that prime. This is the sieve's key distinction from using trial division to sequentially test each candidate number for divisibility by each prime. Once all the multiples of each discovered prime have been marked as composites, the remaining unmarked numbers are primes.\nThe earliest known reference to the sieve (, \"k\u00f3skinon Eratosth\u00e9nous\") is in Nicomachus of Gerasa's \"Introduction to Arithmetic\", an early 2nd-century CE book which attributes it to Eratosthenes of Cyrene, a 3rd-century BCE Greek mathematician, though describing the sieving by odd numbers instead of by primes.\nOne of a number of prime number sieves, it is one of the most efficient ways to find all of the smaller primes. It may be used to find primes in arithmetic progressions.\nOverview.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Sift the Two's and Sift the Three's:\"\"The Sieve of Eratosthenes.\"\"When the multiples sublime,\"\"The numbers that remain are Prime.\"\nAnonymous\nA prime number is a natural number that has exactly two distinct natural number divisors: the number 1 and itself.\nTo find all the prime numbers less than or equal to a given integer n by Eratosthenes's method:\nThe main idea here is that every value given to p will be prime, because if it were composite it would be marked as a multiple of some other, smaller prime. Note that some of the numbers may be marked more than once (e.g., 15 will be marked both for 3 and 5).\nThe key property of the sieve is that only additions are needed, no multiplications or divisions are used.\nAs a refinement, it is sufficient to mark the numbers in step 3 starting from \"p\"2, as all the smaller multiples of p will have already been marked at that point. This means that the algorithm is allowed to terminate in step 4 when \"p\"2 is greater than n. \nAnother refinement is to initially list odd numbers only, (3, 5, ..., \"n\"), and count in increments of 2\"p\" in step 3, thus marking only odd multiples of p. This actually appears in the original algorithm. This can be generalized with wheel factorization, forming the initial list only from numbers coprime with the first few primes and not just from odds (i.e., numbers coprime with 2), and counting in the correspondingly adjusted increments so that only such multiples of p are generated that are coprime with those small primes, in the first place.\nExample.\nTo find all the prime numbers less than or equal to 30, proceed as follows.\nFirst, generate a list of natural numbers from 2 to 30:\n \u00a02 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30\nThe first number in the list is 2; cross out every 2nd number in the list after 2 by counting up from 2 in increments of 2 (these will be all the multiples of 2 in the list):\n \u00a02 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30\nThe next number in the list after 2 is 3; cross out every 3rd number in the list after 3 by counting up from 3 in increments of 3 (these will be all the multiples of 3 in the list):\n \u00a02 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30\nThe next number not yet crossed out in the list after 3 is 5; cross out every 5th number in the list after 5 by counting up from 5 in increments of 5 (i.e. all the multiples of 5):\n \u00a02 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30\nThe next number not yet crossed out in the list after 5 is 7; the next step would be to cross out every 7th number in the list after 7, but they are all already crossed out at this point, as these numbers (14, 21, 28) are also multiples of smaller primes because 7 \u00d7 7 is greater than 30. The numbers not crossed out at this point in the list are all the prime numbers below 30:\n \u00a02 3 5 7 11 13 17 19 23 29\nAlgorithm and variants.\nPseudocode.\nThe sieve of Eratosthenes can be expressed in pseudocode, as follows:\n algorithm Sieve of Eratosthenes is\n input: an integer \"n\" &gt; 1.\n output: all prime numbers from 2 through \"n\".\n let \"A\" be an array of Boolean values, indexed by integers 2 to \"n\",\n initially all set to true.\n for \"i\" = 2, 3, 4, ..., not exceeding \"\u221an\" do\n if \"A\"[\"i\"] is true\n for \"j\" = \"i\"2, \"i\"2+\"i\", \"i\"2+2\"i\", \"i\"2+3\"i\", ..., not exceeding \"n\" do\n set \"A\"[\"j\"] := false\n return all \"i\" such that \"A\"[\"i\"] is true.\nThis algorithm produces all primes not greater than n. It includes a common optimization, which is to start enumerating the multiples of each prime i from \"i\"2. The time complexity of this algorithm is \"O\"(\"n\" log log \"n\"), provided the array update is an \"O\"(1) operation, as is usually the case.\nSegmented sieve.\nAs Sorenson notes, the problem with the sieve of Eratosthenes is not the number of operations it performs but rather its memory requirements. For large n, the range of primes may not fit in memory; worse, even for moderate n, its cache use is highly suboptimal. The algorithm walks through the entire array A, exhibiting almost no locality of reference.\nA solution to these problems is offered by \"segmented\" sieves, where only portions of the range are sieved at a time. These have been known since the 1970s, and work as follows:\nIf \u0394 is chosen to be , the space complexity of the algorithm is \"O\"(\u221a\"n\"), while the time complexity is the same as that of the regular sieve.\nFor ranges with upper limit \"n\" so large that the sieving primes below as required by the page segmented sieve of Eratosthenes cannot fit in memory, a slower but much more space-efficient sieve like the pseudosquares prime sieve, developed by Jonathan P. Sorenson, can be used instead.\nIncremental sieve.\nAn incremental formulation of the sieve generates primes indefinitely (i.e., without an upper bound) by interleaving the generation of primes with the generation of their multiples (so that primes can be found in gaps between the multiples), where the multiples of each prime p are generated directly by counting up from the square of the prime in increments of p (or 2\"p\" for odd primes). The generation must be initiated only when the prime's square is reached, to avoid adverse effects on efficiency. It can be expressed symbolically under the dataflow paradigm as\n \"primes\" = [\"2\", \"3\", ...] \\ set subtraction]] of [[arithmetic progressions]] of numbers.\nPrimes can also be produced by iteratively sieving out the composites through [[Trial division|divisibility testing]] by sequential primes, one prime at a time. It is not the sieve of Eratosthenes but is often confused with it, even though the sieve of Eratosthenes directly generates the composites instead of testing for them. Trial division has worse theoretical [[Analysis of algorithms|complexity]] than that of the sieve of Eratosthenes in generating ranges of primes.\nWhen testing each prime, the \"optimal\" trial division algorithm uses all prime numbers not exceeding its square root, whereas the sieve of Eratosthenes produces each composite from its prime factors only, and gets the primes \"for free\", between the composites. The widely known 1975 [[functional programming|functional]] sieve code by [[David Turner (computer scientist)|David Turner]] is often presented as an example of the sieve of Eratosthenes but is actually a sub-optimal trial division sieve.\nAlgorithmic complexity.\nThe sieve of Eratosthenes is a popular way to benchmark computer performance. The time complexity of calculating all primes below n in the random access machine model is \"O\"(\"n\" log log \"n\") operations, a direct consequence of the fact that the prime harmonic series asymptotically approaches log log \"n\". It has an exponential time complexity with regard to length of the input, though, which makes it a pseudo-polynomial algorithm. The basic algorithm requires \"O\"(\"n\") of memory.\nThe bit complexity of the algorithm is \"O\"(\"n\" (log \"n\") (log log \"n\")) bit operations with a memory requirement of \"O\"(\"n\").\nThe normally implemented page segmented version has the same operational complexity of \"O\"(\"n\" log log \"n\") as the non-segmented version but reduces the space requirements to the very minimal size of the segment page plus the memory required to store the base primes less than the square root of the range used to cull composites from successive page segments of size \"O\"().\nA special (rarely, if ever, implemented) segmented version of the sieve of Eratosthenes, with basic optimizations, uses \"O\"(\"n\") operations and \"O\"(\u221a\"n\") bits of memory.\nUsing big O notation ignores constant factors and offsets that may be very significant for practical ranges: The sieve of Eratosthenes variation known as the Pritchard wheel sieve has an \"O\"(\"n\") performance, but its basic implementation requires either a \"one large array\" algorithm which limits its usable range to the amount of available memory else it needs to be page segmented to reduce memory use. When implemented with page segmentation in order to save memory, the basic algorithm still requires about \"O\"() bits of memory (much more than the requirement of the basic page segmented sieve of Eratosthenes using \"O\"() bits of memory). Pritchard's work reduced the memory requirement at the cost of a large constant factor. Although the resulting wheel sieve has \"O\"(\"n\") performance and an acceptable memory requirement, it is not faster than a reasonably Wheel Factorized basic sieve of Eratosthenes for practical sieving ranges.\nEuler's sieve.\nEuler's proof of the zeta product formula contains a version of the sieve of Eratosthenes in which each composite number is eliminated exactly once. The same sieve was rediscovered and observed to take linear time by . It, too, starts with a list of numbers from 2 to n in order. On each step the first element is identified as the next prime, is multiplied with each element of the list (thus starting with itself), and the results are marked in the list for subsequent deletion. The initial element and the marked elements are then removed from the working sequence, and the process is repeated:\n \u00a0[2] (3) 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51 53 55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 ...\n \u00a0[3] (5) 7 11 13 17 19 23 25 29 31 35 37 41 43 47 49 53 55 59 61 65 67 71 73 77 79 ...\n \u00a0[4] (7) 11 13 17 19 23 29 31 37 41 43 47 49 53 59 61 67 71 73 77 79 ...\n \u00a0[5] (11) 13 17 19 23 29 31 37 41 43 47 53 59 61 67 71 73 79 ...\nHere the example is shown starting from odds, after the first step of the algorithm. Thus, on the kth step all the remaining multiples of the kth prime are removed from the list, which will thereafter contain only numbers coprime with the first k primes (cf. wheel factorization), so that the list will start with the next prime, and all the numbers in it below the square of its first element will be prime too.\nThus, when generating a bounded sequence of primes, when the next identified prime exceeds the square root of the upper limit, all the remaining numbers in the list are prime. In the example given above that is achieved on identifying 11 as next prime, giving a list of all primes less than or equal to 80.\nNote that numbers that will be discarded by a step are still used while marking the multiples in that step, e.g., for the multiples of 3 it is 3 \u00d7 3 = 9, 3 \u00d7 5 = 15, 3 \u00d7 7 = 21, 3 \u00d7 9 = 27, ..., 3 \u00d7 15 = 45, ..., so care must be taken dealing with this.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73417", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73417", "title": "Czechoslovakia 1968", "text": "1969 film by Denis Sanders\nCzechoslovakia 1968 (also known as \"Czechoslovakia 1918-1968\") is a 1969 short documentary film about the \"Prague Spring\", the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia. The film was produced by the United States Information Agency (USIA) under the direction of Robert M. Fresco and Denis Sanders and features the graphic design of Norman Gollin.\nIt won the Academy Award for Best Documentary Short Subject and in 1997, was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress having been identified as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nControversy.\nIn 1972, Senator James L. Buckley obtained a copy of \"Czechoslovakia 1968\" to show on New York television stations. The chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, J. William Fulbright, objected to the broadcast based on an interpretation of the Smith\u2013Mundt Act, which would prohibit the domestic dissemination of material produced by the USIA. Fulbright complained to the Attorney General, but the Justice Department refused to intervene based on the interpretation of existing US law. In 1972, Congress amended the Smith-Mundt Act, based on this event, to explicitly prohibit the domestic dissemination of materials produced by the USIA. The USIA was abolished in 1999.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73418", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73418", "title": "Lilium lancifolium", "text": "Species of lily\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLilium lancifolium (syn. \"L. tigrinum\") is an Asian species of lily, native to China, Japan, Korea, and the Russian Far East. It is widely planted as an ornamental because of its showy orange-and-black flowers, and sporadically occurs as a garden escapee in North America, particularly the eastern United States including New England, and has made incursions into some southern states such as Georgia.\nIt has the English name tiger lily, but that name has been applied to other species as well. \nDescription.\nLike other true lilies, the flowers are borne on upright stems that are tall and bear lanceolate leaves long and broad. \"L. lancifolium\" produces aerial bulblets, known as bulbils, in the leaf axils. These bulbils are uncommon in \"Lilium\" species and they produce new plants that are clones of the original plant.\nThe flowers are odorless. Each lasts a few days and if pollinated produce capsules with many thin seeds.\nExtrafloral nectaries on the species were first noted by Zimmerman 1932.\nTaxonomy.\nVarieties.\nThe names of names considered as varieties at some time are:\nThe \"Lilium tigrinum flore pleno\", the double-flowered variety, had been exported out of Japan by William Bull since 1869.\nNames.\nScientific names.\nBotanists for many years considered \"L. tigrinum\" (after Ker Gawler) the correct scientific name until it was determined that older name \"L. lancifolium\" (after Thunberg) refers to the same species, and the latter became the accepted name.\nVernacular names.\nIts common name is tiger lily. Although this name is ambiguous across several species, it is correctly applied to this species alone.\nCat toxicity.\nA case study of the successful treatment of a cat that ingested this particular species was published in 2007.\nUses.\nIt is cultivated and wild foraged in Asia for its edible bulbs. The cultivar 'Splendens' has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit. In Taiwan, both the flower and bulbs are used as food, as are the other related species: \"L. brownii\" var. \"viridulum\", \"L. pumilum\" and \"L. candidum\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73419", "revid": "50054898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73419", "title": "David Holzman's Diary", "text": "David Holzman's Diary is a 1967 American mockumentary, or work of metacinema, directed by James McBride and starring L. M. Kit Carson. A feature-length film made on a tiny budget over several days, it is a work of experimental fiction presented as an autobiographical documentary. \"A self-portrait by a fictional character in a real place\u2014New York's Upper West Side,\" the film comments on the title character's personality and life as well as on documentary filmmaking and the medium of cinema more generally. In 1991, \"David Holzman's Diary\" was included in the annual selection of 25 motion pictures added to the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress, being deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" and recommended for preservation.\nSynopsis.\nL. M. Kit Carson plays David, a young white man living alone in his modest studio apartment on Manhattan's West 71st Street during July 1967. The film begins without the conventional opening credits or music that would signify a professionally made documentary or fiction film. Instead, it's just David at home saying plainly that he has recently lost his job and may soon be drafted into the military and sent to Vietnam. He does not identify the job in question, but his apartment d\u00e9cor and cinephile personality imply that it may have involved film. Sitting on a chair with film equipment and posters behind him, and quoting Jean-Luc Godard, he says he has decided to make a video diary to try to document and understand his life. After this introduction, what follows is a series of filmed diary entries that David makes over a period of several days, depicting his daily life, his surroundings, and his most personal thoughts and feelings.\nIn some scenes, David goes around filming his neighborhood, from various people and historical buildings to spontaneous moments such as police officers helping an apparent robbery victim. This video is sometimes silent and at other times accompanied by dialogue or ambient sound, or sound that he may have taped separately and added to the film later, such as radio broadcasts. David interviews some people and lets others talk freely to the camera. In a scene about one-third of the way into the film, his friend Pepe gives an extended monologue on his critical assessment of the diary as it is shaping up so far, namely that David is making \"a very bad work of art.\" Saying, \"Your life is not a very good script,\" Pepe recommends that David try harder to find what is truly interesting. If he's going to focus on himself\u2014someone who \"is not a good character\" to watch\u2014then maybe he should take more risks, expose his vulnerabilities\u2014perhaps even try filming himself standing naked in front of the camera, for as long as it takes to find some interesting truths. (Andrew Noren is one underground filmmaker from this time and place who had a lot of such nudity in his films.)\nMost often in the film, David sits at home talking to his Lavalier microphone and 16mm \u00c9clair camera about topics important to him, from film theory to his girlfriend Penny, who is a fashion model. Over the several days of making his diary, and maybe following some of Pepe's advice, David becomes increasingly obsessed with filming Penny, without her permission, and even once when she's sleeping in the nude. In that particular moment, she wakes up and attacks him for this transgression, and breaks up with him; this is followed by several failed attempts to contact her, and his monologue praising masturbation. David also repeatedly films through the window of a woman across the street, whom he nicknames \"Sandra\", after the title character in Luchino Visconti's eponymous 1965 film. And, in another scene, he follows an anonymous woman out of the subway and onto the street, quietly stalking her until she turns around and tells him, \"Beat it!\"\nDavid's diary project hits bottom after he leaves town for a day, to attend a family funeral, and returns to find all of his film equipment stolen. He reveals this in his last diary entry, which combines an audio recording of his voice with a series of photos David made of himself with rented or borrowed equipment. Disappointed and disillusioned, he says that this is the end of the film. The sound then stops and the image goes black for about ten seconds, seemingly the end of this diary film. But then \"David Holzman's Diary\" takes a sudden unexpected turn. It displays a title card (still no sound) saying simply \"DAVID HOLZMAN'S DIARY,\" followed by another card identifying L.M. Kit Carson as the actor playing him. Then some cards for the rest of the cast and the crew. The cards effectively acknowledge that the preceding was a work of fiction posing as an autobiographical documentary.\nProduction.\nFilm critic Richard Brody writes that, \"This ingenious, scruffy 1967 metafiction by Jim McBride is an exotic fruit grown in New York from the seed of the French New Wave.\" Jaime Wolf writes that, \"At once a fictional narrative within a recognizable documentary setting and a kind of essay on the conditions of filmmaking, \"David Holzman's Diary\" stands as one of the few American equivalents to the work which Godard was doing at the time.\" The French New Wave clearly was an inspiration for this film, but there were others as well. One influence was \"The Diary of a Lost Girl\", a book published in 1905 as a supposedly authentic diary of a prostitute named Thymian, but actually written by its \"editor,\" Margarete B\u00f6hme; it was later adapted into a popular 1929 German film starring Louise Brooks as Lulu. This is what David refers to in the beginning of his film when he cites \"the famous Lulu's diary\" as an inspiration for his work. Jaime N. Christley notes some other cinematic influences, saying that, \"the real point of origin is either Peter Watkins's docudrama \"The War Game\" (which won the documentary Oscar for 1967) or Luis Bu\u00f1uel's \"Land Without Bread\", depending on where you draw the fault lines.\" James McBride identified his more immediate American context for making the film:\nI entered the world of movies when cinema v\u00e9rit\u00e9 work like the Maysles brothers' and Richard Leacock's and D. A. Pennebaker's was new and exciting, and when a lot of underground filmmakers were trying to use the medium in a more poetic way, as an exercise in different kinds of liberation\u2014you know, from personal liberation to liberation from the classical forms of filmmaking. So there were a lot of alternatives to Hollywood moviemaking then. These movies were all trying to find a new way of looking at life. And I was a young, idealistic filmmaker dealing with these same questions. You know: what is one supposed to be trying to do in the movies and how ought one go about doing it? My film, \"David Holzman's Diary\", was about this guy who makes a diary of his own life to try to find some truth that he can't perceive in real time. It was meant to be kind of an ironical formula, let's say, to explore a lot of those ideas.\n\"David Holzman's Diary\" was filmed in about a week with borrowed equipment and a mere $2,500 budget. According to L.M. Kit Carson, the money came from a book advance from The Museum of Modern Art, intended for him and McBride to research and write a book on cinema verit\u00e9. After conducting several filmmaker interviews, they changed their minds and decided to do something better with the money:\nHalfway through the book-writing, McBride says to me: \"There is no Truth on Film. Basically as soon as you turn the camera on \u2013 everything changes \u2013 to not real \u2013 gets like unreal.\" So we decide it's more quote/unquote \"un-truth-ful\" to write this book \u2013 we decide not to write this book. We take the $2,500.00 book-advance \u2013 and over the 10-day Easter Break from college \u2013 we make a cinema-verite mock-documentary \u2013 we figure it's the strongest way to question cinema-verite: \"David Holzman's Diary.\"\n\"David Holzman's Diary\" exemplifies guerrilla filmmaking, a mode of production defined not by genre but by a drastic lack of production resources along with a by-any-means-necessary mindset. The needed resources include money, equipment, facilities, and professional cast and crew; lacking them requires filmmakers to be very economical and creative, as with McBride and Carson's use of the $2,500 MoMA book money. Or with the writing of the film's dialogue. Film critic Jonathan Rosenbaum says the dialogue in \"David Holzman's Diary\" \"was basically written (when it was written) on a scene by scene basis\" with the actors involved. Other scenes were completely impromptu, such as the one with \"the frank sexual talk from the lady in the Thunderbird\u2013actually a transsexual who'd recently undergone a sex-change operation.\" David B. Lee describes this woman as actually a \"pre-op transsexual,\" and more importantly notes that this is the only woman in the film who isn't victimized by David's camera; who instead openly engages with it, cracking bawdy jokes and even explicitly soliciting sex.\nEarlier in the 1960s, McBride had attended NYU's film school, in the same class as Martin Scorsese. \"When he was doing \"Who's That Knocking at My Door\" and I was doing \"David Holzman's Diary\", we were both working with the same cinematographer, Michael Wadleigh.\" It turns out that Wadleigh was key to making \"David Holzman's Diary\", and not simply as its cinematographer. According to McBride, Wadleigh was doing commercial work at the time, and took creative advantage of that situation to get resources for their film:\nIt's kind of a complicated process, but we would go out and shoot something for somebody and if he had to shoot something on the following Monday, say, we'd keep the equipment over the weekend. So Mike's idea was, this movie you want to make, why don't we just use this free equipment we have on the weekends and shoot stuff. So that's what we did. We used leftover film stock. To process the film we would go to the lab under the aegis of some other project we were working on.\nThe choice of the Upper West Side location for the film came from McBride's own life experience: \"I was born and raised there and I still lived there, not with my parents but I still lived in the neighborhood long after I left home and so these were the streets that I walked, these were the things that I saw. [It] was kind of my world and I wanted to share a little bit.\"\nDistribution.\nA highly unconventional film made completely outside the studio system, \"David Holzman's Diary\" was not distributed theatrically. However, it had early successes at film festivals, cinema clubs, and museums. It screened at the New York Film Festival and the San Francisco Film Festival, and won awards at the Mannheim, Brussels, and Pesaro film festivals. It screened in 1968 at the Flaherty Seminar and the Museum of Modern Art, and in 1973 at the Whitney Museum of American Art. Regarding the MoMA screening, L. M. Kit Carson said the museum, \"was not happy that we did not make the contracted book,\" until the film won awards at festivals. \"Then the Museum arranged for a high-profile Special Screening of the mock-doc \u2013 the beginning of a film-series called CINEPROBE\" and then added the film to its collection.\nIn 1991, \"David Holzman's Diary\" was selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry by the Library of Congress, for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\" It has since had varying distribution on videotape, laserdisc, DVD, and online.\nReception and legacy.\nIn 1973, Chuck Kraemer predicted that \"David Holzman's Diary\" would be remembered as \"the underground autobiographical cinema verit\u00e9 film of the sixties,\" and that \"scholars of the nineties will revere it.\" Since then, the film has remained obscure to the general public while developing and maintaining a strong critical reputation, such that its ratings on Rotten Tomatoes are 91% approval among critics and 76% approval among audiences. Likewise, the \"TV Guide\" website says that \"this provocative, endlessly self-conscious film today stands as one of the best independent films of the 1960s.\"\nAfter its initial years on the festival circuit, \"David Holzman's Diary\" gradually became \"a classic, shown in university classes and film classes\" for reasons including its engagement with film theory and practice. In terms of film practice, it shows a young man using various newly available film technologies and innovative techniques, including \"static long takes with monologues; extended passages of black screen; fish-eye distortions; [and] lateral travellings that offer Arbus-like views of everyday grotesquerie.\" It shows David using these techniques in making a diary film, a format that is technically simple and affordable\u2014a natural option for young creative filmmakers with limited resources. One such young filmmaker at the time was Brian De Palma, who said that:\nWhen I first got my 8mm sound camera, I'd carry it around like David Holzman and try to film everything I did and look at it. My friends and I had cameras all the time and we were all film directors. I filmed a whole section of my life\u2014people I was going out with, my friends. I just shot everything. I directed the scenes, too. And it all came from \"David Holzman's Diary\".\n\"David Holzman's Diary\" has been referenced directly or indirectly in subsequent films including the 1969 drama \"Coming Apart\", the 1974 comedy feature \"Yackety Yack\", the 2001 comedy-drama \"CQ\", and the 2002 comedy short \"Camera Noise\". In 2011, Kevin B. Lee made a two-part online documentary about the film titled \"Diary of David Holzman\". Film critics, scholars, and fans also have written a lot about various aspects of the film, mostly its complicated relations between fact and fiction; between art and life; and between the public and private spheres.\nRelations Between Fact and Fiction.\nThis film's engagement with fact vs. fiction elicited some of its earliest and strongest critical reactions, namely from audience members who felt duped; angry that they were led to believe that David Holzman was an actual person and the film was a documentary. Viewers at the Flaherty Seminar screening were reportedly \"outraged\" at the film, which also was \"booed at the 1968 San Francisco Film Festival when the end credits revealed it to be fiction.\" A college newspaper review noted a sense of \"great shock\" at having \"thought we'd found a truth about life from a film of lived life; instead, we got that meaning from a piece of imaginative art.\" L. M. Kit Carson said that, given such reactions, when MoMA was to screen the film in 1968, the museum billed the film as a comedy rather than a documentary.\nAll this shock and anger may seem to be overreacting, but the film touched a nerve by being so convincing and waiting until the latest possible moment to reveal that it was all staged. The film was so convincing due to many techniques, including its consistent use of mobile camera and sound equipment, location filming, minimal editing, unknown actors, improvised dialogue, and highly personal subject matter, with the David character talking extensively about himself. Louise Spence and Vinicius Navarro identify some additional techniques: \"the direct address to the camera, the wandering narrative, the visual and aural disorder (muddy sound and blurred focus), and the compulsive use of dates to describe the day's filming.\" Altogether, they write, this carefully crafted film violated \"the contract that binds documentary filmmakers to their audiences;\" it did a lot of work to \"upset our faith in documentary representation and presumptions that are often associated with non-fiction cinema.\"\nFurther blurring lines between fiction and fact, this film explores how, even in actual documentaries, truth can be manipulated\u2014consciously or unconsciously\u2014before, during, and after filming. Vincent Canby wrote that the film \"highlights questions we all have about the quality of truth that can be captured by the cinema verit\u00e9 camera,\" and about the \"awful possibilities for distortion\" via the editing process. In his critical monologue within the film, Pepe speaks to how the act of filming can change what's being filmed:\nAs soon as you start filming something, whatever happens in front of the camera is not reality any more. It becomes a work of art ... And you stop living somehow. And you get very self-conscious about anything you do. 'Should I put my hand here?' ... 'Should I place myself on this side of the frame?' And your decisions stop being moral decisions, and they become aesthetical decisions.\nPutting this differently, Jaime Wolf writes that \"David Holzman's Diary\" applies what film critic Andrew Sarris described as the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle of documentary filmmaking, namely \"the inevitable effect of the presence of an observer on the behavior of the observed.\" For better or worse, consciously or not, overtly or subtly, people often play to the camera, behaving differently than they otherwise would. Nowhere in this film is this more overt than in David's scene with the unnamed character dubbed by some as the \"Thunderbird Lady.\" This extended scene of a woman\u2014a self-proclaimed nude model\u2014sitting in her car and talking boldly and crudely to the cameraman, mostly about sex\u2014is just too extreme for an actual unmediated encounter, even on the streets of New York. Several critics noted her exaggerated performance for the camera, as well as the fact that she also altered what was going on behind the camera during this scene. L. M. Kit Carson reports that he \"choked and dummied up\" and \"became so unnerved\" at this bizarre interview situation that Michael Wadleigh had to take over and complete the interview for him, something barely noticeable in the final film.\nDavid begins his diary by quoting Godard's famous statement that the medium of cinema is \"truth twenty-four times a second.\" However, as Edward Copeland has observed, David does not mention that Godard's full quote ends with, \"and every cut is a lie.\" Many writers have discussed the implications of \"David Holzman's Diary\" for truth beyond the area of documentary film\u2014for cinema and photographic media more generally. Emanuel Levy writes that \"David Holzman's Diary\" is an example of \"the impossibility of achieving complete objectivity on screen.\" \"TV Guide\" describes the film as, \"One of cinema's most pointed statements about the impossibility of objectivity in film.\" Similarly, Justin Stewart calls the film \"a hoaxed blast of 'reality' whose main subject is the impossibility of objective documentation.\"\nMany writers have described \"David Holzman's Diary\" as a satire of documentary films or filmmakers. For example, that the film \"takes funny jabs\" at the self-importance or seriousness of practitioners of the new \"personal cinema.\" These were filmmakers who \"established a new relationship with their subjects: intimate, revelatory and personal, countering a documentary tradition in which human beings were primarily used to illustrate various social themes.\" Filmmakers including Richard Leacock, D.A. Pennebaker, Andrew Noren, and the Maysles brothers. Regarding the extent to which his film mocks such filmmakers, McBride says he was not criticizing specific works or people; instead, he was jabbing at ideas\u2014popular ideas about film and truth:\nThere was this general feeling or idea that there was this kind of truth that could be revealed that had never been revealed before. This was very enticing to me, but at the same time it was also silly, the idea that there is some kind of objective truth that can be revealed. And so I got this idea to make a film about a guy who thought he could find out the truth about himself and about his life by filming it, and not succeed.\nMore recent writings on \"David Holzman's Diary\" sometimes group the film with subsequent fiction films that likewise posed as documentaries, including \"The Blair Witch Project\" and films by Christopher Guest such as \"This is Spinal Tap\". Dave Kehr describes \"David Holzman's Diary\" as, \"much more convincing than Woody Allen's \"Zelig\".\" Jaime N. Christley groups it with \"Catfish\" and \"Exit Through the Gift Shop\". Other writings from recent years cite filmmaking techniques in \"David Holzman's Diary\" that were unusual at the time but have become more common, such as the direct address by characters to the camera, or the creative use of end credit sequences, usually in the form of entertaining behind-the-scenes outtakes captured while making fiction films.\nRelations Between Art and Life.\nMany writers have noted ways that \"David Holzman's Diary\" depicts complicated relations between art and life; how David's life motivates and shapes his art, and vice versa. How his social life, his daily life at home, his background in film\u2014all shape his artistic energy and choices, with various affects. And, vice versa, how David's art shapes his life, and the lives of others, unfortunately often negatively. Film critic Chuck Kraemer captures some of this complexity when he writes that David is, \"every down-and-out filmmaker struggling for a vision, every sensitive New Yorker overwhelmed by the city's visual fecundity, every young man suffering lost love, every inchoate artist trying to sort out his life, to explain himself to himself, and to the world.\"\nFor David, art and life are fused in New York film culture. He is deeply immersed in films, constantly thinking about them, watching them, and quoting other people about them. Film is his obsession, but his daily life also includes radio and TV consumption. As Brody writes, David's city life depicts an \"endless stream of Top Forty radio and a wondrous, hectic view of television.\" The Top Forty radio that David listens to includes news reports of war and social unrest along with popular music; and the \"hectic view\" refers to the sequence that David made by filming one frame from each shot from a whole evening's worth of network TV. Sitting all evening and clicking his camera once after every shot transition, David produced a two-and-a-half minute deluge of separate shots from a \"Huntley-Brinkley Report\" newscast; then from episodes of \"Batman\", \"\", \"The Dean Martin Show\", and a talk show; and then a late-night airing of the Shirley Temple film \"Bright Eyes\". And, as David Blakeslee writes, a lot of commercials, \"Still capable after all these years, and even in this incomprehensibly compressed format of delivering their powerfully efficient subliminal messages.\" This blast of television images speaks to aspects of David's life including the multitudes of images coming to him (and us) daily; and his rather boring life, insular and filled with TV and radio broadcasts along with film. It may also refer to Godard's \"24 frames per second,\" how each individual frame conveys meaning in itself and in relation to other frames, in this case with a total of about 3,600 consecutive frames.\nDavid's life is shaped by images and popular culture, but he is not simply a passive consumer. He is an energetic and creative young filmmaker. Making films takes up a lot of his time, and affects his life, and those of other people, in various ways, not always with good results. While making his film, poking into peoples' lives, David alienates and even endangers women and gets himself punched by a cop. As Jaime N. Christley observes, \"we meet David in personal and professional freefall. Bad choices, bad pathology, and just plain bad luck coalesce into a black cloud that eventually consumes his life, and before the spare title cards indicate the film's conclusion, our hero will have lost his girlfriend, his camera and sound kit, and revealed himself to be a minor sociopath with major control issues.\" \"TV Guide\" likewise lauds the film for being \"unafraid to present and implicitly criticize the more unpleasant sides of its 'hero.'\"\nRelations Between Public and Private.\nOne key part of this film's engagement with art and life is its depiction of relations between public and private, relations that are gendered. As James Latham writes, David uses his film project partly to assert power over women; to spy on them, stalk them, and record them with or without permission, and thereby to potentially make those images public. Part of David's motivation for asserting this power, Latham writes, is that he is experiencing flipped gender roles, or \"patriarchy in crisis.\" In an era when women (as well as people of color and members of the LGBT community) are gradually gaining some power in public spaces, David \"represents the growing realization that male power over women is waning.\" Whereas Sandra, Penny, and the anonymous subway woman \"are independent and associated with the outside man's world, David is comparatively needy, impotent, and isolated in his small inner world. [Only the \"Thunderbird Lady\"] is willing to indulge him, except she is too liberated and aggressive for David.\"\nMany writers have noted the film's clear references to \"Rear Window\" (1954) and \"Peeping Tom\" (1960) and their related issues. Jonathan Rosenbaum writes, for example, that these films examine \"notions of the camera as a probing instrument, especially in relation to voyeurism and other forms of aggressive sexual appropriation as well as self-scrutiny.\" Other critics note the public-private irony of fashion model Penny being unwilling to appear in David's film; or that David is \"naked to everyone, but invisible to himself.\"\nMore recent writings on \"David Holzman's Diary\" sometimes refer to how technology and culture have evolved since the 1960s, further blurring boundaries between private and public. For example, David Blakeslee writes that when he watched the film recently on the Vimeo website, he knew practically nothing about it, except that \"it could be seen as a precursor of sorts to the 21st century phenomenon of YouTube vloggers who chronicle their lives to varying degrees of mundane detail, seeking to pull viewers into whatever fascinating experiences or excruciating dilemmas they think would hold their attention. Obviously, a lot has happened in the realm of personal public self-disclosure on film and video between 1967 and now.\"\nAftermath.\nTypical for a small independent film, \"David Holzman's Diary\" was made by a small group of young and virtually unknown people who mostly continued to be unknown. This was the feature film debut for McBride and Carson; both of them continued to work over the years together or separately on some film and TV projects. Carson worked as a writer on the 1984 film \"Paris, Texas\" and on McBride's 1983 remake of Godard's \"Breathless\". McBride directed the 1987 New Orleans neo-noir film \"The Big Easy\" and the 1989 Jerry Lee Lewis biopic \"Great Balls of Fire!\", as well as episodes of the television shows \"Six Feet Under\" and \"The Wonder Years\". Michael Wadleigh directed and was a cinematographer and writer for the Oscar-winning 1970 concert documentary \"Woodstock\", and directed, wrote, and acted in the 1981 horror thriller \"Wolfen\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73421", "revid": "50712324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73421", "title": "Lilium", "text": "Genus of plants\nLilium ( ) is a genus of herbaceous flowering plants growing from bulbs, all with large and often prominent flowers. Lilies are a group of flowering plants which are important in culture and literature in much of the world. Most species are native to the Northern Hemisphere and their range is temperate climates and extends into the subtropics. Many other plants have \"lily\" in their common names, but do not belong to the same genus and are therefore not true lilies. True lilies are known to be highly toxic to cats.\nDescription.\nLilies are tall perennials ranging in height from . They form naked or tunicless scaly underground bulbs which are their organs of perennation. In some North American species the base of the bulb develops into rhizomes, on which numerous small bulbs are found. Some species develop stolons. Most bulbs are buried deep in the ground, but a few species form bulbs near the soil surface. Many species form stem-roots. With these, the bulb grows naturally at some depth in the soil, and each year the new stem puts out adventitious roots above the bulb as it emerges from the soil. These roots are in addition to the basal roots that develop at the base of the bulb, a number of species also produce contractile roots that move the bulbs deeper into the soil.\nThe flowers are large, often fragrant, and come in a wide range of colors including whites, yellows, oranges, pinks, reds and purples. Markings include spots and brush strokes. The plants are late spring- or summer-flowering. Flowers are borne in racemes or umbels at the tip of the stem, with six tepals spreading or reflexed, to give flowers varying from funnel shape to a \"Turk's cap\". The tepals are free from each other, and bear a nectary at the base of each flower. The ovary is 'superior', borne above the point of attachment of the anthers. The fruit is a three-celled capsule.\nSeeds ripen in late summer. They exhibit varying and sometimes complex germination patterns, many adapted to cool temperate climates.\nMost cool temperate species are deciduous and dormant in winter in their native environment. But some species native to areas with hot summers and mild winters (\"Lilium candidum\", \"Lilium catesbaei\", \"Lilium longiflorum\") lose their leaves and enter a short dormant period in summer or autumn, sprout from autumn to winter, forming dwarf stems bearing a basal rosette of leaves until, after they have received sufficient chilling, the stem begins to elongate in warming weather.\nThe basic chromosome number is twelve (n=12).\nTaxonomy.\nTaxonomical division in sections follows the classical division of Comber, species acceptance follows the World Checklist of Selected Plant Families, the taxonomy of section \"Pseudolirium\" is from the Flora of North America, the taxonomy of Section \"Liriotypus\" is given in consideration of Resetnik et al. 2007, the taxonomy of Chinese species (various sections) follows the Flora of China and the taxonomy of Section \"Sinomartagon\" follows Nishikawa et al. as does the taxonomy of Section \"Archelirion\".\nThe \"Sinomartagon\" are divided into three paraphyletic groups, while the \"Leucolirion\" are divided into two paraphyletic groups.\nThere are seven sections:\nThere are 119 species counted in this genus. For a full list of accepted species with their native ranges, see List of Lilium species.\nSome species formerly included within this genus have now been placed in other genera. These genera include \"Cardiocrinum\", \"Notholirion\", and \"Fritillaria\". Four other genuses, \n\"Lirium\", \"Martagon\", and \"Nomocharis\" are considered to synonyms by most sources.\nEtymology.\nThe botanic name \"Lilium\" is the Latin form and is a Linnaean name. The Latin name is derived from the Greek word \"le\u00edrion\", generally assumed to refer to true, white lilies as exemplified by the Madonna lily. The word was borrowed from Coptic , from Demotic , from Egyptian \"flower\". , , was used by the Greeks, albeit for lilies of any color.\nThe term \"lily\" has in the past been applied to numerous flowering plants, often with only superficial resemblance to the true lily, including water lily, fire lily, lily of the Nile, calla lily, trout lily, kaffir lily, cobra lily, lily of the valley, daylily, ginger lily, Amazon lily, leek lily, Peruvian lily, and others. All English translations of the Bible render the Hebrew \"sh\u016bshan\", \"sh\u014dshan\", \"sh\u014dshann\u0101\" as \"lily\", but the \"lily among the thorns\" of \"Song of Solomon\", for instance, may be the honeysuckle.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe range of lilies in the Old World extends across much of Europe, across most of Asia to Japan, south to India, and east to Indochina and the Philippines. In the New World they extend from southern Canada through much of the United States. They are commonly adapted to either woodland habitats, often montane, or sometimes to grassland habitats. A few can survive in marshland and epiphytes are known in tropical southeast Asia. In general they prefer moderately acidic or lime-free soils.\nEcology.\nLilies are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species including the Dun-bar.\nThe proliferation of deer (e.g. \"Odocoileus virginianus\") in North America, mainly due to factors such as the elimination of large predators for human safety, is responsible there for a downturn in lily populations in the wild and is a threat to garden lilies as well. Fences as high as 8 feet may be required to prevent them from consuming the plants, an impractical solution for most wild areas.\nCultivation.\nMany species are widely grown in the garden in temperate, sub-tropical and tropical regions. Numerous ornamental hybrids have been developed. They are used in herbaceous borders, woodland and shrub plantings, and as patio plants. Some lilies, especially \"Lilium longiflorum\", form important cut flower crops or potted plants. These are forced to flower outside of the normal flowering season for particular markets; for instance, \"Lilium longiflorum\" for the Easter trade, when it may be called the Easter lily.\nLilies are usually planted as bulbs in the dormant season. They are best planted in a south-facing (northern hemisphere), slightly sloping aspect, in sun or part shade, at a depth 2\u00bd times the height of the bulb (except \"Lilium candidum\" which should be planted at the surface). Most prefer a porous, loamy soil, and good drainage is essential. Most species bloom in July or August (northern hemisphere). The flowering periods of certain lily species begin in late spring, while others bloom in late summer or early autumn. They have contractile roots which pull the plant down to the correct depth, therefore it is better to plant them too shallowly than too deep. A soil pH of around 6.5 is generally safe. Most grow best in well-drained soils, and plants are watered during the growing season. Some species and cultivars have strong wiry stems, but those with heavy flower heads are staked to stay upright.\nAwards.\nThe following lily species and cultivars currently hold the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit (confirmed 2017):\nClassification of garden forms.\nNumerous forms, mostly hybrids, are grown for the garden. They vary according to the species and interspecific hybrids that they derived from, and are classified in the following broad groups:\n These are derived from hybrids between species in \"Lilium\" section \"Sinomartagon\".\n They are derived from central and East Asian species and interspecific hybrids, including \"Lilium amabile\", \"Lilium bulbiferum\", \"Lilium callosum\", \"Lilium cernuum\", \"Lilium concolor\", \"Lilium dauricum\", \"Lilium davidii\", \"Lilium \u00d7 hollandicum\", \"Lilium lancifolium\" (syn. \"Lilium tigrinum\"), \"Lilium lankongense\", \"Lilium leichtlinii\", \"Lilium \u00d7 maculatum\", \"Lilium pumilum\", \"Lilium \u00d7 scottiae\", \"Lilium wardii\" and \"Lilium wilsonii\".\n These are plants with medium-sized, upright or outward facing flowers, mostly unscented. There are various cultivars such as Lilium 'Cappuccino', Lilium 'Dimension', Lilium 'Little Kiss' and Lilium 'Navona'.\nThese are based on \"Lilium dalhansonii\", \"Lilium hansonii\", \"Lilium martagon\", \"Lilium medeoloides\", and \"Lilium tsingtauense\".\nThe flowers are nodding, Turk's cap style (with the petals strongly recurved).\n This includes mostly European species: \"Lilium candidum\", \"Lilium chalcedonicum\", \"Lilium kesselringianum\", \"Lilium monadelphum\", \"Lilium pomponium\", \"Lilium pyrenaicum\" and \"Lilium \u00d7 testaceum\".\n These are mostly taller growing forms, originally derived from \"Lilium bolanderi\", \"Lilium \u00d7 burbankii\", \"Lilium canadense\", \"Lilium columbianum\", \"Lilium grayi\", \"Lilium humboldtii\", \"Lilium kelleyanum\", \"Lilium kelloggii\", \"Lilium maritimum\", \"Lilium michauxii\", \"Lilium michiganense\", \"Lilium occidentale\", \"Lilium \u00d7 pardaboldtii\", \"Lilium pardalinum\", \"Lilium parryi\", \"Lilium parvum\", \"Lilium philadelphicum\", \"Lilium pitkinense\", \"Lilium superbum\", \"Lilium ollmeri\", \"Lilium washingtonianum\", and \"Lilium wigginsii\".\nMany are clump-forming perennials with rhizomatous rootstocks.\n These are cultivated forms of this species and its subspecies.\nThey are most important as plants for cut flowers, and are less often grown in the garden than other hybrids.\n This group includes hybrids of many Asiatic species and their interspecific hybrids, including \"Lilium \u00d7 aurelianense\", \"Lilium brownii\", \"Lilium \u00d7 centigale\", \"Lilium henryi\", \"Lilium \u00d7 imperiale\", \"Lilium \u00d7 kewense\", \"Lilium leucanthum\", \"Lilium regale\", \"Lilium rosthornii\", \"Lilium sargentiae\", \"Lilium sulphureum\" and \"Lilium \u00d7 sulphurgale\".\nThe flowers are trumpet shaped, facing outward or somewhat downward, and tend to be strongly fragrant, often especially night-fragrant.\n These are based on hybrids within \"Lilium\" section \"Archelirion\", specifically \"Lilium auratum\" and \"Lilium speciosum\", together with crossbreeds from several species native to Japan, including \"Lilium nobilissimum\", \"Lilium rubellum\", \"Lilium alexandrae\", and \"Lilium japonicum\".\nThey are fragrant, and the flowers tend to be outward facing. Plants tend to be tall, and the flowers may be quite large. The whole group are sometimes referred to as \"stargazers\" because many of them appear to look upwards. (For the specific cultivar, see \"Lilium\" 'Stargazer'.)\n Includes all other garden hybrids.\n All natural species and naturally occurring forms are included in this group.\nSpecies (Division IX).\nThe flowers can be classified by flower aspect and form:\n*a up-facing\n*b out-facing\n*c down-facing\n*a trumpet-shaped\n*b bowl-shaped\n*c flat (or with tepal tips recurved)\n*d tepals strongly recurved (with the Turk's cap form as the ultimate state)\nMany newer commercial varieties are developed by using new technologies such as ovary culture and embryo rescue.\nPests and diseases.\nAphids may infest plants. Leatherjackets feed on the roots. Larvae of the Scarlet lily beetle can cause serious damage to the stems and leaves. The scarlet beetle lays its eggs and completes its life cycle only on true lilies (\"Lilium\") and fritillaries (\"Fritillaria\"). Oriental, rubrum, tiger and trumpet lilies as well as Oriental trumpets (orienpets) and Turk's cap lilies and native North American \"Lilium\" species are all vulnerable, but the beetle prefers some types over others. The beetle could also be having an effect on native Canadian species and some rare and endangered species found in northeastern North America. Daylilies (\"Hemerocallis\", not true lilies) are excluded from this category. Plants can suffer from damage caused by mice, deer and squirrels. Slugs, snails and millipedes attack seedlings, leaves and flowers.\nBrown spots on damp leaves may signal an infection of \"Botrytis elliptica\", also known as Lily blight, lily fire, and botrytis leaf blight. Various viral diseases can cause mottling of leaves and stunting of growth, including lily curl stripe, ringspot, and lily rosette virus.\nPropagation and growth.\nLilies can be propagated in several ways;\nPlant grow regulators (PGRs) are used to limit the height of lilies, especially those sold as potted plants. Commonly used chemicals include ancymidol, fluprimidol, paclobutrazol, and uni-conazole, all of which are applied to the foliage to slow the biosynthesis of gibberellins, a class of plant hormones responsible for stem growth.\nResearch.\nA comparison of meiotic crossing-over (recombination) in lily and mouse led, in 1977, to the conclusion that diverse eukaryotes share a common pattern of meiotic crossing-over. \"Lilium longiflorum\" has been used for studying aspects of the basic molecular mechanism of genetic recombination during meiosis.\nToxicity.\n&lt;section begin=lilium-toxicity /&gt;Some \"Lilium\" species are toxic to cats. This is known to be so especially for \"Lilium longiflorum\", though other \"Lilium\" and the unrelated \"Hemerocallis\" can also cause the same symptoms with equal lethality. The true mechanism of toxicity is undetermined, but it involves damage to the renal tubular epithelium (composing the substance of the kidney and secreting, collecting, and conducting urine), which can cause acute kidney failure. Veterinary help should be sought, as a matter of urgency, for any cat that is suspected of eating any part of a lily \u2013 including licking pollen that may have brushed onto its coat. Due to the high mortality rate, medical care should be sought immediately once it is known a cat came into contact with lilies, ideally before any symptoms develop.&lt;section end=lilium-toxicity /&gt;\nCulinary uses.\nChinese cuisine.\nLily bulbs are starchy and edible as root vegetables, though bulbs of some species may be too bitter to eat.\n\"Lilium brownii\" var. \"viridulum\", known as \u767e\u5408 (\"pak hop\"; ), is one of the most prominent edible lilies in China. Its bulbs are large in size and not bitter. They were even exported and sold in the San Francisco Chinatown in the 19th century, available both fresh and dry. A landrace called \u9f8d\u7259\u767e\u5408 () mainly cultivated in Hunan and Jiangxi is especially renowned for its good-quality bulbs.\n\"L. lancifolium\" () is widely cultivated in China, especially in Yixing, Huzhou and Longshan. Its bulbs are slightly bitter.\n\"L. davidii\" var. \"unicolor\" () is mainly cultivated in Lanzhou and its bulbs are valued for sweetness.\nOther edible Chinese lilies include \"L. brownii\" var. \"brownii\", \"L. davidii\" var. \"davidii\", \"L. concolor\", \"L. pensylvanicum\", \"L. distichum\", \"L. martagon\" var. \"pilosiusculum\", \"L. pumilum\", \"L. rosthornii\" and \"L. speciosum\" var. \"gloriosoides\". Researchers have also explored the possibility of using ornamental cultivars as edible lilies.\nThe dried bulbs are commonly used in the south to flavor soup. They may be reconstituted and stir-fried, grated and used to thicken soup, or processed to extract starch. Their texture and taste draw comparisons with the potato, although the individual bulb scales are much smaller.\nThe commonly marketed \"lily\" flower buds, called \"kam cham tsoi\" () in Chinese cuisine, are actually from daylilies, \"Hemerocallis citrina\", or possibly \"H. fulva\". Flowers of the \"H. graminea\" and \"Lilium bulbiferum\" were reported to have been eaten as well, but samples provided by the informant were strictly daylilies and did not include \"L. bulbiferum\".\nLily flowers and bulbs are eaten especially in the summer, for their perceived ability to reduce internal heat. A 19th century English source reported that \"Lily flowers are also said to be efficacious in pulmonary affections, and to have tonic properties\".\nAsiatic lily cultivars are also imported from the Netherlands; the seedling bulbs must be imported from the Netherlands every year.\nThe parts of \"Lilium\" species which are officially listed as food material in Taiwan are the flower and bulbs of \"Lilium lancifolium\", \"Lilium brownii\" var. \"viridulum\", \"Lilium pumilum\" and \"Lilium candidum\".\nJapanese cuisine.\nThe lily bulb or \"yuri-ne\" is sometimes used in Japanese cuisine. It may be most familiar in the present day as an occasional in the chawan-mushi (savoury egg custard), where a few loosened scales of this optional ingredient are found embedded in the \"hot pudding\" of each serving. It could also be used as an ingredient in a clear soup or \"suimono\".\nThe boiled bulb may also be strained into pur\u00e9e for use, as in the sweetened \"kinton\", or \"chakin-shibori\".\nYokan.\nThere is also the \"yuri-y\u014dkan\", one recipe of which calls for combining measures of yuri starch with agar dissolved in water and sugar. This was a specialty of Hamada, Shimane, and the shop established in 1885 became famous for it. Because a certain Viscount Jimy\u014din wrote a waka poem about the confection which mentioned \"hime-yuri\" \"princess lily\", one source stated that the \"hime-yuri\" (usually taken to mean \"L. concolor\") had to have been used, but another source points out that the city of Hamada lies back to back with across a mountain range with Fuchu, Hiroshima which is renowned for its production of \"yama-yuri\" (\"L. auratum\").\nSpecies used.\nCurrent Japanese governmental sources (c.\u20092005) list the following lily species as prominent in domestic consumption: the \"oni yuri\" or tiger lily \"Lilium lancifolium\", the \"kooni yuri\" \"Lilium leichtlinii\" var. \"maximowiczii\", and the gold-banded white \"yama-yuri\" \"L. auratum\".\nBut Japanese sources c. 1895\u20131900, give a top-three list which replaces \"kooni yuri\" with the named from the gaps between the tepals.\nThere is uncertainty regarding which species is meant by the \"hime-yuri\" used as food, because although this is usually the common name for \"L. concolor\" in most up-to-date literature, it used to ambiguously referred to the tiger lily as well, c. 1895\u20131900. The non-tiger-lily \"himeyuri\" is certainly described as quite palatable in the literature at the time, but the extent of exploitation could not have been as significant.\nNorth America.\nThe flower buds and roots of \"Lilium columbianum\" are traditionally gathered and eaten by North American indigenous peoples. Coast Salish, Nuu-chah-nulth and most western Washington peoples steam, boil or pit-cook the bulbs of \"Lilium columbianum\". Bitter or peppery-tasting, they were mostly used as a flavoring, often in soup with meat or fish.\nMedicinal uses.\nTraditional Chinese medicine list the use of the following: \u91ce\u767e\u5408 \"Lilium brownii\", \u767e\u5408 \"Lilium brownii\" var. \"viridulum\", \u6e25\u4e39 \"Lilium concolor\", \u6bdb\u767e\u5408 \"Lilium dauricum\", \u5377\u4e39 \"Lilium lancifolium\", \u5c71\u4e39 \"Lilium pumilum\", \u5357\u5ddd\u767e\u5408 \"Lilium rosthornii\", \u836f\u767e\u5408\"Lilium speciosum\" var. \"gloriosoides\", \u6de1\u9ec4\u82b1\u767e\u5408 \"Lilium sulphureum\".\nIn Taiwan, governmental publications list \"Lilium lancifolium\" Thunb., \"Lilium brownii\" var. \"viridulum\" Baker, \"Lilium pumilum\" DC.\nIn the \"kanp\u014d\" or Chinese medicine as practiced in Japan, the official Japanese governmental pharmacopeia includes the use of lily bulb (known as in traditional pharmacological circles), listing the use of the following species: \"Lilium lancifolium\", \"Lilium brownii\", \"Lilium brownii\" var. \"colchesteri\", \"Lilium pumilum\" The scales flaked off from the bulbs are used, usually steamed.\nIn South Korea, the lilium species which are officially listed for medicinal use are \ucc38\ub098\ub9ac \"Lilium lancifolium\" Thunberg; \ub2f9\ub098\ub9ac \"Lilium brownii\" var. \"viridulun\" Baker.\nIn culture.\nSymbolism.\nIn the Victorian language of flowers, lilies portray love, ardor, and affection for one's loved ones, while orange lilies stand for happiness, love, and warmth.\nWhite lilies have been used since the Romantic era of Japanese literature to symbolize beauty and purity in women, and are a \"de facto\" symbol of the \"yuri\" genre ( translates literally to \"lily\"), which describes the portrayal of intimate love, sex, or emotional connections between women. The term was coined in 1976 by Ito Bungaku, editor of the gay men's magazine \"Barazoku\" (see above), to refer to his female readers. While not all those women were lesbians, and it is unclear whether this was the first instance of the term \"yuri\" in this context, an association of \"yuri\" with lesbianism subsequently developed. In Korea and China, \"lily\" is used as a semantic loan from the Japanese usage to describe female-female romance media, where each use the direct translation of the term \u2013 \"baekhap\" (\ubc31\ud569) in Korea and \"b\u01ceih\u00e9\" (\u767e\u5408) in China.\nLilies are the flowers most commonly used at funerals, where they symbolically signify that the soul of the deceased has been restored to the state of innocence. \n\"Lilium formosanum\", or Taiwanese lily, is called \"the flower of broken bowl\" () by the elderly members of the Hakka ethnic group. They believe that because this lily grows near bodies of clean water, harming the lily may damage the environment, just like breaking the bowls that people rely on. A different viewpoint proposes that parents discourage kids from picking lilies by informing them of the possible repercussions, like their dinner bowls breaking if they harm the flower. The indigenous Rukai people who call this same species \"bariangalay\" consider it as a symbol of bravery and perseverance.\nIn Western Christianity, Madonna lily or \"Lilium candidum\" has been associated with the Virgin Mary since at least the Medieval Era. Medieval and Renaissance depictions of the Virgin Mary, especially at the Annunciation, often show her with these flowers. Madonna lilies are also commonly included in depictions of Christ's resurrection. \"Lilium longiflorum\", the Easter lily, is a symbol of Easter, and \"Lilium candidum\", the Madonna lily, carries a great deal of symbolic value in many cultures. See the articles for more information.\nIn Ancient Minoan Crete and Cyclades cultures, lilies are depicted associated with an unknown religious meaning. The crown from the \"Priest-King\" fresco at Knossos is covered with white lilies while a depiction of a shrine in the Xest\u00e9 3 house Akrotiri is covered in red lilies.\nHeraldry.\n\"Lilium bulbiferum\" has long been recognised as a symbol of the Orange Order in Northern Ireland.\n\"Lilium mackliniae\" is the state flower of Manipur. \"Lilium michauxii\", the Carolina lily, is the official state flower of North Carolina. Idyllwild, California, hosts the Lemon Lily Festival, which celebrates \"Lilium parryi\". \"Lilium philadelphicum\" is the floral emblem of Saskatchewan province in Canada, and is on the flag of Saskatchewan.\nOther plants referred to as lilies.\nLily of the valley, flame lilies, daylilies, water lilies and spider lilies are symbolically important flowers commonly referred to as lilies, but they are not in the genus \"Lilium\".\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73422", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73422", "title": "The Day the Earth Stood Still", "text": "1951 science fiction film by Robert Wise\nThe Day the Earth Stood Still is a 1951 American science fiction film from 20th Century Fox, produced by Julian Blaustein and directed by Robert Wise. It stars Michael Rennie, Patricia Neal, Hugh Marlowe, Sam Jaffe, Billy Gray, Frances Bavier and Lock Martin. The screenplay was written by Edmund H. North, based on the 1940 science fiction short story \"Farewell to the Master\" by Harry Bates. The film score was composed by Bernard Herrmann. Set in the Cold War during the early stages of the nuclear arms race, the storyline involves a humanoid alien visitor who comes to Earth, accompanied by a powerful robot, to deliver an important message that will affect the entire human race. In 1995, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlot.\nAfter a flying saucer lands in the National Mall in Washington, D.C., the United States Army quickly surrounds it with soldiers and tanks. A humanoid in a spacesuit emerges, announcing that he comes \"in peace and with good will\". While the alien is opening a small metallic device, he is shot and wounded by a nervous soldier. A large robot emerges from the saucer and quickly disintegrates the soldiers' weapons, including tanks. The alien, Klaatu, orders the robot, Gort, to desist. Klaatu explains that the now-broken device was a gift for the President of the United States \"to study life on the other planets\". The injured Klaatu is taken to Walter Reed Army Hospital for surgery, after which he uses a salve to quickly heal his wound. The Army is unable to open or blast its way into the saucer. Gort stands outside, silent and unmoving.\nThe President's secretary, Mr. Harley, visits Klaatu, who relates that his message must be delivered to all world leaders simultaneously. Harley says this is impossible in the current world situation. When Klaatu proposes spending time among ordinary humans to better understand their \"unreasoning suspicions and attitudes\", Harley rejects the proposal, and Klaatu remains locked in his hospital room.\nEscaping, Klaatu acquires a suit and a valise from Walter Reed Hospital; the laundry ticket on the jacket sleeve says \"Maj. Carpenter\", and the initials on the valise are L.M.C. He rents a room at a boarding house, saying that his name is Carpenter. Among the residents are a young widow, Helen Benson, and her son, Bobby. Helen's boyfriend, Tom Stevens, becomes jealous of the stranger.\nBobby takes Klaatu on a tour of the city, including the Lincoln Memorial and a visit to his father's grave in Arlington National Cemetery; Klaatu learns that most of the dead are soldiers killed in wars. When Klaatu asks Bobby, \"Who is the greatest living person?\", Bobby suggests Professor Barnhardt. Visiting the scientist's home, they find him away. Peering through a window, Klaatu sees Barnhardt's blackboard is covered with equations (an attempt to solve the three-body problem). To \"leave a calling card\", Klaatu opens the locked French windows and enters the room to correct the equation, giving his contact information to the housekeeper.\nThat evening, a government agent escorts Klaatu to Barnhardt. Klaatu tells Barnhardt the people of other planets are concerned about Earth's aggressiveness now that humanity has developed rudimentary atomic power. If his message is ignored, Earth could be \"eliminated\". Barnhardt agrees to gather scientists from around the world at the saucer; he suggests Klaatu provide a demonstration of his power beforehand. Unaware Bobby is following, Klaatu returns to his spaceship. Bobby watches as Gort knocks out two soldiers so Klaatu can reenter the saucer. Running home, Bobby tells Helen, who does not believe him, but Tom is suspicious. The next day, starting at noon East Coast time, all electrical equipment on Earth ceases to function for 30 minutes, except for essential services such as hospitals and aircraft in flight.\nLearning that Bobby followed him the previous night, Klaatu visits Helen at work, reveals his mission, and asks that she not betray him. Helen asks Tom to keep Klaatu's secret, but he refuses to listen, already in the process of alerting the military. Hoping that Barnhardt can hide Klaatu until that evening, Helen and Klaatu rush to Barnhardt in a taxi. Klaatu instructs Helen that if anything should happen to him, she must say to Gort \"Klaatu barada nikto.\" The Army tracks them in their taxi. Klaatu is shot and killed; his body is moved to a police station cell. Rushing to the saucer, Helen recites the phrase to Gort. Gort then carries her into the saucer. Gort retrieves Klaatu's body and revives him inside the saucer, though Klaatu tells Helen his revival is only temporary.\nDeparting the spaceship with Klaatu and Gort, Helen joins Barnhardt among the gathered scientists. Klaatu tells the scientists that an interplanetary organization has created a police force of invincible robots like Gort. \"In matters of aggression, we have given them absolute power over us.\" Klaatu concludes, \"Your choice is simple: join us and live in peace, or pursue your present course and face obliteration.\" Klaatu and Gort then depart in the saucer.\nCast.\nTop broadcast journalists of their time, Elmer Davis, H.V. Kaltenborn, Drew Pearson, and Gabriel Heatter, had cameo roles. Spencer Tracy and Claude Rains originally were considered for the part of Klaatu.\nMetaphors.\nIn a 1995 interview, producer Julian Blaustein explained that Joseph Breen, the film censor installed by the Motion Picture Association of America at the Twentieth Century Fox studios, balked at the portrayal of Klaatu's resurrection and limitless power. At the behest of the MPAA, a line was written into the script; when Helen asks Klaatu whether Gort has unlimited power over life and death, Klaatu explains that Gort has only revived him temporarily: \"that power is reserved to the Almighty Spirit.\" Of the elements that he added to Klaatu's character, screenwriter Edmund North said, \"It was my private little joke. I never discussed this angle with Blaustein or Wise because I didn't want it expressed. I had originally hoped that the Christ comparison would be subliminal.\"\nThat the question even came up in an interview is proof enough that such comparisons did not remain subliminal, but they are subtle enough so that it is not immediately obvious to all viewers that those elements were intended to compare Klaatu to Jesus Christ. When Klaatu escapes from the hospital, he steals the clothing of a Maj. Carpenter. This as an allusion to carpentry as the profession the New Testament says Jesus learned from Joseph, his adoptive father. His previous actions are misunderstood, and he eventually is killed by military authority. At the end of the film, Klaatu, having been restored to life, ascends into the (night) sky. Other parallels include his coming to Earth with a message for all mankind, his befriending of a child, possessing wisdom and specialized scientific knowledge beyond those of any human being, and people being given a sign of his power. At the start of the film, one of the British radar technicians, upon observing the speed of Klaatu's spaceship, is heard to exclaim, \"Holy Christmas!\".\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nProducer Julian Blaustein originally set out to make a film under the working titles of \"Farewell to the Master\" and \"Journey to the World\" which illustrated the fear and suspicion that characterized the early Cold War and Atomic Age. He reviewed more than two hundred science fiction short stories and novels in search of a storyline that could be used because this film genre was well suited for a metaphorical discussion of such grave issues. Studio head Darryl F. Zanuck gave the go-ahead for this project, and Blaustein hired Edmund North to write the screenplay based on elements from Harry Bates's 1940 short story \"Farewell to the Master\". The revised final screenplay was completed on February 21, 1951. Science fiction writer Raymond F. Jones worked as an uncredited adviser.\nPre-production.\nThe set was designed by Thomas Little and Claude Carpenter. They collaborated with the architect Frank Lloyd Wright for the design of the spacecraft. Paul Laffoley has suggested that the futuristic interior was inspired by Wright's Johnson Wax Headquarters, completed in 1936. Laffoley quotes Wright and his attempt in designing the exterior: \"...to imitate an experimental substance that I have heard about which acts like living tissue. If cut, the rift would appear to heal like a wound, leaving a continuous surface with no scar.\"\nScience consultant.\nSamuel Herrick, an astrophysicist at UCLA, developed the equations on Prof. Barnhardt's blackboard. \"Herrick reasoned that an equation related to celestial mechanics would be most appropriate, specifically an equation related to his own work on the \"three-body problem\" in astronavigation.\"\nFilming.\nPrincipal outdoor photography was shot on the 20th Century Fox sound stages and on its studio back lot (now located in Century City, California), with a second unit shooting background and other scenes in Washington, D.C., and at Fort George G. Meade in Maryland. The shooting schedule was from April 9 to May 23, 1951, and the primary actors never traveled to Washington to make the film. Director Robert Wise indicated in the DVD commentary that the United States Department of Defense refused participation in the film based on a reading of the script. The military equipment shown, however, came from the 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment then stationed at Fort Meade which supplied the vehicles, equipment, and soldiers for the segments depicting Army operations. One of the film's tanks bears the \"Brave Rifles\" insignia of the 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment.\nThe robot Gort was played by Lock Martin, who worked as an usher at Grauman's Chinese Theatre and stood seven feet and seven inches tall. Not accustomed to a confining, heat-inducing costume, he worked carefully while wearing the two oversized, laced up, foamed neoprene suits for the illusion of a seamless metallic Gort. Wise decided Martin's on-screen shooting time would be limited to half-hour intervals, so Martin, with his generally weak constitution, would face no more than minor discomfort. These segments, in turn, were then edited together into the film's final print.\nIn a commentary track on DVD, interviewed by fellow director Nicholas Meyer, Wise said he wanted the film to appear as realistic and believable as possible, to push the core message against armed conflict in the real world. The original title is \"The Day the World Stops\". Blaustein said his aim was to promote a \"strong United Nations\".\nHerrmann's score.\nThe music score was composed by Bernard Herrmann in August 1951, and is the first film score he composed after moving from New York to Hollywood. Herrmann chose unusual instrumentation for the film: violin, cello, and bass (all three electric), two theremin electronic instruments (played by Dr. Samuel Hoffman and Paul Shure), two Hammond organs, Fox studio's Wurlitzer organ, three vibraphones, two glockenspiels, marimba, tam-tam, two bass drums, three sets of timpani, two pianos, celesta, two harps, one horn, three trumpets, three trombones, and four tubas. Herrmann's advances in film scoring included Unison organs, tubas, piano, and bass drum, staggered tritone movement, and glissando in theremins, as well as exploitation of the dissonance between D and E-flat and experimentation with unusual overdubbing and tape-reversal techniques. In using the theremin, Herrmann made an early foray into electronic music, one year before Karlheinz Stockhausen and three years before Edgard Var\u00e8se.\nMusic and soundtrack.\n20th Century Fox later reused the Bernard Herrmann title theme in the original pilot episode of Irwin Allen's 1965 TV series \"Lost in Space\"; the music was also used extensively in Allen's \"Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea\" TV series in various episodes. Danny Elfman noted \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\"'s score inspired his interest in film composing, and made him a fan of Herrmann.\nCritical reception.\n\"Variety\" praised the documentary style: \"the yarn is told interestingly enough and imbued with sufficient science-fiction lures and suspense so that only seldom does its moralistic wordiness get in the way... Cast, although secondary to the story, works well\". \"Harrison's Reports\" wrote: \"Very good! It is by far the best of the science-fiction pictures yet produced. It holds one's interest undiminished from start to finish and, although the theme is admittedly fantastic, one is made to feel as if he is seeing a real-life occurrence because of the expert handling of the subject matter and the extremely fine special effects work.\" The \"Los Angeles Times\" praised the film's seriousness, though it also found \"certain subversive elements\". Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" dismissed the film as \"tepid entertainment\" and described Gort as \"oddly unmenacing\".\n\"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" was moderately successful when released, accruing US$ in distributors' U.S. and Canadian rentals, making it the year's 52nd biggest earner. \"Rentals\" refers to the distributor/studio's share of the box office gross, which, according to Gebert, is roughly half of the money generated by ticket sales.\n\"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" earned more plaudits in other countries: the Hollywood Foreign Press Association gave the filmmakers a special Golden Globe Award for \"promoting international understanding\". Bernard Herrmann's score also received a nomination at the Golden Globes. The French magazine \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\" was impressed, its contributor Pierre Kast called it \"almost literally stunning\" and praised its \"moral relativism\".\nLegacy.\n\"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" was selected for preservation in the United States Library of Congress's National Film Registry. In 2001, it was ranked number 82 on the American Film Institute's AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills, a list of America's most heart-pounding films. It placed number 67 on AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers, a list of America's most inspiring films. In June 2008, the American Film Institute revealed its AFI's 10 Top 10\u00a0\u2013 the best ten films in ten \"classic\" American film genres\u00a0\u2013 after polling more than 1,500 people from the creative community. \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" was acknowledged as the fifth best film in the science fiction genre. In 2004, the film was selected by \"The New York Times\" as one of \"The Best 1000 Movies Ever Made\".\nRingo Starr brought the imagery of the film back into popular culture by using a modified scene of the ship and Klaatu for the cover of his 1974 album \"Goodnight Vienna\". Lou Cannon and Colin Powell believed the film inspired Ronald Reagan to discuss uniting against an alien invasion when meeting Mikhail Gorbachev in 1985. Two years later, Reagan told the United Nations, \"I occasionally think how quickly our differences worldwide would vanish if we were facing an alien threat from outside this world.\" The film is playing in the opening scene of the first episode of \"\" when Captain Pike refers to it as a \"classic\". American rock musician Willie Nile released an album entitled \"The Day The Earth Stood Still\" in 2021. The album's title track was inspired by the deserted streets of New York City during the COVID-19 pandemic, and contains the \"Klaatu Barada Nikto\" phrase in its chorus.\n\"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" is now considered one of the best films released in 1951. \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" is in Arthur C. Clarke's list of the 12 best science fiction films of all time. The film holds a 97% rating at the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes based on 57 reviews, with an average rating of 8.10/10. The consensus states, \"Socially minded yet entertaining, \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" imparts its moral of peace and understanding without didacticism.\" Tony Magistrale describes the film as one of the best examples of early techno-horror.\nAdaptations.\nThe film was dramatized as a radio play on January 4, 1954, for the \"Lux Radio Theatre\"; Michael Rennie reprised his lead role as Klaatu with actress Jean Peters as Helen Benson. This production was later re-broadcast on the \"Hollywood Radio Theater\", the re-titled \"Lux Radio Theatre\", which aired on the Armed Forces Radio Service.\nThe 2008 remake \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" was directed by Scott Derrickson and stars Keanu Reeves as Klaatu. Rather than leaving to humans the chance to collaborate, the remake rests on Klaatu's decision whether to let humanity be destroyed or saved.\n\"Klaatu barada nikto\".\nSince the release of the film, the phrase \"Klaatu barada nikto\" has appeared repeatedly in fiction and in popular culture. The Robot Hall of Fame described it as \"one of the most famous commands in science fiction\", and Frederick S. Clarke of \"Cinefantastique\" called it in 1970 \"the most famous phrase ever spoken by an extraterrestrial\".\nPatricia Neal had a problem speaking the phrase, though she was proud of the film overall. \"I do think it's the best science fiction film ever made, although I admit that I sometimes had a difficult time keeping a straight face. Michael would patiently watch me bite my lips to avoid giggling and ask, with true British reserve, 'Is that the way you intend to play it?'\"\nEdmund H. North, who wrote \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\", also created the alien language used in the film, including the iconic phrase \"Klaatu barada nikto.\" The official spelling for the phrase comes directly from the script and provides insight as to its proper pronunciation. No translation was given in the film. Philosophy professor Aeon J. Skoble speculates the famous phrase is a \"safe-word\" which is part of a fail-safe feature used during diplomatic missions such as the one Klaatu and Gort make to Earth. With the use of the safe-word, Gort's deadly force can be deactivated in the event the robot is mistakenly triggered into a defensive posture. Skoble observes that the theme has evolved into a \"staple of science fiction that the machines charged with protecting us from ourselves will misuse or abuse their power.\"\n\"Fantastic Films\" explored the meaning of \"Klaatu barada nikto\" in a 1978 article titled \"The Language of Klaatu\". The article, written by Tauna Le Marbe, who is listed as its \"alien linguistics editor\", attempts to translate all the alien words Klaatu used throughout the film. In the article, the literal translation for Klaatu barada nikto was \"Stop Barbarism (I have) death, bind\" and the free translation was \"I die, repair me, do not retaliate.\"\nThe documentary \"Decoding \"Klaatu Barada Nikto\": Science Fiction as Metaphor\" examined the phrase \"Klaatu barada nikto\" with some of the people involved in the production of \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\". Robert Wise, the director of the film, conveyed an account of Edmund North telling him, \"Well, it's just something I kind of cooked up. I thought it sounded good.\" Billy Gray, who played Bobby Benson in the film, said he believed the message was coming from Klaatu and that \"Barada Nikto must mean... save Earth.\"\nFlorence Blaustein, widow of the producer Julian Blaustein, said North had to pass a street called \"Baroda\" every day going to work and indicated \"I think that's how that was born.\" The film historian Steven Jay Rubin recalled an interview he had with North when he asked the question, \"What is the direct translation of Klaatu Barada Nikto, and Edmund North said to me 'There's hope for Earth, if the scientists can be reached'.\" When director Robert Wise was awarded the American Film Institute's Lifetime Achievement Award in 1997, he ended his acceptance speech with it, which in that circumstance meant \"Thank you from the bottom of my heart.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73423", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73423", "title": "Dead Birds (1963 film)", "text": "American documentary film by Robert Gardner\nDead Birds is a 1963 American documentary film by Robert Gardner about the ritual warfare cycle of the Dugum Dani people who live in the Baliem Valley in present-day Highland Papua province (then a part of Papua province known as \"Irian Jaya\") on the western half of the island of New Guinea in Indonesia. The film presents footage of battles between the Willihiman-Wallalua confederation (Wiligima-Alula) of Gutelu alliance (Kurulu) and the Wittaia alliance (Wita Waya) with scenes of the funeral of a small boy killed by a raiding party, the women's work that goes on while battles continue, and the wait for enemy to appear. In 1964 the film received the Grand Prize \"Marzocco d'Oro\" at the 5th (\"International Ethnographic and Sociological Film Festival of the Peoples\") in Florence, Italy, the Robert J. Flaherty Award given by the City College of New York, and was a featured film at the Melbourne Film Festival (now Melbourne International Film Festival). In 1998, \"Dead Birds\" was included in the annual selection of 25 motion pictures added to the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress, being deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" and recommended for preservation. \"Dead Birds\" has come to hold canonical status among ethnographic films.\nSynopsis.\nThe film's theme is the encounter that all people must have with death, as told in a Dugum Dani myth of the origins of death that bookends the film. The film uses a nonlinear narrative structure of parallel or braided narrative that traces three individuals through a season of three deaths and one near-death as relayed by an expository voiceover that describes scenes and the thoughts of the film's protagonists. The film's establishing shot, an extreme long shot, tilts and pans over the Baliem valley from left to right, following the flight of a bird across the village, its cultivated fields, and the fighting ground. A voiceover describes the great race between a bird and a snake which was to determine the lives of human beings: Should men shed their skins and live forever like snakes, or die like birds? The bird won: the fate of humans is death. Abruptly the sounds and sights of a funeral envelope the screen. Weyak, an adult man, farms, guards the frontier, and creates a complex knotted strap that will be presented to another at a funeral as Laca (or Laka), his wife, harvests sweet potatoes and goes to make salt with other women of the community. The small boy Pua tends pigs, explores nature, and plays with his friends. Enemy announce their intentions and the men come to the fighting ground, while the women continue to the salt grounds and Pua plays and tends his pigs. One fighter is wounded, it begins to rain, and the battle ends. \"Dead Birds\" now focuses on the relationship of the living to the ghosts and the rituals that placate them and keep them away from the village. As a pig ritual is planned and pigs are slaughtered, news comes that Pua's little friend Weyakhe has been killed. The next sequence details Weyakhe's funeral ceremony. Laca receives the funeral strap: Weyak does not want to touch it. He heads to his guard tower. In the distance, the enemy dance to celebrate this victory over Weyak's group. The victory does not last long, for Weyak's people kill a man who tried to steal a pig. Now the victors celebrate with their own dance. Scenes of the celebration are intercut with those of Weyak completing his weaving. As dusk closes in the camera and voiceover lingers on the celebration, on birds, and death.\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRobert Gardner sought to film the last days of indigenous warfare in western New Guinea and accordingly organized the Harvard-Peabody Expedition (1961\u20131965) which brought together a multidisciplinary team to collect data on various aspects of war and culture in the Baliem Valley of western New Guinea. In addition to filmmaker Gardner, team members included Jan Broekhuijse (anthropologist), Karl Heider (anthropologist), Peter Matthiesson (naturalist), and Michael Rockefeller (sound). Gardner carried out the filming from the team's arrival in early 1961 while Rockefeller captured samples of wild sound for later use, as the filming did not use the then-new synchronous sound technology. Gardner composed the film narrative and edited the raw footage into the film after his return to the United States in August, 1961. The sound used in the film was post-synchronized from Rockefeller's samples along with the added voiceover and composed narrative of the film. In line with similar works of ethnographic film at this time, some of the scenes in the film were composed out of shots filmed at different times.\nCompanion works.\nResearch conducted for the film and in conjunction with it resulted in several companion works and related publications by Gardner and members of the Harvard-Peabody Expedition. Robert Gardner and Karl Heider's book \"Gardens of War\" detailed the filmmaking and aspects of Dani culture relating to the film's themes. A recent work by Gardner and Charles Warren described the making of this film. Karl G. Heider authored \"The Dani of West Irian: an Ethnographic Companion to the Film Dead Birds\", ethnographic monographs, and film shorts. Peter Matthiessen separately wrote about the Dugum Dani and Baliem Valley in his book \"Under the Mountain Wall: a Chronicle of Two Seasons in the Stone Age.\"\nBackground.\n\"Dead Birds\" reflects the concerns of anthropology emergent by the early 1960s relating to the practice of warfare in non-state level societies. The film also fits the-then dominant paradigm of structural-functionalism that emphasized demonstrating how diverse characteristics fit into the larger pattern of the culture. \"Dead Birds\" has been taken to exemplify the approach of anthropological holism as it knits together small and seemingly insignificant moments and actions, with those of great cultural significance.\nRelease.\nThe film was first shown at an evening meeting of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences held at the Cohen Arts Center at Tufts University, Boston, on Nov. 13, 1963. It was first distributed by Contemporary Films at 267 West 25th Street, New York.\nReception.\nSince the film's release, some reviewers have praised filmmaker Gardner's presentation as poetic and cinematographic, while others have criticized it as lacking a clear scientific and ethnographic focus. Reviewers have frequently remarked on its evocation of a Dani fable and its supporting shots of birds. The most-noted visual is the long take of a bird soaring over the Baliem Valley that is the film's establishing shot. Reviewers point out that the film foregrounds Dugum Dani understandings of the world. Others complained that the film gave short shrift to data on the culture such as the kinship system and food production. Though stylistically impressive, \"Dead Birds\" has been criticized with respect to its authenticity. The characters who speak in the film are never subtitled, and even then the voice itself is not always what it seems. What the audience perceives as Weyak's voice is actually a post-filming dub of Karl G. Heider speaking Dani. Gardner himself did not speak Dani, and so all his interpretations of events are second-hand. The battle sequences are made up of many shots taken during different battles and stitched together to give the appearance of temporal unity. The apparent continuity stems from the post-synchronized sound, and in fact all the sound in the film is post-synched. Heider, himself, admits in his book \"Ethnographic Film\", that some of the battle films were edited out of sequence, intercut with a scene of the women at the salt pool, which was filmed at a different time than the battle sequences.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "73424", "revid": "6817", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73424", "title": "R.A. Lafferty", "text": ""}
{"id": "73425", "revid": "1318652138", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73425", "title": "The Deer Hunter", "text": "1978 film directed by Michael Cimino\nThe Deer Hunter is a 1978 American epic war drama film co-written and directed by Michael Cimino about a trio of Slavic-American steelworkers whose lives are upended by fighting in the Vietnam War. The soldiers are played by Robert De Niro, Christopher Walken and John Savage, with John Cazale (in his final role), Meryl Streep and George Dzundza in supporting roles. The story takes place in Clairton, Pennsylvania (a working-class town on the Monongahela River south of Pittsburgh) and in Vietnam.\nThe film is based in part on an unproduced screenplay called \"The Man Who Came to Play\" by Louis A. Garfinkle and Quinn K. Redeker about Las Vegas and Russian roulette. Producer Michael Deeley, who bought the script, hired Cimino, who, with Deric Washburn, rewrote the script, taking the Russian roulette element and placing it in the Vietnam War. The film went over budget and over schedule, costing $15 million. Its production company EMI Films released it in other territories, while Universal Pictures handled its distribution in the United States and Canada.\n\"The Deer Hunter\" received acclaim from critics and audiences, with praise for Cimino's direction, the performances of its cast, its screenplay, realistic themes and tones, and cinematography. It was also successful at the box office, grossing $49 million. At the 51st Academy Awards, it was nominated for nine Academy Awards, and won five: Best Picture, Best Director (for Cimino), Best Supporting Actor (for Walken), Best Sound and Best Film Editing. It is Meryl Streep's first Academy Award nomination (for Best Supporting Actress).\n\"The Deer Hunter\" has been included on lists of the best films ever made, including being named the 53rd-greatest American film of all time by the American Film Institute in 2007 in their 10th Anniversary Edition of the AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies list. It was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress in 1996, as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nThree friends in the Slavic-American community of Clairton, Pennsylvania\u2014Mike Vronsky, Steven Pushkov and Nick Chevotarevich\u2014work in a steel mill and hunt deer with their co-workers Stanley (\"Stan\") and Peter \"Axel\" Axelrod, and their bartender friend John Welsh. The three have enlisted for the Vietnam War. Steven is marrying Angela Ludhjduravic, who was secretly impregnated by another man. The withdrawn Mike and amiable Nick are close friends who live together and both love Linda, though she appears closer to Nick; he allows her to stay in their house while they are away to escape her abusive alcoholic father. After catching the bouquet at Steven and Angela's wedding, Linda accepts Nick's spontaneous marriage proposal. The three also meet a traumatized Green Beret, who dismisses them. Nick implores Mike to promise that he return from Vietnam. Mike, Nick and their friends go on a final hunting trip where Mike kills a deer with \"one shot\", a feat Nick described as impossible.\nIn Vietnam, Mike, now a Green Beret himself, coincidentally crosses paths with Nick and Steven, who land in a village during an air assault mission. The three are soon imprisoned by the Viet Cong in a cage along a river and forced to participate in games of Russian roulette while the jailers wager. Steven fires his round into the ceiling and is forced into a cage with rats and previous victims of the jailers. To escape, Mike convinces their captors to increase the stakes by loading three bullets into the revolver rather than the standard one. When the next two chambers luckily fall on empty, Mike and Nick turn the gun on their captors, killing two and overpowering the others. Although Nick is wounded in the leg, they rescue Steven and escape.\nThe trio floats down the river on a felled tree trunk, but Nick and Steven are weak from their wounds. They are found by an American helicopter. Nick boards and is rescued, but Steven falls back into the river while trying to hold onto the helicopter skids, and Mike drops down to help him. Steven breaks both of his legs on the river\u2019s rock bottom, so Mike carries him until they join refugees and a South Vietnamese Army convoy. All three of them end up in Saigon.\nNick is treated at a U.S. military hospital. When released, now suffering from PTSD, Nick wanders into a gambling den where people are playing Russian roulette. French businessman Julien Grinda forces him to come inside. Upset, Nick interrupts the game, pulling the trigger on a player and himself then assaulting the bouncer. Mike happens to be a spectator, but Nick hurriedly leaves with Julien, who decides to bankroll him in future games.\nMike returns home, but remains traumatized and avoids a welcome-home party. He learns that Nick has deserted, and Angela has slipped into near-catatonia following the birth of her child and return of Steven. On a hunting trip with his friends, Mike stops himself from shooting a deer and returns to the cabin, finding Stan cavalierly threatening Axel with a pistol. Mike takes it, inserts a single round, and triggers an empty chamber at Stan's head.\nMike repeatedly stays at a hotel instead of his home. Linda follows him each time, and they eventually consummate their relationship. The next day he visits Steven at a veterans' hospital, finding that both of his legs and one arm have been amputated, and he is subsequently refusing to come home. He shows Mike that he has been regularly receiving large sums of cash from Saigon. Mike realizes that Nick is the source of these payments as well as the father of Angela\u2019s son, and convinces Steven to return to Angela.\nMike returns to Saigon, which is now in a state of chaos shortly before its fall, to find Nick. He finds Julien and persuades him to take him to another gambling den. There he locates Nick, who has become a professional in Russian roulette and fails to recognize Mike due to drug addiction. Mike attempts to bring Nick back to reason, but Nick maintains unspirited apathy, even spitting in Mike's face. Mike resorts to entering in a game with Nick; as he describes their hunting trips, Nick seems to recall Mike's \"one shot\" mantra about the deer and smiles before pulling the trigger, killing himself.\nMike, Steven, and their friends and loved ones attend Nick's funeral. As they convene at the bar for breakfast, John begins to sing \"God Bless America\" to lighten the mood, and all join in.\nCast.\nAlthough Deeley was pleased with the revised script, he was still concerned with being able to sell the film. He later wrote, \"We still had to get millions out of a major studio, as well as convince our markets around the world that they should buy it before it was finished. I needed someone with the caliber of Robert De Niro.\" Deeley felt that De Niro was \"the right age, apparently tough as hell, and immensely talented\".\nDe Niro, who knew many actors in New York, brought Streep and Cazale to the attention of Cimino and Deeley. De Niro also accompanied Cimino to scout locations for the steel-mill sequence, and rehearsed with the actors to use the workshops as a bonding process.\nEach of the six principal male characters carried a photo in his back pocket depicting them all together as children to enhance the sense of camaraderie among them. Cimino instructed the props department to fashion complete photo IDs for each of them, including driver licenses and medical cards, to enhance each actor's sense of his character.\nProduction.\nPreproduction.\nThere has been considerable debate and controversy about how \"The Deer Hunter\" was initially developed and written. Director and cowriter Michael Cimino, writer Deric Washburn and producers Barry Spikings and Michael Deeley all have different versions of how the film came to be. \nDevelopment.\nIn 1968, record company EMI formed a new company, EMI Films, which by the mid 70s came under the control of Barry Spikings and Deeley. Deeley purchased the first draft of a spec script called \"The Man Who Came to Play\", written by Louis A. Garfinkle and Quinn K. Redeker, for $19,000. It was about people who go to Las Vegas to play Russian roulette. Deeley later wrote, \"The screenplay had struck me as brilliant, but it wasn't complete. The trick would be to find a way to turn a very clever piece of writing into a practical, realizable film.\" When the film was being planned during the mid-1970s, the Vietnam War was still a taboo subject with all major Hollywood studios. According to Deeley, the standard response was that \"no American would want to see a picture about Vietnam\".\nAfter consulting with various Hollywood agents, Deeley found Cimino and was impressed by Cimino's television commercial work and his crime film \"Thunderbolt and Lightfoot\" (1974). Cimino was confident that he could further develop the principal characters of \"The Man Who Came to Play\" without losing the essence of the original. According to Deeley, Cimino questioned the need for the Russian-roulette element of the script, but Redeker fervently fought to preserve it. Cimino and Deeley discussed the work that would be needed in the first part of the script, and Cimino believed that he could develop the stories of the main characters in the film's first twenty minutes.\nScreenplay.\nCimino worked for six weeks with Deric Washburn on the script. Cimino and Washburn had previously collaborated with Steven Bochco on the screenplay for \"Silent Running\" (1972). According to producer Barry Spikings, Cimino said that he wanted to work with Washburn again. According to Deeley, he heard from an office rumor that Washburn was contracted by Cimino to work on the script. \"Whether Cimino hired Washburn as his sub-contractor or as a co-writer was constantly being obfuscated,\" wrote Deeley, \"and there were some harsh words between them later on, or so I was told.\"\nCimino's claim\nAccording to Cimino, he would call Washburn while on the road scouting for locations and feed him notes on dialogue and story. After reviewing Washburn's draft, Cimino said, \"I came back and read it and I just could not believe what I read. It was like it was written by somebody who was... mentally deranged.\" Cimino confronted Washburn at the Sunset Marquis in LA about the draft, and Washburn supposedly replied that he could not take the pressure and had to go home. So Cimino fired Washburn. Cimino later claimed to have written the entire screenplay. Washburn's response to Cimino's claim was, \"It's all nonsense. It's lies. I didn't have a single drink the entire time I was working on the script.\"\nWashburn's claim\nAccording to Washburn, he and Cimino spent three days together in Los Angeles at the Sunset Marquis hammering out the plot. The script eventually went through several drafts, evolving into a story with three distinct acts. Washburn did not interview any veterans to write \"The Deer Hunter\", nor did he do any research. \"I had a month, that was it,\" he explained. \"The clock was ticking. Write the fucking script! But all I had to do was watch TV. Those combat cameramen in Vietnam were out there in the field with the guys. I mean, they had stuff that you wouldn't dream of seeing about Iraq.\"\nWhen Washburn was finished, he says, Cimino and Joann Carelli, the latter an associate producer on \"The Deer Hunter\" who went on to produce two more of Cimino's films, took him to dinner at a cheap restaurant near the Sunset Strip. He recalled, \"We finished, and Joann looks at me across the table, and she says, 'Well, Deric, it's fuck-off time.' I was fired. It was a classic case: you get a dummy, get him to write the goddamn thing, tell him to go fuck himself, put your name on the thing, and he'll go away. I was so tired, I didn't care. I'd been working 20 hours a day for a month. I got on the plane the next day, and I went back to Manhattan and my carpenter job.\"\nDeeley's reaction to the revised script\nDeeley felt that the revised script, now called \"The Deer Hunter\", broke fresh ground for the project. The protagonist in the Redeker/Garfinkle script, Merle, was an individual who sustained a bad injury in active service and was damaged psychologically by his violent experiences, but was nevertheless a tough character with strong nerves and guts. Cimino and Washburn's revised script distilled the three aspects of Merle's personality and separated them into three distinct characters. They became three old friends who grew up in the same small industrial town and worked in the same steel mill, and in due course, were drafted to serve in Vietnam. In the original script, the roles of Merle (later renamed Mike) and Nick were reversed in the last half of the film. Nick returns home to Linda, while Mike remains in Vietnam, sends money home to help Steven, and meets his tragic fate at the Russian-roulette table.\nA Writers' Guild arbitration process awarded Washburn sole \"Screenplay by\" credit. Garfinkle and Redeker were given a shared \"Story by\" credit with Cimino and Washburn. Deeley felt that the story credits for Garfinkle and Redeker \"did them less than justice\". Cimino contested the results of the arbitration. \"In their Nazi wisdom,\" added Cimino, \"[they] didn't give me the credit because I would be producer, director and writer.\" All four writers\u2014Cimino, Washburn, Garfinkle and Redeker\u2014received an Oscar nomination for Best Original Screenplay for the film.\nFilming.\n\"The Deer Hunter\" began principal photography on June 20, 1977. It was the first feature film depicting the Vietnam War to be filmed in Thailand. All scenes were shot on location. \"There was discussion about shooting the film on a backlot, but the material demanded more realism,\" says Spikings. The cast and crew watched large amounts of news footage from the war to ensure authenticity. The film was shot in six months. The scenes of Clairton, Pennsylvania, comprise footage that was shot in eight towns in three states: West Virginia, Pennsylvania and Ohio.&lt;ref name=\"mL/Dh\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The film's initial budget was $8.5 million.\nMeryl Streep accepted the role of the \"vague, stock girlfriend\" to remain for the duration of filming with John Cazale, who had been diagnosed with lung cancer. De Niro had spotted Streep in the stage production of \"The Cherry Orchard\" and suggested that she play his girlfriend Linda. Meryl Streep wrote all of her lines.&lt;ref name=\"fnn/MS77c\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Streep is said to have accepted the role to primarily be with Cazale.&lt;ref name=\"9h/streep-gummer\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nBefore the beginning of principal photography, Deeley met with the film's appointed line producer Robert Relyea, whom Deeley hired after meeting him on the set of \"Bullitt\" (1968) and being impressed with his experience. However, Relyea declined the job, refusing to disclose his reason. Deeley suspected that Relyea sensed in director Cimino something that would have made production difficult. As a result, Cimino was acting without the day-to-day supervision of a producer.\nBecause Deeley was busy overseeing the production of Sam Peckinpah's \"Convoy\" (1978), he hired John Peverall to oversee Cimino's shoot. Peverall's expertise with budgeting and scheduling made him a natural successor to Relyea, and Peverall knew enough about the picture to be elevated to the status of producer. \"John is a straightforward Cornishman who had worked his way up to become a production supervisor,\" wrote Deeley, \"and we employed him as EMI's watchman on certain pictures.\"\nThe wedding scenes.\nThe wedding scenes were filmed at historic St. Theodosius Russian Orthodox Cathedral in the Tremont neighborhood of Cleveland, Ohio.&lt;ref name=\"LL/dH\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; They took five days to film. St. Theodosius's Father Stephen Kopestonsky was cast as the priest. The reception scene was filmed at nearby Lemko Association Hall. The amateur extras cast for the crowded wedding-dance sequences drank real liquor and beer. The scenes were filmed in the summer, in 95\u00a0\u00b0F (35\u00a0\u00b0C) weather,&lt;ref name=\"Wi/DHf\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; but were set in the fall. To accomplish a fall look, individual leaves were removed from deciduous trees. Vilmos Zsigmond also had to desaturate the colors of the exterior shots, partly in camera and partly in laboratory processing.\nThe production manager asked each of the extras who were portraying Russian immigrants to bring to the location a gift-wrapped box to double for wedding presents. The manager figured that if the extras did this, not only would the production save time and money, but the gifts would look more authentic. After the unit unwrapped and the extras disappeared, the crew discovered to their amusement that the boxes were not empty but filled with real presents, from china to silverware. \"Who got to keep all these wonderful offerings,\" wrote Deeley, \"is a mystery I never quite fathomed.\"\nCimino originally claimed that the wedding scene would take up 21 minutes of screen time; in the end, it took 51 minutes. Deeley believes that Cimino always planned to make this prologue last for an hour, and that \"the plan was to be advanced by stealth rather than straight dealing\".\nAt this point in the production, nearly halfway through principal photography, Cimino was already over budget, and producer Spikings could tell from the script that shooting the extended scene could sink the project.\nThe bar and the steel mill.\nThe bar was specially constructed in an empty storefront in Mingo Junction, Ohio, for $25,000; it soon became an actual saloon for local steel-mill workers. U.S. Steel allowed filming inside its Cleveland mill, including placing the actors around the furnace floor, after securing a $5 million insurance policy. Other filming took place in Pittsburgh.\nHunting the deer.\nThe first deer to be shot was depicted in a \"gruesome close-up\", although it was hit with only a tranquilizer dart. This was not a white-tailed buck, which is native to Pennsylvania, but a red deer native to Eurasia. The stag that Michael lets escape is the same as the one used on TV commercials for The Hartford.\nVietnam and the Russian roulette scenes.\nThe Viet Cong Russian-roulette scenes were shot with real rats and mosquitoes, as the three principals (De Niro, Walken and Savage) were tied up in bamboo cages erected along the River Kwai. The woman who was given the task of casting extras in Thailand had much difficulty finding a local to play the vicious-looking individual who runs the game. The first hired actor was incapable of slapping De Niro in the face. The casting agent found a local Thai man, Somsak Sengvilai, who held a particular dislike of Americans, and so he was cast. De Niro suggested that Walken be slapped by one of the guards without any warning, and Walken's reaction was genuine. Producer Deeley has said that Cimino shot the brutal Viet Cong Russian-roulette scenes brilliantly and more efficiently than any other part of the film.\nDe Niro and Savage performed their own stunts in the fall into the river, filming the drop 15 times in two days. During the helicopter stunt, the skids got caught on the rope bridge as the helicopter ascended, threatening to seriously injure De Niro and Savage. The actors gestured and shouted to the crew in the helicopter to warn them. Footage of this is included in the film.\nAccording to Cimino, De Niro requested a live cartridge in the revolver for the scene in which he subjects John Cazale's character to an impromptu game of Russian roulette, to heighten the intensity of the situation. Cazale agreed without protest, but obsessively rechecked the gun before each take to be sure that the live round was not in the next chamber.\nAlthough appearing later in the film, the first scenes shot in Thailand were the hospital sequences between Walken and the military doctor. Deeley believed that this scene was \"the spur that would earn him an Academy Award\".\nIn the final scene between Mike and Nick in the gambling den, Cimino had Walken and De Niro improvise in one take. His direction to his actors: \"You put the gun to your head, Chris, you shoot, you fall over and Bobby cradles your head.\"\nFilming locations.\nThailand\nUnited States\nPost-production.\nBy this point, \"The Deer Hunter\" had cost $13 million, and the film still had to go through an arduous post-production. Film editor Peter Zinner was given of printed film to edit, a monumental task at the time. Producers Spikings and Deeley were pleased with the first cut, which ran for three-and-a-half hours. \"We were thrilled by what we saw,\" wrote Deeley, \"and knew that within the three and a half hours we watched there was a riveting film.\"\nExecutives from Universal, including Lew Wasserman and Sid Sheinberg, were not very enthusiastic. \"I think they were shocked,\" recalled Spikings. \"What really upset them was 'God Bless America'. Sheinberg thought it was anti-American. He was vehement. He said something like, 'You're poking a stick in the eye of America.' They really didn't like the movie. And they certainly didn't like it at three hours and two minutes.\"\nDeeley was not surprised by Universal's response. He said, \"\"The Deer Hunter\" was a United Artists sort of picture, whereas \"Convoy\" was more in the style of Universal. I'd muddled and sold the wrong picture to each studio.\" Deeley did agree with Universal that the film needed to be shorter, not only because of pacing, but also to ensure commercial success. \"A picture under two and a half hours can scrape three shows a day,\" wrote Deeley, \"but at three hours you've lost one third of your screenings and one third of your income for the cinemas, distributors, and profit participants.\"\nUniversal president Thom Mount said, \"This was just a... continuing nightmare from the day Michael finished the picture to the day we released it. That was simply because he was wedded to everything he shot. The movie was endless. It was \"The Deer Hunter and the Hunter and the Hunter\". The wedding sequence was a cinematic event all unto its own.\" Mount said that he turned to Verna Fields, Universal's head of post-production. \"I sicced Verna on Cimino,\" Mount said. \"Verna was no slouch. She started to turn the heat up on Michael, and he started screeching and yelling.\"\nZinner eventually cut the film to . Cimino soon fired Zinner when he discovered that Zinner was editing the wedding scenes. Ironically, Zinner won the Best Editing Oscar for \"The Deer Hunter\". Regarding his clashes with Cimino, Zinner stated, \"Michael Cimino and I had our differences at the end, but he kissed me when we both got Academy Awards.\" Cimino commented in \"The New York Observer\", \"[Zinner] was a moron\u00a0... I cut \"Deer Hunter\" myself.\"\nSound design.\n\"The Deer Hunter\" was Cimino's first film to use the Dolby noise-reduction system. \"What Dolby does,\" replied Cimino, \"is to give you the ability to create a \"density of detail\" of sound\u2014a richness so you can demolish the wall separating the viewer from the film. You can come close to demolishing the screen.\" It took five months to mix the soundtrack. One short battle sequence\u2014200 feet of film in the final cut\u2014took five days to dub. Another sequence recreated the 1975 American evacuation of Saigon; Cimino brought the film's composer Stanley Myers to the location to listen to the auto, tank and jeep horns while the sequence was being photographed. The result, according to Cimino: Myers composed the music for that scene in the same key as the horn sounds, so that the music and the sound effects would blend with the images to create one jarring, desolate experience.\nPreviews.\nBoth the long and short versions of the movie were previewed to Midwestern audiences, although there are differing accounts among Cimino, Deeley and Spikings regarding how the previews panned out. Director Cimino claimed that he bribed the projectionist to interrupt the shorter version to obtain better reviews of the longer one. According to producer Spikings, Wasserman let EMI's CEO Bernard Delfont decide between the two, and he chose Cimino's longer cut. Deeley claimed that the tested two-and-a-half-hour version had a better response.\nSoundtrack.\nThe soundtrack to \"The Deer Hunter\" was released on CD on October 25, 1990.\nTheatrical release.\nThe producer Allan Carr took control of the movie's marketing and convinced the studio to allow the film to be played on the Z Channel before theatrical release.&lt;ref name=\"afi/MC/dH\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\n\"The Deer Hunter\" debuted at one theater in New York and one in Los Angeles for a week on December 8, 1978. The release strategy was to qualify the film for Oscar consideration and close after a week to build interest.\nAfter the Oscar nominations, Universal widened the distribution to include major cities, building up to a full-scale release on February 23, 1979, after the previous year's Oscars. \"The Deer Hunter\" pioneered a new release pattern for so-called prestige pictures that screen only at the end of the year to qualify for Academy Award recognition. The film eventually grossed $48.9 million at the US box office.\nCBS paid $3.5 million for three runs of the film. The network later canceled the acquisition on the contractually permitted grounds of the film containing too much violence for US network transmission; the Russian-roulette scene was deemed controversial.\nHome media.\n\"The Deer Hunter\" has been released on DVD twice in the US. The first 1998 issue was by Universal, with no extra features and a non-anamorphic transfer, and has been discontinued. A second version, part of the \"Legacy Series\", was released as a two-disc set on September 6, 2005, with an anamorphic transfer of the film. The set features a cinematographer's commentary by Vilmos Zsigmond, as well as deleted and extended scenes and production notes.\nThe Region 2 release of \"The Deer Hunter\", released in the UK and Japan, features a commentary track from director Michael Cimino.\nThe film was released on HD DVD on December 26, 2006.\nStudioCanal released the film on the Blu-ray format in countries other than the United States on March 11, 2009. It was released on Blu-ray in the U.S. on March 6, 2012.\nOn May 26, 2020, Shout! Factory released the film on Ultra HD Blu-ray featuring a new Dolby Vision transfer.\nAnalysis.\nControversy over Russian roulette.\nOne of the most talked-about sequences in the film, the Viet Cong's use of Russian roulette with POWs was criticized as being contrived and unrealistic because there were no documented cases of Russian roulette in the Vietnam War. Associated Press reporter Peter Arnett, who won a Pulitzer Prize for his coverage of the war, wrote in the \"Los Angeles Times\", \"In its 20 years of war, there was not a single recorded case of Russian roulette\u00a0... The central metaphor of the movie is simply a bloody lie.\"\nCimino countered that his film was not political, polemical, literally accurate, nor posturing for any particular point of view. Nevertheless, he also claimed that he had news clippings from Singapore that confirmed that Russian roulette was used during the war, without specifying which article.\nCritics' response.\nIn his review, Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" defended the artistic license of Russian roulette, arguing, \"It is the organizing symbol of the film. Anything you can believe about the game, about its deliberately random violence, about how it touches the sanity of men forced to play it, will apply to the war as a whole. It is a brilliant symbol because, in the context of this story, it makes any ideological statement about the war superfluous.\"\nFilm critic and biographer David Thomson also agreed that the film works despite the controversy. \"There were complaints that the North Vietnamese had not employed Russian roulette. It was said that the scenes in Saigon were fanciful or imagined. It was also suggested that De Niro, Christopher Walken, and John Savage were too old to have enlisted for Vietnam (Savage, the youngest of the three, was thirty). Three decades later [written in 2008], 'imagination' seems to have stilled those worries\u00a0... and \"The Deer Hunter\" is one of the great American films.\"\nIn her review, Pauline Kael of \"The New Yorker\" wrote, \"The Deer Hunter\" is the newest version of the \"American 'gentleman' of the wilderness\" and \"the fullest screen treatment so far of the mystic bond of male comradeship.\" She goes on to say \"The Vietcong [\"sic\"] are treated in the standard inscrutable-evil Oriental style of the Japanese in the Second World War movies\u00a0... The impression a viewer gets is that if we did some bad things there we did them ruthlessly but impersonally; the Vietcong were cruel and sadistic.\"\nCritic Jonathan Rosenbaum of the \"Chicago Reader\" disliked the film: \"A disgusting account of what the evil Vietnamese did to poor, innocent Americans stands at the center of this Oscar-laden weepie.\" He thought the cast was \"uniformly good\", yet \"the male self-pity is so overwhelming that you\u2019ll probably stagger out of this mumbling something about Tolstoy if you aren\u2019t as nauseated as I was.\"\nIn his \"Vanity Fair\" article \"The Vietnam Oscars\", Peter Biskind wrote that the political agenda of \"The Deer Hunter\" was something of a mystery. \"It may have been more a by-product of Hollywood myopia, the demands of the war-film genre, garden-variety American parochialism, and simple ignorance than it was the pre-meditated right-wing road map it seemed to many.\"\nCast and crew response.\nAccording to Christopher Walken, the historical context was not paramount. \"In the making of it, I don't remember anyone ever mentioning Vietnam!\" De Niro added to this sentiment. \"Whether [the film's vision of the war] actually happened or not, it's something you could imagine very easily happening. Maybe it did. I don't know. All's fair in love and war.\" Producer Spikings, while proud of the film, regrets the way the Vietnamese are portrayed. \"I don't think any of us meant it to be exploitive,\" Spikings said. \"But I think we were\u00a0... ignorant. I can't think of a better word for it. I didn't realize how badly we'd behaved to the Vietnamese people\u00a0...\"\nProducer Deeley, on the other hand, was quick to defend Cimino's comments on the nature and motives of the film. \"\"The Deer Hunter\" wasn't really 'about' Vietnam. It was something very different. It wasn't about drugs or the collapse of the morale of the soldiers. It was about how individuals respond to pressure: different men reacting quite differently. The film was about three steel workers in extraordinary circumstances. \"Apocalypse Now\" is surreal. \"The Deer Hunter\" is a parable\u00a0... Men who fight and lose an unworthy war, face some obvious and unpalatable choices. They can blame their leaders... or they can blame themselves. Self-blame has been a great burden for many war veterans. So how does a soldier come to terms with his defeat and yet still retain his self-respect? One way is to present the conquering enemy as so inhuman, and the battle between the good guys (us) and the bad guys (them) so uneven, as to render defeat irrelevant. Inhumanity was the theme of \"The Deer Hunter's\" portrayal of the North Vietnamese prison guards forcing American POWs to play Russian roulette. The audience's sympathy with prisoners who (quite understandably) cracked thus completes the chain. Accordingly, some veterans who suffered in that war found the Russian roulette a valid allegory.\"\nDirector Cimino's autobiographical intent.\nCimino frequently referred to \"The Deer Hunter\" as a \"personal\" and \"autobiographical\" film, although subsequent investigation by journalists like Tom Buckley of \"Harper's Magazine\" revealed inaccuracies in Cimino's accounts and reported background.\nMale friendship.\n\"AFI\"'s Movie Club says, \"The film portrays male friendship in an atypical way for the time,\" and asks, \"How does the friendship of the characters played by Robert De Niro, John Savage, Christopher Walken and John Cazale evolve throughout the film?\"\nCoda of \"God Bless America\".\nThe final scene in which all the main characters gather and sing \"God Bless America\" became a subject of heated debate among critics when the film was released. It raised the question of whether this conclusion was meant ironically or not\u2014\"as a critique of patriotism or a paean to it\". Cimino later spoke of his intentions for the scene:\nThe ending is really, not meant to be so much a statement of patriotism, but a statement of communion. When people are in trouble, as they are when they're very troubled and sick inside, spiritually very sick, they need, sometimes to do something together. In this case it's make a sound. And they sing that song because it's a song that every American child knows by heart, because you're taught it in school. Everybody knows the words of \"God Bless America\", and so it's a communal sound, and they begin to sing the one song they all know from grade school on. And you never forget those words as long as you live. And so they sing... the one song they happen to know happens to be \"God Bless America\", and it reunites them as a family. It becomes a family communion. Instead of a Last Supper, it becomes a first breakfast, if you will, of a new family. It is breakfast that they're eating. It's not the Last Supper, it's the first breakfast.\nReception.\nCritical response.\nOn its release, \"The Deer Hunter\" received acclaim from critics, who considered it the best American epic since Francis Ford Coppola's \"The Godfather\". The film was praised for its depiction of realistic working-class settings and environment; Cimino's direction; the performances of De Niro, Walken, Streep, Savage, Dzundza and Cazale; the symphonic shifts of tone and pacing in moving from America to Vietnam; the tension during the Russian-roulette scenes; and the themes of American disillusionment.\nThe film holds an approval rating of 86% on Rotten Tomatoes based on 130 reviews, with an average score of 8.60/10. The consensus reads: \"Its greatness is blunted by its length and one-sided point of view, but the film's weaknesses are overpowered by Michael Cimino's sympathetic direction and a series of heartbreaking performances from Robert De Niro, Meryl Streep, and Christopher Walken\". On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 90 out of 100 based on reviews from 18 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nRoger Ebert gave the film four stars out of four, and called it \"one of the most emotionally shattering films ever made\". Gene Siskel of the \"Chicago Tribune\" praised the film, saying, \"This is a big film, dealing with big issues, made on a grand scale. Much of it, including some casting decisions, suggest inspiration by \"The Godfather\".\"\nLeonard Maltin also gave the film four stars, calling it a \"sensitive, painful, evocative work\".\nVincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" called \"The Deer Hunter\" \"a big, awkward, crazily ambitious motion picture that comes as close to being a popular epic as any movie about this country since \"The Godfather\". Its vision is that of an original, major new filmmaker.\"\nDavid Denby of \"New York\" magazine called it \"an epic\", with \"qualities that we almost never see any more\u2014range and power and breadth of experience.\"\nJack Kroll of \"Time\" asserted that it put director Cimino \"right at the center of film culture\".\nStephen Farber pronounced in \"New West\" magazine that the movie is \"the greatest anti-war movie since \"La Grande Illusion\".\"\nHowever, \"The Deer Hunter\" was not without critical backlash. Pauline Kael of \"The New Yorker\" wrote a positive review with some reservations: \"[It is] a small minded film with greatness in it\u00a0... with an enraptured view of common life\u00a0... [but] enraging, because, despite its ambitiousness and scale, it has no more moral intelligence than the Eastwood action pictures.\"\nWilliam Goldman, in his book \"Adventures in the Screen Trade\", described \"The Deer Hunter\" as a \"well-disguised comic-book movie\". He wrote, \"I enjoyed it every bit as I used to be enthralled by Batman having it out with the Penguin\u2014and precisely on that level.\"\nAndrew Sarris of \"The New York Observer\" wrote that the film was \"massively vague, tediously elliptical, and mysteriously hysterical\u00a0... It is perhaps significant that the actors remain more interesting than the characters they play.\"\nJohn Simon of \"New York\" wrote, \"For all its pretensions to something newer and better, this film is only an extension of the old Hollywood war-movie lie. The enemy is still bestial and stupid, and no match for our purity and heroism; only we no longer wipe up the floor with him\u2014rather, we litter it with his guts.\"\nIn a review for \"Chicago\" magazine, Studs Terkel wrote that he was \"appalled by its shameless dishonesty\", and that \"not since \"The Birth of a Nation\" has a non-Caucasian people been portrayed in so barbaric a fashion\". Cimino's dishonesty \"was to project a sadistic psyche not only onto 'Charlie' but to all the Vietnamese portrayed\".\nAuthor Karina Longworth notes that Streep \"made a case for female empowerment by playing a woman to whom empowerment was a foreign concept\u2014a normal lady from an average American small town, for whom subservience was the only thing she knew\". She states that \"The Deer Hunter\" \"evokes a version of dominant masculinity in which male friendship is a powerful force\". It has a \"credibly humanist message\", and that the \"slow study of the men in blissfully ignorant homeland machismo is crucial to it\".\nDespite its critical acclaim and awards, some critics derided what they considered the film's simplistic, bigoted and historically inaccurate depictions of the Viet Cong and America's position in the Vietnam War. The central theme of the Viet Cong forcing American captives to play Russian roulette has been widely criticized as having no historical basis, a claim that Cimino denied but did not refute with evidence.\nDuring the 29th Berlin International Film Festival in 1979, the Soviet delegation expressed its indignation with the film that, in their opinion, insulted the Vietnamese people in numerous scenes. Other communist states also voiced their solidarity with the \"heroic people of Vietnam\". They protested the screening of the film and insisted that it violated the statutes of the festival because in no way does it contribute to the \"improvement of mutual understanding between the peoples of the world\". The ensuing domino effect led to the walk-outs of the Cubans, East Germans, Hungarians, Bulgarians, Poles and Czechoslovakians, and two members of the jury resigned in sympathy.\nTop-ten lists.\nAcademy Award-winning film director Milo\u0161 Forman and Academy Award-nominated actor Mickey Rourke consider \"The Deer Hunter\" to be one of the greatest films of all time.\nRevisionism following \"Heaven's Gate\".\nCimino's next film, \"Heaven's Gate\" (1980), debuted to lacerating reviews and took in only $3 million in ticket sales, effectively leaving United Artists bankrupt. The failure of \"Heaven's Gate\" led several critics to revise their positions on \"The Deer Hunter\". Canby said in his famous review of \"Heaven's Gate\", \"[The film] fails so completely that you might suspect Mr. Cimino sold his soul to the Devil to obtain the success of \"The Deer Hunter\", and the Devil has just come around to collect.\"\nAndrew Sarris wrote in his review of \"Heaven's Gate\", \"I'm a little surprised that many of the same critics who lionized Cimino for \"The Deer Hunter\" have now thrown him to the wolves with equal enthusiasm.\" Sarris added, \"I was never taken in\u00a0... Hence, the stupidity and incoherence in \"Heaven's Gate\" came as no surprise since very much the same stupidity and incoherence had been amply evident in \"The Deer Hunter\".\"\nIn his book \"Final Cut: Dreams and Disaster in the Making of Heaven's Gate\", Steven Bach wrote, \"Critics seemed to feel obliged to go on the record about \"The Deer Hunter\", to demonstrate that their critical credentials were un-besmirched by having been, as Andrew Sarris put it, 'taken in'.\"\nFilm critic Mark Kermode described \"Deer Hunter\" as \"a genuinely terrible film\".\nHowever, many critics, including David Thomson and A. O. Scott, maintain that \"The Deer Hunter\" is a great film, the power of which has not diminished.\nAwards.\nLead-up to awards season.\nFilm producer and \"old-fashioned mogul\" Allan Carr used his networking abilities to promote \"The Deer Hunter\". \"Exactly how Allan Carr came into \"The Deer Hunter\"'s orbit I can no longer remember,\" recalled producer Deeley, \"but the picture became a crusade to him. He nagged, charmed, threw parties, he created word-of-mouth\u00a0\u2013 everything that could be done in Hollywood to promote a project. Because he had no apparent motive for this promotion, it had an added power and legitimacy and it finally did start to penetrate the minds of the Universal's sales people that they actually had in their hands something a bit more significant than the usual.\" Deeley added that Carr's promotion of the film was influential in positioning \"The Deer Hunter\" for Oscar nominations.\nOn the \"Sneak Previews\" special \"Oscar Preview for 1978\", Roger Ebert correctly predicted that \"The Deer Hunter\" would win for Best Picture, while Gene Siskel predicted that \"Coming Home\" would win. However, Ebert incorrectly guessed that Robert De Niro would win for Best Actor for \"Deer Hunter\" and Jill Clayburgh would win for Best Actress for \"An Unmarried Woman\", while Siskel called the wins for Jon Voight as Best Actor and Jane Fonda as Best Actress, both for \"Coming Home\". Both Ebert and Siskel correctly predicted the win for Christopher Walken receiving the Oscar for Best Supporting Actor.\nAccording to producer Deeley, orchestrated lobbying against \"The Deer Hunter\" was led by Warren Beatty, whose own picture \"Heaven Can Wait\" had multiple nominations. Beatty also used ex-girlfriends in his campaign: Julie Christie, serving on the jury at the Berlin Film Festival where \"Deer Hunter\" was screened, joined the walkout of the film by the Russian jury members. Jane Fonda also criticized \"The Deer Hunter\" in public. Deeley suggested that her criticisms partly stemmed from the competition between her film \"Coming Home\" vying with \"The Deer Hunter\" for Best Picture. According to Deeley, he planted a friend of his in the Oscar press area behind the stage to ask Fonda if she had seen \"The Deer Hunter\". Fonda replied she had not seen the film, and to this day she still has not.\nAs the Oscars drew near, the backlash against \"The Deer Hunter\" gathered strength. When the limos pulled up to the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion on April 9, 1979, they were met by demonstrators, mostly from the Los Angeles chapter of Vietnam Veterans Against the War. The demonstrators waved placards covered with slogans that read \"No Oscars for racism\" and \"\"The Deer Hunter\" a bloody lie\", and they thrust pamphlets berating \"Deer Hunter\" into long lines of limousine windows. Washburn, nominated for Best Original Screenplay, claimed that his limousine was pelted with stones. According to \"Variety\", \"Police and \"The Deer Hunter\" protesters clashed in a brief but bloody battle that resulted in 13 arrests.\"\nDe Niro was so anxious that he did not attend the Oscars ceremony. He asked the Academy to allow him to sit out the show backstage, but when the Academy refused, De Niro stayed home in New York. Producer Deeley made a deal with fellow producer David Puttnam, whose film \"Midnight Express\" was nominated, that each would take $500 to the ceremony so if one of them won, the winner would give the loser the $500 to \"drown his sorrows in style\".\nLegacy.\n\"The Deer Hunter\" is among the early, and most controversial, major theatrical films to be critical of the American involvement in Vietnam after 1975, when the war officially ended. Although the film opened in the same year as Hal Ashby's \"Coming Home\", Sidney Furie's \"The Boys in Company C\", and Ted Post's \"Go Tell the Spartans\", it is the first film about Vietnam to reach a wide audience and critical acclaim, culminating in winning the Oscar for Best Picture. Other films that illustrate the conditions of the Vietnam War combat include:\nDavid Thomson wrote in an article titled \"\"The Deer Hunter\": Story of a scene\" that the film changed the way war-time battles were portrayed on film. \"The terror and the blast of firepower changed the war film, even if it only used a revolver. More or less before the late 1970s, the movies had lived by a Second World War code in which battle scenes might be fierce but always rigorously controlled. \"The Deer Hunter\" unleashed a new, raw dynamic in combat and action, paving the way for \"Platoon\", \"Saving Private Ryan\" and Clint Eastwood's Iwo Jima films.\"\nIn a 2011 interview with Rotten Tomatoes, actor William Fichtner stated that he and his partner were silenced after seeing the film, stating that \"the human experience was just so pointed; their journeys were so difficult, as life is sometimes. I remember after seeing it, walking down the street\u2014I actually went with a girl on a date and saw \"The Deer Hunter\", and we left the theater and walked for like an hour and nobody said anything; we were just kind of stunned about that.\"\nThe deaths of approximately 25 people who died playing Russian roulette were reported as having been influenced by scenes in the movie.\nHonors and recognition.\nIn 1996, \"The Deer Hunter\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nAmerican Film Institute included the film as #79 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies, #30 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills, and #53 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition).\nThe film ranks 467th in the \"Empire\" magazine's 2008 list of the 500 greatest movies of all time, noting:\nCimino's bold, powerful 'Nam epic goes from blue-collar macho rituals to a fiery, South East Asian hell and back to a ragged singalong of \"America the Beautiful\" [sic]. De Niro holds it together, but Christopher Walken, Meryl Streep and John Savage are unforgettable.\n\"The New York Times\" placed the film on its \"Best 1000 Movies Ever\" list.\nJan Scruggs, a Vietnam veteran who became a counselor with the U.S. Department of Labor, thought of the idea of building a National Memorial for Vietnam Veterans after seeing a screening of the film in March 1979, and he established and operated the memorial fund that paid for it. Director Cimino was invited to the memorial's opening.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nInterviews\nTexts\nIn which Michael is called Merle and stays in Saigon while Nick returns to Linda.\nMetadata"}
{"id": "73426", "revid": "39104771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=73426", "title": "Iris (plant)", "text": "Genus of flowering plants in the family Iridaceae\nIris is a flowering plant genus of 310 accepted species with showy flowers. As well as being the scientific name, iris is also widely used as a common name for all \"Iris\" species, as well as some belonging to other closely related genera. A common name for some species is flags, while the plants of the subgenus \"Scorpiris\" are widely known as junos, particularly in horticulture. It is a popular garden flower.\nThe often-segregated, monotypic genera \"Belamcanda\" (blackberry lily, \"I. domestica\"), \"Hermodactylus\" (snake's head iris, \"I. tuberosa\"), and \"Pardanthopsis\" (vesper iris, \"I. dichotoma\") are currently included in \"Iris\".\nThree \"Iris\" varieties are used in the \"Iris\" flower data set outlined by Ronald Fisher in his 1936 paper \"The use of multiple measurements in taxonomic problems\" as an example of linear discriminant analysis.\nDescription.\nIrises are perennial plants, growing from creeping rhizomes (rhizomatous irises) or, in drier climates, from bulbs (bulbous irises). They have long, erect flowering stems which may be simple or branched, solid or hollow, and flattened or have a circular cross-section. The rhizomatous species usually have 3\u201310 basal sword-shaped leaves growing in dense clumps. The bulbous species also have 2\u201310 narrow leaves growing from the bulb.\nFlower.\nThe inflorescences are in the shape of a fan and contain one or more symmetrical six-lobed flowers. These grow on a pedicel or peduncle. The three sepals, which are usually spreading or droop downwards, are referred to as \"falls\". They expand from their narrow base (the \"claw\" or \"haft\"), into a broader expanded portion (\"limb\" or \"blade\") and can be adorned with veining, lines or dots. In the centre of the blade, some of the rhizomatous irises have a \"beard\", a row of fuzzy hairs at the base of each falls petal which gives pollinators a landing place and guides them to the nectar.\nThe three, sometimes reduced, petals stand upright, partly behind the sepal bases. They are called \"standards\". Some smaller iris species have all six lobes pointing straight outwards, but generally limb and standards differ markedly in appearance. They are united at their base into a floral tube that lies above the ovary (This flower, with the petals, and other flower parts, above the ovary is known as an epigynous flower, and it is said to have an inferior ovary, that is an ovary below the other flower parts). The three styles divide towards the apex into petaloid branches; this is significant in pollination.\nThe iris flower is of interest as an example of the relation between flowering plants and pollinating insects. The shape of the flower and the position of the pollen-receiving and stigmatic surfaces on the outer petals form a landing-stage for a flying insect, which in probing for nectar, will first come into contact with the perianth, then with the three stigmatic stamens in one whorled surface which is borne on an ovary formed of three carpels. The shelf-like transverse projection on the inner whorled underside of the stamens is beneath the overarching style arm below the stigma, so that the insect comes in contact with its pollen-covered surface only after passing the stigma; in backing out of the flower it will come in contact only with the non-receptive lower face of the stigma. Thus, an insect bearing pollen from one flower will, in entering a second, deposit the pollen on the stigma; in backing out of a flower, the pollen which it bears will not be rubbed off on the stigma of the same flower.\nThe iris fruit is a capsule which opens up in three parts to reveal the numerous seeds within. In some species, the seeds bear an aril, such as \"Iris stolonifera\" which has light brown seeds with thick white aril.\nEtymology.\nThe genus takes its name from the Greek word \"\u00eeris\" \"rainbow\", which is also the name for the Greek goddess of the rainbow, Iris. Some authors state that the name refers to the wide variety of flower colors found among the many species. \nTaxonomy.\n\"Iris\" is the largest genus of the family Iridaceae with up to 300 species \u2013 many of them natural hybrids. Plants of the World Online lists 310 accepted species from this genus as of 2022. Modern classifications, starting with Dykes (1913), have subdivided them. Dykes referred to the major subgroupings as sections. Subsequent authors such as Lawrence (1953) and Rodionenko (1987) have generally called them subgenera, while essentially retaining Dykes' groupings, using six subgenera further divided into twelve sections. Of these, section \"Limneris\" (subgenus \"Limneris\") was further divided into sixteen series. Like some older sources, Rodionenko moved some of the bulbous subgenera (\"Xiphium\", \"Scorpiris\" and \"Hermodactyloides\") into separate genera (\"Xiphion\", \"Juno\" and \"Iridodictyum\" respectively), but this has not been accepted by later writers such as Mathew (1989), although the latter kept \"Hermodactylus\" as a distinct genus, to include \"Hermodactylus tuberosus\", now returned to \"Hermodactyloides\" as \"Iris tuberosa\".\nRodionenko also reduced the number of sections in subgenus Iris, from six to two, depending on the presence (\"Hexapogon\") or absence (\"Iris\") of arils on the seeds, referred to as \"arilate\" or \"nonarilate\". Taylor (1976) provides arguments for not including all arilate species in \"Hexapogon\".\nIn general, modern classifications usually recognise six subgenera, of which five are restricted to the Old World; the sixth (subgenus \"Limniris\") has a Holarctic distribution. The two largest subgenera are further divided into sections. The Iris subgenus has been divided into six sections; bearded irises (or pogon irises), Psammiris, Oncocyclus, Regelia, Hexapogon and Pseudoregelia. Iris subg. Limniris has been divided into 2 sections; Lophiris (or 'Evansias' or crested iris) and Limniris which was further divided into 16 series.\nEvolution.\nThe concept of introgressive hybridization (or \"introgression\") was first coined to describe the pattern of interspecific hybridization followed by backcrossing to the parentals that is common in this genus.\nDistribution and habitat.\nNearly all species are found in temperate Northern Hemisphere zones, from Europe to Asia and across North America. Although diverse in ecology, \"Iris\" is predominantly found in dry, semi-desert, or colder rocky mountainous areas. Other habitats include grassy slopes, meadowlands, woodland, bogs and riverbanks. Some irises like \"Iris setosa\" Pall. can tolerate damp (bogs) or dry sites (meadows), and \"Iris foetidissima\" can be found in woodland, hedge banks and scrub areas.\nDiseases.\n\"Narcissus mosaic virus\" is most commonly known from \"Narcissus\". Wylie \"et al.\", 2014, made the first identification of \"Narcissus mosaic virus\" infecting this garden plant genus, and the first record in Australia. \"Japanese iris necrotic ring virus\" also, commonly infects this genus. It was, however, unknown in Australia until Wylie \"et al.\", 2012, identified it in Australia on \"I. ensata\".\nCultivation.\nIris is extensively grown as ornamental plant in home and botanical gardens. Presby Memorial Iris Gardens in New Jersey, for example, is a living iris museum with over 10,000 plants, while in Europe the most famous iris garden is arguably the Giardino dell'Iris in Florence (Italy) which every year hosts a well attended iris breeders' competition. Irises, especially the multitude of bearded types, feature regularly in shows such as the Chelsea Flower Show.\nFor garden cultivation, iris classification differs from taxonomic classification. Garden iris are classed as either bulb iris or rhizome iris (called rhizomatous) with a number of further subdivisions. Due to a wide variety of geographic origins, and thus great genetic diversity, cultivation needs of iris vary greatly.\nGenerally, Irises grow well in most garden soil types providing they are well-drained, depending on the species. The earliest to bloom are species like \"I. reticulata\" and \"I. reichenbachii\", which flower as early as February and March in the Northern Hemisphere, followed by the dwarf forms of \"I. pumila\" and others. In May or June, most of the tall bearded varieties start to bloom, such as the German iris and its variety \"florentina\", sweet iris, Hungarian iris, lemon-yellow iris (\"I. flavescens\"), \"Iris sambucina\", and their natural and horticultural hybrids such as those described under names like \"I. neglecta\" or \"I. squalens\" and best united under \"I. \u00d7 lurida\".\nThe iris is promoted in the United Kingdom by the British Iris Society. The National Collection of Arthur Bliss Irises is held in Gloucestershire.\nThe American Iris Society is the International Cultivar Registration Authority for \"Iris\", and recognises over 30,000 registered cultivar names.\nBearded rhizome iris.\nBearded iris are classified as dwarf, tall, or aril. In Europe, the most commonly found garden iris is a hybrid iris (falsely called German iris, \"I. germanica\" which is sterile) and its numerous cultivars. Various wild forms (including \"Iris aphylla\") and naturally occurring hybrids of the Sweet iris (\"I. pallida\") and the Hungarian iris (\"I. variegata\") form the basis of almost all modern hybrid bearded irises. Median forms of bearded iris (intermediate bearded, or IB; miniature tall bearded, or MTB; etc.) are derived from crosses between tall and dwarf species like \"Iris pumila\".\nThe \"beard\", short hairs arranged to look like a long furry caterpillar, is found toward the back of the lower petals and its purpose is to guide pollinating insects toward the reproductive parts of the plant. Bearded irises have been cultivated to have much larger blooms than historically; the flowers are now twice the size of those a hundred years ago. Ruffles were introduced in the 1960s to help stabilize the larger petals.\nBearded iris are easy to cultivate and propagate and have become very popular in gardens. A small selection is usually held by garden centres at appropriate times during the season, but there are thousands of cultivars available from specialist suppliers (more than 30,000 cultivars of tall bearded iris). They are best planted as bare root plants in late summer, in a sunny open position with the rhizome visible on the surface of the soil and facing the sun. They should be divided in summer every two or three years, when the clumps become congested.\nA truly red bearded iris, like a truly blue rose, remains an unattained goal despite frequent hybridizing and selection. There are species and selections, most notably based on the beardless rhizomatous Copper iris (\"I. fulva\"), which have a relatively pure red color. However, getting this color into a modern bearded iris breed has proven very difficult, and thus, the vast majority of irises are in the purple and blue range of the color spectrum, with yellow, pink, orange and white breeds also available. Irises \u2013 like many related genera \u2013 lack red-based hues because their anthocyanins are delphinidin-derived. Pelargonidin-derived anthocyanins would lend the sought-after blue-based colors but these genera are metabolically disinclined to produce pelargonidin. Dihydroflavonol 4-reductases in \"Iris\"'s relatives selectively do not catalyse dihydrokaempferol to leucopelargonidin, the precursor, and this is probably the case here as well. The other metabolic difficulty is the presence of flavonoid 3'-hydroxylase, which in \"Chrysanthemum\" inhibits pelargonidin synthesis. The bias in irises towards delphinidin-anthocyanins is so pronounced that they have served as the gene donors for transgenic attempts at the aforementioned blue roses. Although these have been technically successful \u2013 over 99% of their anthocyanins are blue \u2013 their growth is crippled and they have never been commercializable.\nAGM cultivars.\nThe following is a selection of bearded irises that have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit:\nBearded iris \"Oncocyclus\" section.\nThis section contains the cushion irises or royal irises, a group of plants noted for their large, strongly marked flowers. Between 30 and 60 species are classified in this section, depending on the authority. Species of section \"Oncocyclus\" are generally strict endemics, typically occurring in a small number of scattered, disjunct populations, whose geographical isolation is enhanced by their pollination strategy and myrmecochory seed dispersal. Morphological divergence between populations usually follows a cline reflecting local adaptation to environment conditions; furthermore, this largely overlaps divergence between species, making it difficult to identify discrete species boundaries in these irises. Compared with other irises, the cushion varieties are scantily furnished with narrow sickle-shaped leaves and the flowers are usually borne singly on the stalks; they are often very dark and in some almost blackish. The cushion irises are somewhat fastidious growers, and to be successful with them they must be planted rather shallow in very gritty well-drained soil. They should not be disturbed in the autumn, and after the leaves have withered the roots should be protected from heavy rains until growth starts again naturally.\nBearded iris \"Regelia\" section.\nThis section, closely allied to the cushion irises, includes several garden hybrids with species in section \"Oncocyclus\", known as \"Regelio-cyclus\" irises. They are best planted in September or October in warm sunny positions, the rhizomes being lifted the following July after the leaves have withered.\nBeardless rhizome iris (subgenus \"Limniris\").\nThere are six major subgroupings of the beardless iris, depending on origin. They are divided into Pacific Coast, Siberica, Spuria, Louisiana, Japanese, and other.\nBeardless rhizomatous iris types commonly found in the European garden are the Siberian iris (\"I. sibirica\") and its hybrids, and the Japanese Iris (\"I. ensata\") and its hybrids. \"Japanese iris\" is also a catch-all term for the Japanese iris proper (\"hanash\u014dbu\"), the blood iris (\"I. sanguinea, ayame\") and the rabbit-ear iris (\"I. laevigata, kakitsubata\"). \"I. unguicularis\" is a late-winter-flowering species from Algeria, with sky-blue flowers with a yellow streak in the centre of each petal, produced from Winter to Spring. Yet another beardless rhizomatous iris popular in gardening is \"I. ruthenica\", which has much the same requirements and characteristics as the tall bearded irises. In North America, Louisiana iris and its hybrids are often cultivated.\nCrested rhizome iris (subgenus \"Limniris\").\nOne specific species, \"Iris cristata\" from North America.\nBulbing juno iris (subgenus \"Scorpiris\").\nOften called 'junos', this type of iris is one of the more popular bulb irises in cultivation. They are generally earliest to bloom.\nBulbing European iris (subgenus \"Xiphium\").\nThis group includes irises generally of European descent, and are also classified as Dutch, English, or Spanish iris.\nBulbing reticulate iris (subgenus \"Hermodactyloides\").\nReticulate irises with their characteristic bulbs, including the yellow \"I. danfordiae\", and the various blue-purple \"I. histrioides\" and \"I. reticulata\", flower as early as February and March. These reticulate-bulbed irises are miniatures and popular spring bulbs, being one of the first to bloom in the garden. Many of the smaller species of bulbous iris, being liable to perish from excess of moisture, should have a well-drained bed of good but porous soil made up for them, in some sunny spot, and in winter should be protected by a covering of half-decayed leaves or fresh coco-fiber. \nUses.\nAromatic rhizomes.\nRhizomes of the German iris (\"I. germanica\") and sweet iris (\"I. pallida\") are traded as orris root and are used in perfume and medicine, though more common in ancient times than today. Today, Iris essential oil (absolute) from flowers are sometimes used in aromatherapy as sedative medicines. The dried rhizomes are also given whole to babies to help in teething. Gin brands such as Bombay Sapphire and Magellan Gin use orris root and sometimes iris flowers for flavor and color.\nFor orris root production, iris rhizomes are harvested, dried, and aged for up to 5 years. In this time, the fats and oils inside the roots undergo degradation and oxidation, which produces many fragrant compounds that are valuable in perfumery. The scent is said to be similar to violets. The aged rhizomes are steam-distilled which produces a thick oily compound, known in the perfume industry as \"iris butter\" or orris oil.\nIris rhizomes also contain notable amounts of terpenes, and organic acids such as ascorbic acid, myristic acid, tridecylenic acid and undecylenic acid. Iris rhizomes can be toxic. Larger blue flag (\"I. versicolor\") and other species often grown in gardens and widely hybridized contain elevated amounts of the toxic glycoside iridin. These rhizomes can cause nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and/or skin irritation, but poisonings are not normally fatal. Irises should only be used medicinally under professional guidance.\nWater purification.\nIn water purification, yellow iris (\"I. pseudacorus\") is often used. The roots are usually planted in a substrate (e.g. lava-stone) in a reedbed-setup. The roots then improve water quality by consuming nutrient pollutants, such as from agricultural runoff. This highly aggressive grower is now considered a noxious weed and prohibited in some states of the US where it is found clogging natural waterways.\nIn culture.\nThe iris has been used in art and as a symbol, including in heraldry. The symbolic meaning has evolved, in Christendom moving from a symbol of Mary mother of Jesus, to a French heraldic sign, the fleur-de-lis, and from French royalty it spread throughout Europe and beyond.\nArt.\nVincent van Gogh has painted several famous pictures of irises.\nThe American artist Joseph Mason \u2013 a friend of John James Audubon \u2013 painted a precise image of what was then known as the Louisiana flag or copper iris (\"Iris fulva\"), to which Audubon subsequently added two Northern paraula birds (\"Parula americana\") for inclusion as Plate 15 in his \"Birds of America\".\nThe artist Philip Hermogenes Calderon painted an iris in his 1856 work \"Broken Vows\"; he followed the principles of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. An ancient belief is that the iris serves as a warning to be heeded, as it was named for the messenger of Olympus. It also conveys images of lost love and silent grief, for young girls were led into the afterlife by the goddess Iris. \"Broken Vows\" was accompanied with poetry by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow when it was first exhibited.\nContemporary artist George Gessert, who introduced the cultivation of flowers as an art form, has specialised in breeding irises.\nLocal varieties as symbol.\n\"Iris nigricans\", the black iris is the national flower of Jordan.\n\"Iris bismarckiana\", the Nazareth Iris, is the symbol of the city of Upper Nazareth.\nThe Iris croatica is the unofficial national flower of Croatia.\nA stylized yellow iris is the symbol of Brussels, since historically the important Saint Gaugericus Island was carpeted in them. The iris symbol is now the sole feature on the flag of the Brussels-Capital Region.\nIn 1998, \"Iris lacustris\", the Dwarf Lake iris, was designated the state wildflower of Michigan, where the vast majority of populations exist.\nIn 1990, the Louisiana iris was voted the state wildflower of Louisiana (see also fleur-de-lis:United States, New France), though the state flower is the magnolia blossom.\nAn iris \u2014 species unspecified \u2014 is one of the state flowers of Tennessee. It is generally accepted that the species \"Iris versicolor\", the Purple Iris, is the state flower alongside the wild-growing purple passionflower (\"Passiflora incarnata\"), the state's other floral emblem. Greeneville, Tennessee, is home to the annual Iris Festival celebrating the iris, local customs, and culture.\nThe species \"Iris versicolor\" is also the provincial flower of Quebec, Canada, having replaced the Madonna lily which is not native to the province (see also fleur-de-lis: Canada). The provincial flag of Qu\u00e9bec carries the harlequin blueflag (\"I. versicolor\", \"iris versicolore\" in French).\nIn Serbian, the word for the flower is https://, after Perun, the Slavic god of thunder.\nChina.\nIt is thought in China that \"Iris anguifuga\" has the ability to keep snakes from entering the garden. It grows all winter, keeping snakes out, but then goes dormant in the spring, allowing the snakes back into the garden. In the autumn, the iris re-appears and can stop the snakes again.\nAncient Greece.\nIn the \"Homeric Hymn to Demeter\", the goddess Persephone and her companion nymphs (the Oceanids along with Artemis and Athena) were gathering flowers such as rose, crocus, violet, iris (also called 'agallis' or \u1f00\u03b3\u03b1\u03bb\u03bb\u03af\u03c2 (in Greek script), lily, larkspur, and hyacinth in a springtime meadow before she was abducted by the god Hades.\nIt has been suggested that the 'agallis' mentioned was a dwarf iris, as described by leaf and root shape, and identified as Iris attica.\nMuslim culture.\nIn Iran and Kashmir, \"Iris kashmiriana\" and \"Iris germanica\" are most commonly grown on Muslim grave yards.\nFleur-de-lis and associated heraldry.\nFrench King Clovis I (466\u2013511), when he converted to Christianity, changed his symbol on his banner from three toads to irises (the Virgin's flower).\nThe fleur-de-lis, a stylized iris, first occurs in its modern use as the emblem of the House of Capet. The fleur-de-lis has been associated with France since Louis VII adopted it as a symbol in the 12th century. The yellow fleur-de-lis reflects the yellow iris (\"I. pseudacorus\"), common in Western Europe. Contemporary uses can be seen in the Quebec flag and the logo of the New Orleans Saints professional football team and on the flag of Saint Louis, Missouri.\nThe red fleur-de-lis in the coat-of-arms and flag of Florence, Italy, descends from the white iris which is native to Florence and which grew even in its city walls. This white iris displayed against a red background was the symbol of Florence until the Medici family reversed the colors to signal a change in political power, setting in motion a centuries-long and still on-going breeding program to hybridize a red iris.\nScouting, fraternities &amp; sororities.\nThe fleur-de-lis is the almost-universal symbol of Scouting and one of the symbols adopted by the sorority Kappa Kappa Gamma.\nThe \"Iris versicolor\" is the official flower of Kappa Pi International Honorary Art Fraternity.\nOther.\nThe Iris is one of the flowers listed as birth flower for February.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
