{"id": "66159", "revid": "2153309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66159", "title": "Alfalfa", "text": "Plant species in pea family\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlfalfa () (Medicago sativa), also called lucerne, is a perennial flowering plant in the legume family Fabaceae. It is cultivated as an important forage crop in many countries around the world and is used for grazing, hay, and silage, as well as a green manure and cover crop. The name alfalfa is used in North America, whereas the name lucerne is more commonly used in the United Kingdom, South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand. The plant superficially resembles clover (a cousin in the same family), especially while young, when trifoliate leaves comprising round leaflets predominate. Later in maturity, leaflets are elongated. It has clusters of small purple flowers followed by fruits spiraled in two to three turns containing 10\u201320 seeds. Alfalfa is native to warmer temperate climates. It has been cultivated as livestock fodder since at least the era of the ancient Greeks and Romans.\nDescription.\nAlfalfa has an autotetraploid genome with tetrasomic inheritance.\nIt is a perennial forage legume which normally lives four to eight years, but can live more than 20 years, depending on variety and climate. The plant grows to a height of up to , and has a deep root system, sometimes growing to a depth of more than to reach groundwater. Typically the root system grows to a depth of depending on subsoil constraints.\nAlfalfa is a small-seeded crop and has a slowly growing seedling, but after several months of establishment, it forms a tough \"crown\" at the top of the root system. This crown contains shoot buds that enable alfalfa to regrow many times after being grazed or harvested.\nEtymology.\nThe English use of \"alfalfa\" dates to 1791, and derives from the identical cognate in Spanish, suggesting that its origin there was from the word, \"\", of an Arabic dialect, otherwise presented as . Harper, at \"Etymology Online\", suggests \"alfalfa\" to derive from the same Spanish cognate, but dating from 1845, and gives the Spanish predecessor of the cognate to be \"alfalfez\"; it again ascribes its origin to Arabic, citing \"Iberian sources\", and offers the definition of the Arabic as \"fresh fodder\", further suggesting a source arguing that the Arabic might derive from \"an Old Iranian compound\", meaning \"horse food\". Lucerne (or \"luzerne\") is the name for alfalfa in Britain, Australia, France, Germany, and a number of other countries.\nEcology.\nAlfalfa is considered an insectary plant and has been proposed to be helpful to other crops such as cotton, as the alfalfa harbours predatory and parasitic insects that would protect the other crop if the two are interplanted. Harvesting the alfalfa by mowing the entire crop area destroys the insect population, but this can be avoided by mowing in strips so that part of the growth remains.\nAlfalfa develops extensive taproots that can extend around 6 feet per year in loose soil. This allows the plant to access soil moisture that is not accessible to plants with shallow root systems, making it more resistant to droughts and soil erosion. This depth of root system, and perenniality of crowns that store carbohydrates as an energy reserve, make it very resilient.\nThis plant exhibits autotoxicity, which means it is difficult for alfalfa seed to grow in existing stands of alfalfa. Therefore, alfalfa fields are recommended to be rotated with other species (for example, corn or wheat) before reseeding. The exact mechanism of autotoxicity is unclear, with medicarpins and phenols both seeming to play a role. Levels of autotoxicity in soil depends on soil type (clay soils maintain autotoxicity for longer), cultivar and age of the previous crop. A soil assay can be used to measure autotoxicity. Resistance to autotoxicity also varies by cultivar, a tolerant one being 'WL 656HQ'.\nPests and diseases.\nLike most plants, alfalfa can be attacked by various pests and pathogens. Diseases often have subtle symptoms which are easily misdiagnosed and can affect the leaves, roots, stems, and blossoms.\nSome pests, such as the alfalfa weevil, aphids, and potato leafhopper, can reduce alfalfa yields dramatically, particularly with the second cutting when weather is warmest. Spotted alfalfa aphid, broadly spread in Australia, not only sucks sap but also injects salivary toxins into the leaves. Registered insecticides or chemical controls are sometimes used to prevent this, and labels will specify the withholding period before the forage crop can be grazed or cut for hay or silage. Alfalfa is also susceptible to root rots, including \"Phytophthora\", \"Rhizoctonia\", and Texas root rot. Alfalfa is also susceptible to downy mildew caused by the oomycete species \"Peronospora aestivalis\".\nCultivation.\nAlfalfa is widely grown throughout the world as forage for cattle, and is most often harvested as hay, but can also be made into silage, grazed, or fed as greenchop. Alfalfa usually has the highest feeding value of all common hay crops. It is used less frequently as pasture. When grown on soils where it is well-adapted, alfalfa is often the highest-yielding forage plant, but its primary benefit is the combination of high yield per hectare and high nutritional quality.\nIts primary use is as feed for high-producing dairy cows, because of its high protein content and highly digestible fiber, and secondarily for beef cattle, horses, sheep, and goats. Alfalfa hay is a widely used protein and fiber source for meat rabbits. In poultry diets, dehydrated alfalfa and alfalfa leaf concentrates are used for pigmenting eggs and meat, because of their high content in carotenoids, which are efficient for colouring egg yolk and body lipids. Humans also eat alfalfa sprouts in salads and sandwiches. Dehydrated alfalfa leaf is commercially available as a dietary supplement in several forms, such as tablets, powders and tea. Fresh alfalfa can cause bloating in livestock, so care must be taken with livestock grazing on alfalfa because of this hazard.\nAlfalfa engages in symbiotic nitrogen fixation with nitrogen-fixing bacteria called rhizobia and includes \"Sinorhizobium meliloti.\" This symbiosis results in the formation of indeterminate nodules (continuously growing) which grow on the root on the root hairs. S. meliloti, once inside the nodule will terminally differentiate into bacteroids in which they lose the ability to return to free-living growth in soil. The bacteroids fix atmospheric nitrogen into bioavailable forms such as ammonia. Bacteroids are provided with carbohydrates for growth and return usable nitrogen to the plant. This mutualistic interaction improves soil nitrogen fertility as plant matter is accumulated in the surrounding soil.\nSymbiosis allows Alfalfa to producing a nutritious feed regardless of available nitrogen in the soil. Its nitrogen-fixing ability (which increases soil nitrogen) and its use as an animal feed greatly improve agricultural efficiency.\nAlfalfa can be sown in spring or fall, and does best on well-drained soils with a neutral pH of 6.8\u20137.5. Alfalfa requires sustained levels of potassium and phosphorus to grow well. It is moderately sensitive to salt levels in both the soil and irrigation water, although it continues to be grown in the arid southwestern United States, where salinity is an emerging issue. Soils low in fertility should be fertilized with manure or a chemical fertilizer, but correction of pH is particularly important. Usually a seeding rate of is recommended, with differences based upon region, soil type, and seeding method. A nurse crop is sometimes used, particularly for spring plantings, to reduce weed problems and soil erosion, but can lead to competition for light, water, and nutrients.\nIn most climates, alfalfa is cut three to four times a year, but it can be harvested up to 12 times per year in Arizona and southern California. Total yields are typically around in temperate environments, but yields have been recorded up to . Yields vary with region, weather, and the crop's stage of maturity when cut. Later cuttings improve yield, but with reduced nutritional content.\nHistory.\nAlfalfa is believed to have originated in south-central Asia, and was first cultivated in Central Asia. According to Pliny (died 79 AD), it was introduced to Greece in about 490 BC when the Persians invaded Greek territory. Alfalfa cultivation is discussed in the fourth-century AD book \"Opus Agriculturae\" by Palladius, stating: \"One sow-down lasts ten years. The crop may be cut four or six times a year ... A jugerum of it is abundantly sufficient for three horses all the year ... It may be given to cattle, but new provender is at first to be administered very sparingly, because it bloats up the cattle.\"\nThe medieval Arabic agricultural writer Ibn al-'Awwam, who lived in Spain in the later 12th century, discussed how to cultivate alfalfa, which he called (\"\"). A 13th-century general-purpose Arabic dictionary, \"Lis\u0101n al-'Arab\", says that alfalfa is cultivated as an animal feed and consumed in both fresh and dried forms. It is from the Arabic that the Spanish name \"alfalfa\" was derived.\nIn the 16th century, Spanish colonizers introduced alfalfa to the Americas as fodder for their horses.\nIn the North American colonies of the eastern US in the 18th century, it was called \"alfalfa\", and many trials at growing it were made, but generally without sufficiently successful results. Relatively little is grown in the southeastern US today. Alfalfa seeds were imported to California from Chile in the 1850s. That was the beginning of a rapid and extensive introduction of the crop over the western US and introduced the word \"alfalfa\" to the English language. Since North and South America now produce a large part of the world's output, the word \"alfalfa\" has been slowly entering other languages.\nHarvesting.\nWhen alfalfa is to be used as hay, it is usually cut and baled. Loose haystacks are still used in some areas, but bales are easier for use in transportation, storage, and feed. Ideally, the first cutting should be taken at the bud stage, and the subsequent cuttings just as the field is beginning to flower, or one-tenth bloom because carbohydrates are at their highest. When using farm equipment rather than hand-harvesting, a swather cuts the alfalfa and arranges it in windrows. In areas where the alfalfa does not immediately dry out on its own, a machine known as a mower-conditioner is used to cut the hay. The mower-conditioner has a set of rollers or flails that crimp and break the stems as they pass through the mower, making the alfalfa dry faster. After the alfalfa has dried, a tractor pulling a baler collects the hay into bales.\nSeveral types of bales are commonly used for alfalfa. For small animals and individual horses, the alfalfa is baled into small, two-string bales, commonly named by the strands of string used to wrap it. Other bale sizes are three-string, and so on up to half-ton (six-string) \"square\" bales \u2013 actually rectangular, and typically about . Small square bales weigh from depending on moisture, and can be easily hand separated into \"flakes\". Cattle ranches use large round bales, typically in diameter and weighing from . These bales can be placed in stable stacks or in large feeders for herds of horses or unrolled on the ground for large herds of cattle. The bales can be loaded and stacked with a tractor using a spike, known as a \"bale spear\" that pierces the center of the bale, or they can be handled with a grapple (claw) on the tractor's front-end loader.\nWhen used as feed for dairy cattle, alfalfa is often made into haylage by a process known as ensiling. Rather than being dried to make dry hay, the alfalfa is chopped finely and fermented in silos, trenches, or bags, where the oxygen supply can be limited to promote fermentation. The anaerobic fermentation of alfalfa allows it to retain high nutrient levels similar to those of fresh forage, and is also more palatable to dairy cattle than dry hay. In many cases, alfalfa silage is inoculated with different strains of microorganisms to improve the fermentation quality and aerobic stability of the silage.\nProduction.\nDuring the early 2000s, alfalfa was the most cultivated forage legume in the world. Worldwide production was around 436 million tons in 2006. In 2009, alfalfa was grown on approximately worldwide; of this North America produced 41% (), Europe produced 25% (), South America produced 23% (), Asia produced 8% (), and Africa and Oceania produced the remainder. The US was the largest alfalfa producer in the world by area in 2009, with , but considerable production area is found in Argentina (), Canada (), Russia (), Italy (), and China ().\nUnited States.\nIn the United States in 2012, the leading alfalfa-growing states were California, Idaho, and Montana. Alfalfa is predominantly grown in the northern and western US; it can be grown in the southeastern US, but leaf and root diseases, poor soils, and a lack of well-adapted varieties are often limitations.\nIn California, varieties resistant to the spotted alfalfa aphid (\"Therioaphis maculata\") are necessary, but even that is not always enough due to constant resistance evolution.\nAustralia.\nAlfalfa grown in Australia prior to the 1970s was from seed brought from Great Britain in the early years of colonization, with production most successful in the Hunter and Peel river valleys. Hunter River cv. was the first alfalfa variety developed for the Australian environment and was bred from selections of pre-existing alfalfa stands in the Upper Hunter River (New South Wales) region. Pest burdens from the spotted alfalfa aphid in the 1970s caused significant destruction of NSW alfalfa paddocks, with surviving populations being used as parents for Hunterfield cv. (released 1983). This variety showed significant improvement of resistance to spotted alfalfa aphid.\nGrazing is the most commonly used form of pasture management in Australia, with many varieties of alfalfa being specifically bred for low rainfall, high grazing pressure.\nNew South Wales produces 40% of Australia's alfalfa. Due to the introduction of the spotted alfalfa aphid (\"Therioaphis maculata\") in 1977 all varieties grown there must be resistant to it. South Australia is home to 83% of all alfalfa seed production in Australia. Much of this seed industry is centred around the town of Keith, South Australia, also encompassing the neighbouring localities of Tintinara, Bordertown, Willalooka, Padthaway and Naracoorte.\nAlfalfa and bees.\nAlfalfa seed production requires the presence of pollinators when the fields of alfalfa are in bloom. Alfalfa pollination is somewhat problematic, however, because western honey bees, the most commonly used pollinator, are less than ideal for this purpose; the pollen-carrying keel of the alfalfa flower trips and strikes pollinating bees on the head, which helps transfer the pollen to the foraging bee. Western honey bees, however, do not like being struck in the head repeatedly and learn to defeat this action by drawing nectar from the side of the flower. The bees thus collect the nectar, but carry no pollen, so do not pollinate the next flower they visit. Because older, experienced bees do not pollinate alfalfa well, most pollination is accomplished by young bees that have not yet learned the trick of robbing the flower without tripping the head-knocking keel.\nWhen western honey bees are used to pollinate alfalfa, the beekeeper stocks the field at a very high rate to maximize the number of young bees. However, Western honey bee colonies may suffer protein stress when working alfalfa only, because alfalfa pollen protein is deficient in isoleucine, one of the amino acids essential in the diet of honeybee larvae.\nToday, the alfalfa leafcutter bee (\"Megachile rotundata\") is increasingly used to circumvent these problems. As a solitary but gregarious bee species, it does not build colonies or store honey, but is a very efficient pollinator of alfalfa flowers. Nesting is in individual tunnels in wooden or plastic material, supplied by the alfalfa seed growers. The leafcutter bees are used in the Pacific Northwest, while western honeybees dominate in California alfalfa seed production.\n\"M. rotundata\" was unintentionally introduced into the US during the 1940s, and its management as a pollinator of alfalfa has led to a three-fold increase in seed production in the U.S. The synchronous emergence of the adult bees of this species during alfalfa blooming period in combination with such behaviors as gregarious nesting, and utilization of leaves and nesting materials that have been mass-produced by humans provide positive benefits for the use of these bees in pollinating alfalfa.\nA smaller amount of alfalfa produced for seed is pollinated by the alkali bee, mostly in the northwestern US. It is cultured in special beds near the fields. These bees also have their own problems. They are not portable like honey bees, and when fields are planted in new areas, the bees take several seasons to build up. Honey bees are still trucked to many of the fields at bloom time.\nThe rusty patched bumble bee, \"Bombus affinis\", is important to the agricultural industry as well as for the pollination of alfalfa. It is known that members of this species pollinate up to 65 different species of plants, and it is the primary pollinator of key dietary crops, such as cranberries, plums, apples, onions, and alfalfa.\nVarieties.\nConsiderable research and development has been done with this important plant. Older cultivars such as 'Vernal' have been the standard for years, but many public and private varieties better adapted to particular climates are available. Private companies release many new varieties each year in the US.\nMost varieties go dormant in the fall, with reduced growth in response to low temperatures and shorter days. 'Nondormant' varieties that grow through the winter are planted in long-season environments such as Mexico, Arizona, and Southern California, whereas 'dormant' varieties are planted in the Upper Midwest, Canada, and the Northeast. 'Nondormant' varieties can be higher-yielding, but they are susceptible to winter-kill in cold climates and have poorer persistence.\nMost alfalfa cultivars contain genetic material from \"sickle medick\" (\"M.\"\u00a0\"falcata\"), a crop wild relative of alfalfa that naturally hybridizes with \"M. sativa\" to produce \"sand lucerne\" (\"M. sativa\" ssp. \"varia\"). This species may bear either the purple flowers of alfalfa or the yellow of sickle medick, and is so called for its ready growth in sandy soil. Traits for insect resistance have also been introduced from \"M. glomerata\" and \"M. prostrata\", members of alfalfa's secondary gene pool.\nMost of the improvements in alfalfa over the last decades have consisted of better disease resistance on poorly drained soils in wet years, better ability to overwinter in cold climates, and the production of more leaves. The plant has a number of genotypes with regard to its foliage, including trifoliate, and multifoliate (the latter with five, seven, or nine leaflets).\nAlfalfa growers have a suite of varieties or cultivars to choose from in the seed marketplace, and base their selection on a number of factors including the dormancy or activity rating, crown height, fitness for purpose (i.e., hay production or grazing), disease resistance, insect pest resistance, and forage yield. Plant breeding efforts use scientific methodology and technology to strive for new improved varieties.\nIn 2013, a regional newspaper reported that the L. Teweles Seed Company claimed it had created the world's first hybrid alfalfa.\nWisconsin, California, and many other states publish alfalfa variety trial data. A complete listing of state variety testing data is provided by the North American Alfalfa Improvement Conference (NAAIC) State Listing, and additional detailed alfalfa genetic and variety data are published by the NAAIC.\nGenetic modification.\nRoundup Ready alfalfa (RRA), a genetically modified variety, was released by Forage Genetics International in 2005. This was developed through the insertion of a gene owned by Monsanto Company that confers resistance to glyphosate, a broad-spectrum herbicide, also known as Roundup. Although most grassy and broadleaf plants, including ordinary alfalfa, are killed by Roundup, growers can spray fields of Roundup Ready alfalfa with the glyphosate herbicide and kill the weeds without harming the alfalfa crop.\nLegal issues in the US.\nIn 2005, after completing a 28-page environmental assessment the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) granted RRA nonregulated status under Code of Federal Regulations Title 7 Part 340, which regulates, among other things, the introduction (importation, interstate movement, or release into the environment) of organisms and products altered or produced through genetic engineering that are plant pests or that there is reason to believe are plant pests. Monsanto had to seek deregulation to conduct field trials of RRA, because the RRA contains a promoter sequence derived from the plant pathogen figwort mosaic virus. The USDA granted the application for deregulation, stating that the RRA with its modifications: \"(1) Exhibit no plant pathogenic properties; (2) are no more likely to become weedy than the nontransgenic parental line or other cultivated alfalfa; (3) are unlikely to increase the weediness potential of any other cultivated or wild species with which it can interbreed; (4) will not cause damage to raw or processed agricultural commodities; (5) will not harm threatened or endangered species or organisms that are beneficial to agriculture; and (6) should not reduce the ability to control pests and weeds in alfalfa or other crops.\" Monsanto started selling RRA and within two years, more than 300,000 acres were devoted to the plant in the US.\nThe granting of deregulation was opposed by many groups, including growers of non-GM alfalfa who were concerned about gene flow into their crops. In 2006, the Center for Food Safety, a US non-governmental organization that is a critic of biotech crops, and others, challenged this deregulation in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California. Organic growers were concerned that the GM alfalfa could cross-pollinate with their organic alfalfa, making their crops unsalable in countries that ban the growing of GM crops. The District Court ruled that the USDA's environmental assessment did not address two issues concerning RRA's effect on the environment, and in 2007, required the USDA to complete a much more extensive environmental impact statement (EIS). Until the EIS was completed, they banned further planting of RRA but allowed land already planted to continue. The USDA proposed a partial deregulation of RRA but this was also rejected by the District Court. Planting of RRA was halted.\nIn June 2009, a divided three-judge panel on the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the District Court's decision. Monsanto and others appealed to the US Supreme Court.\nOn 21 June 2010, in \"Monsanto Co. v. Geertson Seed Farms\", the Supreme Court overturned the District Court decision to ban planting RRA nationwide as there was no evidence of irreparable injury. They ruled that the USDA could partially deregulate RRA before an EIS was completed. The Supreme Court did not consider the District Court's ruling disallowing RRA's deregulation and consequently RRA was still a regulated crop waiting for USDA's completion of an EIS.\nThis decision was welcomed by the American Farm Bureau Federation, Biotechnology Industry Organization, American Seed Trade Association, American Soybean Association, National Alfalfa and Forage Alliance, National Association of Wheat Growers, National Cotton Council, and National Potato Council. In July 2010, 75 members of Congress from both political parties sent a letter to Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack asking him to immediately allow limited planting of genetically engineered alfalfa. However the USDA did not issue interim deregulatory measures, instead focusing on completing the EIS. Their 2,300-page EIS, published in December 2010, concluded that RRA would not affect the environment.\nThree of the biggest natural food brands in the US lobbied for a partial deregulation of RRA, but in January 2011, despite protests from organic groups, Secretary Vilsack announced that the USDA had approved the unrestricted planting of genetically modified alfalfa and planting resumed. Secretary Vilsack commented, \"After conducting a thorough and transparent examination of alfalfa\u00a0... APHIS [Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service] has determined that [RRA] is as safe as traditionally bred alfalfa.\" About of alfalfa were grown in the US, the fourth-biggest crop by acreage, of which about 1% were organic. Some biotechnology officials forecast that half of the US alfalfa acreage could eventually be planted with GM alfalfa.\nThe National Corn Growers Association, the American Farm Bureau Federation, and the Council for Biotech Information warmly applauded this decision. Christine Bushway, CEO of the Organic Trade Association, said, \"A\u00a0lot of people are shell-shocked. While we feel Secretary Vilsack worked on this issue, which is progress, this decision puts our organic farmers at risk.\" The Organic Trade Association issued a press release in 2011 saying that the USDA recognized the impact that cross-contamination could have on organic alfalfa and urged them to place restrictions to minimize any such contamination. However, organic farming groups, organic food outlets, and activists responded by publishing an open letter saying that planting the \"alfalfa without any restrictions flies in the face of the interests of conventional and organic farmers, preservation of the environment, and consumer choice\". In addition to House Agriculture Committee Chairman Frank Lucas, Senator Debbie Stabenow (Chairwoman of the Senate Agriculture Committee) and Senator Richard Lugar strongly supported the decision, respectively stating that it would give growers \"the green light to begin planting an abundant, affordable and safe crop\" and give farmers and consumers the \"choice\u00a0... in planting or purchasing food grown with GM technology, conventionally, or organically\". In a joint statement, US Senator Patrick Leahy and Representative Peter DeFazio said the USDA had the \"opportunity to address the concerns of all farmers\", but instead \"surrender[ed] to business as usual for the biotech industry\".\nIn March 2011, the non-profit Center for Food Safety appealed the deregulation decision, which the District Court for Northern California rejected in 2012.\nSafety concerns.\nAlfalfa sprouts may contain microbiological pathogens, mainly from \"Salmonella\" or \"E.\"\u00a0\"coli\", which have caused numerous food product recalls and illness outbreaks, putting sprouts into a \"high risk\" category for food safety. People with weakened immune systems, such as the elderly, pregnant women, or those taking prescription drugs affecting the immune system, should not eat sprouts.\nWith long-term human consumption of alfalfa seeds, several safety concerns and medication interactions may result, including possible reactions similar to lupus erythematosus, an autoimmune disease.\nOther concerns are for women during pregnancy or breast-feeding, hormone-sensitive conditions (such as breast, uterine, and ovarian cancers), and for people with diabetes. Alfalfa may interact with warfarin (e.g. Coumadin), birth control pills (contraceptive drugs), and estrogens.\nToxicity of canavanine.\nRaw alfalfa seeds and sprouts are a source of the amino acid canavanine. Much of the canavanine is converted into other amino acids during germination, so sprouts contain much less canavanine than unsprouted seeds. Canavanine competes with arginine, resulting in the synthesis of dysfunctional proteins. Raw unsprouted alfalfa has toxic effects in primates, including humans, which can result in lupus-like symptoms and other immunological diseases in susceptible individuals. Stopping consumption of alfalfa seeds can reverse the effects.\nPhytoestrogens and effect on livestock fertility.\nAlfalfa, like other leguminous crops, is a source of phytoestrogens, including spinasterol, coumestrol, and coumestan. Because of this, grazing on alfalfa during breeding can cause reduced fertility in sheep and in dairy cattle if not effectively managed.\nCoumestrol levels in alfalfa have been shown to be elevated by fungal infection, but not significantly under drought stress or aphid infestation. Grazing management can be utilised to mitigate the effects of coumestrol on ewe reproductive performance, with full recovery after removal from alfalfa. Coumestrol levels in unirrigated crops can be predicted practically using weather variables.\nNutrition.\nRaw alfalfa seed sprouts are 93% water, 2% carbohydrates, 4% protein, and contain negligible fat. In a reference amount, raw alfalfa sprouts supply of food energy and 29% of the Daily Value of vitamin\u00a0K. They are a moderate source of vitamin\u00a0C, some B\u00a0vitamins, phosphorus, and zinc.\nSprouts.\nSprouting alfalfa seeds is the process of germinating seeds at the immature stage for use as a garnish on various food preparations, such as salads. Although sprouts may be grown in soil, they are more commonly germinated in a soilless medium using drums, trays or racks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66161", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66161", "title": "Marie-Jos\u00e9 P\u00e9rec", "text": "French sprinter (born 1968)\nMarie-Jos\u00e9 P\u00e9rec (; born 9 May 1968) is a retired French track and field sprinter who specialised in the 200 and 400 metres and is a three-time Olympic gold medalist. She was born in the French overseas department of Guadeloupe and moved to Paris when she was 16 years old.\nAthletics career.\nP\u00e9rec first represented France in the 200 metres event at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, reaching the quarter-finals. She won the 400metres world title at the 1991 World Championships in Tokyo and repeated the feat at the 1995 World Championships in Gothenburg. She won her first Olympic gold medal in the 400metres event at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona.\nShe entered the 200metres and 400metres events at the 1996 Atlanta Games and won both, achieving the second-ever Olympic 200metres/400metres gold medal double, after Valerie Brisco-Hooks in Los Angeles 1984. P\u00e9rec won the 400metres title in an Olympic record time of 48.25 seconds, which ranked her as the third-fastest woman of all time. It took another 23 years before Salwa Eid Naser, in October 2019, surpassed her mark to demote P\u00e9rec to fourth in the list of world's fastest-ever female 400-metre sprinters.\nIn addition to her Olympic and World titles, P\u00e9rec won the 400metres title and was part of the gold medal-winning 4\u00d7400metres relay team at the 1994 European Championships in Helsinki. The two 1996 Olympic golds were P\u00e9rec's last international titles. In 1997, she shifted to the 200metres but withdrew at the semi-finals stage in the World Championships that year after sustaining a thigh muscle injury while warming up. She was diagnosed with glandular fever in March 1998, and the long recovery forced her to take time out from competitions until the following year.\nOn 8July 2000, having not run a 400metres race since 1996, P\u00e9rec began her Olympic title defence by finishing third in Nice (at the Nikaia meeting of the 2000 IAAF Grand Prix), behind eventual Olympic silver and bronze medalists Lorraine Graham and Katharine Merry. This was the last significant race P\u00e9rec took part in. On 22September 2000, she pulled out of the 200metres and 400metres events of the 2000 Sydney Games, several days before they were due to start. P\u00e9rec claimed that she had been threatened and insulted several times since arriving in Australia and that the local press, who were supporting Australian athlete Cathy Freeman, had been trying to sabotage her chances of winning 400metres gold.\nP\u00e9rec trained in Los Angeles with the HSI track team and is listed as a legend on the team's page. She officially retired from competitive athletics in June 2004 at the age of 36.\nLife after retirement from athletics.\nP\u00e9rec enrolled in the top French business school ESSEC and graduated in 2007 with a Master's in Sports Management.\nShe is a member of the 'Champions for Peace' club, a group of more than 70 famous elite athletes committed to promoting peace in the world through sports, created by Peace and Sport, a Monaco-based international organisation.\nOn 21 October 2012, P\u00e9rec was elected president of the Ligue R\u00e9gionale d'Athl\u00e9tisme de la Guadeloupe, the governing body for athletics in Guadeloupe.\nP\u00e9rec participated in the French reality music competition \"Mask Singer\" as the Red Panther, performing Stromae's \"Papaoutai\" and Ang\u00e8le's \"Balance ton quoi\" before being eliminated in the first episode.\nOn 26 July 2024, P\u00e9rec and judoka Teddy Riner lit the Olympic cauldron at the 2024 Summer Olympics opening ceremony in Paris.\nFamily.\nP\u00e9rec's partner is French freestyle skier S\u00e9bastien Foucras. They have one child, a son named Nolan, born on 30March 2010.\nAwards.\nP\u00e9rec was chosen as the French Champion of Champions in 1992 and 1996 by the French sports daily \"L'\u00c9quipe\".\nOn 9 October 2013, she was awarded the Officier de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur by French President Fran\u00e7ois Hollande in the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Palace. Just before presenting the insignia to P\u00e9rec during the award ceremony, Hollande described her as \"one of the most brilliant athletes in the history of French athletics\". She had received the Chevalier de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur in 1996.\nP\u00e9rec was inducted into the IAAF Hall of Fame in November 2013.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66162", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66162", "title": "Eilat", "text": "City in Southern Israel\nEilat ( , ; ; ) is Israel's southernmost city, with a population of 57,339, a busy port and popular resort at the northern tip of the Red Sea, on what is known in Israel as the Gulf of Eilat and in Jordan as the Gulf of Aqaba. The city is considered a tourist destination for domestic and international tourists heading to Israel.\nEilat is located at the southernmost tip of Israel, at the southern end of the Arava valley and the Negev desert, adjacent to the Egyptian resort city of Taba to the south, the Jordanian port city of Aqaba to the east, and within sight of Haql, Saudi Arabia, across the gulf to the southeast.\nEilat hosts numerous hotels, holiday resorts, and beaches. Its renowned coral reefs make it a popular destination for diving tourism, with activities such as snorkeling and scuba diving. The city's shopping centers benefit from its status as a tax-free zone. Notable attractions include the Dolphin Reef, where visitors can swim with dolphins; the Coral Beach Nature Reserve, the northernmost shallow coral reef on Earth; the Coral World Underwater Observatory, the Ice Mall, and the city's marina and sea-side promenade, home to many bars, restaurants and shops. The city also offers opportunities for hiking and exploration in nearby natural reserves like Timna Valley Park and the Eilat Mountains.\nEilat's arid desert climate and low humidity are moderated by proximity to a warm sea. Temperatures often exceed in summer, and in winter, while water temperatures range between . Eilat averages 360 sunny days a year.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Eilat\" was given to the abandoned frontier post of \"Umm al-Rashr\u0101sh\" () in 1949 by the , referring to Elath, a location in the vicinity mentioned multiple times in the Hebrew Bible, notably as a station during the Israelites' exodus from Egypt, a site where King Solomon built ships, which was later rebuilt by Uzziah of Judah. The ancient site is possibly located at Tell el-Kheleifeh, an archaeological site situated halfway between modern Eilat and Aqaba, on the Jordanian side of the border.\nGeography.\nThe geology and landscape are varied: igneous and metamorphic rocks, sandstone and limestone; mountains up to above sea level; broad valleys such as the Arava, and seashore on the Gulf of Aqaba. With an annual average rainfall of and summer temperatures of and higher, water resources and vegetation are limited. \"The main elements that influenced the region's history were the copper resources and other minerals, the ancient international roads that crossed the area, and its geopolitical and strategic position. These resulted in a settlement density that defies the environmental conditions.\"\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nArchaeological excavations uncovered impressive prehistoric (Neolithic) tombs dating to the 7th millennium BC at the western edge of Eilat, while nearby copper workings and mining operations at Timna Valley are one of the oldest on earth.\nAn Islamic community of 250\u2013400 residents flourished for one or two generations in the area during the Umayyad period. It dealt in agriculture, copper mining and smelting, as well as trading with pilgrims by taking advantage of the adjacent \"Darb el-Hajj\" ('Way of the Hajj') route in the 8th century CE. There was some sporadic reuse of the abandoned site by pastoralists during the 9th. It was one of six very similar contemporary villages discovered in close vicinity, two along the northbound leg of the \"Darb\", and three to the southwest, along the coastal road, all of them depending on the nearby port of Ayla and the Hajj road. Its remains were found and excavated in 1989, between the industrial zone at the northern edge of Eilat and nearby Kibbutz Eilot.\nModern city.\nDuring the British Mandate era, a British police post existed in the area, which was known as \"Umm Al-Rashrash\". The area was designated as part of the Jewish state in the 1947 UN Partition Plan. During the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, the abandoned police post, which consisted of five clay huts, was taken without a fight on March 10, 1949, as part of Operation Uvda. This marked the end of Israel's war for independence. The memorial at the historical place of March 1949 was declared a National Heritage Site in 1994.\nThe town developed over the following years. Eilat Airport was built in 1949 and individual ships began arriving in the 1950s, but as there were no dedicated port facilities they unloaded their goods at sea. In the early 1950s, Eilat was a small and remote town, populated largely by port workers, soldiers, and former prisoners. The town's development accelerated in 1955, when it had a population of about 500. The Timna Copper Mines near the Timna Valley and the Port of Eilat were opened that year and concerted effort by the Israeli government to populate Eilat began, starting with Jewish immigrant families from Morocco being resettled there. Eilat began to develop rapidly after the Suez Crisis in 1956, with its tourism industry in particular starting to flourish. The Israeli Navy's Eilat naval base was founded that year. The town's population grew to 5,300 in 1961. Yoseftal Medical Center and the Eilat-Ashkelon pipeline were completed in 1968, and the population increased further, reaching 13,100 in 1972 and 18,900 in 1983.\nAfter the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War Arab countries maintained a state of hostility with Israel, blocking all land routes; Israel's access to and trade with the rest of the world was by air and sea alone. Further, Egypt denied passage through the Suez Canal to Israeli-registered ships or to any ship carrying cargo to or from Israeli ports. This made Eilat and its sea port crucial to Israel's communications, commerce and trade with Africa and Asia, and for oil imports. Without recourse to a port on the Red Sea Israel would have been unable to develop its diplomatic, cultural and trade ties beyond the Mediterranean basin and Europe. This happened in 1956 and again in 1967, when Egypt's closure of the Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping effectively blockaded the port of Eilat. In 1956, this led to Israel's participation alongside Britain and France in the war against Egypt sparked by the Suez Crisis, while in 1967, 90% of Israeli oil passed through the Straits of Tiran. Oil tankers that were due to pass through the straits were delayed. The straits' closure was cited by Israel as an additional \"casus belli\" leading to the outbreak of the Six-Day War. Following peace treaties signed with Egypt in 1979 and Jordan in 1994, Eilat's borders with its neighbors were finally opened.\nIsraeli\u2013Arab conflict.\nEilat is especially defended by its own special forces unit LOTAR Eilat. It is a reservist special forces unit of the IDF trained in counter-terrorism and hostage rescue in the Eilat area, which has taken part in many counter-terrorist missions in the region since its formation in 1974. The Lotar unit is composed solely of reservists, citizens who must be Eilat residents between the ages of 20 and 60, who are on call in case of a terrorist attack on the city. It is one of only three units in the IDF authorized to free hostages on its own command. In 2007 the Eilat bakery bombing killed three civilian bakers. This was the first such attack in Eilat proper, although other terror attacks had been carried out in the area.\nIn 2011, terrorists infiltrated Israel across the Sinai border to execute multiple attacks on Highway 12, including a civilian bus and private car a few miles north of Eilat, in what became known as the 2011 southern Israel cross-border attacks.\nIn order to prevent terrorist infiltration of Israel from the Sinai, Israel has built the Egypt\u2013Israel barrier, a steel barrier equipped with cameras, radar and motion sensors along the country's southern border. The fence was completed in January 2013.\nDuring the Gaza war and ensuing Red Sea crisis, the port saw an 85% reduction in volumes and by 12 July 2024 the port of Eilat declared bankruptcy resulting in it seeing no economic activity or revenue for eight months.\nFuture development plans.\nIn July 2012, Israel signed an agreement with China to cooperate in building the high-speed railway to Eilat, a railway line which will serve both passenger and freight trains. It will link Eilat with Beersheba and Tel Aviv, and will run through the Arava Valley and Nahal Zin (see Zin Desert).\nThe former Eilat Airport was closed on 18 March 2019 after the opening of Ramon Airport. The land occupied by the former airport is to be redeveloped. The new Ramon Airport opened in January 2019, north of Eilat and replaced both Eilat Airport and the civilian use of Ovda Airport. Hotels and apartment buildings, containing a total of 2,080 hotel rooms and 1,000 apartments will be constructed on the site, as well as 275 dunams of public space and pedestrian paths. The plans also set aside space for the railway line and an underground railway station. The plan's goal is to create an urban continuum between the city center and North Beach, as well as tighten the links between the city's neighborhoods, which were separated by the airport.\nIn addition, there are plans to move the Port of Eilat and the Eilat-Ashkelon pipeline terminal to the northern part of the city, as well as to turn it into a university town of science and research, and brand it an international sports city. All these projects are part of a plan to increase Eilat's population to 150,000 people and build 35,000 hotel rooms.\nClimate.\nEilat has a hot desert climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BWh\") with very hot, dry summers and warm, similarly dry winters. Winters are usually between . Summers are usually between . There are relatively small coral reefs near Eilat; however, 50 years ago they were much larger.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe overwhelming majority of Eilat's population are Jews. Arabs constitute about 4% of the population. Eilat's population includes a large number of foreign workers, estimated at over 10,000 working as caregivers, hotel workers and in the construction trades. Eilat also has a growing Israeli Arab population, as well as many affluent Jordanians and Egyptians who visit Eilat in the summer months.\nIn 2007, over 200 Sudanese refugees from Egypt who arrived in Israel illegally on foot were given work and allowed to stay in Eilat.\nEducation.\nThe educational system of Eilat accommodates more than 9,000 children in eight day-care centers, 67 pre-kindergartens and kindergartens, 10 elementary schools, and 3 six-year high schools. Also, there are some special-education schools and religious schools. Ben Gurion University of the Negev maintains a campus in Eilat. The Eilat branch has 1,100 students, about 75 percent from outside the city. The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, also maintains a campus in Eilat. In 2010, a new student dormitory was funded and built by the Jewish Federation of Toronto, the Rashi Foundation, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev and the municipality of Eilat. The SPNI's Eilat Field School on the outskirts of Eilat offers special hiking tours that focus on desert ecology, the Red Sea, bird migration and other aspects of Eilat's flora and fauna. The Hesder Yeshiva Ayelet Hashachar, is based in Eilat, established in 1997.\nHealthcare.\nYoseftal Medical Center, established in 1968, is Israel's southernmost hospital, and the only hospital covering the southern Negev. With 65 beds, the hospital is Israel's smallest. Special services geared to the Red Sea region are a hyperbaric chamber to treat victims of diving accidents and kidney dialysis facilities open to vacationing tourists.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nSince 2019, Ramon International Airport has handled commercial domestic and international flights to Eilat (IATA: ETM, ICAO: LLER).\nRoad.\nEilat has two main roads connecting it with the center of Israel \u2013 Route 12, which leads North West, and Route 90 which leads North East, and South West to the border crossing with Egypt.\nBus.\nEgged, the national bus company, provides regular service to points north on an almost hourly basis as well as in-city on a half-hourly basis during daylight hours. In part due to the comparatively long travel times, there are different booking procedures for buses to Eilat, including the option of advance reservations.\nMaritime.\nThe Port of Eilat and Eilat Marina allow travel by sea.\nRail.\nFuture plans also call for a rail link, sometimes referred to as the Med-Red to decrease travel times substantially from Eilat to Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, via the existing line at Beer Sheba; planning is underway. As of 2021 Dimona railway station is the southernmost passenger train station in Israel.\nEconomy.\nIn the 1970s tourism became increasingly important to the city's economy as other industries shut down or were drastically reduced. Today tourism is the city's major source of income, although Eilat became a free trade zone in 1985.\nTourism.\nEilat offers a wide range of accommodations, from hostels and luxury hotels to Bedouin hospitality. In recent years Eilat has been the target of militants from Egypt and Gaza causing a reduced tourist inflow to the region. Attractions include:\nDive tourism.\nSkin and scuba diving equipment is for hire on or near all major beaches. Scuba diving equipment rental and compressed air are available from diving clubs and schools all year round. Eilat is located in the Gulf of Aqaba, one of the most popular diving destinations in the world. The coral reefs along Eilat's coast remain relatively pristine and the area is recognized as one of the prime diving locations in the world. About 250,000 dives are performed annually in Eilat's coastline, and diving represents 10% of the tourism income of this area. In addition, given the proximity of many of these reefs to the shore, non-divers can encounter the Red Sea's reefs with relative ease. Water conditions for SCUBA divers are good all year round, with water temperatures around , with little or no currents and clear waters with an average of visibility.\nFilm.\nEilat has been utilized by film and television productions \u2013 domestic and foreign \u2013 for location shooting since the 1960s, most notably in the early 90s as a tropical locale for season 2 of the Canadian production \"Tropical Heat\".\nIt was also used in the films \"She\", \"Madron\", \"Ashanti\" and \"Rambo III\".\nArchaeology.\nDespite harsh conditions, the region has supported large populations as far back as 8,000 BCE. Several Neolithic sites have been discovered in Eilat in its vicinity. One of them is a late Neolithic burial site with fan scrapers, dated by archaeologists to 5410\u20134250 BCE.\nExploration of ancient sites began in 1861, but only 7% of the area has undergone serious archaeological excavation. Some 1,500 ancient sites are located in a area. In contrast to the gaps found in settlement periods in the neighbouring Negev Highlands and Sinai, these sites show continuous settlement for the past 10,000 years.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nEilat is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEilat has streets named after Antibes, Durban, Kamen, Kampen and Los Angeles as well as a Canada Park.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66164", "revid": "5230605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66164", "title": "Ronaldo (Brazilian footballer)", "text": "Brazilian footballer (born 1976)\nRonaldo Lu\u00eds Naz\u00e1rio de Lima (; born 18 September 1976), mononymously known as Ronaldo, is a Brazilian former professional footballer who played as a striker. He is the owner and president of La Liga club Real Valladolid. Nicknamed ('The Phenomenon') and R9, he is widely regarded as one of the greatest players of all time. As a multi-functional striker who brought a new dimension to the position, Ronaldo has been an influence for a generation of strikers that have followed. His individual accolades include being named FIFA World Player of the Year three times and winning two Ballon d'Or awards.\nRonaldo started his career at Cruzeiro and moved to PSV in 1994. He joined Barcelona in 1996 for a then world record transfer fee and at 20 years old, he was named the 1996 FIFA World Player of the Year, making him the youngest recipient of the award. In 1997, Inter Milan broke the world record fee to sign Ronaldo, making him the first player since Diego Maradona to break the world transfer record twice. At 21, he received the 1997 Ballon d'Or and remains the youngest recipient of the award. By the age of 23, Ronaldo had scored over 200 goals for club and country. However, after a series of knee injuries and recuperation, he was inactive for almost three years. Ronaldo joined Real Madrid in 2002 and won the 2002\u201303 La Liga title. He had spells at AC Milan and Corinthians before retiring in 2011, having suffered further injuries.\nRonaldo played for Brazil in 98 matches, scoring 62 goals and is the third-highest goalscorer for his national team. At age 17, he was the youngest member of the Brazilian squad that won the 1994 FIFA World Cup. At the 1998 FIFA World Cup, Ronaldo received the Golden Ball as the player of the tournament after he helped Brazil reach the final, where he suffered a convulsive fit hours before kick-off. He won the 2002 FIFA World Cup, starring in a front three with Ronaldinho and Rivaldo. Ronaldo scored twice in the final and received the Golden Boot as the tournament's top goalscorer. This achievement, viewed as \"redemption\" for what occurred at the previous World Cup, saw Ronaldo named the 2002 FIFA World Player of the Year, receive the 2002 Ballon d'Or, and for his return from injury, won the Laureus World Sports Award for Comeback of the Year. At the 2006 FIFA World Cup, Ronaldo scored his 15th World Cup goal, a tournament record at the time. He also won the 1997 Copa Am\u00e9rica, where he became the player of the tournament and the 1999 Copa Am\u00e9rica, where he was the top goalscorer.\nRonaldo was one of the most marketable sportsmen in the world during his playing career. He was named in the FIFA 100 list of the greatest living players compiled in 2004 by Pel\u00e9 and was inducted into the Brazilian Football Museum Hall of Fame, Italian Football Hall of Fame, Inter Milan Hall of Fame and Real Madrid Hall of Fame. In 2020, Ronaldo was named in the Ballon d'Or Dream Team, a greatest all-time XI published by \"France Football\" magazine. Ronaldo has continued his work as a United Nations Development Programme Goodwill Ambassador, a position to which he was appointed in 2000. Ronaldo became the majority owner of Real Valladolid in September 2018, after buying 51% of the club's shares. In December 2021, he bought a controlling stake in his boyhood club Cruzeiro, investing $70 million in the club. He sold his stake in Cruzeiro in April 2024.\nEarly life.\nRonaldo Lu\u00eds Naz\u00e1rio de Lima was born on 18 September 1976 in Itagua\u00ed as the third child of N\u00e9lio Naz\u00e1rio de Lima Sr. and S\u00f4nia dos Santos Barata. Ronaldo has a brother, N\u00e9lio Jr. His parents separated when he was only 11, and Ronaldo dropped out of school shortly afterward to pursue a career in football. He played on the streets of Bento Ribeiro, a suburb of Rio de Janeiro. His mother states: \"I always found him on the street playing ball with friends when he should have been in school. I know, I lost my battle.\" His first futsal team was Valqueire Tenis Clube, and then he joined the Social Ramos futsal team at the age of 12 leading the city's youth league in scoring with a record 166 goals in his first season which included scoring 11 of his team's 12 goals in a single game. Crediting futsal for developing his skills, Ronaldo has said, \"futsal will always be my first love.\" His coach from Social Ramos, Alirio Carvalho, says: \"What was special about Ronaldo was his attitude. It was as if he had come from the moon. Nothing disturbed him, nothing overawed him, nothing threw him off his game.\"\nSpotted by former Brazilian player Jairzinho, who was coaching S\u00e3o Crist\u00f3v\u00e3o, Ronaldo played for the S\u00e3o Crist\u00f3v\u00e3o youth team. Under the guidance of coach Alfredo Sampaio, he progressed quickly through the ranks, playing for the clubs' under-17 and under-20 teams while only 15. Ronaldo's agents in Brazil, Reinaldo Pitta and Alexandre Martins, signed him as a 13-year-old. Pitta stated: \"We saw right away that he could be something different than most other players.\" Recognized as a child prodigy, Jairzinho recommended the then 16-year-old to his former club Cruzeiro.\nClub career.\nCruzeiro.\nRonaldo quickly attracted attention from big clubs, and his agents rejected offers from Botafogo and S\u00e3o Paulo. He was turned down by Flamengo, the team he supported as a boy, after missing practice due to an inability to afford the fare for the hour-long bus ride. Jairzinho saw Ronaldo's potential and helped get him a move to Cruzeiro. Ronaldo's agents accepted an offer of \u20ac50,000 from the club, and he scored four goals on his youth team debut.\nThree months after arriving at Cruzeiro, Ronaldo made his professional debut on 25 May 1993 against Caldense in the Minas Gerais State Championship. His first senior goal came in a friendly during a tour of Portugal, scoring a goal against Belenenses and generally impressing new coach Carlos Alberto Silva, enough to become a first team regular. During the tour, his performance against Porto impressed enough that they bid $500,000, which was turned down by club president C\u00e9sar Masci.\nUpon returning from the 1993 summer tour, he would score 20 goals in 21 games for Cruzeiro until the end of the year. On 5 October 1993 he scored his first senior career hat-trick against Chilean side Colo-Colo (6\u20131) in the first home leg of the Supercopa Libertadores. He scored two more in the second leg, further three against Uruguayan team Nacional, and finished as the tournament's top-scorer with 8 goals, being the youngest to do so in the history of the Supercopa Libertadores.\nOn 7 November 1993 he came to national public attention once more by scoring five goals in Cruzeiro's 6\u20130 home win against Bahia in the 1993 Campeonato Brasileiro S\u00e9rie A and became the second youngest South-American in history to score a league hat-trick behind Pel\u00e9.\nRonaldo scored a total of 44 goals in 47 games with Cruzeiro in two seasons, leading them to their first Copa do Brasil in 1993, and the Minas Gerais State Championship in 1994.\nPSV.\nRonaldo joined PSV after the 1994 World Cup. He was selected for the tournament despite being just 17, but did not play in any games. His Brazil teammate Rom\u00e1rio, having played for PSV from 1988 to 1993, advised Ronaldo to move to the club. On 28 August 1994, Ronaldo scored ten minutes into his debut against Vitesse, and scored a brace on his home debut against Go Ahead Eagles. He scored 30 league goals in his first season in the Netherlands, which included seven braces and a hat-trick against Utrecht. After scoring a hat-trick in PSV's game against Bayer Leverkusen in the 1994\u201395 UEFA Cup, Leverkusen striker and Germany World Cup winner Rudi V\u00f6ller stated in a post match press conference, \"Never in my life have I seen an 18-year-old play in this way.\" His dribbles from midfield caught the attention of many in the sport, with future Barcelona teammate Luis Enrique stating, \"I'd seen him on television at PSV and thought \u2018wow'. Then he came to Barcelona. He's the most spectacular player I've ever seen. He did things I'd never seen before. We're now used to seeing Messi dribble past six players, but not then. Ronaldo was a beast.\"\nNick Miller, match reporter for \"The Guardian\", writes: \"What's striking about Ronaldo in that first year at PSV is how complete he looks, even as a skinny teenager. Everything that would come to define him \u2013 the lightning pace, the blurry stepovers, the implausible impression that he was faster with the ball than without it, even the exceptional upper-body strength \u2013 was all there.\" Rob Smyth added, \"In many ways Ronaldo was the first PlayStation footballer. His stepover was a form of hypnosis, and his signature trick, the elastico, could certainly have come from a computer screen.\" Ronaldo's second season was marred by a knee injury which kept him out of most of the campaign, but he still averaged nearly a goal a game, scoring 19 goals in 21 appearances, including a UEFA Cup four-goal haul against Finnish side MyPa. With PSV, Ronaldo won the Dutch Cup in 1996 and he was Eredivisie top scorer in 1995. In his two seasons at the club he scored 54 goals in 58 games. Ronaldo occasionally names Luc Nilis as one of the best strike partners he had played with, despite sharing only a brief time with him at PSV.\nBarcelona.\nDuring his spell at PSV, Ronaldo attracted the attention of both Inter Milan and Barcelona. It was Barcelona that was willing to pay the then-world record fee of $19.5\u00a0million, and he joined the club on 17 July 1996. According to manager Bobby Robson, he signed an eight-year contract, and would play up front alone.\nDuring the 1996\u201397 season, Ronaldo scored 47 goals in 49 games in all competitions, with his goal celebration invariably the same with his arms outstretched like the statue of \"Christ the Redeemer\" that watches over his native Rio de Janeiro. He helped Barcelona to the 1996\u201397 UEFA Cup Winners' Cup title, capping the season with the winning goal in the final, and to a win in the 1996 Supercopa de Espa\u00f1a. He also won La Liga top scorer award in 1997 with 34 goals in 37 games, and the European Golden Shoe. Until the 2008\u201309 season, Ronaldo remained the last player to score more than 30 goals in La Liga.\nRonaldo was at his physical peak at Barcelona, and many of his 47 goals involved him rounding the goalkeeper before slotting the ball into the net. By January 1997, at 20 years old, he was touted to be the next \"great\" in football, being viewed as the heir to Pel\u00e9, Diego Maradona, Johan Cruyff and Marco van Basten. Speaking to \"The New York Times\" regarding Ronaldo later that season, Robson said \"I don't think I've ever seen a player at 20 have so much\". \"World Soccer\" featured Ronaldo on its cover in the same year under the headline 'The Best Ever?'. \u00d3scar Garc\u00eda, Ronaldo's teammate that season, stated, \"Back then, he was all fibre and muscle. He was a perfect physical specimen. Such incredible power matched to his technical skills could make him unstoppable.\" Jos\u00e9 Mourinho, who worked as an interpreter at Barcelona, referred to Ronaldo as \"the greatest player I have ever seen in my life\", adding, \"I have no doubts. Ronaldo is the best my eyes have seen\", and in 2014 regarded him as the best player post-Diego Maradona.\nArguably, Ronaldo's most memorable Barcelona goal was scored at Compostela on 11 October 1996; having received the ball inside his own half, he evaded a cynical tackle of the first opponent with a drag back, before running away from another and ran towards goal, going past two more defenders in the box with close ball control, before finishing into the bottom corner of the net. The camera then cut to manager Robson who had got up off the bench and clasped his head in disbelief at what he had seen. The footage of the goal was later used in a Nike advert with a voiceover asking: \"Imagine you asked God to be the best player in the world, and he listened to you\", and the goal was said to have been replayed 160 times on the main Spanish television channels in the 48 hours following the game. Half-way through the season, Barcelona agreed in principle to extend his contract to 2006, doubling his salary in the process. A hat-trick against Valencia, the third goal of which saw him dissect two Valencia defenders before striking the ball into the net, saw Barcelona fans waving white handkerchiefs as an expression of admiration for an exceptional performance. Sid Lowe of \"Sports Illustrated\" stated: \"That season Ronaldo was unstoppable. He was slim and powerful, skillful, fast and deadly. He was ridiculously good.\" At the end of 1996, aged 20, Ronaldo became the youngest player to win FIFA World Player of the Year.\nInter Milan.\n1997\u20131999: World record transfer and Ballon d'Or win.\nRonaldo's time at Barcelona lasted one season, as there were problems with the renegotiation of his contract. Barcelona thought there was an agreement in place, with Barcelona president Josep Llu\u00eds N\u00fa\u00f1ez saying \"He's ours for life\", but when the parties reconvened the following day, the agreement collapsed, with N\u00fa\u00f1ez admitting: \"It's all over, Ronaldo is going\". Speaking to ESPN, Ronaldo stated, \"I had reached an agreement to renew my contract just a month before that season finished, but a week later the lawyer and the president of Barcelona agreed that that contract was absurd.\" Paying the buy out clause fee in his contract, Inter Milan signed him in the summer of 1997 for a then world record fee of $27\u00a0million, making him the second player, after Diego Maradona, to break the world transfer record twice. He signed a five-year contract with the Italians, and was unveiled to 4,000 Inter fans at their training ground. His debut came on 27 July during the pre-season fixture against Manchester United. His competitive debut came on the opening day of the 1997\u201398 season against Brescia.\nRonaldo adapted to the Italian style of the game in his first season, finishing with 25 Serie A goals, and was named Serie A Footballer of the Year. Ronaldo started to develop into a complete forward. He began racking up assists, became first-choice penalty taker, taking and scoring freekicks. Halfway through his first season he won FIFA World Player of the Year for the second time, and collected the Ballon d'Or. During his time with Inter, he scored several goals against city rivals AC Milan in the Derby della Madonnina. Ronaldo and prolific Fiorentina striker Gabriel Batistuta were the two best strikers in Serie A, with their duels the most anticipated in Italy. Ronaldo's goal celebrations often saw his Inter teammates congratulating him by kneeling down and pretending to shine his shoe. Ronaldo scored a trademark goal against Lazio in the 1998 UEFA Cup Final. Running through defence to go one on one with Lazio goalkeeper Luca Marchegiani, Ronaldo feinted to go right then left, without touching the ball, leaving Marchegiani on his backside, before going right and slotting the ball into the net. His Inter teammate Youri Djorkaeff stated; \"Ronaldo was phenomenal. He proved that he was a cut above the rest that season.\" After the 1998 FIFA World Cup, where he was named player of the tournament, Ronaldo was widely regarded as the best striker in the world. By the end of the 1998\u201399 season, he was appointed Inter Milan captain.\n1999\u20132002: Recurring injury problems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The knee injuries suffered at Inter Milan took away the explosiveness that made him possibly the greatest young footballer of all time, a futuristic fusion of speed, strength and skill. That is not to belittle Ronaldo's achievements in the second half of his career, when he scored eight goals in a single World Cup [in 2002] and became the first Ronaldo to receive a standing ovation at Old Trafford [in 2003], but it is the memory of the early years that puts mist in the eyes of grown men.\"\n\u2014Rob Smyth, \"The Guardian\".\nAfter two seasons with Inter, A.C. Milan defender Paolo Maldini viewed Ronaldo and Diego Maradona as the two best players he ever faced, stating, \"Ronaldo during his first two years at Inter was a phenomenon.\" Inter had high hopes going into the 1999\u20132000 season with their attack including Ronaldo and Italian stars Roberto Baggio and Christian Vieri. However, on 21 November, during a Serie A match against Lecce, Ronaldo felt his knee buckle and was forced to limp off the field. A medical examination confirmed that the striker had ruptured a tendon in his knee and would require surgery. During his first comeback on 12 April 2000, he played only six minutes during the first leg of the Coppa Italia final against Lazio before suffering a complete rupture of the knee-cap tendons. Ronaldo's physiotherapist Nilton Petrone stated, \"his knee-cap actually exploded\", and called it \"the worst football injury\" he's ever seen.\nRonaldo was forced to miss the entire 2000\u201301 season and much of the two seasons either side of it. Since his Inter teammate Javier Zanetti had replaced him as the team captain during his absence, he eventually inherited the captain's armband in late 2001. After two operations and rehabilitation, Ronaldo came back for the 2002 World Cup, helping Brazil win their fifth World Cup title. Later in 2002, he won the FIFA World Player of the Year award for the third time, and transferred from Inter to Real Madrid. Ronaldo was given his most recognizable nickname, , by the Italian press while playing there. His Inter teammate Djorkaeff stated: \"when we were training, we would practically stop to watch him. It was extraordinary.\" Prior to his November 1999 injury, Ronaldo had registered 42 goals in 58 Serie A games, in what was the hardest league to score in with the most advanced defensive strategies and the world's best defenders. After five years, he had played 99 games and scored 59 goals for \"Nerazzurri\". Ronaldo's performances at the club \u2013 especially the first two seasons before injury \u2013 saw him named among the four inaugural inductees into the Inter Milan Hall of Fame in 2018.\nReal Madrid.\n2002\u20132005: Ballon d'Or win and La Liga championship.\nHaving signed for Real Madrid for \u20ac46\u00a0million, his jersey sales broke all records on the first day. Ronaldo was part of the \"Gal\u00e1cticos\" era of global stars signed by the club every summer, which included Zinedine Zidane, Lu\u00eds Figo, Roberto Carlos and David Beckham. He was sidelined through injury until October 2002 which further fuelled fan anticipation. Ronaldo scored twice on his debut against Alav\u00e9s, the first 61 seconds after coming on. That same reception was observed at the final game of the season against Athletic Bilbao, where Ronaldo scored to finish his first season with 23 league goals and seal La Liga title for 2003. He also won an Intercontinental Cup in 2002 and Supercopa de Espa\u00f1a in 2003, scoring in both finals.\nIn the second leg of Real Madrid's Champions League quarter-final, Ronaldo scored a hat-trick against Manchester United at Old Trafford, knocking the English team out of the competition. Completing his hat-trick with a swerving strike from 30 yards, Ronaldo was substituted off after 67 minutes, and was given a standing ovation from both sets of fans. Reflecting on the ovation given to him from the oppositions' fans, Ronaldo stated that \"it remains a very beautiful, very special moment\". Manchester United defender Wes Brown commented: \"He was just unstoppable. A young Ronaldo [before a series of injuries] would have been even more dangerous, but it shows how good a player he was. Whenever he wanted to turn it on he could, on any stage, in any stadium\". Ronaldo scored in a 2\u20131 home win over Juventus in the first leg of the Champions League semi-finals, but injury crucially kept him out of most of the second leg defeat where Real were eliminated.\nIn the 2003\u201304 season, Madrid were on track to win the treble, until Ronaldo was injured towards the end of the season; they subsequently lost the Copa del Rey final, were knocked out of the UEFA Champions League quarter-finals to Monaco, and suffered a league form breakdown. During that second season at the club, Ronaldo scored one of the fastest goals in the club's history when he netted after 15 seconds in a league match against Atl\u00e9tico Madrid at the Bernab\u00e9u on 3 December 2003. Three days later he helped to ensure Real's first league victory over Barcelona at the Nou Camp in 20 years when he scored the second goal in a 2\u20131 victory over his former club. He finished the season as La Liga's top scorer with 25 goals and received the Pichichi Trophy for a second time, despite Madrid losing the league title to Valencia.\n2005\u20132007: Final two seasons.\nIn his final two seasons at Real Madrid, Ronaldo missed a number of games with injuries and weight issues, and with the acquisition of Ruud van Nistelrooy in 2006, he grew further out of favour with the manager Fabio Capello. Speaking in 2017 on Ronaldo's weight issues and lack of fitness at Madrid, in addition to his ability, Capello summed up the conflicting emotions he has with the Brazilian: \"The most difficult player to handle was the best I coached: Ronaldo, il Fenomeno.\"\nIn four and a half seasons at the club, Ronaldo scored over a century of goals, becoming the fifth foreigner at Madrid to achieve the feat after Argentine Alfredo Di St\u00e9fano, Hungarian Ferenc Pusk\u00e1s, Mexican Hugo S\u00e1nchez and Chilean Iv\u00e1n Zamorano. Although the knee injuries before 2002 meant he \"was robbed of the explosiveness of his early years\" (according to \"FourFourTwo\") by the time he signed for Real Madrid, Ronaldo was named by \"Marca\" as a member of the \"Best foreign eleven in Real Madrid's history\".\nWhile past his 1990s prime, Ronaldo still drew praise from his Madrid colleagues, with Zidane stating: \"Without hesitation, Ronaldo is the best player I ever played with or against. He had such an ease with the ball. Every day I trained with him, I saw something different, something new, something beautiful.\" Michael Owen, who joined Madrid in 2004, acknowledged that he never got the chance to play with Ronaldo in his prime when \"he had absolute blistering speed and strength, mesmerizing foot speed, he was just a blur, he'd be that fast\", before adding, \"even in training, he showed more than enough to convince me that I would have loved to play with him at his peak.\" Teammates for six months, Van Nistelrooy said: \"Ronaldo was the best natural talent I ever played with. His innate ability went beyond anything that I'd ever seen or played alongside.\"\nAC Milan.\nOn 18 January 2007, it was reported that Ronaldo agreed terms with Milan for a transfer of \u20ac8.05\u00a0million. Departing Real Madrid, having been the club's leading goalscorer for all of his four full seasons, Ronaldo thanked everyone except Capello: \"I would like to thank the fans who've supported me all the time and thank all the teammates that I've had here and all the coaches I've had \u2013 except one\". Capello, who dropped him due to weight issues, commented: \"I wish him the best of luck in doing what he used to do which is being a great player.\" On 25 January, Ronaldo flew from Madrid to Milan, with statements on the club's website stating Ronaldo was in Milan for a medical, and that a meeting had been arranged with Real Madrid officials to discuss and finalize his transfer to the Milanese club. On 26 January, Ronaldo successfully completed his medical tests at the Milanello training complex under the supervision of club doctors, and the transfer was completed on 30 January. Wearing the number 99 jersey, he made his debut as a substitute on 11 February 2007 in the 2\u20131 victory over Livorno. The next game at Siena, on 17 February, Ronaldo scored twice and assisted on a third goal in his first start for Milan, as they won 4\u20133. In his first season, Ronaldo scored seven goals in 14 appearances.\nAfter his move to Milan, Ronaldo joined the list of the few players to have played for both Inter Milan and AC Milan in the Derby della Madonnina, and is one of few players to have scored for both rival teams in the Milan derby game (for Inter in the 1998\u201399 season and for AC Milan in the 2006\u201307 season), the others being players such as Giuseppe Meazza, Zlatan Ibrahimovi\u0107, Enrico Candiani and Aldo Cevenini. Ronaldo is also one of the few players to have started for Real Madrid and Barcelona, which also boasts a heated rivalry. Ronaldo, however, has never transferred directly between rival clubs. Ronaldo only played 300-plus minutes in his second season at Milan due to recurring injury problems and weight issues. Ronaldo's only goals in the 2007\u201308 season, besides his goal against Lecce in pre-season, came in a 5\u20132 victory against Napoli at the San Siro, where he scored an emotional double. It was also the first time Milan's much hyped attacking trio of Kak\u00e1, Alexandre Pato and Ronaldo, known as \"Ka-Pa-Ro\", played together.\nDespite tremendous success over the past decade, Ronaldo never won the UEFA Champions League in his club career. In 2019, \"FourFourTwo\" named him the best player never to win the competition; in 2020, Sky Sports ranked him the second-best player (after Diego Maradona) never to win the Champions League or European Cup. Ronaldo stated: \"I live football with a passion that doesn't give me any peace for not winning the Champions League \u2013 it's a trophy everyone would love to win.\" In 2011, Paul Wilson wrote in \"The Guardian\": \"Ronaldo was unlucky in his timing or his choice of club \u2013 for there is no doubt that at his very best he would have walked into any club in the world.\" For the 2006\u201307 season, when AC Milan won the Champions League, Ronaldo was cup-tied with Madrid and ineligible to take part. The closest that he came to Champions League success was in 2003 when he helped Real Madrid to the semi-finals, in which they lost to Juventus.\nOn 13 February 2008, Ronaldo suffered a severe season-ending knee injury while jumping for a cross in Milan 1\u20131 draw with Livorno, and was stretchered off and taken to a hospital. The club confirmed after the match that Ronaldo had ruptured the kneecap ligament in his left knee. It marked the third such occurrence of this injury, which he suffered twice to his right knee in 1999 and 2000. Teammate Clarence Seedorf stated: \"My heart stopped beating because it was like watching a repeat of the injury he suffered playing for Inter Milan against Lazio [in 2000]. His reaction was the same.\" Silvio Berlusconi told Italy's RAI TV: \"He fears for his career. I called him last evening and told him to believe in himself. He has enormous physical potential.\" Ronaldo was released by Milan at the end of the season, as his contract expired and was not renewed.\nCorinthians.\n2009\u20132010: Paulist\u00e3o and Copa do Brasil.\nRonaldo trained with Rio de Janeiro based Brazilian club Flamengo during his recovery from knee surgery, and the club's board of directors said that the doors were open for him to join. On 9 December, however, Ronaldo signed a one-year deal with Flamengo's league rival Corinthians. The announcement received much publicity in the Brazilian press about his choice of Corinthians over Flamengo, since Ronaldo publicly declared himself a Flamengo fan. Rio-based sports newspaper \"Lance!\" called Ronaldo a \"phenomenal traitor\", and some angry fans burned Ronaldo shirts outside the Flamengo headquarters. Ronaldo responded that playing for Corinthians was the only option open to him. \"I understand perfectly, I'm openly a Flamengo fan. But I was training with Flamengo for four months and didn't receive any offer. Corinthians made an offer that will let me continue my career.\"\nRonaldo played his first match for Corinthians on 4 March 2009, a Copa do Brasil match against Itumbiara at Est\u00e1dio Juscelino Kubitschek, in which he came as a substitute for Jorge Henrique. Ronaldo scored his first goal for Corinthians on 8 March 2009 in a Campeonato Paulista match against Palmeiras. Scoring eight goals in nine matches, his form led to calls for his return to the Brazil national team \u2013 nearly 70% of respondents in a poll for the \"O Globo\" newspaper voted that he should be reinstated, with the country's president Lula also calling for his immediate return. He scored twice in a 3\u20131 win against local rivals Santos in the first leg of the state championship final, with Santos idol Pel\u00e9 looking on from the stands. His second goal, a chip over the Santos goalkeeper from 30 yards out, sent the Corinthians fans into hysteria. Ultimately, he helped Corinthians win the Campeonato Paulista with ten goals in 14 games.\nRonaldo scored in Corinthians 4\u20132 aggregate defeat of Internacional in the final of the 2009 Copa do Brasil, helping the club win the trophy for the third time (the second of his career), thus earning a spot in the Copa Libertadores 2010. Following an injury lay off he returned on 20 September in a match against Goi\u00e1s, and a week later scored for Corinthians in a draw against S\u00e3o Paulo. He finished the 2009 Campeonato Brasileiro S\u00e9rie A with 12 goals in 20 matches.\n2011: Retirement.\nIn February 2010, Ronaldo signed a contract extension with Corinthians that would keep him with the club until the end of 2011, and said he would then retire. Commenting on his weight issues following this announcement, Brian Homewood of \"The Guardian\" stated: \"Sadly, Ronaldo's celebrity is now more of a draw than his skills on the pitch \u2013 Coldplay, Israeli prime minister Shimon Peres and actor Hugh Jackman have all visited S\u00e3o Paulo to get a picture with the roly\u2011poly star.\"\nIn February 2011, after Corinthians were eliminated from the 2011 Copa Libertadores by the Colombian team Deportes Tolima, Ronaldo announced his retirement from football, concluding an 18-year career. In an emotional press conference on 14 February, he cited pain and hypothyroidism as the reasons for his premature retirement. He discovered he had hypothyroidism \u2013 a condition which slows down metabolism and causes weight gain \u2013 during tests with Milan in 2007.\nThe player said that the problem could be solved by taking hormones, but this practice is forbidden in football and would lead to a suspension for doping. However, doctors disagree that such treatment would be confused with doping, with some publicly claiming that Ronaldo had lied when he said could not treat his hypothyroidism. Corinthians' own doctor said that Ronaldo did not have this disease. Hypothyroidism is usually associated with a slight weight gain (eminently due to fluid accumulation, not fat gain) and difficulty getting rid of extra pounds.\nRonaldo admitted his body had finally succumbed to the crippling litany of injuries that had blighted his career: \"It's very hard to leave something that made me so happy. Mentally I wanted to continue but I have to acknowledge that I lost to my body. The head wants to go on but the body can't take any more. I think of an action but I can't do it the way I want to. It's time to go.\"\nInternational career.\nRonaldo made his international debut for Brazil on 23 March 1994 in a friendly match in Recife against Argentina. His first senior goal for Brazil came on 4 May 1994 in a 3\u20130 friendly win against Iceland. He went to the 1994 FIFA World Cup in the United States aged 17, but did not play as Brazil went on to win the tournament. He stated he was \"overjoyed\" at the experience. He was then known as \"Ronaldinho\" (\"little Ronaldo\" in Portuguese), because Ronaldo Rodrigues de Jesus, his older teammate, was also called Ronaldo and later nicknamed \"Ronald\u00e3o\" (\"big Ronaldo\") to further distinguish them. Another player, Ronaldo de Assis Moreira, now widely known as Ronaldinho, was called \"Ronaldinho Ga\u00facho\" when he joined the Brazil team in 1999.\nAtlanta '96 and Copa Am\u00e9rica.\nAt the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Ronaldo used the name \"Ronaldinho\" again, since centre-back Ronaldo Guiaro, two years his senior, was one of his teammates. Brazil went on to win the bronze medal. Ronaldo also represented Brazil in the 1995 Copa Am\u00e9rica (finishing second) and won both the 1997 and the 1999 editions of the tournament. He was named player of the tournament in 1997, was the top scorer in 1999 and scored in the finals of both, against Bolivia in 1997 and Uruguay in 1999. He also took part in the friendly Tournoi de France in 1997, preceding the 1998 FIFA World Cup, scoring a goal as Brazil became runners-up. Ronaldo starred alongside Rom\u00e1rio, dubbed the \"Ro-Ro\" attack, at the 1997 FIFA Confederations Cup, helping Brazil win their first ever Confederations Cup title where he finished as the third-highest scorer with 4 goals, scoring a hat-trick against Australia in the final. On the combination of Ronaldo and Rom\u00e1rio, Will Sharp writes: \"...to the elation of all those fortunate enough to have watched them, they found themselves together, fated with the opportunity to forge one of the most outrageous offensive pairings the game has ever seen. Their partnership was brief but it was inexplicably brilliant.\"\n1998 FIFA World Cup.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The way he combined powerhouse athleticism with a poetic touch made for an awesome sight. In the 1990s, in his physical pomp, in his free-flowing prime, there was nothing remotely like him. By the time the 1998 World Cup came along his reputation had extended to the point of fully formed marvel. A happening.\"\n\u2014Amy Lawrence, \"The Guardian\".\nRonaldo entered the 1998 FIFA World Cup billed as the world's greatest player by reporters in the sport. Jacob Steinberg of \"The Guardian\" writes, \"In 1998, no one was as ferociously talented as Ronaldo, whose supernatural mixture of power, pace and skill had made him the player every child in the playground wanted to be; at the age of 21, the hopes and dreams of a nation rested on his shoulders.\"\nRonaldo scored four goals and made three assists en route to the final, scoring once and assisting Bebeto's goal in a 3\u20130 win against Morocco in the team's second group stage match, netting twice in a 4\u20131 win against Chile in the round of 16, set\u2013up two goals in Brazil's 3\u20132 victory over Denmark in the quarter-finals, and scored once in the 1\u20131 draw against the Netherlands in the semi-finals, also netting Brazil's first penalty in the 4\u20132 shoot\u2013out victory. Hours before the final against France, Ronaldo suffered a convulsive fit. At first, he was removed from the starting lineup 72 minutes before the match, and the team sheet (with Edmundo as his replacement) was submitted to the FIFA delegate. The starting line up without Ronaldo was released to a stunned world media. The BBC's John Motson stated, \"The scenes in the commentary box have been absolute mayhem and chaos.\" However, shortly before kick off, after pleading that he felt fine and requested to play, Ronaldo was reinstated by Brazil coach M\u00e1rio Zagallo.\nRonaldo was the last Brazilian player out of the tunnel as the teams entered the field. During the playing of the Brazil national anthem the camera focused on him throughout, with Ronaldo showing little emotion. Steinberg states that Ronaldo \"sleepwalked\" through the final, which also saw him injured in a collision with French goalkeeper Fabien Barthez. Zagallo admitted the fears over Ronaldo affected his team psychologically, and stated \"for the whole of the first half I was wondering whether to take him off\", but feared a public outcry in Brazil had he done so. Brazil lost the match to hosts France 3\u20130. Ronaldo later reflected: \"We lost the World Cup but I won another cup \u2013 my life.\"\nAn inquest was launched in Brazil, with team doctor L\u00eddio Toledo telling the commission \"imagine if I stopped Ronaldo playing and Brazil lost. At that moment I'd have to go and live on the North Pole.\" Adrian Williams, professor of clinical neurology at Birmingham University, said that Ronaldo should not have played, that he would have been feeling the after effects of the seizure, and \"there is no way that he would have been able to perform to the best of his ability within 24 hours of his first fit \u2013 if it was his first fit.\" Despite his sub-par performance in the final due to his seizure hours earlier, Ronaldo was awarded the Golden Ball as the best player of the tournament for his performances leading up to the final, and finished the tournament as the joint-third highest scorer. The nature of the incident set off a trail of questions and allegations which persisted for years, with Alex Bellos writing in \"The Guardian\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When Ronaldo's health scare was revealed after the match, the situation's unique circumstances lent itself to conspiracy theories. Here was the world's most famous sportsman, about to take part in the most important match of his career, when he suddenly, inexplicably, fell ill. Was it stress, epilepsy, or had he been drugged?\"\nA conspiracy surrounded Nike, the sportswear company who sponsored Ronaldo and the Brazilian national team, with some in Brazil believing the company had forced Ronaldo to play. The parliamentary inquiry was unable to find any wider conspiracy, although the Brazilian public remained unconvinced. Reporting for CNN, Don Riddell wrote, \"It's one of the great mysteries of our time: not the Loch Ness Monster, Stonehenge or the Lost City of Atlantis; it's the case of the missing striker \u2013 not so much a whodunit, more a kind of a what the heck happened?\"\n2002 FIFA World Cup.\nPrior to the 2002 FIFA World Cup, Ronaldo had barely played since rupturing the cruciate ligament in his right knee in April 2000, and he missed Brazil's entire qualification campaign where, in his absence, the team had been poor.\nTim Vickery writes, \"Without Ronaldo, Brazil were a shambles, fortunate even to get to the tournament. With him, it was a different story.\" In a remarkable comeback from injury that had threatened his career, Ronaldo led Brazil to their record fifth World Cup title, receiving the Golden Boot as top scorer with eight goals. Many publications regarded his personal triumph as \"redemption\" for what occurred at the previous World Cup. Ronaldo spoke about his obsession with lifting the World Cup trophy, having missed out in 1998. \"I used to visualise the trophy in front of my eyes and imagine what a wonderful feeling it must be to hold it up in the air. It was a fabulous feeling actually to hold it in my hands and kiss it.\" Dubbed the \"three R's\", Ronaldo starred in a formidable attack alongside Rivaldo and Ronaldinho, and the trio were named in the FIFA World Cup All-Star Team.\nRonaldo scored against every opponent in the tournament except in the quarter-finals against England. The match-winner against Turkey in the semi-final, with the winning goal a toe-poke finish with little back-lift while on the run \u2013 a finish he learned while playing futsal in his youth \u2013 the final whistle saw fans behind the goal hoist huge white letters to spell out his name, akin to the Hollywood Sign. Much attention was on his haircut \u2013 in which his head was shaved except the forelock \u2013 done as a deliberate distraction to shift media attention away from a leg injury. He revealed that \"when I arrived in training with this haircut everybody stopped talking about the injury\". In the final against Germany in Yokohama, Japan, Ronaldo scored twice in Brazil's 2\u20130 win and tied Pel\u00e9's Brazilian record of 12 career World Cup goals. Ronaldo was the first player to seek out German players to offer his condolences, before he was congratulated by Pel\u00e9 when receiving his World Cup winners medal. G\u00e9rard Saillant, the French surgeon who operated on Ronaldo's knee, was in the crowd as his guest, and stated after the game; \"This gives hope to everyone who is injured, even those who aren't sportsmen, to see that by fighting you can make it. He's back to where he was; it's hugely satisfying and I am very moved.\"\nRonaldo received a number of accolades for his achievement, including the Laureus World Sports Award for Comeback of the Year and the BBC World Sport Star of the Year, and in December 2002 he dedicated his third FIFA World Player of the Year award to the medical team which helped him recover. In a 2017 interview with Fox Sports, Ronaldo stated, \"the best team I played in was the Brazilian one in 2002, we felt that we could always score. It was a team without any vanity, or individuals. The collective was important.\"\n2006 FIFA World Cup.\nOn 2 June 2004, Ronaldo scored an unusual hat-trick of penalties for Brazil against arch-rivals Argentina in a 2006 World Cup qualifying match, which put them top of the group. With 10 goals in 15 games, including a goal against Venezuela in the last game to secure first place, Ronaldo was the South American top scorer in Brazil's qualifying campaign. Prior to the tournament, questions were asked of his weight and fitness, but was declared fit for Brazil's opening match with Croatia.\nAt the 2006 World Cup, Ronaldo was part of a much-publicized \"magic quartet\" alongside Adriano, Ronaldinho and Kak\u00e1. The all-star Brazilian team was promoted as masters of Joga Bonito, \"the beautiful game\", which was advertised by Nike before the tournament. Although Brazil won their first two group games against Croatia and Australia, Ronaldo was repeatedly jeered for being overweight and slow, but coach Carlos Alberto Parreira kept him in the starting lineup.\nWith two goals against Japan in the third match, Ronaldo became the 20th player to score in three World Cups and also equalled the all-time World Cup finals scoring record of fourteen, held by Gerd M\u00fcller (Ronaldo scored at France 98, Korea/Japan 2002 and Germany 2006). He then broke M\u00fcller's record in the Round of 16 match against Ghana by scoring his fifteenth-career World Cup goal. With his third goal of the tournament, Ronaldo became only the second player ever, after J\u00fcrgen Klinsmann, to score at least three goals in each of three World Cups. Brazil, however, were knocked out by France 1\u20130 with a goal by striker Thierry Henry in the quarter-finals. Ronaldo was awarded the Bronze Shoe as the third-highest goal-scorer of the World Cup.\nHaving been listed in \"Guinness World Records\", Ronaldo stated, \"I am proud of my career and of the records I set. But I know that one day they will be broken.\" Ronaldo and Klinsmann's shared record of at least three goals in three separate World Cup finals was broken by German striker Miroslav Klose, who has a record of at least four goals in each of three tournaments, having netted five at both the 2002 and 2006 finals, and four at the 2010 tournament. Ronaldo finished with fifteen goals in nineteen World Cup matches, for an average of 0.79 per game. His teammate Kak\u00e1 reflected, \"Ronaldo is the best player I have ever played with. I have seen il Fenomeno do things nobody else has ever done.\"\nFarewell match and sporadic appearances.\nIn February 2011, it was announced that Ronaldo would be given one last match for Brazil, a friendly against Romania in S\u00e3o Paulo on 7 June 2011, five years after his last match with the national team. Brazilian Football Confederation official Ricardo Teixeira stated that it was fitting that his final game should take place in Brazil while representing his nation.\nRonaldo played for 15 minutes in a match that ended with a Brazilian victory with a goal from Fred. Fred celebrated his goal with Ronaldo's famous 'finger wag' celebration along with his Brazilian teammates. Ronaldo was introduced after 30 minutes, partnering 19-year-old Neymar in attack, and had three shots on target which were saved by the Romanian goalkeeper Ciprian T\u0103t\u0103ru\u0219anu. After the first half ended, Ronaldo made a farewell speech to the crowd. With 62 goals for Brazil Ronaldo retired from international football as the second-highest goalscorer for his country, behind only Pel\u00e9 (Neymar has since surpassed Pel\u00e9, with Ronaldo the third-highest scorer as of September 2023).\nOn 13 December 2011 Ronaldo and Zinedine Zidane played a charity match with their friends against former and current players of the German team Hamburg in the ninth edition of the Match Against Poverty series, which Ronaldo and Zidane established in 2003. In December 2012, Ronaldo and Zidane reunited for the Match Against Poverty in Porto Alegre, Portugal, with the field littered with World Cup winners from France and Brazil, which also saw 1982 World Cup star Zico (Ronaldo's childhood idol) turn out for Ronaldo's team. In January 2013, Ronaldo was named one of the six ambassadors of the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil.\nRonaldo was chosen as a goodwill ambassador for the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in 2000 as he had the highest global appeal among sportspeople, and he accepted the role as he saw it as \"an obligation\" to help with causes around the world. Ronaldo played in the UNDP's 11th Match Against Poverty on 4 March 2014 against a Zidane XI in Bern, Switzerland, with proceeds raised helping the recovery efforts in the Philippines in the wake of Typhoon Haiyan. Joined by Didier Drogba in attack, Ronaldo scored a hat-trick in the next year's match on 21 April 2015 in St Etienne, France, with proceeds going towards the African countries most affected by the Ebola epidemic.\nOn 14 June 2018, Ronaldo featured at the 2018 FIFA World Cup opening ceremony held at the Luzhniki Stadium in Moscow, Russia. He walked out with a child wearing a Russia 2018 shirt at the beginning, and returned at the end of the ceremony with the official ball of the 2018 World Cup \u2013 Adidas Telstar 18 \u2013 which was sent into space with the International Space Station crew in March and came back to Earth in early June.\nStyle of play and legacy.\nRonaldo is regarded as one of the greatest and most complete forwards of all time. Nicknamed \"Il (or O) Fenomeno\" (the phenomenon), he was a prolific goalscorer, and despite being more of an individualistic attacker, he was also capable of providing assists for his teammates, due to his vision, passing and crossing ability. He was an extremely powerful, fast, and technical player, with excellent movement, as well as being a composed finisher. Highly regarded for his technical ability, Ronaldo was able to use both feet, despite being naturally right footed, and is considered one of the most skillful dribblers in the game. Ronaldo would also operate outside the penalty area before running with the ball towards goal, with Rob Smyth writing, \"he played like every attack had a 10-second deadline.. he would explode into life with no warning for defenders.\" He frequently beat several players when dribbling at speed, and excelled in one on one situations, due to his ball control, acceleration, agility, balance and nimble footwork in his prime.\nHis coach at Barcelona, Bobby Robson, commented: \"Ronaldo could start from the halfway line and the whole stadium would ignite. He was the fastest thing I've ever seen running with the ball. Had he managed to stay free of injury, he had every chance of becoming the best footballer ever.\" In one on one situations, Ronaldo often used elaborate feints to trick and beat defenders and goalkeepers; he popularised the use of many football tricks such as the elastico and the step over. Sid Lowe of \"Sports Illustrated\" wrote, \"When he was one on one with the goalkeeper, you knew that he would score. He was so natural, so cool, so utterly in control. He would dip the shoulder, step over, and bang!\"\nHis Barcelona teammate \u00d3scar Garc\u00eda observed, \"I'd never seen anyone play football with such technical ability, creativity and precision at that incredible speed. What stood out to all of us, from the moment we met Ronnie, was that he could do things which other players found very difficult and make them look easy. But he could also produce those things while running at an unbelievable, explosive pace.\" With his combination of speed, skill and finishing Ronaldinho called Ronaldo \"the most complete striker there has ever been\", a view echoed by Zlatan Ibrahimovi\u0107, who stated, \"as a football player, he was complete. There will never, in my view, be a better player than him.\" The goalscoring idol of Lionel Messi, the Argentine states \"Ronaldo was the best striker I've ever seen. He was so fast he could score from nothing.\" Wanting to emulate Ronaldo growing up, Egypt and Liverpool forward Mohamed Salah opined, \"The ability, the speed, the intelligence, he had everything\". Naming Ronaldo as an inspiration, Wayne Rooney stated, \"as an out-and-out forward he was probably the best.\" The outstanding influence for a generation of strikers, from Karim Benzema to Sergio Ag\u00fcero, with Romelu Lukaku stating \"he changed the dimension of a striker\" and could \"dribble like a winger, run like a sprinter\", Zlatan added, \"nobody influenced football and the players who emerged as much as Ronaldo\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ronaldo, as so many of those who looked up to him acknowledge, changed what it is to be a centre-forward. Every time you see a striker who is expected to hold the ball up, beat players, win headers, shoot from range, drop deep, do everything a striker can possibly do \u2013 it might be worth remembering him. He shifted boundaries, challenged convention, just as much as Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo have altered our perceptions of what a winger might be. Ronaldo, the original Ronaldo, inspired a phalanx of imitators, players we see on our screens every weekend. But he also turned the game so that it will always look just a little bit like him. More than most, he made that No. 9 his own.\nEmilio Butrague\u00f1o stated, \"Ronaldo creates a goalscoring opportunity where it doesn't exist. Most strikers need the midfielders and their teammates, but he does not.\" On his speed of thought, Kak\u00e1 said \"For me the best players are those who are able to think of a play and execute it quickest and in the best way possible, and Ronaldo was the best at that. The speed of thought he had \u2013 and the speed he had to carry out his actions \u2013 were perfect.\" Ronaldo was also a strong and powerful player who could shield the ball from the opposition, with former Italian defender Alessandro Nesta (who faced Ronaldo in a high-profile one on one duel in the 1998 UEFA Cup final which was billed as \"the best attacker against the best defender in Serie A\") stating: \"It was the worst experience of my career. Ronaldo is the hardest attacker I've ever had to face.\" Asked who was the toughest opponent of his career, Fabio Cannavaro responded, \"I have no doubt, Ronaldo, the phenomenon. For my generation he was what Maradona or Pel\u00e9 were for the previous ones. He was unmarkable.\" Sid Lowe compared Ronaldo's ability to take on a number of opponents on a single run to what rugby player Jonah Lomu was doing in the same era. Regarding Ronaldo's influence on the evolution of the centre-forward role, French former forward Thierry Henry said: \"He did things nobody had seen before. He, together with Rom\u00e1rio and George Weah, reinvented the centre-forward position. They were the first to drop from the box to pick up the ball in midfield, switch to the flanks, attract and disorientate the central defenders with their runs, their accelerations, their dribbling.\"\nComparing his natural ability to Roger Federer, Paul MacDonald of \"Goal\" wrote, \"there's a joy to be had watching something we know to be extremely difficult executed with considerable ease. Ronaldo in his prime was able to do that better than anyone who has ever played the game.\" A reliance on his superior innate ability is given as a reason for his application in training often not being as high as his teammates \u2013 though his knee issues may also have been a factor \u2013 with his Brazil teammate Emerson stating \"Ronaldo felt he didn't need to work as hard as us, that he could do in two days what the rest of us would take ten days to do. And usually, he was right\". On his precocious talent \u2013 a talent which saw him become the youngest FIFA World Player of the Year at age 20, and youngest Ballon d'Or recipient aged 21 \u2013 Rob Smyth of \"The Guardian\" wrote in 2016, \"Ronaldo is easily the best of the past 30 years, possibly ever. The other Ronaldo and Messi were brilliant teenagers but had nothing like the same impact at that age. Only Pel\u00e9, Diego Maradona and George Best can really compare.\" Asked to name the best player of his lifetime, Jos\u00e9 Mourinho said, \"Ronaldo, El Fenomeno. Cristiano Ronaldo and Leo Messi have had longer careers. They have remained at the top every day for 15 years. However, if we are talking strictly about talent and skill, nobody surpasses Ronaldo.\" Mika\u00ebl Silvestre states, \"I played against [Lionel] Messi and I played with Cristiano at Manchester United, but he [Ronaldo] is something else in terms of speed. Cristiano, maybe you can guess that he has three or four tricks he would use most of the time, but Ronaldo, it was always something different. He was inventing things on the spot, so you can't guide him left or right because he's going to get out of these situations, no matter what\". In 2020, Ronaldo was named in the Ballon d'Or Dream Team, a greatest all-time XI published by \"France Football\" magazine.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"There were two Ronaldos: the one that returned after long-term injury in 2002 was a great goalscorer, but the 1990s version was a great everything. At his fearsome peak for PSV, Barcelona and Inter Milan he was arguably the most dangerous striker the world has ever seen.\"\n\u2014Rob Smyth, \"The Guardian\".\nAt his physical peak in the 1990s, Ronaldo became severely affected by the knee injuries he suffered from late 1999 onward and the subsequent weight gain during his inactivity, which limited his speed, fitness, and mobility. According to his physiotherapist Nilton Petrone, Ronaldo was vulnerable to injury due to a medical condition combined with his explosive running. \"Ronaldo had a problem called trochlear dysplasia. This makes the relationship between the kneecap and the femur a bit unstable. There is no direct surgery for that so the kneecap keeps, for a lack of a better word, \"dancing\" on the femur. Ronaldo's injuries weren't because his body was weak, but because of his explosive capacity. He didn't just run fast in a straight line, he also changed direction at incredible speed. Ronaldo moved from left to right very fast...so it was obvious, by the way that he played, that injuries were always a possibility\". Acknowledging \"he was never quite the same\" after his knee injury in 2000, with \"his pace and sheer brute force diminished in comparison to The Phenomenon\" in the 1990s, \"FourFourTwo\" magazine ranked him the best player at the 2002 World Cup, adding \"he was still a cut above the rest\" in the tournament.\nClub ownership.\nReal Valladolid.\nIn September 2018, Ronaldo became the majority owner of La Liga club Real Valladolid after buying a 51% controlling stake in the club for \u20ac30 million. At his unveiling as the club's new owner at Valladolid city hall, Ronaldo stated, \"I have gone through many stages in my training in football to prepare for this. Football is all about passion. We want to build the best team possible to compete while also giving information about our management with transparency.\"\nCruzeiro.\nIn December 2021, Ronaldo bought a controlling stake in his boyhood club Cruzeiro. Investing 400 million reais ($70 million) in the club, Ronaldo stated he wants to \"give back to Cruzeiro and take them where they deserve to be.\"\nOn 30 April 2024, an announcement was made that Ronaldo had agreed to sell his ownership stake for undisclosed terms to BPW Sports company. The announcement also noted that Ronaldo would continue to be on the club's board of directors.\nOutside football.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1997, Ronaldo met the Brazilian model and actress Susana Werner on the set of the Brazilian telenovela \"Malha\u00e7\u00e3o\" when they acted together in three episodes. Although they never married, they began a long-term relationship and lived together in Milan until the beginning of 1999.\nIn December 1999, Ronaldo married Brazilian footballer Milene Domingues, at the time pregnant with the couple's first son, Ronald, who was born in Milan, on 6 April 2000. The marriage lasted four years. In 2005, Ronaldo became engaged to Brazilian model and MTV VJ Daniella Cicarelli, who became pregnant but suffered a miscarriage; the relationship lasted only three months after their luxurious wedding at the Ch\u00e2teau de Chantilly. The ceremony reportedly cost \u00a3700,000 (\u20ac896,000).\nDespite his fame \u2013 a 2003 poll by Nike listed him the world's most famous sportsperson (and third most famous person overall) \u2013 Ronaldo is protective of his privacy, including with teammates, stating in an interview with \"The Telegraph\", \"each [player] has his own private life, and no one thinks about anyone else's private life. Or talks about it.\" By 2003 he was fluent in Portuguese, Spanish and Italian, and had a good understanding of English.\nIn a 2005 interview with \"Folha de S.Paulo\", Ronaldo revealed that, somewhat unexpectedly, he identified racially as white, generating a wider conversation about the complex role of race in Brazil. Ronaldo's father, Nelio Nazario, stated, \"He knows full well that he's black. Actually, at the time, I thought it was some philosophy, something to that effect. Because he knows he's black.\" According to a study led by geneticist S\u00e9rgio Pena of the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, most Brazilians often have a misconception about their roots. \"The maternal ancestry of the Brazilian white was one-third African, one third Amerindian, and one third European. An individual who considers himself white may be genomically more African than an individual who considers himself to be brown or black.\"\nIn April 2008, Ronaldo was involved in a scandal involving three travesti prostitutes whom he met in a nightclub in Rio de Janeiro. Ronaldo claimed that upon discovering that they were legally male, he offered them $600 to leave. One of the three attempted to blackmail Ronaldo, while the other two admitted to lying about having sex with him. Ronaldo's engagement to Maria Beatriz Antony was immediately halted, but resumed shortly after and they married in the same year. Maria Beatriz Antony gave birth to their first daughter, named Maria Sophia, in Rio de Janeiro, on 24 December 2008. In April 2009, the family moved to a new penthouse in S\u00e3o Paulo. On 6 April 2010, Maria Beatriz Antony gave birth to their second daughter. The girl, born in S\u00e3o Paulo, was named Maria Alice, and was born exactly 10 years after her older brother Ronald.\nIn December 2010, Ronaldo and his family moved to a new mansion in S\u00e3o Paulo. Also in December, Ronaldo took a paternity test and was confirmed to be the father of a boy named Alexander, born in April 2005. The boy was born after a brief relationship between Ronaldo and Michele Umezu, a Brazilian waitress who Ronaldo first met in Tokyo in 2002. After the confirmation of his fourth child, Ronaldo stated on 6 December 2010 that he had had a vasectomy, feeling that having four children was enough. Ronaldo and Maria Beatriz Antony divorced in 2012.\nIn a 2011 interview with the BBC, former Real Madrid teammate Steve McManaman spoke about Ronaldo's personality. \"He could go in a restaurant, and I could go in with him, and you're not just there with close friends. He invites everybody. You'd be at a table with him and it'd be a judge sitting opposite talking to a politician with someone off the street listening in. So he just had this amazing aura, where everyone wanted to join him. Sometimes there'd be 20 to 30 people sitting at meal times with him. He was a wonderful person. Everybody would second that, no matter what club he played for.\"\nRonaldo was the co-owner of A1 Team Brazil, along with former F1 driver Emerson Fittipaldi. Ronaldo co-owns the sports marketing company 9INE, with his friend, mixed martial artist Anderson Silva, one of his clients. A keen poker player, in April 2013 Ronaldo became a member of PokerStars SportStar, and in 2014 he played a charity poker tournament against tennis star Rafael Nadal. On 11 December 2014, Ronaldo became a minority owner of the Fort Lauderdale Strikers of the North American Soccer League. In 2015, Ronaldo opened eight new branches of his youth football school \u2013 the Ronaldo Academy \u2013 in China, the U.S. and Brazil, with 100 expected to be opened worldwide by 2020. In 2017, Ronaldo's son, Ronald, was selected for the junior football team representing Brazil in the 2017 Maccabiah Games. The Maccabiah is described as \"the Jewish Olympics\"; Ronald is not Jewish, but some participating countries have more relaxed rules about eligibility and Ronald is a member of a Jewish football club.\nIn January 2023, Ronaldo announced his fifth engagement, to model and businesswoman Celina Locks. Ronaldo and Locks went on to marry in July of the same year.\nReligion.\nA practicing Catholic, Ronaldo was baptized into the faith in 2023. He donated a signed football to Pope Francis in 2014, which is now housed in the Vatican Museums.\nMedia.\nRonaldo appeared in \"The Simpsons\" season 18 episode \"Marge Gamer\" broadcast in April 2007. Simon Crerar of \"The Times\" listed Ronaldo's performance as one of the thirty-three funniest cameos in the history of the show. Ronaldo made a cameo appearance in ' (2001) and each film of the \"Goal!\" film trilogy, \"Goal!\" (2005), ' (2007) and \"\" (2009). Archive footage of Ronaldo features in the music video \"We Are One (Ole Ola)\", the official song of the 2014 World Cup by Pitbull and Jennifer Lopez.\nRonaldo has appeared in various commercials, from Snickers chocolate bar to Pirelli tyres. Ronaldo's usual goal celebration of both arms outstretched \u2013 especially from his early career \u2013 was the basis for Pirelli's 1998 commercial where he replaced the figure of Christ from the \"Christ the Redeemer\" statue that towers over his home city of Rio de Janeiro while in an Inter Milan strip. It was controversial with the Catholic Church. Released in 2000 for the PlayStation and Game Boy Color, the video game \"Ronaldo V-Football\" was exclusively endorsed by Ronaldo. In 2017 Ronaldo was added as an icon to the Ultimate Team in EA Sports' \"FIFA\" video game \"FIFA 18\", receiving a 95 rating along with Brazilian compatriot Pel\u00e9, Argentine playmaker Diego Maradona, former Russian goalkeeper Lev Yashin and former French star Thierry Henry. Ronaldo also appears as the cover athlete on the Icon edition of the game.\nIn May 2021, DAZN released the first of a six-part series titled \"Ronaldo: El Presidente\". The series takes viewers inside the day-to-day running of Real Valladolid, revealing every challenge and triumph in Valladolid's first full season under their Brazilian president, intercut with parallel narratives detailing the highs and lows of Ronaldo's own playing career.\nNike sponsorship.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Ronaldo is the most global of all athletes today, bar none.\"\n\u2014Joaquin Hidalgo, director of Nike's Brazilian marketing unit, 1998.\nRonaldo has been sponsored by sportswear company Nike since the early part of his career. In 1996, Nike signed Ronaldo to a 10-year contract and to a lifetime endorsement deal worth over $180 million. Nicknamed R9 (his initial and shirt number), Ronaldo is closely associated with the original Nike Mercurial R9 that was designed for him for the 1998 FIFA World Cup. To celebrate 15 years of the boot, Nike created a Mercurial Vapor IX inspired by the 1998 design, with Phil McCartney, VP of Football Footwear for Nike, stating; \"Ronaldo's impact on the game 15 years ago was immense, and in the run up to 2014, we wanted to celebrate that boot and the man himself. We thought a modern construction of his 1998 boot would be a great commemoration of that moment.\" \nIn 2018, Ronaldo's R9 Mercurial boots inspired the Nike Mercurial Superfly VI boots commissioned for Kylian Mbapp\u00e9. Unveiled in 2000, a bronze statue of Ronaldo is located next to Ronaldo Field at Nike headquarters in Beaverton, Oregon.\nRonaldo has appeared in a series of Nike commercials. He starred in the 1996 Nike commercial titled \"Good vs Evil\" in a gladiatorial game set in a Roman amphitheatre. Appearing alongside football players from around the world, including Paolo Maldini, Eric Cantona, Lu\u00eds Figo, Patrick Kluivert and Jorge Campos, they defend \"the beautiful game\" against a team of demonic warriors, destroying evil by winning the match. In 1998, he featured in a Nike commercial set in an airport with a number of stars from the Brazil national team, including Rom\u00e1rio and Roberto Carlos. In the run-up to the 2002 World Cup in Korea and Japan, he starred in Nike's \"Secret Tournament\" commercial (branded \"Scopion KO\") directed by Terry Gilliam, appearing alongside football players such as Thierry Henry, Fabio Cannavaro, Francesco Totti, Ronaldinho and Hidetoshi Nakata, with former player Eric Cantona as the tournament \"referee\". In the run-up to the 2014 World Cup, Ronaldo starred as a mentor in Nike's Risk Everything animated commercial with a host of current players in the Nike stable.\nCareer statistics.\nClub.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nInternational.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Scores and results list Brazil's goal tally first.\"\nHonours.\nCruzeiro\nPSV Eindhoven\nBarcelona\nInter Milan\nReal Madrid\nCorinthians\nBrazil U23\nBrazil\nIndividual\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66166", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66166", "title": "LAMP", "text": ""}
{"id": "66167", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66167", "title": "University constituency", "text": "Parliamentary constituency representing a university\nA university constituency is a constituency, used in elections to a legislature, that represents the members of one or more universities rather than residents of a geographical area. These may or may not involve plural voting, in which voters are eligible to vote in or as part of this entity and their home area's geographical constituency.\nWhen James VI inherited the English throne in 1603, the system was adopted by the Parliament of England. The system was continued in the Parliament of Great Britain (from 1707 to 1800) and the United Kingdom Parliament, until 1950. It was also used in the Parliament of Ireland, in the Kingdom of Ireland, from 1613 to 1800, and in the Irish Free State from 1922 to 1936.\nSuch constituencies have also existed in Japan and in some countries of the British Empire such as India.\nAt present there are four instances in two countries of university constituencies: two in Seanad \u00c9ireann (the upper\u2014and in general less powerful\u2014house of the legislature of the Republic of Ireland) and two in the Senate of Rwanda.\nSummary.\nAs shown, at Westminster (in the English then successor British parliaments) 4 seats were incepted in 1603 and the final total, 12, were abolished in 1950.\nThe Northern Irish body was the last in the UK to abolish such seats: it abolished its four for Queens, Belfast in 1969.\nSix such seats continue in Seanad \u00c9ireann, the upper chamber of the Oireachtas (legislature of the Republic of Ireland). They are the sole directly elected members of the Seanad, with the remainder of the seats being elected by a combination of members of Oireachtas, incoming TDs and outgoing Senators, and local councillors, along with 11 members appointed by the Taoiseach.\nUnited Kingdom.\nKing James VI of Scotland, on ascending the English throne, brought to the English Parliament a practice which endured in the Scottish Parliament of allowing the universities to elect members. The king believed that the universities were often affected by the decisions of Parliament, and ought therefore to have representation in it. James gave the University of Cambridge and the University of Oxford two seats each from 1603. On the formal Union (1707), Scottish universities lost their representatives as none were appointed to the Parliament of Great Britain (at Westminster). The voters were the graduates of the university, whether they were resident or not; they could vote for the university seats in addition to any other vote that they might have.\nAfter the Act of Union 1800 with Ireland, the University of Dublin (Trinity College), which had elected two MPs to the Parliament of Ireland since 1613, was allowed one member from 1801 and two from 1832.\nIn 1868, three new one-member seats were created: University of London; Glasgow and Aberdeen universities combined; and St Andrews and Edinburgh universities combined.\nIn 1918, the Queen's University of Belfast and the National University of Ireland each received seats. Both these, as well as the University of Dublin, also received four seats in the devolved Stormont parliament and the Southern Ireland parliament respectively that were established in 1920 and first used in elections in 1921. Also in 1918, the Scottish universities switched to all electing three members jointly (see Combined Scottish Universities).\nIn 1918, all the other English universities (i.e. except for Cambridge, Oxford and London) were enfranchised as a single constituency with two seats, as Combined English Universities. They were Birmingham, Bristol, Durham, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, and Sheffield. Reading was added in August 1928. The University of Wales also received one seat in 1918.\n1918 also saw the introduction of the single transferable vote for university constituencies.\nAbolition.\nThe Labour government in 1930 attempted to abolish the university constituencies but was defeated in the House of Commons. Although the members for the university constituencies were usually Conservatives, in the later years independent candidates began to win many of the seats. The Labour government finally abolished the university constituencies via the Representation of the People Act 1948, with effect from the dissolution of Parliament in 1950, along with all other examples of plural voting.\nThe Queen's University, Belfast constituency survived in the Parliament of Northern Ireland until it was abolished in 1968 (with effect from the dissolution of Parliament in 1969) by the Electoral Law Act (Northern Ireland) 1968 (c. 20 (N.I.)). This was one of several measures by the then Northern Ireland Prime Minister Terence O'Neill to reform elements of the election franchise and deal with many long-standing civil rights grievances.\nNotable members.\nThe members for the university constituencies include many notable statesmen: William Pitt the Younger and Lord Palmerston both served as MPs for Cambridge University, and Robert Peel and William Ewart Gladstone each served as MP for Oxford University for portions of their careers. In his last years Ramsay MacDonald was MP for Combined Scottish Universities after losing his previous seat in the 1935 general election. Many criticised this, as he had previously sought to abolish the seats whilst Labour prime minister and many now felt the seats were being used to provide a failed politician with a seat he could not find elsewhere.\nThe humorist and law reform activist A. P. Herbert sat as an independent member for Oxford University from 1935 to 1950. He described the counting of the votes at the 1935 election in a chapter entitled \"'P.R.': Or, Standing for Oxford\" in his 1936 book \"Mild and Bitter\".\nList of members.\nOnly members after 1885 are shown.\nIreland.\n There are two university constituencies in Seanad \u00c9ireann, with graduates of the Dublin University and National University of Ireland entitled to elect three Senators each. Only graduates who are Irish citizens are entitled to vote in these elections. There is no residency requirement so those qualifying who are resident outside the State may vote. Elections are conducted under the single transferable vote and by postal ballot.\nWhen the Irish Free State seceded from the UK in 1922, its new lower house of parliament, the Free State D\u00e1il, had three seats each for the two university constituencies. However, under the Electoral Act 1923 voters registered in a university constituency were not permitted to also vote in a geographical one. Both university constituencies were ultimately abolished by the Constitution (Amendment No. 23) Act 1936 and the Electoral (University Constituencies) Act 1936, which took effect on the dissolution of the D\u00e1il in 1937. These two constituencies were recreated in Seanad \u00c9ireann under the Constitution of Ireland adopted in 1937, with the first Seanad election in 1938.\nSome politicians have called for university representation to be abolished, on the ground that it is unacceptable that possession of a degree should confer greater electoral rights than those available to other voters. An example of this view can be found in the Green Party submission on Seanad reform in 2004. \nList of members.\nA cell marked \u2192 has a different colour background to the preceding cell and denotes an incumbent who defected or won a re-election for another party.\nD\u00e1il \u00c9ireann.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Independent Unionist\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Sinn F\u00e9in\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Ulster Unionist\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Cumann na nGaedheal\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Independent\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Fianna F\u00e1il\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Ceann Comhairle\nSeanad \u00c9ireann.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Independent\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Fianna F\u00e1il\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Labour\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Fine Gael\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Human Dignity Alliance\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66168", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66168", "title": "Received pronunciation", "text": ""}
{"id": "66169", "revid": "7269056", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66169", "title": "Nasals", "text": ""}
{"id": "66170", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66170", "title": "Kent Pitman", "text": "American computer programmer\nKent M. Pitman (KMP) is a programmer who has been involved for many years in the design, implementation, and use of systems based on the programming languages Lisp and Scheme. Since 2010[ [update]], he has been President of HyperMeta Inc.\nPitman was chair of the ad hoc group (part of X3J13) that designed the Common Lisp Error and Condition System and is author of the proposal document that was ultimately adopted, and many papers on Lisp programming and computer programming in general.\nWhile in high school, he saw output from one of the \"guess the animal\" pseudo-artificial intelligence (AI) games then popular. He considered implementing a version of the program in BASIC, but once at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), instead he implemented it in several dialects of Lisp, including Maclisp.\nHe was a technical contributor to X3J13, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) subcommittee that standardized Common Lisp and contributed to the design of the programming language. He prepared the document that became ANSI Common Lisp, the Common Lisp HyperSpec (a hypertext conversion of the standard), and the document that became International Organization for Standardization (ISO) ISLISP. He can often be found on the Usenet newsgroup codice_1, where he is involved in discussions about Lisp and computer programming, and insider perspectives on Lisp evolution and Common Lisp standardization. In some posts there, he has expressed his opinion on open-source software, including open source implementations of Lisp and Scheme, as something that should be judged individually on its essential merits, rather than automatically considered good merely by being free or open.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66171", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66171", "title": "Stephen F. Austin", "text": "American empresario (1793\u20131836)\nStephen Fuller Austin (November 3, 1793 \u2013 December 27, 1836) was an American-born empresario. Known as the \"Father of Texas\" and the founder of Anglo Texas, he led the second and, ultimately, the successful colonization of the region by bringing 300 families and their slaves from the United States to the Tejas region of Mexico in 1825.\nBorn in Virginia and raised in southeastern Missouri, Austin served in the Missouri territorial legislature. He moved to Arkansas Territory and later to Louisiana. His father, Moses Austin, received an empresario grant from Spain to settle Texas. After Moses Austin died in 1821, Stephen Austin won recognition of the empresario grant from the newly independent nation of Mexico.\nAustin attracted numerous Anglo-American settlers to move to Texas, and by 1825, Austin had brought the first 300 American families into the territory. Throughout the 1820s, Austin sought to maintain good relations with the Mexican government and helped suppress the Fredonian Rebellion. He also helped ensure the introduction of slavery into Texas despite the Mexican government's opposition to the institution. Austin led the initial actions against the indigenous Karankawa people in this area.\nAs Texas settlers became increasingly dissatisfied with the Mexican government, Austin advocated conciliation, but the dissent against Mexico escalated into the Texas Revolution. Austin led Texas forces at the successful siege of B\u00e9xar before serving as a commissioner to the United States. Austin ran as a candidate in the 1836 Texas presidential election but was defeated by Sam Houston, who had served as a general in the war and entered the race two weeks before the election. Houston appointed Austin as Secretary of State for the new republic, and Austin held that position until his death in December 1836.\nNumerous places and institutions are named in his honor, including the capital of Texas.\nEarly years.\nStephen F. Austin was born on November 3, 1793, in the mining region of southwestern Virginia. His parents were Mary Brown Austin and Moses Austin. In 1798, his family moved west to the lead-mining region of present-day Potosi, Missouri. Moses Austin received a \"sitio\" from the Spanish government for the mining site of \"Mine \u00e0 Breton\", which had been established by French colonists.\nHis great-great-grandfather, Anthony Austin (b. 1636), was the son of Richard Austin (b.1598 in Bishopstoke, Hampshire, England). The immigrant ancestors, Richard Austin and his wife Esther, were original settlers of Suffield, Massachusetts, which became Connecticut in 1749.\nWhen Austin was eleven years old, his family sent him back East to be educated, first at the preparatory school of Bacon Academy in Colchester, Connecticut. He studied at Transylvania University in Lexington, Kentucky, from which he graduated in 1810. After graduation, Austin began studying to be a lawyer, reading the law with an established firm.\nAt age 21, he was elected to and served in the Missouri Territory legislature. There, he was \"influential in obtaining a charter for the struggling Bank of St. Louis\". Left penniless after the Panic of 1819, Austin decided to move south to the new Arkansas Territory.\nHe acquired property on the south bank of the Arkansas River, in the area that would later become Little Rock. After purchasing the property, he learned the area was being considered as the location for the new territorial capital, which could make his land worth a great deal more. He made his home in Hempstead County, Arkansas. Austin declared his candidacy for Congress two weeks before the first Arkansas territorial elections in 1820. His late entrance meant his name did not appear on the ballot in two of the five counties, but he still placed second in the field of six candidates. Later, he was appointed as a First Circuit Court judge. Little Rock was designated as the territorial capital over the next few months. But Austin's claim to land in the area was contested, and the courts ruled against him. The Territorial Assembly reorganized the government and abolished Austin's judgeship.\nAustin left the territory and moved to Louisiana. He reached New Orleans in November 1820. He met and stayed with Joseph H. Hawkins, a New Orleans lawyer and former Kentucky congressman, and made arrangements to study law with him.\nMove to Texas.\nDuring Austin's time in Arkansas, his father traveled to Spanish Texas and received an empresarial grant that would allow him to bring 300 American families to Texas. Moses Austin caught pneumonia soon after returning to Missouri. He directed that his \"empresario\" grant would be taken over by his son Stephen. Although Austin was reluctant to carry on his father's Texas venture, he was persuaded to do so by a letter from his mother, written two days before Moses's death.\nAustin boarded the steamer \"Beaver\" and departed to New Orleans to meet Spanish officials led by Erasmo Segu\u00edn. He was at Natchitoches, Louisiana, in 1821 when he learned of his father's death. \"This news has effected me very much, he was one of the most feeling and affectionate Fathers that ever lived. His faults I now say, and always have, were not of the heart.\"\nAustin led his party to travel in four weeks to San Antonio, with the intent of reauthorizing his father's grant; they arrived on August 12. While in transit, they learned Mexico had declared its independence from Spain, and Texas had become a Mexican province rather than a Spanish territory. Jos\u00e9 Antonio Navarro, a San Antonio native with ambitious visions of the future of Texas, befriended Stephen F. Austin, and the two developed a lasting association. Navarro, proficient in Spanish and Mexican law, assisted Austin in obtaining his empresario contracts. In San Antonio, the grant was reauthorized by Governor Antonio Mar\u00eda Mart\u00ednez, who allowed Austin to explore the Gulf Coast between San Antonio and the Brazos River to find a suitable location for a colony. As guides for the party, Manuel Becerra and three Aranama Indians went with the expedition.\nAustin advertised the Texas opportunity in New Orleans, announcing that land was available along the Brazos and Colorado rivers. A family of a husband, wife, and two children would receive at twelve and a half cents per acre. Farmers could get and ranchers . In December 1821, the first U.S. colonists crossed into the granted territory by land and sea on the Brazos River in present-day Brazoria County.\nEmpresario.\nAustin's plan for an American colony was thrown into turmoil by Mexico's gaining independence from Spain in 1821. Governor Mart\u00ednez informed Austin that the \"junta instituyente\", the new rump congress of the government of Agust\u00edn de Iturbide of Mexico, refused to recognize the land grant authorized by Spain. His government intended to use a general immigration law to regulate new settlement in Mexico. Austin traveled to Mexico City, where he persuaded the \"junta instituyente\" to approve the grant to his father and the law signed by the Mexican Emperor on January 3, 1823.\nThe old imperial law offered heads of families a league and a labor of land, , and other inducements. It also provided for the employment of agents, called \"empresarios\", to promote immigration. As an \"empresario\", Austin was to receive 67,000 acres of land for each 200 families he brought to Texas. According to the law, immigrants were not required to pay fees to the government. Some of the immigrants denied Austin's right to charge them for services at the rate of 12.5 cents/acre (31 cents/ha).\nWhen Emperor of Mexico Agust\u00edn de Iturbide abdicated in March 1823, the law was annulled once again. In April 1823, Austin induced the congress to grant him a contract to bring 300 families into Texas. He wanted honest, hard-working people who would make the colony a success. In 1824, the congress passed a new immigration law that allowed the individual states of Mexico to administer public lands and open them to settlement under certain conditions. In March 1825, the legislature of the Mexican state of Coahuila y Tejas passed a law similar to the one authorized by Iturbide. The law continued the system of \"empresarios\" and granted each married man a league of land, , stipulating that he must pay the state $30 within six years.\nAustin sought an area for his colonists on the land near the mouth of the Colorado River (Texas) for a colony that could provide a good supply of clean, potable water. Austin claimed rich tracts of land near bays and river mouths already populated by the Karankawa. The Karankawa relied on these bays for the fish and shellfish that provided their winter food sources and thus were fiercely protective of that land.\nAustin was greeted by the native Karankawa inhabitants with the help of his Mexican scouts, they watched closely as the immigrants unloaded their goods, so that their two sloops could navigate safely up the shallows of the Colorado River. When the Karankawa noticed that only four armed men were guarding the merchandise of 300 immigrants, they made their attack, killing the guards and plundering the articles.\nOn February 23, 1823, the Karankawa killed two men, named Loy and John C. Alley, and wounded another named John C. Clark. They were bringing home a canoe full of corn on the Colorado River near the mouth of Skull Creek. Later the same evening, Robert Brotherton was riding along a trail near Skull Creek when he was \"met by the Indians, robbed of his guns and perceiving he was in danger of his life after making his escape, was wounded in the back with an arrow, very severely. A volunteer militia was organized and went to the scene of the robbery. They followed the tracks to a nearby encampment and slew nineteen of them, scalped them and plundered their camp\", wrote one of the participants, John H. Moore. This event became known as the Skull Creek massacre.\nAustin wrote that extermination of the Karankawa would be necessary, even though his first encounter with the tribe was friendly. He talked to the settlers of cannibalism and extreme violence of the Karankawa, sometimes more specifically the Carancaguases. Research had suggested that these accusations of cannibalism were false, possibly caused by confusion with another tribe, and that the Karankawa were horrified by cannibalism when they learned of it being practiced by shipwrecked Spaniards. Austin told the colonists that the Karankawa would be impossible to live among. Austin continued to encourage violence both against and between the Indian tribes, culminating in 1825 with his order for all Kawankawa to be pursued and killed on sight.\nBy late 1825, Austin had brought the first 300 families to his settlement, the Austin Colony; these 300 are now known in Texas history as the Old Three Hundred. Austin had obtained further contracts to settle an additional 900 families between 1825 and 1829. He had effective civil and military authority over the settlers, but he quickly introduced a semblance of American law \u2013 the Constitution of Coahuila y Tejas was agreed on in November 1827. Austin organized small, informal armed groups to protect the colonists, which evolved into the Texas Rangers. Despite his hopes, Austin was making little money from his endeavors; the colonists were unwilling to pay for his services as \"empresario,\" and most of his revenues were spent on the processes of government and other public services.\nDuring these years, Austin, a Louisiana Lodge No. 111 member at Ste. Genevieve, Missouri, sought to establish Freemasonry in Texas. Freemasonry was well established among the educated classes of Mexican society. It had been introduced among the aristocracy loyal to the House of Bourbon, and the conservatives had total control over the Order. By 1827, Americans living in Mexico City had introduced the United States York Rite of Freemasonry as a liberal alternative to the established European-style Scottish Rite. On February 11, 1828, Austin called a meeting of Freemasons at San Felipe to elect officers and to petition the Masonic Grand Lodge in Mexico City for a charter to form a lodge. Austin was elected Worshipful Master of the new lodge. Although the petition reached Matamoros and was to be forwarded to Mexico City, nothing more was heard. By 1828, the ruling faction in Mexico feared the liberal elements in Texas might try to gain their independence. Fully aware of the political philosophies of American Freemasons, the Mexican government outlawed Freemasonry on October 25, 1828. In 1829, Austin called another meeting, where it was decided that it was \"impolitic and imprudent, at this time, to form Masonic lodges in Texas\".\nHe was active in promoting trade and currying the good favor of the Mexican authorities, aiding them in the suppression of the Fredonian Rebellion of Haden Edwards. Some historians consider the Fredonian Rebellion the beginning of the Texas Revolution. Although \"premature ...\u00a0 the Fredonian Rebellion sparked the powder for later success.\" For this event, Austin raised troops to fight with Mexican troops against the Texas rebels. With the colonists numbering more than 11,000 by 1832, they were becoming less amenable to Austin's cautious leadership, and the Mexican government was becoming less cooperative. It was concerned with the colony's growth and the U.S. government's efforts to buy the state from them. The Mexican government had attempted to stop further U.S. immigration as early as April 1830, but Austin's skills gained an exemption for his colonies. He granted land to immigrants based on to the husband, 320 to the wife, 160 for every child, and 80 for every enslaved person.\nSlavery.\nSlavery was a very important issue to Austin, one he called \"of great interest\" to him. Austin was a periodical enslaver throughout his life; however, he had conflicting views about it. Theoretically, he believed slavery was wrong and went against the American ideal of liberty. In practice, however, he agreed with the social, economic, and political justifications for it and worked hard to defend and expand it. Despite his defense of it, he also harbored concerns that the long-term effects of slavery would destroy American society. He grew particularly concerned following Nat Turner's rebellion in 1831, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I sometimes shudder at the consequences and think that a large part of America will be Santo Domingonized in 100, or 200 years. The idea of seeing such a country as this overrun by a slave population almost makes me weep. It is in vain to tell a North American that the white population will be destroyed some fifty or eighty years hence by the negroes, and that his daughters will be violated and Butchered by them.\"\nWhile Austin thought it would be advantageous someday for Texas to phase out of slavery, up until the Texas Revolution, he worked to ensure that his colony's immigrants could bypass the Mexican government's resistance to it. Doing so ensured the population growth and economic development of his colony, which was primarily dependent on the monocropping of cotton and sugar. In August 1825, he recommended that the state government allow immigrants to bring people they were enslaving with them through 1840, with the caveat that female grandchildren of the enslaved people would be freed by age 15 and males by age 25. His recommendation was rejected.\nIn 1826, when a state committee proposed abolishing slavery outright, 25 percent of the people in Austin's colony were enslaved. Austin's colonists, mostly pro-slavery immigrants from the south, threatened to leave Texas if the proposition passed, while prospective Southern immigrants hesitated to come to Texas until slavery was guaranteed there. Austin conceded that his colony's success depended on slavery. Without enslaved people, the colonists would lack the mass labor to cultivate the land, which would stall the pace of immigration needed to develop and increase the land's value, deflate the economy, and motivate his colonists to leave.\nAustin went before the legislature and pleaded that, at the least, his original 300 families should be allowed to continue enslaving people. He argued against the \"bad faith\" of freeing them, demanded reparations to enslavers for every enslaved person emancipated by the state, warned that the loss of enslaved people could leave some colonists destitute, and reasoned that freeing them would not only leave his settlers alone in the harsh Texas environment but would also expose them to the discomfort and nuisance of living amongst formerly enslaved people, who would become vagrants seeking retribution upon their former owners. While he waited for the legislature's verdict of his request, Austin went into a deep depression over the issue and sent his brother, Brown Austin, to further lobby the legislature on his behalf.\nIn March 1827, the legislature signed Article 13 into law. Despite the law complying with some of his requests, Austin called it \"unconstitutional\". He contested the law as it freed the children of enslaved people at birth, established a six-month grace period before fully emancipating all enslaved people in the state, and included provisions to improve the conditions of enslaved people and transitioning freedmen. Austin \u2013\u2013 who had been so effective in persuading the legislature, however, that the author of Article 13 (before its passage) requested to withdraw it \u2013\u2013 helped his colonists evade the law by advising them to legally supplant the word \"slave\" with the words \"workingmen\", \"family servants\", and \"laborers\", and by working to pass a decree that banned freedmen from Texas and forced emancipated slaves to work for their former slaveowners until the accrued \"debt\" (e.g. clothing, food), incurred for their own enslavement, was worked off.\nIn 1828, Austin petitioned the legislature to guarantee that slaveowners immigrating to Texas could legally \"free\" their slaves before immigrating and contract them into a lifetime term of indentured servitude, thereby avoiding recognizing them as slaves. He lobbied to help his colony elude president Vicente Guerrero's 1829 decree to emancipate enslaved people in the province legally and to bypass the government's effort to prohibit slavery when it passed the Law of April 6, 1830.\nIn 1829, John Durst, a prominent landowner and politician, wrote about the president's emancipation of enslaved people, \"We are ruined forever should this measure be adopted\". Stephen F. Austin replied,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I am the owner of one slave only, an old decrepit woman, not worth much, but in this matter I should feel that my constitutional rights as a Mexican were just as much infringed, as they would be if I had a thousand.\"\nIn 1830, Austin wrote that he would oppose Texas joining the United States without guarantees that he should \"insist on the perpetual exclusion of slavery from this state [Texas]\". In 1833, he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Texas must be a slave country. Circumstances and unavoidable necessity compel it. It is the wish of the people there, and it is my duty to do all I can, prudently, in favor of it. I will do so.\"\nIn May 1835, Austin's colonists learned that Mexico's tolerance for the evasions of enslavers was drawing to a close with its proposal of new abolition legislation. Alarmed, and with Austin imprisoned in Mexico for pushing for independence, colonists turned against the Mexican government, calling it \"oppressive\" and a \"plundering, robbing, autocratical government\" without regard for the security of \"life, liberty or property\". Resisting the impact a changed slavery policy would have on economic growth, and fearing rumors of Mexico's plan to free the enslaved people and turn them loose upon the colonists, shortly after Austin returned from Mexico, he and his colonists took up arms against the Mexican government. Austin later gained U.S. Government support for his revolution when he wrote to Senator Lewis F. Linn and pleaded that Santa Anna planned to \"exterminate\" all of the colonists and fill Texas \"with Indians and negroes [freed slaves]\".\nRelations with Mexico.\nImmigration controls and the introduction of tariff laws had done much to dissatisfy the colonists, peaking in the Anahuac Disturbances. Austin became involved in Mexican politics, supporting the upstart Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna. Following the success of Santa Anna, the colonists sought a compensatory reward, proclaimed at the Convention of 1832: resumption of immigration, tariff exemption, separation from Coahuila, and a new state government for Texas. Austin did not support these demands; he considered them ill-timed and tried to moderate them. When they were repeated and extended at the Convention of 1833, Austin traveled to Mexico City on July 18, 1833, and met with Vice President Valent\u00edn G\u00f3mez Far\u00edas. Austin did gain certain significant reforms: the immigration ban was lifted, but a separate state government was not authorized. Statehood in Mexico required a population of 80,000, and Texas had only 30,000.\nBelieving that he was pushing for Texas independence and suspecting that he was trying to incite insurrection, the Mexican government arrested Austin in January 1834 in Saltillo. He was taken to Mexico City and imprisoned. No charges were filed against him as no court would accept jurisdiction. He was moved from prison to prison. He was released under bond in December 1834 and required to stay in the Federal District. He was entirely freed under the general amnesty in July 1835 and, in August 1835, left Mexico to return to Texas via New Orleans.\nTexas Revolution.\nIn his absence, several events propelled the colonists toward confrontation with Santa Anna's centralist government. Austin temporarily commanded the Texian forces during the siege of B\u00e9xar from October 12 to December 11, 1835. After learning of the Disturbances at Anahuac and Velasco in the summer of 1835, an enraged Santa Anna made rapid preparations for the Mexican army to sweep Anglo settlers from Texas. War began in October 1835 at Gonzales. The Republic of Texas, created by a new constitution on March 2, 1836, won independence following a string of defeats with the dramatic turnabout victory at the Battle of San Jacinto on April 21, 1836, and the capture of Santa Anna the following morning. He was then imprisoned.\nRepublic of Texas.\nIn December 1835, Austin, Branch Archer, and William H. Wharton were appointed commissioners to the U.S. by the provisional government of the republic. On June 10, 1836, Austin was in New Orleans, where he received word of Santa Anna's defeat by Sam Houston at the Battle of San Jacinto. Austin returned to Texas to rest at Peach Point in August. On August 4, he announced his candidacy for president of Texas. Austin felt confident he could win the election until two weeks before the election, when on August 20, Houston entered the race. Austin wrote, \"Many of the old settlers who are too blind to see or understand their interest will vote for him.\" Houston carried East Texas, the Red River region, and most of the soldiers' votes. Austin received 587 votes to Sam Houston's 5,119 and Henry Smith's 743 votes. Houston appointed Austin as the first secretary of state of the new republic; however, Austin only served approximately two months before his death.\nDeath and estate.\nIn December 1836, Austin was in the new capital of Columbia (now known as West Columbia), where he caught a severe cold; his condition worsened. Doctors were called in but could not help him. Austin died of pneumonia at noon on December 27, 1836. He was at the home of George B. McKinstry, near what is now West Columbia, Texas. He was 43. Austin's last words were, \"The independence of Texas is recognized! Don't you see it in the papers?...\" Upon hearing of Austin's death, Houston ordered an official statement proclaiming: \"The Father of Texas is no more; the first pioneer of the wilderness has departed.\" Originally, Austin was buried at Gulf Prairie Cemetery in Brazoria County, Texas. In 1910, Austin's body was reinterred at the Texas State Cemetery in Austin. Austin never married, nor did he have any children. He bequeathed all his land, titles, and possessions to his married sister, Emily Austin Perry.\nPast family.\nWhile Stephen F. Austin and his sister Emily have each been the subject of a biography, they are descended from several generations of noteworthy people, including: Moses Austin (father\u2014biography published by Trinity University Press), Abia Brown (grandfather), Joseph Sharp (great-grandfather), Isaac Sharp (great, great-grandfather), Anthony Sharp (great, great, great-grandfather\u2014biography published by Stanford University Press). Accordingly, history records noteworthy social contributions in each generation of Stephen's family dating back to the early seventeenth century. Richard Austin, a native of Titchfield, Hampshire was his paternal emigrant ancestor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66173", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66173", "title": "Common swift", "text": "Species of bird\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe common swift (Apus apus) is a medium-sized bird, superficially similar to the barn swallow or house martin but somewhat larger, though not stemming from those passerine species, being in the order Apodiformes. The resemblances between the groups are due to convergent evolution, reflecting similar contextual development. The swifts' nearest relatives are the New World hummingbirds and the Southeast Asian treeswifts.\nIts scientific name \"Apus\" is Latin for a swift, thought by the ancients to be a type of swallow with no feet (from Ancient Greek \u03b1, \"a\", \"without\", and \u03c0\u03bf\u03cd\u03c2, \"pous\", \"foot\").\nSwifts have very short legs which they use primarily for clinging to vertical surfaces (hence the German name \"Mauersegler\", literally meaning \"wall-glider\"). They never settle voluntarily on the ground where they would be vulnerable to accidents and predation, and non-breeding individuals may spend up to ten months in continuous flight.\nTaxonomy.\nThe common swift was one of the many species described by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in 1758 in the tenth edition of his \"Systema Naturae\". He introduced the binomial name \"Hirundo apus\". The current genus \"Apus\" was erected by the Italian naturalist Giovanni Antonio Scopoli in 1777 based on tautonymy. The word \"apus\" is the Latin word for a swift. It is derived from the Ancient Greek \u03b1, \"a\", \"without\", and \u03c0\u03bf\u03cd\u03c2, \"pous\", \"foot\", based on the belief that these birds were a form of swallow that lacked feet.\nA Central European subspecies which lived during the last ice age has been described as \"Apus apus palapus\".\nDescription.\nCommon swifts are long with a wingspan of and entirely blackish-brown except for a small white or pale grey patch on their chins which is not visible from a distance. They have a short forked tail and very long swept-back wings that resemble a crescent or a boomerang.\nTheir call is a loud scream in two different tone pitches, the higher of which issues from the female. They often form \"screaming parties\" during summer evenings, when 10\u201320 swifts will gather in flight around their nesting area, calling out and being answered by nesting swifts. Larger \"screaming parties\" are formed at higher altitudes, especially late in the breeding season. Radar tracking of swifts at their breeding colonies has revealed that they often move together in flocks during their evening ascent and their dawn descent, but fly separately during the subsequent evening descent and the prior dawn ascent, suggesting that this flocking benefits the swifts via cue acquisition and information exchange between individuals or through extending social behaviour.\nBehaviour.\nSwifts may nest in former woodpecker tree burrows found in ancient forests, such as some 600 reported nesting in the Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest of North Eastern Poland, or the small colony found in a combination of woodpecker holes and tree nestboxes on the RSPB's reserve at the Caledonian Forest in Abernethy, Scotland. While tree holes and cliffs may have comprised their historical nesting resource, the almost complete removal of ancient forest from their nesting range has resulted in adaptation to man-made sites. Swifts build their nests of air-borne material caught in flight, bonded with their saliva, in suitable buildings hollows, such as under tiles, in gaps beneath window sills, and most typically under eaves and within gables.\nSwifts form pairs that may couple for years, and often return to the same nesting site and partner year after year, repairing degradation suffered in their 40-week migratory absence. Insects such as clothes moths, carpet and larder beetles may consume all but the most indigestible nest elements, typically feather shafts.\nYoung nesting swifts are able to survive for a few days without food by dropping their body temperature and metabolic rate, entering a torpid state.\nExcept when nesting, swifts spend their lives in the air, living on the insects caught in flight; they drink, feed, and often mate and sleep on the wing. Some individuals go 10 months without landing. No other bird spends as much of its life in flight. Contrary to common belief, swifts can take flight from level ground. Their maximum horizontal flying speed is Over a lifetime they can cover millions of kilometers.\nFeeding parties can be very large in insect-rich areas, such as wetlands. Reports of as many as 2,000 swifts feeding over flooded gravel pits, lakes and marshy river deltas are not uncommon, and may represent an ingress of swifts from within as much as a radius; swifts nesting in Western Scotland are thought to venture to Lough Neagh in Northern Ireland to feed on the abundant and nutritious \"Lough Neagh Fly\".\nBreeding.\nCommon swifts nest in a wider variety of sites than any other species of \"Apus\". Swifts usually nest in buildings but they can also be found nesting in holes in trees, cliffs and crevices, and even in nestboxes. Swifts usually enter their nesting holes with direct flight, and take-off is characterized by an initial free-fall.\nDistribution.\nCommon swifts are migratory. Their summer breeding range runs from Portugal and Ireland in the West across to China and Siberia in the East. They breed as far south as Northern Africa (in Morocco and Algeria), with a presence in the Middle East in Israel, Lebanon and Syria, the Near East across Turkey, and the whole of Europe as far north as Norway, Finland, and most of sub-Arctic Russia. Swifts migrate to Africa by a variety of routes, ending up in Equatorial and Sub-Equatorial Africa, excluding the Cape. Common swifts do not breed on the Indian Subcontinent. Outside of their normal range, they are rare vagrants in North America, with records mostly originating from the United States and Canada, however; it has also been recorded in Bermuda and Greenland. Common swifts have also been recorded in the Caribbean, including in Bonaire, Barbados, and Puerto Rico. In South America, there are records in Suriname, French Guiana, Brazil, and Colombia.\nMigration.\nSubjects of a geolocator tracking study demonstrated that swifts breeding in Sweden winter in the Congo region of Africa. Swifts spend three to three-and-a-half months in Africa and a similar time breeding \u2013 the rest is spent on the wing, flying home or away. Unsuccessful breeders, fledglings, and sexually immature year-old birds are the first to leave their breeding area. Breeding males follow next, and finally the breeding females. The breeding females stay longer in the nest to rebuild their fat reserves. The time of departure is often determined by the light cycle, and begins at the first day of less than 17 hours light. For this reason, birds further north, for instance in Finland, leave later in the second half of August. These latecomers are rushed through the quickly shortening days in Central Europe and are barely seen by bird watchers.\nThe prevailing direction of travel through Central Europe is south-by-southwest, and so the Alps do not present a barrier. In bad weather, the swifts follow rivers, because they can find a better food supply there. The population of Western and Central Europe traverses the Iberian peninsula and northwestern Africa. Swifts from Russia and southeastern Europe make a long journey over the eastern part of the Mediterranean. It is unclear where the two groups meet. The western group of swifts mostly follow the Atlantic coastline of Africa \u2013 otherwise they would have to cross the Sahara. Once they arrive at the humid savanna, they turn southeast to arrive at their winter feeding grounds. During the summer in Africa, there is a great bounty of insects for the swifts, since the region lies in the Intertropical Convergence Zone. The swifts have a nearly unbroken presence in the sky.\nA few swifts, usually some of the sexually immature one year olds, remain in Africa. The majority fly northwards through Africa, then turn east towards their destinations. The birds use low pressure fronts during their spring migrations to exploit the southwestern flow of warm air, and on the return trip, ride northeastern winds on the back of the low pressure fronts.\nIn Central Europe, the swifts return in the second half of April and the first third of May, and like to stay in lowlands and near water rather than in high places. In more northerly regions, the swifts arrive later. The weather along the journey has an enormous influence on the arrival date, so in one region the swifts may come back at varying times year to year.\nDifferences between swifts and swallows.\nThe barn swallow and house martin hunt for airborne insects in a manner similar to that of the slightly larger swift, and occasionally mixed groups of the species form. The most noticeable differences between the three types are:\nParasites.\nSwift nests commonly support populations of the chewing louse \"Dennyus hirundinis\" and the lousefly \"Crataerina pallida\".\nIn culture.\nIn medieval Italy, swifts (rondone) were encouraged to nest in towers and buildings using \"rondonare\", holes left in the wall and special constructions under the eaves of buildings. Young birds were harvested for eating but there were rules about leaving at least one young in the nest.\nThe heraldic bird known as the \"martlet\", which is represented without feet, may have been based on the swift, but is generally assumed to refer to the house martin; it was used for the arms of younger sons, perhaps because it symbolized their landless wandering.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66174", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66174", "title": "Barn swallow", "text": "Migratory passerine bird, and the most widespread species of swallow\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe barn swallow (Hirundo rustica) is the most widespread species of swallow in the world, occurring on all continents, with vagrants reported even in Antarctica. It is a distinctive passerine bird with blue upperparts and a long, deeply forked tail. In Anglophone Europe, it is just called the swallow; in northern Europe, it is the only member of family Hirundinidae called a \"swallow\" rather than a \"martin\".\nThere are six subspecies of barn swallow, which breed across the Northern Hemisphere. Two subspecies, (\"H. r. savignii and H. r. transitiva\") have fairly restricted ranges in the Nile valley and eastern Mediterranean, respectively. The other four are more widespread, with winter ranges covering much of the Southern Hemisphere.\nThe barn swallow is a bird of open country that normally nests in man-made structures and consequently has spread with human expansion. It builds a cup nest from mud pellets in barns or similar structures and feeds on insects caught in flight. This species lives in close association with humans, and its insect-eating habits mean that it is tolerated by humans; this acceptance was reinforced in the past by superstitions regarding the bird and its nest. There are frequent cultural references to the barn swallow in literary and religious works due to both its living in close proximity to humans and its annual migration. The barn swallow is the national bird of Austria and Estonia.\nDescription.\nThe adult male barn swallow of the nominate subspecies \"H. r. rustica\" is long including of elongated outer tail feathers. It has a wingspan of and weighs . It has steel blue upperparts and a rufous forehead, chin and throat, which are separated from the off-white underparts by a broad dark blue breast band. The outer tail feathers are elongated, giving the distinctive deeply forked \"swallow tail\". There is a line of white spots across the outer end of the upper tail. The female is similar in appearance to the male, but the tail streamers are shorter, the blue of the upperparts and breast band is less glossy, and the underparts paler. The juvenile is browner and has a paler rufous face and whiter underparts. It also lacks the long tail streamers of the adult.\nAlthough both sexes sing, female song was only recently described. (See below for details about song.) Calls include \"witt\" or \"witt-witt\" and a loud \"splee-plink\" when excited or trying to chase intruders away from the nest. The alarm calls include a sharp \"siflitt\" for predators like cats and a \"flitt-flitt\" for birds of prey like the hobby. This species is fairly quiet on the wintering grounds.\nThe distinctive combination of a red face and blue breast band renders the adult barn swallow easy to distinguish from the African \"Hirundo\" species and from the welcome swallow (\"Hirundo neoxena\") with which its range overlaps in Australasia. In Africa the short tail streamers of the juvenile barn swallow invite confusion with juvenile red-chested swallow (\"Hirundo lucida\"), but the latter has a narrower breast band and more white in the tail.\nTaxonomy.\nThe barn swallow was described by Carl Linnaeus in his 1758 10th edition of \"Systema Naturae\" as \"Hirundo rustica\", characterised as \"H. rectricibus, exceptis duabus intermediis, macula alba notat\u00ees\". \"Hirundo\" is the Latin word for \"swallow\"; \"rusticus\" means \"of the country\". This species is the only one of that genus to have a range extending into the Americas, with the majority of \"Hirundo\" species being native to Africa. This genus of blue-backed swallows is sometimes called the \"barn swallows\".\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" dates the English common name \"barn swallow\" to 1851, though an earlier instance of the collocation in an English-language context is in Gilbert White's popular book \"The Natural History of Selborne\", originally published in 1789:\nThe swallow, though called the chimney-swallow, by no means builds altogether in chimnies [\"sic\"], but often within barns and out-houses against the rafters\u00a0... In \"Sweden\" she builds in barns, and is called \"ladusvala\", the barn-swallow.\nThis suggests that the English name may be a calque on the Swedish term.\nThere are few taxonomic problems within the genus, but the red-chested swallow\u2014a resident of West Africa, the Congo Basin, and Ethiopia\u2014was formerly treated as a subspecies of barn swallow. The red-chested swallow is slightly smaller than its migratory relative, has a narrower blue breast-band, and (in the adult) has shorter tail streamers. In flight, it looks paler underneath than barn swallow.\nSubspecies.\nSix subspecies of barn swallow are generally recognised. In eastern Asia, a number of additional or alternative forms have been proposed, including \"saturata\" by Robert Ridgway in 1883, \"kamtschatica\" by Benedykt Dybowski in 1883, \"ambigua\" by Erwin Stresemann and \"mandschurica\" by Wilhelm Meise in 1934. Given the uncertainties over the validity of these forms, this article follows the treatment of Turner and Rose.\nThe short wings, red belly and incomplete breast band of \"H. r. tytleri\" are also found in \"H. r. erythrogaster\", and DNA analyses show that barn swallows from North America colonised the Baikal region of Siberia, a dispersal direction opposite to that for most changes in distribution between North America and Eurasia.\nBehaviour.\nHabitat and range.\nThe preferred habitat of the barn swallow is open country with low vegetation, such as pasture, meadows and farmland, preferably with nearby water. This swallow avoids heavily wooded or precipitous areas and densely built-up locations. The presence of accessible open structures such as barns, stables, or culverts to provide nesting sites, and exposed locations such as wires, roof ridges or bare branches for perching, are also important in the bird's selection of its breeding range.\nBarn swallows are semi-colonial, settling in groups from a single pair to a few dozen pairs, particularly in larger wooden structures housing animals. The same individuals often breed at the same site year after year, although settlement choices have been experimentally shown to be predicted by nest availability rather than any characteristics of available mates. Because it takes around 2 weeks for a pair to build a nest from mud, hair, and other materials, old nests are highly prized.\nThis species breeds across the Northern Hemisphere from sea level to , but to in the Caucasus and North America, and it is absent only from deserts and the cold northernmost parts of the continents. Over much of its range, it avoids towns, and in Europe is replaced in urban areas by the house martin. However, in Honsh\u016b, Japan, the barn swallow is a more urban bird, with the red-rumped swallow (\"Cecropis daurica\") replacing it as the rural species.\nIn winter, the barn swallow is cosmopolitan in its choice of habitat, avoiding only dense forests and deserts. It is most common in open, low vegetation habitats, such as savanna and ranch land, and in Venezuela, South Africa and Trinidad and Tobago it is described as being particularly attracted to burnt or harvested sugarcane fields and the waste from the cane. In the absence of suitable roost sites, they may sometimes roost on wires where they are more exposed to predators. Individual birds tend to return to the same wintering locality each year and congregate from a large area to roost in reed beds. These roosts can be extremely large; one in Nigeria had an estimated 1.5 million birds. These roosts are thought to be a protection from predators, and the arrival of roosting birds is synchronised in order to overwhelm predators like African hobbies. The barn swallow has been recorded as breeding in the more temperate parts of its winter range, such as the mountains of Thailand and in central Argentina.\nMigration of barn swallows between Britain and South Africa was first established on 23 December 1912 when a bird that had been ringed by James Masefield at a nest in Staffordshire, was found in Natal. As would be expected for a long-distance migrant, this bird has occurred as a vagrant to such distant areas as Hawaii, Bermuda, Greenland, Tristan da Cunha, the Falkland Islands, and even Antarctica.\nFeeding.\nThe barn swallow is similar in its habits to other aerial insectivores, including other swallow species and the unrelated swifts. It is not a particularly fast flier, with a speed estimated at , up to and a wing beat rate of approximately 5, up to 7\u20139 times each second.\nThe barn swallow typically feeds in open areas above shallow water or the ground often following animals, humans or farm machinery to catch disturbed insects, but it will occasionally pick prey items from the water surface, walls and plants. Swallows have been observed feeding on insects that fly around active white stork nests as well. In the breeding areas, large flies make up around 70% of the diet, with aphids also a significant component. However, in Europe, the barn swallow consumes fewer aphids than the house or sand martins. On the wintering grounds, Hymenoptera, especially flying ants, are important food items. Grasshoppers, crickets, dragonflies, beetles and moths are also preyed upon. When egg-laying, barn swallows hunt in pairs, but otherwise will form often large flocks.\nThe amount of food a clutch will get depends on the size of the clutch, with larger clutches getting more food on average. The timing of a clutch also determines the food given; later broods get food that is smaller in size compared to earlier broods. This is because larger insects are too far away from the nest to be profitable in terms of energy expenditure.\nIsotope studies have shown that wintering populations may utilise different feeding habitats, with British breeders feeding mostly over grassland, whereas Swiss birds utilised woodland more. Another study showed that a single population breeding in Denmark actually wintered in two separate areas.\nThe barn swallow drinks by skimming low over lakes or rivers and scooping up water with its open mouth. This bird bathes in a similar fashion, dipping into the water for an instant while in flight.\nSwallows gather in communal roosts after breeding, sometimes thousands strong. Reed beds are regularly favoured, with the birds swirling \"en masse\" before swooping low over the reeds. Reed beds are an important source of food prior to and whilst on migration; although the barn swallow is a diurnal migrant that can feed on the wing whilst it travels low over ground or water, the reed beds enable fat deposits to be established or replenished.\nSong.\nMales sing to defend small territories (when living in colonies, less so in solitary pairs) and to attract mates. Males sing throughout the breeding season, from late April into August in many parts of the range. Their song is made up of a \"twitter warble,\" followed by a rising \"P-syllable\" in European \"H. r. rustica\" and the North American \"H. r. erythrogaster.\" In all subspecies, this is followed by a short \"Q-syllable\" and a trilled series of pulses, termed the \"rattle.\" The rattle is sometimes followed by a terminal \"\u03a9-Note\" in some subspecies' populations, and always at the end of \"H. r. tytleri\" song.\nFemale songs are much shorter than male songs, and are only produced during the early part of the breeding season. Females sing spontaneously, though infrequently, and will also countersing in response to each other.\nBreeding.\nThe male barn swallow returns to the breeding grounds before the females and selects a nest site, which is then advertised to females with a circling flight and song. Plumage may be used to advertise: in some populations, like in the subspecies \"H. r. gutturalis\", darker ventral plumage in males is associated with higher breeding success. In other populations, the breeding success of the male is related to the length of the tail streamers, with longer streamers being more attractive to the female. Males with longer tail feathers are generally longer-lived and more disease resistant, females thus gaining an indirect fitness benefit from this form of selection, since longer tail feathers indicate a genetically stronger individual which will produce offspring with enhanced vitality. Males in northern Europe have longer tails than those further south, whereas in Spain the male's tail streamers are only 5% longer than the female's; in Finland, the difference is 20%. In Denmark, the average male tail length increased by 9% between 1984 and 2004, but it is possible that climatic changes may lead in the future to shorter tails if summers become hot and dry.\nMales with long streamers also have larger white tail spots, and since feather-eating bird lice prefer white feathers, large white tail spots without parasite damage again demonstrate breeding quality; a positive association exists between spot size and the number of offspring produced each season.\nThe breeding season of the barn swallow is variable: in the southern part of the range, the breeding season usually is from February or March to early to mid September, although some late second and third broods finish in October. In the northern part of the range, it usually starts late May to early June and ends the same time as the breeding season of the southernmost birds.\nBoth sexes defend the nest, but the male is particularly aggressive and territorial. Once established, pairs stay together to breed for life, but extra-pair copulation is common, making this species genetically polygamous, despite being socially monogamous. Males guard females actively to avoid being cuckolded. Males may use deceptive alarm calls to disrupt extrapair copulation attempts toward their mates.\nAs its name implies, the barn swallow typically nests inside accessible buildings such as barns and stables, or under bridges and wharves. Before man-made sites became common, it nested on cliff faces or in caves, but this is now rare. The neat cup-shaped nest is placed on a beam or against a suitable vertical projection. It is constructed by both sexes, although more often by the female, with mud pellets collected in their beaks and lined with grasses, feathers, algae or other soft materials. The nest building ability of the male is also sexually selected; females will lay more eggs and at an earlier date with males who are better at nest construction, with the opposite being true with males that are not. After building the nest, barn swallows may nest colonially where sufficient high-quality nest sites are available, and within a colony, each pair defends a territory around the nest which, for the European subspecies, is in size. Colony size tends to be larger in North America.\nIn North America at least, barn swallows frequently engage in a mutualist relationship with ospreys. Barn swallows will build their nest below an osprey nest, receiving protection from other birds of prey that are repelled by the exclusively fish-eating ospreys. The ospreys are alerted to the presence of these predators by the alarm calls of the swallows.\nBarn swallows will normally raise two broods, with the original nest being reused for the second brood and being repaired and reused in subsequent years. The female lays two to seven, but typically four or five, reddish-spotted white eggs. The clutch size is influenced by latitude, with clutch sizes of northern populations being higher on average than southern populations. The eggs are in size, and weigh , of which 5% is shell. In Europe, the female does almost all the incubation, but in North America the male may incubate up to 25% of the time. The incubation period is normally 14\u201319 days, with another 18\u201323 days before the altricial chicks fledge. The fledged young stay with, and are fed by, the parents for about a week after leaving the nest. Occasionally, first-year birds from the first brood will assist in feeding the second brood. Compared to those from early broods, juvenile barn swallows from late broods have been found to migrate at a younger age, fuel less efficiently during migration and have lower return rates the following year.\nThe barn swallow will mob intruders such as cats or accipiters that venture too close to their nest, often flying very close to the threat. Adult barn swallows have few predators, but some are taken by accipiters, falcons, and owls. Brood parasitism by cowbirds in North America or cuckoos in Eurasia is rare.\nHatching success is 90% and the fledging survival rate is 70\u201390%. Average mortality is 70\u201380% in the first year and 40\u201370% for the adult. Although the record age is more than 11 years, most survive less than four years. Barn swallow nestlings have prominent red gapes, a feature shown to induce feeding by parent birds. An experiment in manipulating brood size and immune system showed the vividness of the gape was positively correlated with T-cell\u2013mediated immunocompetence, and that larger brood size and injection with an antigen led to a less vivid gape.\nThe barn swallow has been recorded as hybridising with the cliff swallow (\"Petrochelidon pyrrhonota\") and the cave swallow (\"P. fulva\") in North America, and the house martin (\"Delichon urbicum\") in Eurasia, the cross with the latter being one of the most common passerine hybrids.\nParasites and predators.\nBarn swallows (and other small passerines) often have characteristic feather holes on their wing and tail feathers. These holes were suggested as being caused by avian lice such as \"Machaerilaemus malleus\" and \"Myrsidea rustica\", although other studies suggest that they are mainly caused by species of \"Brueelia\". Several other species of lice have been described from barn swallow hosts, including \"Brueelia domestica\" and \"Philopterus microsomaticus\". The avian lice prefer to feed on white tail spots, and they are generally found more numerously on short-tailed males, indicating the function of unbroken white tail spots as a measure of quality. In Texas, the swallow bug (\"Oeciacus vicarius\"), which is common on species such as the cliff swallow, is also known to infest barn swallows.\nPredatory bats such as the greater false vampire bat are known to prey on barn swallows. Swallows at their communal roosts attract predators and several falcon species make use of these opportunities. Falcon species confirmed as predators include the peregrine falcon and the African hobby. In Africa, tigerfish \"Hydrocynus vittatus\" have been recorded to routinely leap out of the water to capture low-flying swallows.\nStatus.\nThe barn swallow has an enormous range, with an estimated global extent of about and a population of 190 million individuals. The species is evaluated as least concern on the 2019 IUCN Red List, and has no special status under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), which regulates international trade in specimens of wild animals and plants.\nThis is a species that has greatly benefited historically from forest clearance, which has created the open habitats it prefers, and from human habitation, which have given it an abundance of safe man-made nest sites. There have been local declines due to the use of DDT in Israel in the 1950s, competition for nest sites with house sparrows in the US in the 19th century, and an ongoing gradual decline in numbers in parts of Europe and Asia due to agricultural intensification, reducing the availability of insect food. However, there has been an increase in the population in North America during the 20th century with the greater availability of nesting sites and subsequent range expansion, including the colonisation of northern Alberta.\nA specific threat to wintering birds from the European populations is the transformation by the South African government of a light aircraft runway near Durban into an international airport for the 2010 FIFA World Cup. The roughly square Mount Moreland reed bed is a night roost for more than three million barn swallows, which represent 1% of the global population and 8% of the European breeding population. The reed bed lies on the flight path of aircraft using the proposed La Mercy airport, and there were fears that it would be cleared because the birds could threaten aircraft safety. However, following detailed evaluation, advanced radar technology will be installed to enable planes using the airport to be warned of bird movements and, if necessary, take appropriate measures to avoid the flocks.\nClimate change may affect the barn swallow; drought causes weight loss and slow feather regrowth, and the expansion of the Sahara will make it a more formidable obstacle for migrating European birds. Hot dry summers will reduce the availability of insect food for chicks. Conversely, warmer springs may lengthen the breeding season and result in more chicks, and the opportunity to use nest sites outside buildings in the north of the range might also lead to more offspring.\nRelationship with humans.\nThe barn swallow is an attractive bird that feeds on flying insects and has therefore been tolerated by humans when it shares their buildings for nesting. As one of the earlier migrants, this conspicuous species is also seen as an early sign of summer's approach.\nIn the Old World, the barn swallow appears to have used man-made structures and bridges since time immemorial. An early reference is in Virgil's \"Georgics\" (29 BC), \"Ante garrula quam tignis nidum suspendat hirundo\" (Before the twittering swallow hangs its nest from the rafters).\nMany cattle farmers believed that swallows spread \"Salmonella\" infections; however, a study in Sweden showed no evidence of the birds being reservoirs of the bacteria.\nIn literature.\nMany literary references are based on the barn swallow's northward migration as a symbol of spring or summer. The proverb about the necessity for more than one piece of evidence goes back at least to Aristotle's \"Nicomachean Ethics\": \"For as one swallow or one day does not make a spring, so one day or a short time does not make a fortunate or happy man.\"\nThe barn swallow symbolises the coming of spring and thus love in the \"Pervigilium Veneris\", a late Latin poem. In his poem \"The Waste Land\", T. S. Eliot quoted the line \"Quando fiam uti chelidon [ut tacere desinam]?\" (\"When will I be like the swallow, so that I can stop being silent?\") This refers to the myth of Philomela in which she turns into a nightingale, and her sister Procne into a swallow.\nIn culture.\nGilbert White studied the barn swallow in detail in his pioneering work \"The Natural History of Selborne\", but even this careful observer was uncertain whether it migrated or hibernated in winter. Elsewhere, its long journeys were well observed, and a swallow tattoo is traditional among sailors as a symbol of a safe return; the tradition was that a mariner had a tattoo of this fellow wanderer after sailing . A second swallow would be added after at sea.\nIn the past, the tolerance for this beneficial insectivore was reinforced by superstitions regarding damage to the barn swallow's nest. Such an act might lead to cows giving bloody milk, or no milk at all, or to hens ceasing to lay. This may be a factor in the longevity of swallows' nests. Survival, with suitable annual refurbishment, for 10\u201315 years is regular, and one nest was reported to have been occupied for 48 years.\nIt is depicted as the \"martlet\", \"merlette\" or \"merlot\" in heraldry, where it represents younger sons who have no lands. It is also represented as lacking feet as this was a common belief at the time. As a result of a campaign by ornithologists, the barn swallow has been the national bird of Estonia since 23 June 1960, and is also the national bird of Austria.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66178", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66178", "title": "Realpolitik", "text": "Approach in diplomacy and politics\nRealpolitik ( ; from de \" real\"\u00a0'realistic, practical, actual' and \" Politik\"\u00a0'politics') is the approach of conducting diplomatic or political policies based primarily on considerations of given circumstances and factors, rather than strictly following ideological, moral, or ethical premises. In this respect, it shares aspects of its philosophical approach with those of realism and pragmatism.\nWhile generally used as a positive or neutral term, \"Realpolitik\" has been used pejoratively to imply policies that are perceived as being coercive, amoral, or Machiavellian. Prominent proponents of \"Realpolitik\" include Otto von Bismarck, Henry Kissinger, George H. W. Bush, George F. Kennan, Zbigniew Brzezinski, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, Deng Xiaoping, Charles de Gaulle, and Lee Kuan Yew. The opposite of \"Realpolitik\" is \"Idealpolitik\".\nEtymology.\nThe term \"Realpolitik\" was coined by Ludwig von Rochau, a German writer and politician in the 19th century. His 1853 book \"Grunds\u00e4tze der Realpolitik angewendet auf die staatlichen Zust\u00e4nde Deutschlands\" (\"Principles of \"Realpolitik\" applied to the national state of affairs of Germany\") describes the meaning of the term: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The study of the forces that shape, maintain and alter the state is the basis of all political insight and leads to the understanding that the law of power governs the world of states just as the law of gravity governs the physical world. The older political science was fully aware of this truth but drew a wrong and detrimental conclusion\u2014the right of the more powerful. The modern era has corrected this unethical fallacy, but while breaking with the alleged right of the more powerful one, the modern era was too much inclined to overlook the real might of the more powerful and the inevitability of its political influence.\nHistorian John Bew suggests that much of what stands for modern \"Realpolitik\" today deviates from the original meaning of the term. \"Realpolitik\" emerged in mid-19th century Europe from the collision of the Enlightenment with state formation and power politics. The concept, Bew argues, was an early attempt at answering the conundrum of how to achieve liberal enlightened goals in a world that does not follow liberal enlightened rules.\nRochau coined the term in 1853 and added a second volume in 1869 that further refined his earlier arguments. Rochau, exiled in Paris until the 1848 uprising, returned during the revolution and became a well-known figure in the National Liberal Party. As the liberal gains of the 1848 revolutions fell victim to coercive governments or were swallowed by powerful social forces such as class, religion and nationalism, Rochau\u2014according to Bew\u2014began to think hard about how the work that had begun with such enthusiasm had failed to yield any lasting results.\nHe said that the great achievement of the Enlightenment had been to show that might is not necessarily right. The mistake liberals made was to assume that the law of the strong had suddenly evaporated simply because it had been shown to be unjust. Rochau wrote that \"to bring down the walls of Jericho, the Realpolitiker knows the simple pickaxe is more useful than the mightiest trumpet\". Rochau's concept was seized upon by German thinkers in the mid and late 19th century and became associated with Otto von Bismarck's statecraft in unifying Germany in the mid 19th century. By 1890, usage of the word \"Realpolitik\" was widespread, yet increasingly detached from its original meaning.\nHistory and branches.\nChina.\nEven prior to the contemporary \"Realpolitik\" term, China has had a \"realistic\" tradition in its governance dating back thousands of years. Often referred to as Chinese Legalism, the spirit of its content may be most readily recognised by Western viewers through one of its kindred, \"The Art of War\". Chinese administrative organisation significantly influenced other Asian nations as well as Western administrative practices not later than the 12th century, playing a significant role in the development of the modern state, including the usage of examinations for entry to the civil service.\nStarting in the Spring and Autumn period (771\u2013476/403 BC), a trend of \"realistic\" reformers were taken on to advance the material interest of their respective states, with the Qin state founding the first Chinese Empire, Qin dynasty in 221 BCE, ending China's Warring States period. The political theory developed during the era, including that of Confucianism would influence every dynasty thereafter.\nThose termed Legalist are more purely \"Realpolitikal\" in contrast to Confucianism and include non-legal Shen Pu-hai derived political technique, which charges the ruler engage in passive observation to determine facts rather than take on too much himself. Sinologist Herrlee G. Creel writes: \"If one wishes to exaggerate, it would no doubt be possible to translate (foundational Realist) Shen Buhai's term Shu, or technique, as 'science', and argue that Pu-hai was the first political scientist,\" though Creel does \"not care to go this far\".\nDuring the Spring and Autumn period, the prevalent philosophy had dictated war as a gentleman's activity; military commanders were instructed to respect what they perceived to be Heaven's laws in battle.\nGermany.\nIn the United States, the term is often analogous to power politics while in Germany \"Realpolitik\" has a somewhat less negative connotation, referring to realistic politics in opposition to idealistic (or unrealistic) politics. It is particularly associated with the era of 19th century nationalism. \"Realpolitik\" policies were employed in response to the failed Revolutions of 1848 as means to strengthen states and tighten social order.\nThe most famous German advocate of \"Realpolitik\", what was uniquely possible and the applied means to achieve it, was Otto von Bismarck, the first Chancellor (1862\u20131890) to Wilhelm I of the Kingdom of Prussia. Bismarck used \"Realpolitik\" in his quest to achieve Prussian dominance in Germany.\nAnother example was his willingness to adopt some social policies of the socialists such as employee insurance and pensions; in doing so, he used small changes from the top down to avoid the possibility of major change from the bottom up. Likewise, Prussia's seemingly illogical move of not demanding territory from a defeated Austria, a move that later led to the unification of Germany, is an oft-cited example of \"Realpolitik\".\nSingapore.\nSingaporean statesman Lee Kuan Yew, who served as the country's first prime minister, has been considered by many political analysts as a pragmatist for his erudite policies in his governance of Singapore. He believed that the only way Singapore could survive as a relatively small nation as compared to its neighbours was to contrast itself from them, by building up a highly effective and non-corrupt government, in addition to a civil service, under a meritocratic system. He also believed that Singapore was to stay neutral but also possess a strong military capability, believing that it serves as a guarantor of the country's independence due to its strategic position. A strong advocate for Asian values, he argued that Asian societies had different values from Western societies and that practicing such values was vital to succeed as a nation, especially as an Asian country, which includes collectivism and communitarianism.\nLee described Singapore's only natural resources as being the grit of its people as well as their strong work ethic, propelling this mindset to all ethnic groups of the country. Although Lee supported left-wing ideas in his young adulthood, he was largely conservative as a leader, concluding that extensive state welfare and subsidies blunted the individual's drive to succeed. Nevertheless, his government still enacted social policies, which included free public education up until at least secondary school, state housing, a compulsory comprehensive savings and pension plan, as well as universal healthcare, in addition to a civic nationalist stance.\nIn 1975, Chan Heng Chee described Singapore as a depoliticised \"administrative state\", where ideology and politics had triumphantly been replaced by \"rational and scientific modes of public administration\". It is suggested that by doggedly describing itself as pragmatic, the Singaporean state is actually disguising its ideological work and political nature through an assertion of the absence of ideology and politics. Chua Beng Huat argued in 1995 that the rhetoric of pragmatism in Singapore is ideological and hegemonic in nature, adopted and disseminated in the public sphere by the People's Action Party government and institutionalised throughout the state in all its administrative, planning, and policy-making functions.\nMany world leaders affirmed Lee's political knowledge as being pragmatist and \"insightful\". Former President of the United States, Barack Obama, stated that he \"personally appreciated [Lee's] wisdom.\" Former Prime Minister of Japan, Shinzo Abe, who had also championed for Asian values, stated that Lee was \"one of the greatest leaders of modern times that Asia has ever produced\" and a \"great Asian leader who laid the foundation for the prosperity of Singapore today.\" Former Prime Minister of Australia, Tony Abbott, mentioned that Lee was a \"giant of our region\" and that \"thanks to his vision and determination, Singapore is one of the world's most successful countries.\" Henry Kissinger described Lee as one of the \"world's most successful pragmatists\". Today, his ideologies and views are now taught at the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy, an autonomous postgraduate school of the National University of Singapore .\nUnited Kingdom.\nE. H. Carr was a liberal realist and left-wing British historian and international relations theorist who argued for realistic international over utopian policies. Carr described realism as the acceptance that what exists is right; he thus argued that in politics, realism meant that there is no moral dimension and that what is successful is right and what is unsuccessful is wrong. Carr was convinced that the Bolsheviks were destined to win the Russian Civil War and, under the grounds of \"Realpolitik\", approved of British Prime Minister David Lloyd George's opposition to War Secretary Winston Churchill's support for military aid to the anti-Bolshevik White movement. In Carr's opinion, Churchill's support of the anti-Bolsheviks was folly, as Russia was likely to be a great power once more under the leadership of the Bolsheviks.\nUnited States.\nAmerican \"Realpolitik\" began in the 1960s with the influence of Polish-American Zbigniew Brzezinski, later National Security Advisor to Jimmy Carter. Contrary to McCarthy-era hostility and John Foster Dulles's talk of the military \"liberation\" of the Eastern Bloc, Brzezinski proposed \"peaceful engagement\" with the Soviet Union while he advised Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson. Brzezinski, uninterested in promoting anti-Soviet propaganda for the benefit of the United States, felt the country would be more successful through frequent interactions with regimes and people under communist rule. Brzezinski knew the tough economic realities of those living in the Eastern Bloc, particularly the permanent shortage of goods, and that their attachment to the Soviet Union was born of historic necessity, rather than common ideology. Brzezinski suggested enticing these countries economically and through educational and cultural exchanges, which would appeal to intellectuals, followed by favouritism for regimes showing signs of liberalisation or less reliance on Moscow. Through that approach, Brzezinski \"offered a realistic, evolutionary alternative to empty political rhetoric.\"\nHenry Kissinger has been credited with formally introducing the policy of \"Realpolitik\" to the White House as Secretary of State to Richard Nixon. In that context, the policy meant dealing with other powerful nations in a practical manner, rather than on the basis of political doctrine or ethics such as Nixon's diplomacy with the People's Republic of China despite U.S. opposition to communism and the previous doctrine of containment.\nKissinger himself said that he had never used the term \"Realpolitik\" and stated that it is used by both liberal and realist foreign policy thinkers to label, criticise, and facilitate a choosing of sides. Kissinger had looked at what he implemented while he served as Secretary of State and National Security Advisor not in the confines of making \"Realpolitik\" a standard policy, but within the terms of being a statesman. That political mindset can be seen in Kissinger's book \"A World Restored\" and was pointed out by historian John Bew in his book \"Realpolitik\". Kissinger went on to say that the role of the statesman is \"the ability to recognize the real relationship of forces and to make this knowledge serve his ends.\"\nIn that context, one can see how \"Realpolitik\" principles can influence U.S. policy but not as standard policy. The reach and influence of \"Realpolitik\" is found instead in pragmatic and flexible policy that changes to the needs of the situation. That type of policymaking could be seen as recently as in the administration of Barack Obama. Bew made note of that direction in the Obama administration, when Obama's chief of staff, Rahm Emanuel, remarked in an article in \"The New York Times\" that everyone wanted to break it down into contrasts of idealist and realist, but \"if you had to put him in a category, he's probably more realpolitik, like Bush 41 [...] You\u2019ve got to be cold-blooded about the self-interests of your nation.\"\n\"Realpolitik\" is distinct from ideological politics in that it is not dictated by a fixed set of rules but instead tends to be goal-oriented, limited only by practical exigencies. Since \"Realpolitik\" is ordered toward the most practical means of securing national interests, it can often entail compromising on ideological principles. For example, during the Cold War, the United States often supported authoritarian regimes that were human rights violators to secure theoretically the greater national interest of regional stability. After the end of the Cold War, this practice continued.\nMost recently, former Ambassador Dennis Ross advocated that approach to foreign policy in his 2007 book \"Statecraft: And How to Restore America's Standing in the World\". For the purposes of contrast and speaking in ideal types, political ideologues would tend to favor principle over other considerations. Such individuals or groups can reject compromises that they see as the abandonment of their ideals and so may sacrifice political gain, in favor of adhering to principles that they believe to be constitutive of long-term goals.\nPakistan.\nRelations between Pakistan and the U.S. were strained during the 1970s due to Pakistan's nuclear program and the controversial execution of President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto.\nIn the context of the Iranian Revolution, President Jimmy Carter desired to improve relations with Pakistan. General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq came into power in 1977 after martial law was imposed in the country due to political turmoil. Zia recognised the immediate strategic interests that Pakistan may obtain by aligning with the U.S. amidst the Soviet\u2013Afghan War.\nPakistan due to its strategic geopolitical location made it a subject of grave interest to the U.S., which supported Pakistan with financial and military assistance including General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon and financial aid during the Soviet\u2013Afghan War.\nZia initially declined the 400 million USD aid offered by the U.S. (under the Carter administration) dismissing it as \"peanuts\". However, when Ronald Reagan entered office and sought to increment the funding for Operation Cyclone and aid for Pakistan, the U.S. and Pakistan agreed on a 3.2 billion USD military and economic aid package.\nUnder Zia's leadership, Pakistan played a pivotal role in training the Afghan mujahidin, in conjunction with Operation Cyclone to oppose the Soviet-backed government in Afghanistan.\nOne of the major \"Realpolitik\" decision of Zia's presidency was his role in the nuclear program of Pakistan. Amidst international pressure, he ignored threats of sanctions and prioritised the national interest over non-proliferation international norms. The development of nuclear weapons was seen as crucial for deterrence against Pakistan's historical rival, India, which had successfully conducted nuclear tests in 1974.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66179", "revid": "25994772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66179", "title": "Dreyfus affair", "text": "1894\u20131906 political scandal in France\nThe Dreyfus affair (, ) was a political scandal that divided the Third French Republic from 1894 until its resolution in 1906. The scandal began in December 1894 when Captain Alfred Dreyfus, a 35-year-old Alsatian French artillery officer of Jewish descent, was wrongfully convicted of treason for communicating French military secrets to the German Embassy in Paris. He was sentenced to life imprisonment and sent overseas to the penal colony on Devil's Island in French Guiana, where he spent the following five years imprisoned in very harsh conditions.\nIn 1896, evidence came to light\u2014primarily through the investigations of Lieutenant Colonel Georges Picquart, head of counter-espionage\u2014that identified the real culprit as a French Army major named Ferdinand Walsin Esterhazy. High-ranking military officials suppressed the new evidence, and a military court unanimously acquitted Esterhazy after a trial lasting only two days. The Army laid additional charges against Dreyfus, based on forged documents. Subsequently, writer \u00c9mile Zola's open letter \"\" in the newspaper stoked a growing movement of political support for Dreyfus, putting pressure on the government to reopen the case.\nIn 1899, Dreyfus was returned to France for another trial. The intense political and judicial scandal that ensued divided French society between those who supported Dreyfus, the \"Dreyfusards\" such as Sarah Bernhardt, Anatole France, Charles P\u00e9guy, Henri Poincar\u00e9, Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s, and Georges Clemenceau; and those who condemned him, the \"anti-Dreyfusards\" such as \u00c9douard Drumont, the director and publisher of the antisemitic newspaper . The new trial resulted in another conviction and a 10-year sentence, but Dreyfus was pardoned and released. In 1906, Dreyfus was exonerated. After being reinstated as a major in the French Army, he served during the whole of World War I, ending his service with the rank of lieutenant colonel. He died in 1935.\nThe Dreyfus affair came to symbolise modern injustice in the Francophone world; it remains one of the most notable examples of a miscarriage of justice and of antisemitism. The affair divided France into pro-republican, anticlerical Dreyfusards and pro-army, mostly Catholic anti-Dreyfusards, embittering French politics and encouraging radicalisation. The press played a crucial role in exposing information and in shaping and expressing public opinion on both sides of the conflict.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nContexts.\nPolitical.\nIn 1894, the Third Republic was twenty-four years old. Although the 16 May Crisis in 1877 had crippled the political influence of both the Bourbon and Orl\u00e9anist royalists, its ministries continued to be short-lived as the country lurched from crisis to crisis: three years immediately preceding the Dreyfus affair were the near-coup of Georges Boulanger in 1889, the Panama scandals in 1892, and the anarchist threat (reduced by the \"villainous laws\" of July 1894). The elections of 1893 were focused on the \"social question\" and resulted in a Republican victory (just under half the seats) against the conservative right, and the reinforcement of the Radicals (about 150 seats) and Socialists (about 50 seats).\nThe opposition of the Radicals and Socialists resulted in a centrist government with policies oriented towards economic protectionism, a certain indifference to social issues, a willingness to break international isolation, the Russian alliance, and the development of the colonial empire. These centrist policies resulted in cabinet instability, with some Republican members of the government sometimes aligning with the radicals and some Orl\u00e9anists aligning with the Legitimists in five successive governments from 1893 to 1896. This instability coincided with an equally unstable presidency: President Sadi Carnot was assassinated on 24 June 1894; his moderate successor Jean Casimir-Perier resigned several months later on 15 January 1895 and was replaced by F\u00e9lix Faure.\nFollowing the failure of the radical government of L\u00e9on Bourgeois in 1896, the president appointed Jules M\u00e9line as prime minister. His government faced the opposition of the left and of some Republicans (including the Progressive Union) and made sure to keep the support of the right. He sought to appease religious, social, and economic tensions and conducted a fairly conservative policy. He succeeded in improving stability, and it was under this stable government that the Dreyfus affair occurred.\nMilitary.\nThe Dreyfus affair occurred in the context of German annexation of Alsace and Moselle, an event that fed the most extreme nationalism. The traumatic defeat of France in 1870 seemed far away, but a vengeful spirit remained. \nThe military required considerable resources to prepare for the next conflict, and it was in this spirit that the Franco-Russian Alliance of 27 August 1892 was signed, although some opponents thought it \"against nature\". The army had recovered from the defeat, but many of its officers were aristocrats and monarchists. Cult of the flag and contempt for the parliamentary republic prevailed in the army. The Republic celebrated its army; the army ignored the Republic.\nOver the previous ten years, the army had undergone a significant shift resulting from its twofold aim to democratize and modernize. The graduates of the \u00c9cole Polytechnique now competed effectively with officers from the main career path of Saint-Cyr, which caused strife, bitterness, and jealousy among junior officers expecting promotions. The period was also marked by an arms race that primarily affected artillery. There were improvements in heavy artillery (guns of 120\u00a0mm and 155\u00a0mm, Models 1890 Baquet, new hydropneumatic brakes), but also, and especially, development of the ultra-secret 75mm gun.\nThe operation of military counterintelligence, alias the \"Statistics Section\" (SR), should be noted. Spying as a tool for secret war was a novelty as an organised activity by governments in the late 19th century. The Statistics Section was created in 1871 but consisted of only a handful of officers and civilians. Its head in 1894 was Lieutenant-Colonel Jean Sandherr, a graduate of Saint-Cyr, an Alsatian from Mulhouse, and a convinced antisemite. Its military mission was clear: to retrieve information about potential enemies of France and to feed them false information. The Statistics Section was supported by the \"Secret Affairs\" of the Quai d'Orsay at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which was headed by a young diplomat, Maurice Pal\u00e9ologue.\nThe arms race created an acute atmosphere of intrigue from 1890 in French counter-espionage. One of the missions of the section was to spy on the German Embassy at Rue de Lille in Paris to thwart any attempt by the French to transmit important information to the Germans. This was especially critical since several cases of espionage had already been featured in the headlines of newspapers, which were fond of sensationalism. In 1890, the archivist Boutonnet was convicted for selling plans of shells that used melinite.\nThe German military attach\u00e9 in Paris in 1894 was Count Maximilian von Schwartzkoppen, who developed a policy of infiltration that appears to have been effective. In the 1880s, Schwartzkoppen had begun an affair with an Italian military attach\u00e9, Lieutenant Colonel Count Alessandro Panizzardi. While neither had anything to do with Dreyfus, their intimate and erotic correspondence (e.g., \"Don't exhaust yourself with too much buggery.\"), which was obtained by the authorities, lent an air of truth to other documents that were forged by prosecutors to lend retroactive credibility to Dreyfus's conviction as a spy. Some of these forgeries referred to the real affair between the two officers; in one, Alessandro supposedly informed his lover that if \"Dreyfus is brought in for questioning\", they must both claim that they \"never had any dealings with that Jew.\u00a0... Clearly, no one can ever know what happened with him.\"\nThe letters, real and fake, provided a convenient excuse for placing the entire Dreyfus dossier under seal, given that exposure of the liaison would have 'dishonoured' Germany and Italy's military and compromised diplomatic relations. As homosexuality was, like Judaism, then often perceived as a sign of national degeneration, recent historians have suggested that combining them to inflate the scandal may have shaped the prosecution strategy.\nSince early 1894, the Statistics Section had investigated traffic in master plans for Nice and the Meuse conducted by an officer whom the Germans and Italians nicknamed Dubois. This is what led to the origins of the Dreyfus affair.\nSocial.\nThe social context was marked by the rise of nationalism and antisemitism. The growth of antisemitism, virulent since the publication of \"Jewish France\" by \u00c9douard Drumont in 1886 (150,000 copies in the first year), went hand in hand with the rise of clericalism. Tensions were high in all strata of society, fueled by an influential press, which was virtually free to write and disseminate any information even if offensive or defamatory. Legal risks were limited if the target was a private person.\nAntisemitism did not spare the military, which practised hidden discrimination with the \"cote d'amour\" (a subjective assessment of personal acceptability) system of irrational grading, encountered by Dreyfus in his application to the Bourges School. However, while prejudices of this nature undoubtedly existed within the confines of the General Staff, the French Army as a whole was relatively open to individual talent. At the time of the Dreyfus affair there were an estimated 300 Jewish officers in the army (about 3 per cent of the total), of whom ten were generals.\nThe popularity of the duel using sword or small pistol, sometimes causing death, bore witness to the tensions of the period. When a series of press articles in \"La Libre Parole\" accused Jewish officers of \"betraying their birth\", the officers challenged the editors. Captain Cr\u00e9mieu-Foa, a Jewish Alsatian graduated from the Ecole Polytechnique, fought unsuccessfully against Drumont and against M. de Lamase, who was the author of the articles. Captain Mayer, another Jewish officer, was killed by the Marquis de Mor\u00e8s, a friend of Drumont, in another duel.\nHatred of Jews was now public and violent, driven by a firebrand (Drumont) who demonized the Jewish presence in France. Jews in metropolitan France in 1895 numbered about 80,000 (40,000 in Paris alone), who were highly integrated into society; an additional 45,000 Jews lived in Algeria. The launch of \"La Libre Parole\" with a circulation estimated at 200,000 copies in 1892, allowed Drumont to expand his audience to a popular readership already enticed by the boulangiste adventure in the past. The antisemitism circulated by \"La Libre Parole\", as well as by \"L'\u00c9clair\", \"Le Petit Journal\", \"La Patrie\", \"L'Intransigeant\" and \"La Croix\", drew on antisemitic roots in certain Catholic circles.\nPublications remarking on the Dreyfus affair often reinforced antisemitic sentiments, language and imagery. The \"Mus\u00e9e des Horreurs\" was a collection of anti-Dreyfus posters illustrated by Victor Lenepveu during the Dreyfus affair. Lenepveu caricatured \"prominent Jews, Dreyfus supporters, and Republican statesman\". \"No. 35 Amnistie populaire\" depicts the corpse of Dreyfus himself as it dangles from a noose. Large noses, money, and Lenepveu's general tendency to illustrate subjects with bodies of animals likely contributed to the dissemination of antisemitism in French popular culture.\nOrigins of the case and the trial of 1894.\nDiscovery of the \"bordereau\".\nThe staff of the Military Intelligence Service (SR) worked around the clock to spy on the German Embassy in Paris. They had managed to get a French housekeeper named \"Madame Bastian\" hired to work in the building and spy on the Germans. In September 1894, she found a torn-up note which she handed over to her employers at the Military Intelligence Service. This note later became known as \"the bordereau\". This piece of paper, torn into six large pieces, unsigned and undated, was addressed to the German military attach\u00e9 stationed at the German Embassy, Maximilian von Schwartzkoppen. It stated that confidential French military documents regarding the newly developed \"hydraulic brake of 120, and the way this gun has worked\" were about to be sent to a foreign power.\nThe search for the author of the bordereau.\nThis catch seemed of sufficient importance for the head of the \"Statistical Section\", the Mulhousian Jean Sandherr, to inform the Minister of War, General Auguste Mercier. In fact the SR suspected that there had been leaks since the beginning of 1894 and had been trying to find the perpetrator. The minister had been harshly attacked in the press for his actions, which were deemed incompetent, and appears to have sought an opportunity to enhance his image. He immediately initiated two secret investigations, one administrative and one judicial. To find the culprit, using simple though crude reasoning, the circle of the search was arbitrarily restricted to suspects posted to, or former employees of, the General Staff \u2013 necessarily a trainee artillery officer.\nThe ideal culprit was identified: Captain Alfred Dreyfus, a graduate of the \u00c9cole polytechnique and an artillery officer, of the Jewish faith and of Alsatian origin, coming from the republican meritocracy. At the beginning of the case, the emphasis was rather on the Alsatian origins of Dreyfus than on his religion. These origins were not, however, exceptional because these officers were favoured by France for their knowledge of the German language and culture. There was also antisemitism in the offices of the General Staff, and it fast became central to the affair by filling in the credibility gaps in the preliminary enquiry. In particular, Dreyfus was at that time the only Jewish officer to be recently passed by the General Staff.\nIn fact, the reputation of Dreyfus as a cold and withdrawn or even haughty character, as well as his \"curiosity\", worked strongly against him. These traits of character, some false, others natural, made the charges plausible by turning the most ordinary acts of everyday life in the ministry into proof of espionage. From the beginning a biased and one-sided multiplication of errors led the State to a false position. This was present throughout the affair, where irrationality prevailed over the positivism in vogue in that period:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From this first hour the phenomenon occurred that will dominate the whole affair. It is no longer controlled by facts and circumstances carefully examined which will constitute a belief; it is the irresistible cavalier conviction which distorts the facts and beliefs.\u2014\u200a\nExpertise in writing.\nTo condemn Dreyfus, the writing on the bordereau had to be compared to that of the Captain. There was nobody competent to analyse the writing on the General Staff. Then Major du Paty de Clam entered the scene: an eccentric man who prided himself on being an expert in graphology. On being shown some letters by Dreyfus and the bordereau on 5 October, du Paty concluded immediately who had written the two writings. After a day of additional work he provided a report that, despite some differences, the similarities were sufficient to warrant an investigation. Dreyfus was therefore \"the probable author\" of the bordereau in the eyes of the General Staff.\nGeneral Mercier believed he had the guilty party, but he exaggerated the value of the affair, which took on the status of an affair of state during the week preceding the arrest of Dreyfus. The Minister did consult and inform all the authorities of the State, yet despite prudent counsel and courageous objections expressed by Gabriel Hanotaux in the Council of Ministers he decided to pursue it. Du Paty de Clam was appointed Judicial Police Officer to lead an official investigation.\nMeanwhile, several parallel sources of information were opening up, some on the personality of Dreyfus, others to ensure the truth of the identity of the author of the bordereau. The expert Gobert was not convinced and found many differences. He even wrote that \"the nature of the writing on the bordereau excludes disguised handwriting\". Disappointed, Mercier then called in Alphonse Bertillon, the inventor of forensic anthropometry but no handwriting expert. He was initially no more positive than Gobert but he did not exclude the possibility of its being the writing of Dreyfus. Later, under pressure from the military, he argued that Dreyfus had autocopied it and developed his theory of \"autoforgery\".\nThe arrest.\nOn 13 October 1894, without any tangible evidence and with an empty file, General Mercier summoned Captain Dreyfus for a general inspection in \"bourgeois clothing\", i.e. in civilian clothes. The purpose of the General Staff was to obtain the perfect proof under French law: a confession. That confession was to be obtained by surprise \u2013 by dictating a letter based on the bordereau to reveal his guilt.\nOn the morning of 15 October 1894, Captain Dreyfus underwent this ordeal but admitted nothing. Du Paty even tried to suggest suicide by placing a revolver in front of Dreyfus, but he refused to take his life, saying he \"wanted to live to establish his innocence\". The hopes of the military were crushed. Nevertheless Du Paty de Clam still arrested the captain, accused him of conspiring with the enemy, and told him that he would be brought before a court-martial. Dreyfus was imprisoned at the Cherche-Midi prison in Paris.\nThe enquiry and the first military court.\nMrs. Dreyfus was informed of the arrest the same day by a police raid to search their apartment. She was terrorized by Du Paty, who ordered her to keep the arrest of her husband secret and even said, \"One word, one single word and it will be a European war!\" Illegally, Dreyfus was placed in solitary confinement in prison, where Du Paty interrogated him day and night in order to obtain a confession, which failed. The captain was morally supported by the first Dreyfusard, Major Forzinetti, commandant of the military prisons of Paris.\nOn 29 October 1894, the affair was revealed in an article in \"La Libre Parole\", the antisemitic newspaper owned by \u00c9douard Drumont. This marked the beginning of a very brutal press campaign until the trial. This event put the affair in the field of antisemitism, where it remained until its conclusion.\nOn 1 November 1894, Alfred's brother, Mathieu Dreyfus, became aware of the arrest after being called urgently to Paris. He became the architect of the arduous fight for the liberation of his brother. Without hesitation, he began looking for a lawyer, and retained the distinguished criminal lawyer Edgar Demange.\nThe enquiry.\nOn 3 November 1894, General Saussier, the military governor of Paris, reluctantly gave the order for an enquiry. He had the power to stop the process but did not, perhaps because of an exaggerated confidence in military justice. Major Besson d'Ormescheville, the recorder for the Military Court, wrote an indictment in which \"moral elements\" of the charge (which gossiped about the habits of Dreyfus and his alleged attendance at \"gambling circles\", his knowledge of German, and his \"remarkable memory\") were developed more extensively than the \"material elements\", which are rarely seen in the charge:\n\"This is a proof of guilt because Dreyfus made everything disappear\".\nThe complete lack of neutrality of the indictment led to \u00c9mile Zola calling it a \"monument of bias\".\nAfter the news broke on Dreyfus' arrest, many journalists flocked to the story and flooded the story with speculations and accusations. The renowned journalist and antisemitic agitator Edouard Drumont wrote in his publication on November 3, 1894, \"What a terrible lesson, this disgraceful treason of the Jew Dreyfus.\"\nOn 4 December 1894, Dreyfus was referred to the first Military Court with this dossier. The secrecy was lifted and Demange could access the file for the first time. After reading it the lawyer had absolute confidence, as he saw the emptiness of the prosecution's case. The prosecution rested completely on the writing on a single piece of paper, the bordereau, on which experts disagreed, and on vague indirect testimonies.\nThe trial: \"Closed Court or War!\".\nDuring the two months before the trial, the press went wild. \"La Libre Parole\", \"L'Autorit\u00e9\", \"Le Journal\", and \"Le Temps\" described the supposed life of Dreyfus through lies and bad fiction.\nThis was also an opportunity for extreme headlines from \"La Libre Parole\" and \"La Croix\" to justify their previous campaigns against the presence of Jews in the army on the theme \"You have been told!\" This long delay above all enabled the General Staff to prepare public opinion and to put indirect pressure on the judges. On 8 November 1894, General Mercier declared Dreyfus guilty in an interview with \"Le Figaro\". He repeated himself on 29 November 1894 in an article by Arthur Meyer in \"Le Gaulois\", which in fact condemned the indictment against Dreyfus and asked, \"How much freedom will the military court have to judge the defendant?\"\nThe jousting of the columnists took place within a broader debate about the issue of a closed court. For Ranc and Cassagnac, who represented the majority of the press, the closed court was a low manoeuvre to enable the acquittal of Dreyfus, \"because the minister is a coward\". The proof was \"that he \"grovels\" before the Prussians\" by agreeing to publish the denials of the German ambassador in Paris. In other newspapers, such as \"L'\u00c9clair\" on 13 December 1894: \"the closed court is necessary to avoid a \"casus belli\"\"; while for Judet in \"Le Petit Journal\" of 18 December: \"the closed court is our impregnable refuge against Germany\"; or in \"La Croix\" the same day: it must be \"the most absolute closed court\".\nThe trial opened on 19 December 1894 at one o'clock and a closed court was immediately pronounced. This closed court was not legally consistent since Major Picquart and Prefect Louis L\u00e9pine were present at certain proceedings in violation of the law. The closed court allowed the military to avoid disclosing the emptiness of their evidence to the public and to stifle debate. As expected, the emptiness of their case appeared clearly during the hearings. Detailed discussions on the bordereau showed that Captain Dreyfus could not be the author. At the same time the accused himself protested his innocence and defended himself point by point with energy and logic. Moreover, his statements were supported by a dozen defense witnesses. Finally, the absence of motive for the crime was a serious thorn in the prosecution case. Dreyfus was indeed a very patriotic officer highly rated by his superiors, very rich and with no tangible reason to betray France. The fact of Dreyfus's Jewishness, which was used extensively by the right-wing press, was not openly presented in court.\nAlphonse Bertillon, an eccentric criminologist who was not an expert in handwriting, was presented as a scholar of the first importance. He advanced the theory of \"autoforgery\" during the trial and accused Dreyfus of imitating his own handwriting, explaining the differences in writing by using extracts of writing from his brother Matthieu and his wife Lucie. This theory, although later regarded as bizarre and astonishing, seems to have had some effect on the judges. In addition, Major Hubert-Joseph Henry, deputy head of the SR and discoverer of the \"bordereau\", made a theatrical statement in open court. He argued that leaks betraying the General Staff had been suspected to exist since February 1894 and that \"a respectable person\" accused Captain Dreyfus. He swore on oath that the traitor was Dreyfus, pointing to the crucifix hanging on the wall of the court. Dreyfus was apoplectic with rage and demanded to be confronted with his anonymous accuser, which was rejected by the General Staff. The incident had an undeniable effect on the court, which was composed of seven officers who were both judges and jury. However, the outcome of the trial remained uncertain. The conviction of the judges had been shaken by the firm and logical answers of the accused. The judges took leave to deliberate, but the General Staff still had a card in hand to tip the balance decisively against Dreyfus.\nTransmission of a secret dossier to the judges.\nMilitary witnesses at the trial alerted high command about the risk of acquittal. For this eventuality the Statistics Section had prepared a file containing, in principle, four \"absolute\" proofs of the guilt of Captain Dreyfus accompanied by an explanatory note. The contents of this secret file remained uncertain until 2013, when they were released by the French Ministry of Defence. Recent research indicates the existence of numbering which suggests the presence of a dozen documents. Among these letters were some of an erotic homosexual nature (the Davignon letter among others) raising the question of the tainted methods of the Statistics Section and the objective of their choice of documents.\nThe secret file was illegally submitted at the beginning of the deliberations by the President of the Military Court, Colonel \u00c9milien Maurel, by order of the Minister of War, General Mercier. Later at the Rennes trial of 1899, General Mercier explained (falsely) the nature of the prohibited disclosure of the documents submitted in the courtroom. This file contained, in addition to letters without much interest, some of which were falsified, a piece known as the \"Scoundrel D\u00a0...\".\nIt was a letter from the German military attach\u00e9, Maximilian von Schwartzkoppen, to the Italian military attach\u00e9, Lieutenant Colonel Alessandro Panizzardi, intercepted by the SR. The letter was supposed to accuse Dreyfus definitively since, according to his accusers, it was signed with the initial of his name. In reality, the Statistics Section knew that the letter could not be attributed to Dreyfus and if it was, it was with criminal intent. Colonel Maurel confirmed in the second Dreyfus trial that the secret documents were not used to win the support of the judges of the Military Court. He contradicted himself, however, by saying that he read only one document, \"which was enough\".\nConviction, degradation, and deportation.\nOn 22 December 1894, after several hours of deliberation, the verdict was reached. Seven judges unanimously convicted Alfred Dreyfus of collusion with a foreign power, to the maximum penalty under section 76 of the Criminal Code: \"permanent exile in a walled fortification\" (prison), the cancellation of his army rank and military degradation, also known as cashiering. Dreyfus was not sentenced to death, as it had been abolished for political crimes since 1848.\nFor the authorities, the press and the public, doubts had been dispelled by the trial and his guilt was certain. Right and left regretted the abolition of the death penalty for such a crime. Antisemitism peaked in the press and occurred in areas so far spared. Socialist leader Jean Jaur\u00e8s regretted the lightness of the sentence in an address to the Chamber of Deputies and wrote, \"A soldier has been sentenced to death and executed for throwing a button in the face of his corporal. So why leave this miserable traitor alive?\" Radical Republican Georges Clemenceau in \"La\" \"Justice\" made a similar comment.\nOn 5 January 1895, the ceremony of degradation took place in the Morlan Court of the Military School in Paris. While the drums rolled, Dreyfus was accompanied by four artillery officers, who brought him before an officer of the state who read the judgment. A Republican Guard adjutant tore off his badges, thin strips of gold, his stripes, cuffs and sleeves of his jacket. As he was paraded throughout the streets, the crowd chanted \"Death to Judas, death to the Jew.\" Witnesses report the dignity of Dreyfus, who continued to maintain his innocence while raising his arms: \"Innocent, Innocent! Long live France! Long live the army\". The Adjutant broke his sword on his knee and then the condemned Dreyfus marched at a slow pace in front of his former companions. An event known as \"the legend of the confession\" took place before the degradation. In the van that brought him to the military school, Dreyfus is said to have confided his treachery to Captain Lebrun-Renault. It appears that this was merely self-promotion by the captain of the Republican Guard, and that in reality Dreyfus had made no admission. Due to the affair's being related to national security, the prisoner was then held in solitary confinement in a cell awaiting transfer. On 17 January 1895, he was transferred to the prison on \u00cele de R\u00e9 where he was held for over a month. He had the right to see his wife twice a week in a long room, each of them at one end, with the director of the prison in the middle.\nAt the last minute, on 9 February 1895, at the initiative of General Mercier, a law was passed restoring the \u00celes du Salut in French Guiana as a place of fortified deportation, so that Dreyfus was not sent to Ducos, New Caledonia. Indeed, during the deportation of Adjutant Lucien Ch\u00e2telain, sentenced for conspiring with the enemy in 1888, the facilities did not provide the required conditions of confinement and detention conditions were considered too soft. On 21 February 1895, Dreyfus embarked on the ship Ville de Saint-Nazaire. The next day the ship sailed for French Guiana.\nOn 12 March 1895, after a difficult voyage of fifteen days, the ship anchored off the \u00celes du Salut. Dreyfus stayed one month in prison on \u00cele Royale and was transferred to Devil's Island on 14 April 1895. Apart from his guards, he was the only inhabitant of the island and he stayed in a stone hut . Haunted by the risk of escape, the commandant of the prison sentenced him to a hellish life, even though living conditions were already very painful. The temperature reached 45\u00a0\u00b0C, he was underfed or fed contaminated food and hardly had any treatment for his many tropical diseases. Dreyfus became sick and shaken by fevers that got worse every year.\nDreyfus was allowed to write on paper numbered and signed. He underwent censorship by the commandant even when he received mail from his wife Lucie, whereby they encouraged each other. On 6 September 1896, the conditions of life for Dreyfus worsened again; he was chained \"double looped\", forcing him to stay in bed motionless with his ankles shackled. This measure was the result of false information of his escape revealed by a British newspaper. For two long months, Dreyfus was plunged into deep despair, convinced that his life would end on this remote island.\nThe truth emerges (1895\u20131897).\nThe Dreyfus family exposes the affair and takes action.\nMathieu Dreyfus, the elder brother of Alfred, was convinced of his innocence. He was the chief architect of the rehabilitation of his brother and spent his time, energy and fortune to gather an increasingly powerful movement for a retrial in December 1894, despite the difficulties of the task:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After the degradation emptiness was around us. It seemed to us that we were no longer human beings like others, we were cut off from the world of the living.\nMathieu tried all paths, even the most fantastic. Thanks to Dr. Gibert, a friend of President F\u00e9lix Faure, he met at Le Havre a woman who spoke for the first time under hypnosis of a \"secret file\". This fact was confirmed by the President of the Republic to Dr. Gibert in a private conversation.\nLittle by little, despite threats of arrest for complicity, machinations and entrapment by the military, he managed to convince various moderates. Thus the anarchist journalist Bernard Lazare looked into the proceedings. In 1896, Lazare published the first Dreyfusard booklet in Brussels. This publication had little influence on the political and intellectual world, but it contained so much detail that the General Staff suspected that Picquart, the new head of SR, was responsible.\nThe campaign for the review, relayed little by little into the leftist anti-military press, triggered a return of a violent yet vague antisemitism. France was overwhelmingly anti-Dreyfusard; Major Henry from the Statistics Section, in turn, was aware of the thinness of the prosecution case. At the request of his superiors, General Boisdeffre, Chief of the General Staff and Major-General Gonse, he was charged with the task of enlarging the file to prevent any attempt at a review. Unable to find any evidence, he decided to build some after the fact.\nThe discovery of the real culprit: Picquart \"going to the enemy\".\nMajor Georges Picquart was assigned to be head of the staff of the Military Intelligence Service (SR) in July 1895, following the illness of Colonel Sandherr. In March 1896, Picquart, who had followed the Dreyfus affair from the outset, now required to receive the documents stolen from the German Embassy directly without any intermediary. He discovered a document called the \"petit bleu\": a telegram that was never sent, written by von Schwarzkoppen and intercepted at the German Embassy at the beginning of March 1896. It was addressed to a French officer, Major Walsin-Esterhazy, 27 rue de la Bienfaisance \u2013 Paris. In another letter in black pencil, von Schwarzkoppen revealed the same clandestine relationship with Esterhazy.\nOn seeing letters from Esterhazy, Picquart realized with amazement that his writing was exactly the same as that on the \"bordereau\", which had been used to incriminate Dreyfus. He procured the \"secret file\" given to the judges in 1894 and was astonished by the lack of evidence against Dreyfus, and became convinced of his innocence. Moved by his discovery, Picquart diligently conducted an enquiry in secret without the consent of his superiors. The enquiry demonstrated that Esterhazy had knowledge of the elements described by the \"bordereau\" and that he was in contact with the German Embassy. It was established that the officer sold the Germans many secret documents, whose value was quite low.\nFerdinand Walsin Esterhazy was a former member of French counterespionage, where he had served after the war of 1870. He had worked in the same office as Major Henry from 1877 to 1880. A man with a personality disorder, a sulphurous reputation and crippled by debt, he was considered by Picquart to be a traitor driven by monetary reasons to betray his country. Picquart communicated the results of his investigation to the General Staff, which opposed him under \"the authority of the principle of \"res judicata\"\". After this, everything was done to oust him from his position, with the help of his own deputy, Major Henry. It was primarily the upper echelons of the Army that did not want to admit that Dreyfus's conviction could be a grave miscarriage of justice. For Mercier, then Zurlinden and the General Staff, what was done was done and should never be returned to. They found it convenient to separate the Dreyfus and Esterhazy affairs.\nThe denunciation of Esterhazy and the progress of Dreyfusism.\nThe nationalist press launched a violent campaign against the burgeoning Dreyfusards. In counterattack, the General Staff discovered and revealed the information hitherto ignored in the \"secret file\". Doubt began to surface, and figures in the artistic and political spheres asked questions. Picquart tried to convince his seniors to react in favour of Dreyfus, but the General Staff seemed deaf. An investigation was started against him, he was monitored when he was in the east, and he was then transferred to Tunisia \"in the interest of the service\".\nAt this moment Major Henry took action. On 1 November 1896, he created a false document, subsequently called the \"faux Henry\" [Henry forgery], keeping the header and signature of an ordinary letter from Panizzardi, and wrote the central text himself:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I read that a deputy will call on Dreyfus. If you ask further explanations from Rome, I would say that I never had relations with the Jew. That is understood. If asked, speak like that, because that person should never know what happened with him.\nThis was a crude forgery. Generals Gonse and Boisdeffre, however, without asking questions, brought the letter to their minister, General Jean-Baptiste Billot. The doubts of the General Staff regarding the innocence of Dreyfus flew out the window. With this discovery the General Staff decided to protect Esterhazy and persecute Colonel Picquart, \"who did not understand anything\". Picquart, who knew nothing of the \"faux Henry\", quickly felt isolated from his fellow soldiers. Major Henry accused Picquart of embezzlement and sent him a letter full of innuendo. He protested in writing and returned to Paris.\nPicquart confided in his friend, lawyer Louis Leblois, who promised secrecy. Leblois, however, spoke to the vice president of the Senate, the Alsatian Auguste Scheurer-Kestner (born in Mulhouse, like Dreyfus), who was in turn infected by doubts. Without citing Picquart, the senator revealed the affair to the highest people in the country. The General Staff, however, still suspected Picquart of causing leaks. This was the beginning of the Picquart affair, a new conspiracy by the General Staff against an officer.\nMajor Henry, although deputy to Picquart, was jealous and fostered his own malicious operation to compromise his superior. He engaged in various malpractices (making a letter and designating it as an instrument of a \"Jewish syndicate\", wanting to help Dreyfus to escape, rigging the \"petit bleu\" to create a belief that Picquart erased the name of the real recipient, drafting a letter naming Dreyfus in full).\nParallel to the investigations of Picquart, the defenders of Dreyfus were informed in November 1897 that the identity of the writer of the \"bordereau\" was Esterhazy. Mathieu Dreyfus had a reproduction of the bordereau published by \"Le Figaro\". A banker, Castro, formally identified the writing as that of Esterhazy, who was his debtor, and told Mathieu. On 11 November 1897, the two paths of investigation met during a meeting between Scheurer-Kestner and Mathieu Dreyfus. The latter finally received confirmation that Esterhazy was the author of the note. Based on this, on 15 November 1897 Mathieu Dreyfus made a complaint to the minister of war against Esterhazy. The controversy was now public and the army had no choice but to open an investigation. At the end of 1897, Picquart returned to Paris and made public his doubts about the guilt of Dreyfus because of his discoveries. Collusion to eliminate Picquart seemed to have failed. The challenge was very strong and turned to confrontation. To discredit Picquart, Esterhazy sent, without effect, letters of complaint to the president of the republic.\nThe Dreyfusard movement, led by Bernard Lazare, Mathieu Dreyfus, Joseph Reinach and Auguste Scheurer-Kestner gained momentum. \u00c9mile Zola, informed in mid-November 1897 by Scheurer-Kestner with documents, was convinced of the innocence of Dreyfus and undertook to engage himself officially. On 25 November 1897 the novelist published \"Mr. Scheurer-Kestner\" in \"Le Figaro\", which was the first article in a series of three. Faced with threats of massive cancellations from its readers, the paper's editor stopped supporting Zola. Gradually, from late-November through early-December 1897, a number of prominent people got involved in the fight for retrial. These included the authors Octave Mirbeau (his first article was published three days after Zola) and Anatole France, academic Lucien L\u00e9vy-Bruhl, the librarian of the \"\u00c9cole normale sup\u00e9rieure\" Lucien Herr (who convinced L\u00e9on Blum and Jean Jaur\u00e8s), the authors of \"La Revue Blanche\", (where Lazare knew the director Thadee Natanson), and the Clemenceau brothers Albert and Georges. Blum tried in late November 1897 to sign, with his friend Maurice Barr\u00e8s, a petition calling for a retrial, but Barr\u00e8s refused, broke with Zola and Blum in early December, and began to popularize the pejorative use of the term \"intellectuals\". This first break was the prelude to a division among the educated elite after 13 January 1898.\nThe Dreyfus affair occupied more and more discussions, something the political world did not always recognize. Jules M\u00e9line declared in the opening session of the National Assembly on 7 December 1897, \"There is no Dreyfus affair. There is not now and there can be no Dreyfus affair.\"\nTrial and acquittal of Esterhazy.\nGeneral Georges-Gabriel de Pellieux was responsible for conducting an investigation. It was brief, thanks to the General Staff's skillful manipulation of the investigator. The real culprit, they said, was Lieutenant-Colonel Picquart. The investigation was moving towards a predictable conclusion until Esterhazy's former mistress, Madame de Boulancy, published letters in \"Le Figaro\" in which ten years earlier Esterhazy had expressed violently his hatred for France and his contempt for the French army. The militarist press rushed to the rescue of Esterhazy with an unprecedented antisemitic campaign. The Dreyfusard press replied with strong new evidence in its possession. Georges Clemenceau, in the newspaper \"L'Aurore\", asked, \"Who protects Major Esterhazy? The law must stop sucking up to this ineffectual Prussian disguised as a French officer. Why? Who trembles before Esterhazy? What occult power, why shamefully oppose the action of justice? What stands in the way? Why is Esterhazy, a character of depravity and more than doubtful morals, protected while the accused is not? Why is an honest soldier such as Lieutenant-Colonel Picquart discredited, overwhelmed, dishonoured? If this is the case we must speak out!\"\nAlthough protected by the General Staff and therefore by the government, Esterhazy was obliged to admit authorship of the Francophobe letters published by \"Le Figaro\". This convinced the Office of the General Staff to find a way to stop the questions, doubts, and the beginnings of demands for justice. The idea was to require Esterhazy to demand a trial and be acquitted, to stop the noise and allow a return to order. Thus, to finally exonerate him, according to the old rule , Esterhazy was set to appear before a military court on 10 January 1898. A \"delayed\" closed court trial was pronounced. Esterhazy was notified of the matter on the following day, along with guidance on the defensive line to take. The trial was not normal: the civil trial Mathieu and Lucy Dreyfus requested was denied, and the three handwriting experts decided the writing in the bordereau was not Esterhazy's. The accused was applauded and the witnesses booed and jeered. Pellieux intervened to defend the General Staff without legal substance. The real accused was Picquart, who was dishonoured by all the military protagonists of the affair. Esterhazy was acquitted unanimously the next day after just three minutes of deliberation. With all the cheering, it was difficult for Esterhazy to make his way toward the exit, where some 1,500 people were waiting.\nBy error an innocent person was convicted, but on order the guilty party was acquitted. For many moderate Republicans it was an intolerable infringement of the fundamental values they defended. The acquittal of Esterhazy therefore brought about a change of strategy for the Dreyfusards. Liberalism-friendly Scheurer-Kestner and Reinach, took more combative and rebellious action. In response to the acquittal, large and violent riots by anti-Dreyfusards and antisemites broke out across France.\nFlush with victory, the General Staff arrested Picquart on charges of violation of professional secrecy following the disclosure of his investigation through his lawyer, who revealed it to Senator Scheurer-Kestner. The colonel, although placed under arrest at Fort Mont-Val\u00e9rien, did not give up and involved himself further in the affair. When Mathieu thanked him, he replied curtly that he was \"doing his duty\". Esterhazy benefited from special treatment by the upper echelons of the army, which was inexplicable except for the General Staff's desire to stifle any inclination to challenge the verdict of the court martial that had convicted Dreyfus in 1894. The army declared Esterhazy unfit for service.\nEsterhazy's flight to England and confession.\nTo avoid personal risk Esterhazy shaved off his prominent moustache and went into exile in England.\nRachel Beer, editor of \"The Observer\" and the \"Sunday Times\", interviewed him twice. He confessed to writing the bordereau under orders from Sandherr in an attempt to frame Dreyfus. She wrote about her interviews in September 1898, reporting his confession and writing a leader column accusing the French military of antisemitism and calling for a retrial for Dreyfus. Esterhazy lived comfortably in England until his death in 1923.\n\"J'Accuse ...!\" 1898.\nThe Dreyfus affair becomes \"The Affair\".\nOn 13 January 1898, \u00c9mile Zola touched off a new dimension in the Dreyfus affair, which became known simply as \"The Affair\". The first great Dreyfusard intellectual, Zola was at the height of his glory: the twenty volumes of the \"Les Rougon-Macquart\" epic were being distributed in dozens of countries. He was a leader in the literary world and was fully conscious of it. To General Pellieux, he said at his trial, \"I ask General Pellieux if there are not many ways to serve France? It can be served by the sword or by the pen. General Pellieux has probably won great victories! I have won mine, too. By my work the French language has been brought into the world. I have my victories! I bequeath to posterity the name of General Pellieux and that of \u00c9mile Zola: history will choose!\nOutraged by the acquittal of Esterhazy, Zola published a 4,500-word article on the front page of \"L'Aurore\" in the form of an open letter to President F\u00e9lix Faure (Clemenceau thought up the headline \"J'Accuse...!\"). With a typical circulation of 30,000, the newspaper distributed nearly 300,000 copies that day. This article had the effect of an explosion. The article was a direct attack, explicit and clear, and named names. It denounced all those who had conspired against Dreyfus, including the minister of war and the General Staff. The article contained numerous errors, exaggerating or minimizing the roles of one or another of the figures involved (the role of General Mercier was greatly underestimated, for instance).\n\"J'Accuse...!\" provided for the first time a compilation of all existing data on the affair in one place. Zola's goal was to make himself a target, to force the authorities to prosecute him. His trial forced a new public review of both the Dreyfus and Esterhazy affairs. Here he went against the strategy of Scheurer-Kestner and Lazare, who advocated patience and reflection. Thanks to the national and international success of Zola's article, a trial became inevitable. From that critical moment the case followed two parallel paths. On one hand, the state used its apparatus to impose a limitation on the trial, restricting it to one of simple libel so as to separate the Dreyfus and Esterhazy cases, which had already been adjudicated. On the other hand, conflicting camps of opinion tried to influence judges and the government\u2014one side pushed to obtain a review and the other to convict Zola. But Zola achieved his aim: the opening of a public debate at the Assize Court.\nOn 15 January 1898, \"Le Temps\" published a petition calling for a retrial. It included the names of \u00c9mile Zola, Anatole France, director of the Pasteur Institute \u00c9mile Duclaux, Daniel Hal\u00e9vy, Fernand Gregh, F\u00e9lix F\u00e9n\u00e9on, Marcel Proust, Lucien Herr, Charles Andler, Victor B\u00e9rard, Fran\u00e7ois Simiand, Georges Sorel, the painter Claude Monet, the writer Jules Renard, the sociologist \u00c9mile Durkheim, and the historian Gabriel Monod.\nOn 20 January 1898, after an anti-Zola speech by rightist politician Albert de Mun at the Chamber of Deputies, the chamber voted 312\u201322 to prosecute Zola. On 23 January 1898 Clemenceau, in the name of a \"peaceful revolt of the French spirit\", picked up the term \"intellectuals\" and used it in \"L'Aurore\", but in a positive sense. On 1 February 1898, Barres lambasted the intellectuals in \"Le Journal\". Anti-intellectualism became a major theme of right-wing intellectuals, who accused the Dreyfusards of failing to put the nation's interests first, an argument that continued throughout the years that followed and which became the basis of the public debate: a choice between justice and truth on the one hand, and the defense of the nation, preservation of society, and superiority of the state on the other. At first, the political left did not echo this mobilization of intellectuals\u2014on 19 January 1898 Socialist Deputies distanced themselves from the \"two rival bourgeois factions\".\nThe trial of Zola.\nGeneral Billot, Minister of War, filed a complaint against Zola and Alexandre Perrenx, the manager of \"L'Aurore\", to be heard at the Assises of the Seine from 7 to 23 February 1898. Defamation of a public authority was liable to trial in the Cour d'Assises, while insults to private figures\u2014such as journalists and intellectuals\u2014uttered by the nationalist and antisemitic press were limited to the civil adversarial system. (The taxpayer is at risk in the first case, while only the plaintiff is at risk in the second.) The minister referred to only three passages of Zola's article, eighteen lines out of hundreds. He accused Zola of having written that the court martial had committed \"unlawful acts\u00a0... by order\". The trial opened in an atmosphere of extreme violence\u2014Zola had been the object of \"the most shameful attacks\" as well as important support and congratulations. (On 2 February, Octave Mirbeau, Laurent Tailhade, Pierre Quillard and Georges Courteline, among others, in \"L'Aurore\" signed an \"Address to \u00c9mile Zola\" assuring him of their support \"in the name of justice and truth\".)\nFernand Labori, Zola's lawyer, intended to call about 200 witnesses. The details of the Dreyfus affair, unknown to most of the public, were published in the press. Several papers, \"Le Siecle\" and \"L'\u00c1urore\" among others, published shorthand notes verbatim of the debates every day to build support in the population. These notes were, for the Dreyfusards, an essential tool for later debates. The nationalists, behind Henri Rochefort, however, were more visible and organized riots, which forced the prefect of police to intervene to protect Zola whenever he left the facility after every hearing.\nThis trial was also the scene of a real legal battle in which the rights of the defence were constantly violated. Many observers were aware of the collusion between France's political and military worlds. Evidently the court received instructions not to raise the subject of former judicial errors. President Delegorgue, on the pretext of the long duration of the hearings, juggled the law incessantly to ensure that the trial dealt only with the alleged defamation by Zola. Delegorgue's phrase \"the question will not be put\" was repeated dozens of times.\nZola was sentenced to one year in prison and a fine of 3,000 francs, which was the maximum penalty. This harshness was due to the atmosphere of violence surrounding the trial. \"The excitement of the audience and the exasperation of the crowd in front of the courthouse were so violent that one could fear the worst excesses if the jury acquitted Mr. Zola\". However, the Zola trial was rather a victory for the Dreyfusards. Indeed, the affair and its contradictions had been widely discussed throughout the trial, especially by the military. In addition, the violent attacks against Zola and the injustice of the conviction of Dreyfus reinforced the commitment of the Dreyfusards. St\u00e9phane Mallarm\u00e9 declared, \"[I am] imbued by the admirable actions [of Zola]\" and Jules Renard wrote in his diary: \"From tonight I hold on to the Republic that inspires respect in me, a tenderness in me that I do not know. I declare that Justice is the most beautiful word in the language of men and I must cry if men no longer understand it\". Senator Ludovic Trarieux and Catholic jurist Paul Viollet founded the League for the Defence of Human Rights. Even more than the Dreyfus affair the Zola affair resulted in a regrouping of intellectual forces into two opposing camps.\nOn 2 April 1898, an application to the Supreme Court received a favourable response. This was the court's first intervention in the affair. The court upheld the appeal, on the formal grounds that as the alleged libel was against the military court, rather than the minister, it was the military court that should have made the complaint. Prosecutor-General Manau supported a review of the Dreyfus trial and strongly opposed the antisemites. The judges of the military court, whom Zola had challenged, therefore opened a new suit against him for libel. The case was brought before the Assizes of Seine-et-Oise in Versailles, where the public was considered more favourable to the army and more nationalistic. On 23 May 1898, at the first hearing, Mr. Labori appealed to the Supreme Court regarding the change of jurisdiction, which adjourned the trial and postponed the hearing to 18 July 1898. Labori advised Zola to leave France for England before the end of the trial, which the writer did, departing for a one-year exile in England. The defendants were convicted again. As for Colonel Picquart, he found himself again in prison.\nAntisemitic riots.\nAntisemitic disturbances and riots broke out in 1898 in cities across Metropolitan France, mostly in January and February. Antisemitic riots predated the Dreyfus affair, and were almost a tradition in the East, which \"the Alsatian people observed upon the outbreak of any revolution in France\". But the 1898 disturbances were much more widespread.\nThere were three waves of unrest in 55 localities: the first ending the week of 23 January; the second wave in the week following; and the third wave from 23\u201328 February; these waves and other incidents totaled 69 riots or disturbances across the country. Additionally, riots took place in Algeria from 18\u201325 January. Demonstrators at these disturbances threw stones, chanted slogans, attacked Jewish property and sometimes Jewish people, and resisted police efforts to stop them. Mayors called for calm, and troops including cavalry were called in an attempt to quell the disturbances.\nZola's \"J'Accuse\" appeared on 13 January, and most historians suggest that the riots were spontaneous reactions to its publication, and to the subsequent Zola trial. The press reported that \"tumultuous demonstrations broke out nearly every day\". Prefects or police in various towns noted demonstrations in their localities, and associated them with \"the campaign undertaken in favor of ex-Captain Dreyfus\", or with the \"intervention by M. Zola\", or the Zola trial itself, which \"seems to have aroused the antisemitic demonstrations\". In Paris, demonstrations around the Zola trial were frequent and sometimes violent. Roger Martin du Gard reported that \"Individuals with Jewish features were grabbed, surrounded, and roughed up by delirious youths who danced round them, brandishing flaming torches, made from rolled-up copies of \"L'Aurore\".\nHowever, the fervid reaction to the Dreyfus affair and especially the Zola trial was only partly spontaneous. In a dozen cities including Nantes, Lille, and Le Havre, antisemitic posters appeared in the streets, and riots followed soon after. At Saint-Etienne, posters read, \"Imitate your brothers of Paris, Lyon, Marseille, Nantes, Toulouse\u00a0... join with them in demonstrating against the underhand attacks being made on the Nation.\" In Caen, Marseille, and other cities, riots followed antisemitic speeches or meetings, such as the meeting organized by the \"Comit\u00e9 de D\u00e9fense Religieuse et Sociale\" in Caen.\nHenry unmasked, the case is rekindled.\nThe acquittal of Esterhazy, the convictions of \u00c9mile Zola and of Georges Picquart, and the continued presence of an innocent man in prison had a considerable national and international effect. France was exposed as an arbitrary state, which contradicted its founding republican principles. Antisemitism made considerable progress and riots were common throughout the year 1898. However politicians were still in denial about the affair. In April and May 1898, they were mostly concerned with elections, in which Jaur\u00e8s lost his seat of Carmaux. The majority was moderate, though a parliamentary group in the House was antisemitic. Nevertheless the cause of the Dreyfusards was restarted.\nGodefroy Cavaignac, the new minister of war and a fierce supporter of anti-revisionism, definitely wanted to prove the guilt of Dreyfus and from there \"wring the neck\" of Esterhazy, whom he considered \"a pathological liar and blackmailer\". He was absolutely convinced of Dreyfus's guilt, a conviction reinforced by the legend of the confession (after meeting the main witness, Captain Lebrun-Renault). Cavaignac had the honesty of a doctrinaire intransigent, but absolutely did not know the depths of the affair\u2014the General Staff had kept him in the dark. He was surprised to learn that all the documents on which the prosecution was based had not been expertly appraised and that Boisdeffre had \"absolute confidence\" in Henry. Cavaignac decided to investigate\u2014in his office, with his assistants\u2014and retrieved the secret file, which now contained 365 items.\nOn 4 April, the newspaper \"Le Si\u00e8cle\" published \"Lettre d'un Diplomate\", the first of four documents, that were of critical importance in exposing Esterhazy's guilt, and enabled the Dreyfusard cause to regain the initiative it had lost with Zola's conviction. The secret information had been provided by Zola, who had received it from Oscar Wilde; Wilde had gained it from best friend Carlos Blacker, who was an intimate friend of Alessandro Panizzardi.\nOn 7 July 1898, during a questioning in the National Assembly Cavaignac reported three items \"overwhelming among a thousand\", two of which had no connection with the case. The other was the \"faux Henry\". Cavaignac's speech was effective: the \"d\u00e9put\u00e9s\" (deputies) gave him an ovation and voted to display copies of the three documents in the 36,000 communes of France. The anti-Dreyfusards had triumphed, but Cavaignac implicitly recognized that the Dreyfus's defence had not had access to all the evidence. The application for annulment made by Lucie Dreyfus became admissible. The next day, Picquart declared in \"Le Temps\" to the council president, \"I am in a position to establish before a court of competent jurisdiction that the two documents bearing the date of 1894 could not be attributed to Dreyfus and that the one that bears the date of 1896 had all the characteristics of a fake\", which earned him eleven months in prison.\nOn the evening of 13 August 1898, Louis Cuignet, who was attached to the cabinet of Cavaignac, was working by the light of a lamp and observed that the colour of the lines on the \"faux Henry\" paper header and footer did not correspond with the central part of the document. Cavaignac was still trying to find logical reasons for the guilt and conviction of Dreyfus but was not silent on this discovery. A board of inquiry was formed to investigate Esterhazy, before which he panicked and confessed his secret reports to Major du Paty de Clam. Collusion between the General Staff and the traitor was revealed. On 30 August 1898 Cavaignac resigned himself to demanding explanations from Colonel Henry in the presence of Boisdeffre and Gonse. After an hour of questioning by the minister himself, Henry broke down and made a full confession. He was placed under arrest at the Mont-Val\u00e9rien fortress, where he killed himself the next day by cutting his own throat with a razor. The request for review filed by Lucie Dreyfus could not be rejected. Yet Cavaignac said \"less than ever!\", but the president of the council, Henri Brisson, forced him to resign. Despite his apparently entirely involuntary role in the revision of the 1894 trial Cavaignac remained convinced that Dreyfus was guilty and made a statement disparaging and offensive to Dreyfus at the Rennes trial.\nThe anti-revisionists did not consider themselves beaten. On 6 September 1898 Charles Maurras published a eulogy of Henry in \"La Gazette de France\" in which he called him a \"heroic servant of the great interests of the State\". \"La Libre Parole\", Drumont's antisemitic newspaper, spread the notion of \"patriotic fake\" (\"faux patriotique\"). In December the same newspaper launched a subscription, in favour of his widow, to erect a monument to Henry. Each gift was accompanied by pithy, often abusive, remarks on Dreyfus, the Dreyfusards, and the Jews. Some 14,000 subscribers, including 53 deputies, sent 131,000 francs. On 3 September 1898, Brisson, the president of the council, urged Mathieu Dreyfus to file an application for review of the military court of 1894. The government transferred the case to the Supreme Court for its opinion on the past four years of proceedings.\nFrance was thoroughly divided into two, but several things remain clear: the Jewish community had little involvement, intellectuals were not all Dreyfusards, the Protestants were divided, and Marxists refused to support Dreyfus. The split transcended religion and social background, as shown in a cartoon by Caran d'Ache, \"A Family Dinner\": before, \"Above all, never talk about it!\"; after, \"They talked about it\".\nCrisis and reshaping the political landscape.\nHenry was dead, Boisdeffre had resigned, Gonse had no more authority, and du Paty had been severely compromised by Esterhazy: for the conspirators it was a d\u00e9b\u00e2cle. The government was now caught between two fires: the nationalist pressure on the street and the higher command. Cavaignac, having resigned for continuing to spread his anti-Dreyfusard vision of the affair, arose as an anti-revisionist leader. General Zurlinden who succeeded him and was influenced by the General Staff, delivered a negative opinion at the review on 10 September 1898 comforting the extremist press by saying that, \"a review means war\". The obstinacy of the government, who voted to revert to the Supreme Court on 26 September 1898, led to the resignation of Zurlinden who was soon replaced by General Chanoine. When Chanoine was questioned in the House he handed in his resignation; trust was denied to Brisson and he was also forced to resign. Ministerial instability caused some governmental instability.\nOn 1 November 1898, the Progressive Charles Dupuy was appointed in place of Brisson. In 1894 he had covered the actions of General Mercier at the beginning of the Dreyfus affair, and four years later he announced that he would follow the judgment of the Supreme Court, thus blocking the road for those who wanted to stifle the review and divest the Court. On 5 December 1898 in the shadow of a debate in the House on the transmission of the \"secret file\" to the Supreme Court the tension rose another notch. Insults, invective, and other nationalistic violence gave way to threats of an uprising. Paul D\u00e9roul\u00e8de declared: \"If there has to be a civil war so be it.\"\nA new crisis arose at the same time in the heart of the Supreme Court, since Quesnay de Beaurepaire, president of the Civil Chamber, accused the Criminal Chamber of Dreyfusism in the press. He resigned on 8 January 1899 as a hero of the nationalist cause. This crisis led to the divestiture of the Criminal Division in favour of joint chambers. This was the point of blockage for the review.\nIn 1899, the Dreyfus affair took up more and more of the political scene. On 16 February 1899, F\u00e9lix Faure, the President of France and a fierce opponent of the review, died of a heart attack. \u00c9mile Loubet was elected, which was an advance for the cause of the review. On 23 February 1899 at the funeral for Faure, Paul D\u00e9roul\u00e8de attempted to force a coup at the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Palace. It was a failure as it was not supported by the military. On 4 June 1899 Loubet was assaulted at the Longchamp Racecourse. These provocations plus permanent demonstrations from the extreme right, although it never actually put the Republic in danger, created a burst of Republicanism leading to the formation of a \"government of republican defence\" around Waldeck-Rousseau on 22 June 1899. The center of French politics, including Raymond Poincar\u00e9, had aligned itself with the pro-revisionists. The progressive anti-Dreyfusard Republicans such as Jules M\u00e9line, were rejected outright. The Dreyfus affair led to a clear reorganization of the French political landscape.\nThe appeal on the judgment of 1894.\nThe Supreme Court considered the Dreyfus affair in the context of press campaigns against the Criminal Division, the magistrates being constantly dragged through the mud in nationalist newspapers from the Panama scandals. On 26 September 1898, after a Cabinet vote, the Minister of Justice appealed to the Supreme Court. On 29 October 1898, after the submission of the report from the recorder Alphonse Bard, the Criminal Chamber of the Court stated that \"the application is admissible and will proceed with a supplementary investigation\".\nThe recorder Louis Loew presided. He was subjected to a very violent campaign of antisemitic insults due to his being an Alsatian Protestant accused of being a deserter and tainted by the Prussians. Despite the compliant silence of Mercier, Billot, Zurlinden, and Roget, who hid behind the authority of \"already judged\" and \"state secret\", understanding of the affair increased. Cavaignac made a statement two days long, but failed to prove the guilt of Dreyfus. On the contrary, he unwittingly exonerated him by a demonstration of the exact date of the bordereau (August 1894).\nPicquart then demonstrated all the workings of the error, then the conspiracy. In a decision dated 8 December 1898 in response to his divestiture announcement, Picquart was protected from the military court by the Criminal Division of the Supreme Court. This was a new obstacle to the wishes of the General Staff. A new furiously antisemitic press campaign burst during the event, while \"L'Aurore\" on 29 October 1898 published an article entitled \"Victory\" in the same character as \"J'accuse...!\" The work of the investigation was still to be taken back by the Criminal Division. The \"secret file\" was analyzed from 30 December 1898 and the Criminal Division requested disclosure of diplomatic records, which was granted.\nOn 9 February 1899, the Criminal Division submitted its report by highlighting two important facts: it was certain Esterhazy used the same paper as the bordereau, and the secret file was completely void. These two major events alone destroyed all proceedings against Alfred Dreyfus. In parallel, President Mazeau conducted an inquiry by the Criminal Division, which led to divestiture thereof \"to not only leave it to bear alone all responsibility for the final decision\", so protecting the Criminal Division from actions arising from its report.\nOn 28 February 1899, Waldeck-Rousseau spoke to the Senate on the floor and denounced \"moral conspiracy\" within the government and in the street. The review was no longer avoidable. On 1 March 1899, Alexis Ballot-Beaupr\u00e9, the new president of the Civil Chamber of the Supreme Court, was appointed recorder for the consideration of the application for review. He took on the legal files and decided on a further investigation. Ten additional witnesses were interviewed, which further weakened the version of the General Staff. In the final discussion, President Ballot-Beaupr\u00e9 demonstrated the inanity of the bordereau, which was the only evidence against Dreyfus. The prosecutor Manau echoed the views of the President. Mornard, who represented Lucie Dreyfus, argued without any difficulty or opposition from the prosecution.\nOn 3 June 1899, the joint chambers of the Supreme Court overturned the judgment of 1894 in a formal hearing. The case was referred to the Military Court of Rennes. By that judgment, the Supreme Court imposed itself as an absolute authority capable of standing up to military and political power. For many Dreyfusards, this ruling was the prelude to the acquittal of the captain; they forgot to consider that it was again the army who would judge. The court, in overturning the judgement, believed in the legal autonomy of the military court without taking into account the laws of \"esprit de corps\".\nFear of boycott.\nHannah Arendt wrote that fear of an international boycott of the Paris Exposition of 1900 was what \"united the disrupted country, turned parliament in favor of a retrial and eventually reconciled disparate elements\" of France in a way \"Clemenceau's daily editorials, Zola's pathos, Jaur\u00e8s' speeches and popular hatred of the clergy and aristocracy\" had not.\nThe trial in Rennes 1899.\nConduct of the trial.\nAlfred Dreyfus was in no way aware of what was happening thousands of kilometres from him. Neither was he aware of the schemes hatched to guarantee that he could never return, or the commitment of countless men and women to his cause. The prison administration filtered information deemed confidential. At the end of 1898, he learned with astonishment the actual size of the affair, about which he knew nothing: the accusation by his brother against Esterhazy, the acquittal of the traitor, Henry's confession and suicide, and the reading of the record of investigations of the Supreme Court, which he received two months after its publication. On 5 June 1899, Alfred Dreyfus was notified of the decision of the Supreme Court on the judgment of 1894. On 9 June 1899, he left Devil's Island, heading to France, but locked in a cabin as if guilty, even though he no longer was. He disembarked on 30 June 1899 in Port Haliguen on the Quiberon peninsula in the greatest secrecy, \"a clandestine and nocturnal return\". After five years of imprisonment, he was on his native soil, but he was immediately locked up from 1 July 1899 in the military prison in Rennes. He was remanded on 7 August 1899 before the military court of the Breton capital.\nGeneral Mercier, champion of the anti-Dreyfusards, intervened constantly in the press to confirm the accuracy of the first judgement: Dreyfus was surely guilty. Immediately, however, dissent emerged in the defence of Dreyfus. His two lawyers actually had opposing strategies. Demange wanted to stand on the defensive and just get the acquittal of Dreyfus. Labori, a brilliant lawyer who was just 35 years old, wanted to take the offensive, to aim higher and defeat and publicly humiliate the General Staff. Mathieu Dreyfus imagined a complementarity between the two lawyers. The conduct of the trial revealed the disunity that served the prosecution with a defence so impaired.\nThe trial opened on 7 August 1899 in an atmosphere of extreme tension. Rennes was in a state of siege. The judges of the court-martial were under pressure. Esterh\u00e1zy, who admitted authorship of the bordereau, was in exile in England. He and du Paty were both excused. On the appearance of Dreyfus, emotions ran high. His physical appearance disturbed his supporters and some of his opponents. Despite his deteriorated physical condition, he had a complete mastery of the files acquired in only a few weeks. All the General Staff testified against Dreyfus without providing any proof. They stubbornly considered null and void the confessions of Henry and Esterhazy. The trial even tended to go out of control to the extent that the decisions of the Supreme Court were not taken into account. They discussed in particular the bordereau, which was the proof of guilt of Esterhazy. Nevertheless Mercier was booed at the end of the hearing. The nationalist press and the anti-Dreyfusards could only speculate on his silence about the \"conclusive evidence\" (the pseudo-note annotated by Emperor Wilhelm II, which nobody will ever see in evidence) that he had not ceased to report before the trial.\nOn 14 August 1899, Labori was on his way to court when he was shot in the back by an extremist who escaped and was never found. The lawyer was missing from discussions for over a week at the decisive moment of the examination of witnesses. On 22 August 1899, his condition had improved and he returned. Incidents between the two lawyers for Dreyfus multiplied. Labori reproached Demange about his excessive caution. The government, in the face of the military hardening stance, still had two ways to influence events: call for testimony from Germany or abandon the charge. These negotiations in the background, however, had no result. The German Embassy sent a polite refusal to the government. The Minister of War, General Gaston de Galliffet, sent respectful word to Major Louis Carri\u00e8re, the government commissioner. He asked him to act in the spirit of the revised judgment of the Supreme Court. The officer pretended not to understand the allusion and helped the nationalist lawyer Auffray to make the indictment against Dreyfus. The defence needed to make a decision because the outcome of the case looked bad, despite evidence of the absence of charges against the accused. On behalf of the president of the council, Pierre Waldeck-Rousseau, aided by Zola and Jaur\u00e8s, Labori was convinced to give up his argument so as not to offend the military. They decided to risk conciliation in exchange for the acquittal that seemed to be promised by the government. Mr. Demange, alone and without illusions, continued the defence of Dreyfus in an atmosphere of civil war. In Paris, the antisemitic and nationalist agitators of Auteuil were arrested. Jules Gu\u00e9rin and those who fled and holed up in Fort Chabrol were assaulted by the police.\nNew conviction.\nOn 9 September 1899, the court rendered its verdict: Dreyfus was convicted of treason, but \"with extenuating circumstances\" (by five votes to two) and sentenced to ten years' imprisonment and a further degradation. Contrary to appearances, this verdict was on the verge of acquittal by one vote. The Code of Military Justice adopted the principle that a minority vote of three against four was an acquittal.\nThe day after the verdict, Alfred Dreyfus, after much hesitation, filed an appeal for a retrial. Waldeck-Rousseau, in a difficult position, tackled for the first time the possibility of a pardon. Dreyfus had to accept guilt. Exhausted, having been away from his family for too long, he accepted. The decree was signed by President \u00c9mile Loubet on 19 September 1899 and Dreyfus was released on 21 September 1899. Many Dreyfusards were frustrated by this final act. Public opinion welcomed this conclusion indifferently. France wanted civil peace and harmony on the eve of the Universal Exhibition of 1900 and before the big fight that the Republic was about to take for freedom of association and secularism.\nIt was in this spirit that on 17 November 1899, Waldeck-Rousseau filed an amnesty law covering \"all criminal acts or misdemeanours related to the Dreyfus affair or that have been included in a prosecution for one of these acts\" excluding only Alfred Dreyfus himself who was instead pardoned to be able to still seek acquittal. Many Dreyfusards protested as this indemnified not only Zola and Picquart against (further) punishment but also protected the real culprits. Despite these massive protests the bill was passed.\nReactions.\nReactions in France were strong, consisting of \"shock and sadness\" in the revisionist camp. Still other reactions tended to show that the \"verdict of appeasement\" made by the judges was understood and accepted by the population. The Republicans sought above all social peace and to turn the page on this extremely long and controversial affair. Also there were very few demonstrations in the provinces while agitation persisted somewhat in Paris. In the military world appeasement was also essential. Two of the seven judges voted for acquittal. They refused to yield to the implied military order. This was also clearly seen. In an apostrophe for the army, Galliffet announced: \"The incident is closed\".\nAnti-French demonstrations took place in twenty foreign capitals and the press was outraged. Reactions were twofold. Norwegian composer Edvard Grieg cancelled his concerts in France in protest. The British, as legalists, focused on espionage and challenged rather strongly this conviction devoid of positive arguments in its construction. As such the report of the Lord Chief Justice of England, Lord Russell of Killowen, on 16 September 1899, was a symbol of the global effect of the affair in the United Kingdom. Russell, who went as an observer to Rennes, criticised the weaknesses of the Military Court:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Military judges were not familiar with the law or criminal proceedings. They lacked the experience and skill that can see the evidence behind the evidence. They were drowning in prejudice and they acted according to what they saw as the honour of the army. Impressed, full of respect for their superiors, they accorded too much importance to fragile allegations that were only made against the accused.\" Thus he concluded: \"For surely it might have been predicted with certainty that, if the revision trial had taken place before the Cour de cassation\u00a0... Dreyfus would now be a free man.\nIn Germany and Italy, the two countries widely challenged by lawsuits against Dreyfus, there was relief. Even if the German Emperor regretted that the innocence of Dreyfus was not recognized, the normalization of future Franco-German relations was seen as a welcome relaxation. Diplomacy between the three powers, with the help of Britain, sought to relax in an atmosphere that deteriorated again on the eve of the First World War.\nThis judicial conclusion also had an unfortunate consequence for the relationship between the Dreyfus family and the branch of Ultra-Dreyfusards. Fernand Labori, Jaures, and Clemenceau, with the consent of Picquart openly accused Alfred Dreyfus of accepting the pardon and only gently protesting the amnesty law.\nRehabilitation, 1900\u20131906.\nPreferring to avoid a third trial, the government decided to pardon Dreyfus by a decree signed by President \u00c9mile Loubet on 19 September 1899 after much hesitation. Dreyfus was not found innocent. The rehabilitation process was not completed until six years later, when passions had cooled. Many books appeared during this period. In addition to the memoires of Alfred Dreyfus, Reinach published his \"History of the Dreyfus Affair\" and Jaur\u00e8s published \"The Proofs\". As for Zola, he wrote the third of his \"Gospels: Truth\". Even Esterhazy took advantage of his secrets and sold several different versions of the text of his statement to the consul of France.\nDeath of Zola.\nOn 29 September 1902, Zola, who was the initiator of \"The Affair\" and the first of the intellectual Dreyfusards, died, asphyxiated by fumes from his chimney. His wife, Alexandrine, narrowly escaped. It was a shock for the Dreyfusard clan. Anatole France, who demanded that Dreyfus be present at the funeral while the Chief of Police wanted his absence \"to avoid problems\", read his funeral oration for the author of \"\"J'accuse...!\"\nIn 1953, the newspaper \"Lib\u00e9ration\" published a death-bed confession by a Parisian roofer that he had murdered Zola by blocking the chimney of his house.\nThe semi-rehabilitation.\nLegal rehabilitation.\nThe elections of 1902 saw the victory of the left. Jean Jaur\u00e8s was re-elected and he revived the affair on 7 April 1903 while France thought the affair buried forever. In a speech Jaur\u00e8s evoked the long list of falsehoods peppering the Dreyfus case, and placed particular emphasis on two things. First, the letter of resignation from Pellieux, which was worded in very harsh terms. Legally, it formed an admission of the collusion of the General Staff:\n[It] dupes people without honour [and] can no longer rely on the trust of subordinates, without which command is impossible. For my side I can not trust any of my chiefs who have been working on falsehoods, I ask for my retirement.\nIn addition, the note allegedly annotated (by Kaiser Wilhelm II), which General Mercier had alluded to at the Rennes trial, which is reported by the press to have influenced the judges of the Military Court.\nGiven these developments, General Louis Andr\u00e9, the new Minister of War, led an investigation at the instigation of \u00c9mile Combes and assisted by judges. The investigation was conducted by Captain Antoine Louis Targe, aide to the minister. During searches of the Statistics Section he discovered numerous documents, most of which were obviously fabricated. In November 1903 a report was submitted to the Minister of Justice by the Minister of War. This was in compliance with the regulations since the Minister found an error committed by the Military Court. This was the beginning of a new review led by lawyer Ludovic Trarieux, the founder of the League of Human Rights, with a thorough investigation to run over two years. The years 1904 and 1905 were devoted to different legal phases before the Court of Cassation. The court identified three events (grounds) for review, the demonstration of the falsification of the Panizzardi telegram, demonstration of a date change on a document in the 1894 trial (April 1895 changed to April 1894) and demonstration of the fact that Dreyfus had not removed the minutes related to heavy artillery in the army.\nWith regard to the writing of the bordereau, the court was particularly severe against Alphonse Bertillon, who \"reasoned badly on forged documents\". The report showed that the writing was certainly by Esterhazy and that the latter had also confessed subsequently. Finally the Court demonstrated by a comprehensive and skilled analysis of the bordereau the futility of this purely intellectual construction and a commission of four headed by a general of artillery, General Sebert, maintained \"it is highly unlikely that an artillery officer could write this missive\".\nOn 9 March 1905, Attorney-General Baudouin delivered an 800-page report in which he demanded the convictions be quashed without further reference to another court and denounced the army. He began a divestiture of the military justice system, which did not conclude until 1982. It was not until 12 July 1906 that the Court of Cassation unanimously cancelled the judgment without reference to the military trial at Rennes in 1899 and pronounced \"the end of the rehabilitation of Captain Dreyfus\". The anti-Dreyfusards protested at this hasty rehabilitation. The goal was obviously political: it was to finish and finally turn the page. Nothing could dent the conviction of the opponents of Dreyfus. This method was the most direct and most definitive. What was annulled not only put a stop to Rennes, but the entire chain of prior acts, beginning with the arraignment order given by General Saussier in 1894. The Court focused on the legal aspects only and observed that Dreyfus did not have a duty to be returned before a Military Court for the simple reason that it should never have taken place due to the total absence of charges:\nWhereas in the final analysis of the accusation against Dreyfus nothing remains standing and setting aside the judgment of the Military Court leaves nothing that can be considered to be a crime or misdemeanour; therefore by applying the final paragraph of Article 445 no reference to another court should be pronounced.\nSubsequent career.\nDreyfus was reinstated in the army with the rank of artillery major by law on 13 July 1906. This reflected the rank to which he could reasonably have been expected to have risen had his career not been interrupted by the false charges against him. However, Dreyfus and his supporters were disappointed that his five years of imprisonment were not taken into account for the reconstruction of his career and that his promotion to major was back-dated only to 10 July 1903. This decision blocked any hope of a career worthy of his past successes before his arrest in 1894. After serving for a year as commander of the artillery depot at Fort Neuf de Vincennes, Major Dreyfus retired in June 1907; a decision taken in part because of recurrent tropical fevers and chronic fatigue arising from the strain of his imprisonment.\nOn 4 June 1908, on the occasion of the transfer of the ashes of \u00c9mile Zola to the Pantheon, Alfred Dreyfus was the target of an attack. Louis Gr\u00e9gori, an extreme right-wing journalist and assistant of Drumont, fired two shots from a revolver and wounded Dreyfus slightly in the arm. He was driven to do this for \"Action Fran\u00e7aise\" (French Action) not only to disrupt the ceremony for the \"two traitors\" Zola and Dreyfus, but also to remake the Dreyfus trial through a new trial, a revenge of some sort. The trial was at the Assises of the Seine, where Gr\u00e9gori was acquitted \u2013 the latest in a long series of judicial misconducts. It was an occasion for new antisemitic riots that the government suppressed half-heartedly.\nAs a reserve officer, Dreyfus participated in the First World War of 1914\u20131918, serving as head of the artillery depot at a fortified camp near Paris and commander of a supply column. In 1917 he saw frontline service at the Chemin des Dames and Verdun. Apart from Major Du Paty de Clam, Dreyfus was the only officer directly involved in the affair to serve in the war. Having been named as a Chevalier of the Legion of Honour at the time of his reinstatement in 1906, Dreyfus was promoted to the rank of officer of the Legion of Honour in 1919. His son, Pierre Dreyfus, also served in World War I as an artillery officer and was awarded the Croix de Guerre. Alfred Dreyfus's two nephews also fought as artillery officers in the French Army and both were killed. The same artillery piece (the Obusier de 120 mm C mod\u00e8le 1890), the secrets of which Dreyfus was accused of revealing to the Germans, was among those used in blunting the early German offensives. He ended his military career as a colonel.\nDreyfus died on 12 July 1935 at the age of seventy-five. His funeral cort\u00e8ge passed through ranks assembled for Bastille Day celebrations at the Place de la Concorde and he was buried in Montparnasse Cemetery. Colonel Picquart was also officially rehabilitated and reintegrated into the army with the rank of brigadier general. Picquart was Minister of War from 1906 to 1909 in the first Clemenceau government; he died in January 1914 in a horse riding accident.\nOn July 21, 1935, \"The New York Times\" published a feature by Walter Littlefield headlined \"Dreyfus Unaware to End He Had Been Victim of Plot...\" The piece fills 2 full pages and leads with the statement that the truth could not be published during Dreyfus' lifetime \"because while he lived this would have caused him pain and resentment.\"\nConsequences of the Dreyfus affair.\nFor some the Dreyfus affair marked French society as a tortured society. All sections of society were affected; some were devastated. According to Katrin Schultheiss, a modern historian:\nThe enduring significance of the Dreyfus Affair\u00a0... lies in its manifest embodiment of multiple narratives and multiple strands of historical causality. It shows how longstanding beliefs and tensions can be transformed\u00a0... into a juggernaut that alters the political and cultural landscape for decades. In the interest of increasing our understanding\u00a0... the complexities of that transformation should be recognized and analyzed rather than packaged for moral or political usefulness.\nPolitical consequences.\nThe Dreyfus affair brought the confrontation between two sides of France to life. However, according to most historians, this opposition served the republican order. There was indeed a strengthening of parliamentary democracy and a failure of monarchist and reactionary forces.\nThe excessive violence of the nationalist parties brought together republicans in a united front, which defeated attempts to return to the \"old order\". In the short term, progressive political forces from the elections of 1893 and confirmed in 1898 as a result of the Dreyfus affair disappeared in 1899. The shock trials of Esterhazy and Zola created a dreyfusian politics whose aim was to develop a republican consciousness and to fight against authoritarian nationalism, which expressed itself during the affair. For the uninhibited growth of populist nationalism was another major result of the event in French politics even though it did not originate from the Dreyfus affair. It grew out of the Boulanger affair, 1886\u20131889, and was shaped into a coherent theory by Maurice Barr\u00e8s in 1892. Nationalism had its ups and downs, but managed to maintain itself as a political force under the name of \"Action Fran\u00e7aise\", among others. On that occasion many republicans rallied to Vichy, without which the operation of the State would have been precarious, which showed the fragility of the republican institution in extreme circumstances. Upon liberation, Charles Maurras who was convicted on 25 January 1945 for acts of collaboration exclaimed at the verdict: \"This is the revenge of Dreyfus!\"\nThe other result was an intellectual mutation of socialism. Jaur\u00e8s was a late Dreyfusard (January 1898) and was persuaded by revolutionary socialists. His commitment became unwavering alongside Georges Clemenceau and from 1899 under the influence of Lucien Herr. The year 1902 saw the birth of two parties: the French Socialist Party, which brought together jaur\u00e9siens; and the Socialist Party of France under the influence of Guesde and Vaillant. Both parties merged in 1905 as the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO).\nIn addition, 1901 saw the birth of the Republican Radical and Radical-Socialist Party, the first modern political party, conceived as an electoral machine of the republican group. It had a permanent structure and relied on networks of Dreyfusards. The creation of the French League for Human Rights was contemporaneous with the affair. It was the hub of the intellectual left and extremely active at the beginning of the century, the conscience of the humanist left.\nThe final consequence on the political scene at the turn of the century saw a profound renewal of political personalities with the disappearance of great republican figures beginning with Auguste Scheurer-Kestner. Those who at the end of the century could weigh heavily on the events of the affair had now disappeared giving way to new men whose ambition was to reform and correct the errors and injustices of the past.\nThe Dreyfus affair created difficulties and blocked the way for improved relations between France and Italy after the customs war, as Italy was Europe's most Dreyfusard nation.\nSocial consequences.\nSocially, antisemitism was prominent. Existing prior to the Dreyfus affair, it had expressed itself during the Boulangisme affair and the Panama scandals but was limited to an intellectual elite. The Dreyfus affair spread hatred of Jews through all strata of society, a movement that certainly began with the success of \"Jewish France\" by \u00c9douard Drumont in 1886. It was then greatly amplified by various legal episodes and press campaigns for nearly fifteen years. Antisemitism was from then on official and was espoused in numerous settings including the working classes. Candidates for the legislative elections took advantage of antisemitism as a watchword in parliamentary elections. This antisemitism was reinforced by the crisis of the separation of church and state in 1905, which probably led to its height in France. Antisemitic actions were permitted on the advent of the Vichy regime, which allowed free and unrestrained expression of racial hatred.\nAnother social consequence was the enhanced role of the press. For the first time it exerted an important influence on French political life. It was possible to speak of a fourth estate since it could act the part of all state organs. Especially as the high editorial quality of the press was mainly derived from the work of writers and novelists who used newspapers as a revolutionary way of expression. The power of the press certainly brought politicians to action, an example of which was Mercier, who appeared to have pushed at the Dreyfus trial in 1894 to please \"La Libre Parole\" who attacked ferociously. This being said the role of the press was limited by the size of circulation, influential in Paris but to a lesser extent nationwide. The entire run of the national press appeared to revolve around four and a half million copies whose real influence was relatively strong. There was also assistance through the publication in 1899 of a specific newspaper intended to coordinate the fight (in the dreyfusard camp), with the \"People's Daily\" of S\u00e9bastien Faure.\nZionism.\nThe Austro-Hungarian journalist Theodor Herzl appeared profoundly moved by the Dreyfus affair, which followed his debut as a correspondent for the \"Neue Freie Presse\" of Vienna and was present at the degradation of Dreyfus in 1895. \"The catalyst for Herzl's 'conversion' is usually seen as the Dreyfus affair, which made him realise the impossibility of Jewish existence in Europe\", although some scholars believe that Herzl may have exaggerated the influence that the Dreyfus affair had on him. Before the wave of antisemitism that accompanied the degradation Herzl was \"convinced of the need to resolve the Jewish question\", which became \"an obsession for him\". In \"Der Judenstaat\" (State of the Jews), he considered that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[I]f France \u2013 bastion of emancipation, progress and universal socialism \u2013 [can] get caught up in a maelstrom of antisemitism and let the Parisian crowd chant 'Kill the Jews!' Where can they be safe once again \u2013 if not in their own country? Assimilation does not solve the problem because the Gentile world will not allow it as the Dreyfus affair has so clearly demonstrated.\nHerzl's shock was great, for, having lived his youth in Austria, an antisemitic country, he chose to live in France for its humanist image, which made it appear a shelter from extremist excess. He had originally been a fanatic supporter for assimilation of Jews into European Gentile society. The Dreyfus affair shook Herzl's view on the world, and he became completely enveloped in a tiny movement calling for the restoration of a Jewish State within the biblical homeland in the Land of Israel. Herzl quickly took charge in leading the movement.\nHe organized on 29 August 1897, the First Zionist Congress in Basel and is considered the \"inventor of Zionism as a real political movement\". Theodor Herzl wrote in his diary (1 September 1897):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Were I to sum up the Basel Congress in a word \u2013 which I shall guard against pronouncing publicly \u2013 it would be this: At Basel I founded the Jewish State. If I said this out loud today, I would be answered by universal laughter. Perhaps in five years, and certainly in fifty, everyone will recognize this.\nThe Dreyfus affair also marked a turning point in the lives of many Jews from Western and Central Europe, as the pogroms of 1881\u20131882 had done for the Jews of Eastern Europe, as many Jews had believed that they were Frenchmen first. Yet Jews, despite the state-sanctioned efforts of the emancipation movement, were never truly accepted into society and were often deemed aliens and outsiders, even when they showed extreme devotion by fighting courageously in the wars of their respective countries.\n21st-century aftermath.\nIn October 2021, French President Emmanuel Macron opened a museum dedicated to the Dreyfus affair in Zola's former home in M\u00e9dan in the northwestern suburbs of Paris. He said that nothing could repair the humiliations and injustices Dreyfus had suffered, and \"let us not aggravate it by forgetting, deepening or repeating them\". In June 2025, the French parliament approved a bill to promote Dreyfus to the rank of brigadier general.\nThe statements followed attempts by the French far right to question Dreyfus's innocence. An army colonel was cashiered in 1994 for publishing an article suggesting that Dreyfus was guilty; far-right politician Jean-Marie Le Pen's lawyer responded that Dreyfus's exoneration was \"contrary to all known jurisprudence\". \u00c9ric Zemmour, a far-right political opponent of Macron who had said that France's Second World War collaborationist leader Philippe P\u00e9tain, who had assisted deportation of French Jews to Nazi death camps, had, in certain cases, saved their lives, said repeatedly in 2021 that the truth about Dreyfus was not clear, his innocence was \"not obvious.\"\nThough Alfred Dreyfus was eventually exonerated of all charges, the scandal and its aftermath had lasting repercussions in French society. In the 20th and 21st century, the Dreyfus affair was an important part of French history and has been the focus of much public debate. The controversy has been used to frame discussion on issues such as immigration, religious freedom, minority rights, and the French Republic itself. In recent years, the Dreyfus affair has also been used to draw attention to the resurgence of antisemitism in Europe, and to advocate for legislation that would protect minority rights across the continent. French lawmakers have proposed a number of bills that would extend protections to minority communities, such as prohibiting discrimination based on ethnicity or religion, and providing additional resources for victims of hate crimes.\nOther related events.\nCommission of sculpture.\nIn 1985, President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand commissioned a statue of Dreyfus by sculptor Louis Mitelberg. It was to be installed at the \u00c9cole Militaire but the Minister of Defense Charles Hernu refused to display it there. Hernu claimed that this was because the \u00c9cole Militaire is not open to the public, but it was widely believed that this was done to avoid provoking the army. Mitterrand did not override his minister and the statue was instead installed at Boulevard Raspail, No. 116\u2013118 at the exit of the Notre-Dame-des-Champs metro station, where it can be found today. A replica is located at the entrance of Paris's Museum of Jewish Art and History, which houses the \"Fonds Alfred Dreyfus\" of over 2500 historical documents donated by the grandchildren of Captain Dreyfus.\nCentennial commemoration.\nOn 12 July 2006, President Jacques Chirac held an official state ceremony marking the centenary of Dreyfus's official rehabilitation. This was held in the presence of the living descendants of both \u00c9mile Zola and Alfred Dreyfus. The event took place in the same cobblestone courtyard of Paris's \u00c9cole Militaire where Capitaine Dreyfus had been officially stripped of his officer's rank. Chirac stated that \"the combat against the dark forces of intolerance and hate is never definitively won\", and called Dreyfus \"an exemplary officer\" and a \"patriot who passionately loved France\". The French National Assembly also held a memorial ceremony of the centennial marking the end of the affair. This was held in remembrance of the 1906 laws that had reintegrated and promoted both Dreyfus and Picquart at the end of the Dreyfus affair.\nAnnual commemoration day.\nIn 2025, President Emmanuel Macron declared July 12 as an annual day of commemoration for Dreyfus. Pending approval by the French senate, the first date of observance will be 2026, recognizing the 120th anniversary of France's high court clearing Dreyfus of charges and affirming his innocence.\nHistoriography of the Dreyfus affair.\nThe Dreyfus affair is distinguished by the large number of books published on this subject.\nThe contemporary literature of the case was published between 1894 and 1906. It began with the pamphlet of Bernard Lazare, the first intellectual Dreyfusard.\n\"The Precis of the Dreyfus Affair\" by \"Henri-Dutrait Crozon\", a pseudonym of Colonel Larpent, is the basis of all anti-Dreyfusard literature after the affair to the present time. The author develops the theory of conspiracy, fueled by Jewish finance, to push Esterhazy to accuse himself of crime. Under a scientific exterior there will be found there an elaboration of theories without evidence or support.\nThe publication of notes by Schwartzkoppen in 1930 shed light on the guilty role of Esterh\u00e1zy in the affair and exonerated Alfred Dreyfus at the same time, if such vindication was needed. The extreme right questioned the value of this testimony but most historians hold it to be a valid source despite some ambiguities and inaccuracies.\nThe period of the occupation throws a veil over the case. The liberation and the revelation of the Holocaust brought a deep reflection on all of the Dreyfus affair. Jacques Kayser (1946) then Maurice Pal\u00e9ologue (1955) and Henri Giscard d'Estaing (1960) revived the case without great revelations, a process generally considered insufficient historically.\nMarcel Thomas, chief curator at the National Archives, in 1961 provided through his \"The Affair Without Dreyfus\" in two volumes a complete review of the history of the affair supported by all available public and private archives. His work is the foundation of all subsequent historical studies.\nReflecting the intense interest in social history that gripped historians since the 1960s and 1970s, Eric Cahm wrote \"The Dreyfus Affair in French Society and Politics\" (1996), an analysis of the sociology of the affair. Michael Burns, \"Rural Society and French Politics, Boulangism and the Dreyfus Affair, 1886\u20131900\" (1984) does the same in a more limited fashion. Vincent Duclert's \"Biography of Alfred Dreyfus\" (2005) includes, in 1300 pages, the complete correspondence of Alfred and Lucie Dreyfus from 1894 to 1899.\nEarly writers marginalized the role of antisemitism. However since the publication of Jean-Denis Bredin, \"The Affair: The Case of Alfred Dreyfus\" (1986) and Stephen Wilson, \"Ideology and Experience: Antisemitism in France at the Time of the Dreyfus Affair\" (1982), more attention has been paid to the undercurrent of antisemitism in French society and its effect on the evolution of the case.\nIn 1983, the lawyer and historian Jean-Denis Bredin published \"L'Affair\" (\"The Affair\"). The interest of the book focuses on a strictly factual relating of the story with documented facts and multifaceted reflection on the different aspects of the event. The book also revealed for the first time the existence of homosexual correspondence in the prosecution case. Expanding on a 2008 article they published in \"la Revue d'histoire moderne et contemporaine\", in 2012 the historians Pierre Gervais, Pauline Peretz and Pierre Stutin published \"Le dossier secret de l'affaire Dreyfus\" (\"The Secret Record of the Dreyfus Affair\"). Their research enabled the original contents of the secret file to be established. Their thesis was that historians had neglected the correspondence of Schwartzkoppen and Panizzardi, and that homosexuality played a central role in the slandering of Dreyfus.\nIn literature.\nThe Dreyfus affair provided the basis for many novels. The last work of \u00c9mile Zola (1902), \"Truth\", transposes the Dreyfus affair to the world of education. Anatole France published \"The Island of Penguins\" (1907), which recounts the affair in Book VI: \"The Case of 80,000 bundles of hay\". Franz Kafka's short story \"In the Penal Colony\" drew inspiration from Devil's Island and the debate about justice and punishment the Dreyfus affair provoked in French society. Marcel Proust devoted significant passages of his second, third and fourth volumes of \"In Search of Lost Time\" to Parisian society's reaction to the Dreyfus affair. Other authors have also contributed, such as Roger Martin du Gard and Maurice Barr\u00e8s.\nThe 2013 novel \"An Officer and a Spy\" by Robert Harris, and Roman Polanski's 2019 French-language film \"J'accuse\" (aka \"An Officer and a Spy\"), adapted by Polanski and Harris from the novel, tell the story of the Dreyfus affair from Picquart's perspective.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66180", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66180", "title": "Bouvet Island/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "66181", "revid": "50852833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66181", "title": "Role-based access control", "text": "Approach to restricting system access to authorized users\nIn computer systems security, role-based access control (RBAC) or role-based security is an approach to restricting system access to authorized users, and to implementing mandatory access control (MAC) or discretionary access control (DAC).\nRole-based access control is a policy-neutral access control mechanism defined around roles and privileges. The components of RBAC such as role-permissions, user-role and role-role relationships make it simple to perform user assignments. A study by NIST has demonstrated that RBAC addresses many needs of commercial and government organizations. RBAC can be used to facilitate administration of security in large organizations with hundreds of users and thousands of permissions. Although RBAC is different from MAC and DAC access control frameworks, it can enforce these policies without any complication.\nDesign.\nWithin an organization, roles are created for various job functions. The permissions to perform certain operations are assigned to specific roles. Since users are not assigned permissions directly, but only acquire them through their role (or roles), management of individual user rights becomes a matter of simply assigning appropriate roles to the user's account; this simplifies common operations, such as adding a user, or changing a user's department.\nThree primary rules are defined for RBAC:\nAdditional constraints may be applied as well, and roles can be combined in a hierarchy where higher-level roles subsume permissions owned by sub-roles.\nWith the concepts of role hierarchy and constraints, one can control RBAC to create or simulate lattice-based access control (LBAC). Thus RBAC can be considered to be a superset of LBAC.\nWhen defining an RBAC model, the following conventions are useful:\nA constraint places a restrictive rule on the potential inheritance of permissions from opposing roles. Thus it can be used to achieve appropriate separation of duties. For example, the same person should not be allowed to both create a login account and to authorize the account creation.\nThus, using set theory notation:\nA subject may have \"multiple\" simultaneous sessions with/in different roles.\nStandardized levels.\nThe NIST/ANSI/INCITS RBAC standard (2004) recognizes three levels of RBAC:\nRelation to other models.\nRBAC is a flexible access control technology whose flexibility allows it to implement DAC or MAC. DAC with groups (e.g., as implemented in POSIX file systems) can emulate RBAC. MAC can simulate RBAC if the role graph is restricted to a tree rather than a partially ordered set.\nPrior to the development of RBAC, the Bell-LaPadula (BLP) model was synonymous with MAC and file system permissions were synonymous with DAC. These were considered to be the only known models for access control: if a model was not BLP, it was considered to be a DAC model, and vice versa. Research in the late 1990s demonstrated that RBAC falls in neither category. Unlike context-based access control (CBAC), RBAC does not look at the message context (such as a connection's source). RBAC has also been criticized for leading to role explosion, a problem in large enterprise systems which require access control of finer granularity than what RBAC can provide as roles are inherently assigned to operations and data types. In resemblance to CBAC, an Entity-Relationship Based Access Control system is able to secure instances of data by considering their association to the executing subject.\nComparing to ACL.\nAccess control lists (ACLs) are used in traditional discretionary access-control (DAC) systems to affect low-level data-objects. RBAC differs from ACL in assigning permissions to operations which change the direct-relations between several entities (see: \"ACLg\" below). For example, an ACL could be used for granting or denying write access to a particular system file, but it wouldn't dictate how that file could be changed. In an RBAC-based system, an operation might be to 'create a credit account' transaction in a financial application or to 'populate a blood sugar level test' record in a medical application. A Role is thus a sequence of operations within a larger activity. RBAC has been shown to be particularly well suited to separation of duties (SoD) requirements, which ensure that two or more people must be involved in authorizing critical operations. Necessary and sufficient conditions for safety of SoD in RBAC have been analyzed. An underlying principle of SoD is that no individual should be able to effect a breach of security through dual privilege. By extension, no person may hold a role that exercises audit, control or review authority over another, concurrently held role.\nThen again, a \"minimal RBAC Model\", \"RBACm\", can be compared with an ACL mechanism, \"ACLg\", where only groups are permitted as entries in the ACL. Barkley (1997) showed that \"RBACm\" and \"ACLg\" are equivalent.\nFor data interchange, and for \"high level comparisons\", ACL data can be translated to XACML.\nAttribute-based access control.\nAttribute-based access control or ABAC is a model which evolves from RBAC to consider additional attributes in addition to roles and groups. In ABAC, it is possible to use attributes of:\nABAC is policy-based in the sense that it uses policies rather than static permissions to define what is allowed or what is not allowed.\nRelationship-based access control.\nRelationship-based access control or ReBAC is a model which evolves from RBAC. In ReBAC, a subject's permission to access a resource is defined by the presence of relationships between those subjects and resources. \nThe advantage of this model is that allows for fine-grained permissions; for example, in a social network where users can share posts with other specific users. \nUse and availability.\nThe use of RBAC to manage user privileges (computer permissions) within a single system or application is widely accepted as a best practice. A 2010 report prepared for NIST by the Research Triangle Institute analyzed the economic value of RBAC for enterprises, and estimated benefits per employee from reduced employee downtime, more efficient provisioning, and more efficient access control policy administration.\nIn an organization with a heterogeneous IT infrastructure and requirements that span dozens or hundreds of systems and applications, using RBAC to manage sufficient roles and assign adequate role memberships becomes extremely complex without hierarchical creation of roles and privilege assignments. Newer systems extend the older NIST RBAC model to address the limitations of RBAC for enterprise-wide deployments. The NIST model was adopted as a standard by INCITS as ANSI/INCITS 359-2004. A discussion of some of the design choices for the NIST model has also been published.\nPotential Vulnerabilities.\nRole based access control interference is a relatively new issue in security applications, where multiple user accounts with dynamic access levels may lead to encryption key instability, allowing an outside user to exploit the weakness for unauthorized access. Key sharing applications within dynamic virtualized environments have shown some success in addressing this problem.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66183", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66183", "title": "Papua New Guinea/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "66184", "revid": "45217282", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66184", "title": "National Palace Museum", "text": "National museum in Taiwan\nThe National Palace Museum, also known as Taipei Palace Museum, is a national museum headquartered in Taipei, Taiwan. Founded in Beijing in 1925, the museum was re-established in Shilin, Taipei, in 1965, later expanded with a southern branch in Taibao, Chiayi, in 2015.\nThe museum holds a permanent collection of nearly 700,000 pieces of artifacts and artworks, primarily comprising items relocated from the Beijing Palace Museum and other institutions in the mainland China during the government of the Republic of China's retreat to Taiwan. Before the re-establishment of the museum in Shilin in 1965, these collections were temporarily housed in various locations across Taiwan.\nSpanning 8,000 years of history from the Neolithic to the modern era, the museum's collection reflects a comprehensive record of Chinese history. Like the Palace Museum in Beijing, the museum's extensive array of artifacts and artworks were based on the imperial collections of the Ming and Qing dynasties in the Forbidden City.\nHistory.\nIn Mainland China.\nThe National Palace Museum was originally established as the Palace Museum in the Forbidden City on 10 October 1925, shortly after the expulsion of Puyi, the last emperor of China, from the Forbidden City by warlord Feng Yuxiang. The articles in the museum consisted of the valuables of the former imperial family.\nIn 1931, shortly after the Mukden Incident, the Nationalist Government ordered the museum to make preparations to evacuate its most valuable pieces out of the city to prevent them from falling into the hands of the Imperial Japanese Army. As a result, from 6 February to 15 May 1933, the Palace Museum's 13,491 crates and 6,066 crates of objects from the Exhibition Office of Ancient Artifacts, the Summer Palace and the Imperial Hanlin Academy were moved in five groups to Shanghai. In 1936, the collection was moved to Nanjing after the construction of the storage in the Taoist monastery Chaotian Palace was complete. As the Imperial Japanese Army advanced farther inland during the Second Sino-Japanese War, which merged into the greater conflict of World War II, the collection was moved westward via three routes to several places including Anshun and Leshan until the surrender of Japan in 1945. In 1947, it was shipped back to the warehouse in Nanjing.\nIn Taiwan.\nThe Chinese Civil War resumed following the surrender of the Japanese, ultimately resulting in Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek's decision to evacuate the arts to Taiwan, which had been handed over to the ROC in 1945. When the fighting worsened in 1948 between the Communist and Nationalist armies, the National Beijing Palace Museum and other five institutions made the decision to send some of the most prized items to Taiwan. Hang Li-wu, later director of the museum, supervised the transport of some of the collection in three groups from Nanjing to the harbor in Keelung, Taiwan between December 1948 and February 1949. By the time the items arrived in Taiwan, the Communist army had already seized control of the National Palace Museum collection from Beijing, so not all of the collection could be sent to Taiwan. A total of 2,972 crates of artifacts from the Forbidden City moved to Taiwan accounted for only 22% of the crates originally transported south, although the pieces represented some of the very best of the collection.\nThe collection from the National Beijing Palace Museum, the Preparatory Office of the National Central Museum, the National Central Library, and the National Beijing Library was stored in a railway warehouse in Yangmei following transport across the Taiwan Strait and was later moved to storage in a cane sugar mill near Taichung. In 1949, the Executive Yuan created the Joint Managerial Office for the National Beijing Palace Museum, the Preparatory Office of the National Central Museum, and the National Central Library, to oversee the organization of the collection. For security reasons, the Joint Managerial Office chose the mountain village of Beigou, located in Wufeng, Taichung, as the new storage site for the collection. The following year, the collection stored at the cane sugar mill was transported to the new site in Beigou.\nWith the National Central Library's reinstatement in 1955, the collection from the National Beijing Library was simultaneously incorporated into the National Central Library. The Joint Managerial Office of the National Beijing Palace Museum and the Preparatory Office of the National Central Museum stayed in Beigou for another ten years. During the decade, the office obtained a grant from the Asia Foundation to construct a small-scale exhibition hall in the spring of 1956. The exhibition hall, opened in March 1957, was divided into four galleries in which it was possible to exhibit more than 200 items.\nIn the autumn of 1960, the office received a grant of NT$32 million from AID. The Republic of China (ROC) government also contributed more than NT$30 million to establish a special fund for the construction of a museum in the Taipei suburb of Waishuanxi. The construction of the museum in Waishuanxi was completed in August 1965. The new museum site was christened the \"Chung-Shan Museum\" in honor of the founding father of the ROC, Sun Yat-sen, and first opened to the public on the centenary of Sun Yat-sen's birthday. Since then, the museum in Taipei has managed, conserved and exhibited the collections of the National Beijing Palace Museum and the Preparatory Office of the National Central Museum.\nArchitecture.\nNorthern Branch.\nThe National Palace Museum's main building in Taipei was designed by Huang Baoyu and constructed from March 1964 to August 1965. Due to the insufficient space to put on display over 600,000 artifacts, the museum underwent expansions in 1967, 1970, 1984 and 1996. In 2002, the museum underwent a major US$21 million renovation revamping the museum to make it more spacious and modern. The renovation closed about two-thirds of the museum section and the museum officially reopened in February 2007.\nPermanent exhibitions of painting and calligraphy are rotated once every three months. Approximately 3,000 pieces of the museum's collection can be viewed at a given time. Although brief, these exhibitions are extremely popular. In 2014, the museum organized the top three best-attended exhibitions worldwide, including paintings and calligraphic works by Tang Yin, as well as depictions of the Qing dynasty's Qianlong Emperor reinterpreted by contemporary artists.\nZhishan Garden.\nHoused within the compound of the National Palace Museum, this classical Chinese Song and Ming style garden covers . It incorporates the principles of such diverse fields as feng shui, Chinese architecture, water management, landscape design, and Chinese folklore and metaphor. It contains numerous ponds, waterworks, and wooden Chinese pavilions. It was completed and opened in 1985. There is also a second garden located on the southwest side, known as the Zhide Garden.\nChang Dai-chien residence.\nThe National Palace Museum also maintains the residence of Chinese painter Chang Dai-chien, also in Shilin, Taipei. The residence, known as the Chang Dai-chien Residence or the Abode of Maya, was constructed in 1976 and completed in 1978. It is a two-story Siheyuan building with Chinese-style gardens occupying approximately 1,911 m2. After Chang's death in 1983, the house and gardens were donated to the National Palace Museum and turned into a museum and memorial.\nSouthern Branch.\nThe Southern Branch of the National Palace Museum is located in Taibao, Chiayi County, Taiwan, and set on of land. There is also a lake and Asian style garden on the grounds. Planning for the southern branch began in 2000. The building was to be designed by architect Antoine Predock and began construction in 2005. However, due to serious construction delays and disputes between the contractors and the museum, the firm pulled out in 2008. Museum director Chou Kung-shin stated in August 2010 that new architects Kris Yao for the project would commence, with construction completed in 2015. The project cost NT$7.9 billion (US$268 million) and spread over . The museum itself, 9,000 square meters in total, was designed by the Taiwan-based firm Artech Inc. and is both earthquake resistant and flood resistant. After its grand opening on 28 December 2015, the building was plagued by water leakage, which forced its closure in April 2016. The Southern Branch then reopened on 23 August 2016, after repairs to address the water leakage issues were completed.\nCollections.\nComplete inventory inspection has been taken three times in 1951\u20131954, 1989\u20131991 and 2008\u20132012 since the museum started to bring collections to Taiwan in 1948. According to official report, the museum houses Chinese calligraphy, porcelain, bronzes, paintings, jades and many other artifacts, with 22% (2,972 out of 13,491 crates) of the boxes originally transported south from the Forbidden City. Other additions include transfers from other institutions, donations, and purchases made by the museum. A large number of these artifacts were brought by Chiang Kai-shek before his Kuomintang forces fled the mainland in 1949. The museum has accumulated nearly 700,000 artifacts of significant historical or artistic values. With a collection of this size, only 1% of the collection is exhibited at any given time. The rest of the collection is stored in temperature-controlled vaults.\nThe museum houses several treasured items that are the pride of their collection and famous worldwide. The antiquities in the National Palace Museum span over thousands of years with a variety of genres.\nMetalwork.\nAmong the collections of bronzes, \"Zong Zhou Zhong\" (\"Bell of Zhou\"), commissioned by King Li of Zhou, is the most important musical instrument cast under his royal decree. \"Mao Gong Ding\" (Cauldron of Duke of Mao) of the late Western Zhou dynasty (1046\u2013771 BCE) carries the longest Chinese bronze inscriptions so far extant.\nIn 1995, the museum acquired the Taihe Shakyamuni, a statue of The Buddha from the Northern Wei Dynasty, that represents a pivotal shift from early Indian style towards Chinese Buddhist style.\nCeramics.\nWith 21 pieces out of fewer than 80 surviving, the museum has the world's largest collection of Ru ware, one of the rarest Chinese ceramics, made exclusively for the court and one of the Five Great Kilns of the Song dynasty (960\u20131279), along with Ding porcelain, Jun ware, Guan and Ge; the museum has major collections of all of these. Those from the official kilns of the Ming (1368\u20131644) and Qing (1644\u20131912) dynasties, such as the \"doucai\" porcelains of the Chenghua reign during the Ming dynasty and painted enamel porcelains from the early Qing, are also of excellent quality.\nCarvings.\nOne of the most popular pieces of jade carvings in the museum is the \"Jadeite Cabbage\", a piece of jadeite carved into the shape of a cabbage head, and with a large and a small grasshopper camouflaged in the leaves. The ruffled semi-translucent leaves attached is due to the masterful combination of various natural color of the jade to recreate the color variations of a real cabbage. The \"Meat-shaped Stone\" is often exhibited together with the Jadeite Cabbage. A piece of jasper, a form of agate, the strata of which are cleverly used to create a likeness of a piece of pork cooked in soy sauce. The dyed and textured surface makes the layers of skin, lean meat, and fat materialized incredibly lifelike.\nOther various carvings of materials such as bamboo, wood, ivory, rhinoceros horn, and fruit pits are exhibited. The \"Carved Olive-stone Boat\", carved by Chen Zuzhang, is a tiny boat carved from an olive stone. The incredibly fully equipped skilled piece is carved with a covered deck and moveable windows. The interior has chairs, dishes on a table and eight figures representing the characters of Su Shih's \"Latter Ode on the Red Cliff\". The bottom is carved in minute character the entire 300+ character text with the date and the artist's name.\nPainting and calligraphy.\nThe paintings in the National Palace Museum date from the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907) to the modern era. The collection covers over one thousand years of Chinese painting, and encompasses a wide range of genres, including landscape, flower and bird, figure painting, boundary painting, etc. Among the most popular paintings in the collection is the \"Qing Palace Version of Along the River During the Qingming Festival\" by five Qing dynasty court painters (Chen Mu, Sun Hu, Jin Kun, Dai Hong and Cheng Zhidao). \"Dwelling in the Fuchun Mountains\" (Wu-yung version) by Huang Gongwang of the Yuan dynasty is one of the rarest and most dramatic works. \"Walking on a Mountain Path in Spring\" is another significant work. The museum has a vast collection of calligraphy works from the hands of major calligraphers, scholars and important courtiers in history. The calligraphy works date from the Jin (266\u2013420) and Tang (618\u2013907) dynasties, with a variety of styles.\nRare books and documents.\nRare books in the National Palace Museum range from the Song (960\u20131279) and Yuan (1271\u20131368) dynasties to the Ming (1368\u20131644) and Qing (1644\u20131912) dynasties, amounting to over 200,000 volumes. \"Yongle Encyclopedia\" and \"Complete Library of the Four Treasuries\" are among the examples.\nHistorical documents in the museum include \"Jiu Manzhou Dang\", a set of Manchu archives that are the sourcebook of \"Manwen Laodang\" and a primary source of early Manchu history. Other official documents such as the court archives are available for research in the history of the Qing dynasty.\nOverseas exhibitions.\nDue to fears that the artifacts may be impounded and claimed by China due to the controversial political status of Taiwan, the museum does not conduct exhibitions in mainland China. Since the museum's 1965 establishment in Taipei, the National Palace Museum has only made six large overseas exhibitions in countries which have passed laws to prevent judicial seizure of the treasures: the United States in 1996, France in 1998, Germany in 2003, Austria in 2008, Japan in 2014 and Australia in 2019.\nThe past overseas exhibitions are as follows:\nAdministration.\nThe National Palace Museum operates under the Executive Yuan as a level-two agency. It has been headed by many directors over the years: Note that, in 1949, the Joint Managerial Office of the National Central Museum and National Central Library was established. In 1955, the Joint Managerial Office of the National Palace Museum and National Central Museum was established.\nControversies.\nOwnership disputes.\nAccording to writer Ian Johnson, many cultural items on the mainland were destroyed under communist rule and during the Cultural Revolution, so the Kuomintang built the new National Palace Museum to show that Taiwan is the better China. Now that the Chinese communist party has redefined its mission to protect China's cultural past, Beijing has requested the return of the artefacts displayed in Taipei. The museum refuses to do so and does not loan them to other countries either, for fear that they might be indirectly repatriated to the Chinese mainland.\nAmid warmer relations in recent years, the Palace Museum in Beijing has lent relics to the National Palace Museum since 2009. The Palace Museum curator Zheng Xinmiao said that the artifacts in both mainland and Taiwan museums are \"China's cultural heritage jointly owned by people across the Taiwan Strait.\"\nSafety concerns.\nIn October 2022, it was revealed that three artefacts from the Ming and Qing dynasties, reportedly worth US$77 million, had been damaged. In response to inquiries, the museum admitted that two teacups were found broken in February and April that year, and a plate was dropped in May. Curator Wu Mi-cha suspected that the teacups might have been damaged due to unsatisfactory storage practices, which the museum is working to improve.\nIn August 2022, PLA drills around Taiwan raised concerns over the potential safety of the museum's artifacts. Former director Chou Kung-shin suggested creating a plan to store them in the mountain tunnels nearby. After they were originally shipped into Taiwan, the artifacts were first stored inside tunnels in Taichung during the 1950s before being moved to Taipei, where the museum was eventually built.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66185", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66185", "title": "Vinland Map", "text": "Forged 'Norse' map of North America\nThe Vinland Map is a 20th-century forgery purporting to be a 15th-century mappa mundi with unique information about Norse exploration of North America. The map first came to light in 1957 and was acquired by Yale University. It became well known due to the publicity campaign which accompanied its revelation to the public as a \"genuine\" pre-Columbian map in 1965. In addition to showing Africa, Asia and Europe, the map depicts a landmass south-west of Greenland in the Atlantic labelled as Vinland (\"Vinlanda Insula\").\nThe map describes this region as having been visited by Europeans in the 11th century. Although it was presented to the world in 1965 with an accompanying scholarly book written by British Museum and Yale University librarians, nonetheless historians of geography and medieval document specialists began to suspect that it might be a fake as soon as photographs of it became available. Later chemical analyses identified one of the major ink ingredients as a 20th-century artificial pigment.\nIn 2018, after several investigations and many years of debate, specialists at Yale declared that the latest scientific and historical research had conclusively established that it was a modern forgery. The map remains in Yale University's Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library as part of its collection.\nAcquisition by Yale and publication.\nThe Vinland map first came to light in 1957 (three years before the discovery of the Norse site at L'Anse aux Meadows in Newfoundland in 1960), bound in a slim volume with a short medieval text called the \"Hystoria Tartarorum\" (usually called in English the \"Tartar Relation\"), and was unsuccessfully offered to the British Museum by London book dealer Irving Davis on behalf of a Spanish-Italian dealer named Enzo Ferrajoli de Ry. Shortly afterwards, Ferrajoli sold the volume, for $3,500, to American dealer Laurence C. Witten II, who offered it to his \"alma mater\", Yale University. It was initially treated with suspicion, partly because wormholes in the map and the \"Relation\" did not match. In early 1958, however, Witten's friend Thomas Marston, a Yale librarian, acquired from London book dealer Irving Davis a dilapidated medieval copy of books 21\u201324 of Vincent of Beauvais's encyclopedic \"Speculum historiale\" (\"Historical Mirror\"), written in two columns on a mix of parchment and paper sheets, with initial capitals left blank, which turned out to be the missing link; the wormholes showing that it had formerly had the map at its beginning and the \"Relation\" at its end. All traces of former ownership marks, except for a small part of a bright pink stamp which overlapped the writing on folio 223 of the \"Speculum\", had been removed, perhaps to avoid tax liability for the former owner (although as historian Kirsten Seaver noted many years later, stamps on random book pages indicate institutional, not private ownership).\nYale was unable to afford the asking price and was concerned because Witten refused to reveal the provenance of the map, ostensibly because of the former private owner's tax concerns. Yale contacted another alumnus, Paul Mellon, who agreed to buy it (for a price later stated to be about $300,000) and donate it to the university if it could be authenticated. Recognizing its potential importance as the earliest map unambiguously showing America, Mellon insisted that its existence be kept secret until a scholarly book had been written about it. Even the three authors of the book were chosen from among the small number of people who had seen the map before Mellon bought it\u2014two British Museum curators and Marston. Only one of them, Raleigh Ashlin Skelton, keeper of the Museum's map collection, had significant expertise relevant to the problems posed by the map. (His colleague George Painter, the first person to whom Davis had shown the map in 1957, was brought in for the transcription and translation of the \"Relation\".) The secrecy almost completely ruled out consultation with specialists. Witten did his best to help during this period, answering the authors' questions and offering suggestions of his own. After years of study, the proofs of the book, \"The Vinland Map and the Tartar Relation\", were ready by the end of 1964, and Mellon donated the map to Yale. The book was published, and the map revealed to the world, the day before Columbus Day, 1965.\nControversies and investigations 1966\u20132018.\nVinland Map Conference 1966.\nMany academic reviewers of \"The Vinland Map and the Tartar Relation\" took the opportunity to point out evidence that called the map's authenticity into question. So a year later, a Vinland Map Conference was held at the Smithsonian Institution, during which further significant questions were asked, particularly of Witten. However, the proceedings were not published for another five years.\nThere were questions about the actual content of the map. Witten had pointed out that it bore strong resemblances to a map made in the 1430s by Italian mariner Andrea Bianco, but others found some of the similarities and differences very strange\u2014the map cuts off Africa where Bianco's map has a page fold, but distorts shapes, and includes major revisions in the far east and west. The most surprising revision is that, unlike, for example, the famous Cantino World Map, the Vinland Map depicts Greenland as an island, remarkably close to the correct shape and orientation (while Norway, of which Greenland was just a colony, is wildly inaccurate) although contemporary Scandinavian accounts\u2014including the work of Claudius Clavus in the 1420s\u2014depict Greenland as a peninsula joined to northern Russia. For practical purposes, Arctic sea ice may have made this description true, and Greenland is not known to have been successfully circumnavigated until the 20th century. Skelton wondered also whether the revisions in the far east were meant to represent Japan\u2014they seem to show not only Honshu, but also Hokkaido and Sakhalin, omitted even from Oriental maps in the 15th century.\nIn addition, the text uses a Latin form of Leif Ericson's name (\"Erissonius\") more consistent with 17th-century norms and with transmission through a French or Italian source. The Latin captions include several usages of the ligature \"\u00e6\"; this was almost unknown in later medieval times (a simple \"e\" was written instead), and although the ligature was revived by Italian humanist scholars in the early 15th century, it is found only in documents of deliberately classicising humanist minuscule produced by Italian scribes, and never in conjunction with a Gothic style of script such as is seen in the map.\nAnother point calling the map's authenticity into question was raised at the 1966 Conference: that one caption referred to Bishop Eirik of Greenland \"and neighboring regions\" (in Latin, \"regionumque finitimarum\"), a title known previously from the work of religious scholar Luka Jeli\u0107 (1864\u20131922). An essay by British researcher Peter Foote for the \"Saga Book of the Viking Society\" (vol. 11, part 1), published shortly after the conference, noted that German researcher Richard Hennig (1874\u20131951) had spent years, before the Vinland Map was revealed, fruitlessly trying to track Jeli\u0107's phrase down in medieval texts. It seemed that either Jeli\u0107 had seen the Vinland Map and promised not to reveal its existence (keeping the promise so rigidly that he never mentioned any of the other new historical information on the map), or that he had invented the phrase as a scholarly description, and the Vinland Map creator copied him. In practice, because Jeli\u0107's work had gone through three editions, Foote was able to demonstrate how the first edition (in French) had adopted the concept from the work of earlier researchers, listed by Jeli\u0107, then the later editions had adapted the anachronistic French scholarly phrase \"\u00e9v\u00eaque r\u00e9gionnaire des contr\u00e9es am\u00e9ricaines\" into Latin.\nHandwriting experts at the 1966 Conference tended to disagree with Witten's assessment that the map captions had been written by the same person as the \"Speculum\" and \"Relation\" texts. This had also been a major reason why the British Museum had rejected the map in 1957, the Keeper of Manuscripts having detected elements of handwriting style not developed until the nineteenth century.\nAnalysis of ink.\nComplaints were made at the Conference that no scientist had been permitted to examine the map and its companion documents in all the years of study since 1957. Skelton's scientific colleagues at the British Museum made a short preliminary examination in 1967 and found that:\n \nIn 1972, with new technology becoming available, Yale sent the map for chemical analysis by forensic specialist Walter McCrone whose team, using a variety of techniques, found that the yellowish lines contain anatase (titanium dioxide) in a rounded crystalline form manufactured for use in pale pigments since the 1920s, indicating that the ink was modern. They also confirmed that the ink contained only trace amounts of iron, and that the black line remnants were on top of the yellow, indicating that they were not the remains of a penciled guide-line, as the British Museum staff had speculated.\nA new investigation in the early 1980s, by a team under Thomas Cahill at the University of California, Davis, using particle-induced X-ray emission (PIXE) found that only trace amounts (&lt;\n\u00a00.0062% by weight) of titanium appeared to be present in the ink, which should have been too little for some of McCrone's analyses to detect. The Cahill team acknowledged, however, that titanium was the only element within their technique's measurement capability which was significantly more concentrated in the ink than on the bare parchment (other elements such as iron and zinc were found concentrated in some inked samples, but only a minority). One member of the team, Gregory M\u00f6ller, also analyzed loose particles retrieved from the split down the middle of the map by a different method, finding that most of them were rich in titanium (though a few black particles were rich in chromium and iron). Because they were the first to apply PIXE to ink analysis, nobody at the time could explain the difference between the Cahill and McCrone figures. Attempting to reconcile the conflicting results, the Cahill team suggested that the high concentrations found by McCrone were due to a combination of contamination from modern dust, and poor sample selection (i.e. choosing contaminant particles like those in the split); however, they also chose not to publish or publicise M\u00f6ller's loose particle study. The accumulation of large amounts of PIXE data from other laboratories around the world in the ensuing decades was sufficient by 2008 to show that the Cahill figures for all elements in the inks of the map and its companion documents are at least a thousand times too small, so the discrepancy is due to a problem with their work.\nThe McCrone team had also made mistakes, though none as fundamental as Cahill's. Revisiting his notes in 1987 to draft a detailed reply to the abbreviated public version of Cahill's report, Walter McCrone chose the wrong sample to illustrate a \"typical\" black ink particle, selecting one which had been found only loosely attached to the ink. By focusing on this contamination, rich in chromium and iron, he gave Cahill the opportunity to re-emphasise his case in an essay for an expanded version of the 1965 official book, a few years later.\nIn 1991, McCrone, then director and senior research microscopist with the McCrone Research Institute, visited Yale to take new microsamples from the map, partly to check his earlier results, and partly to apply new techniques. Photomicrographs taken at 1 micrometer intervals through the thickness of ink samples demonstrated that the manufactured anatase particles were not just sticking to the surface as Cahill's criticisms had implied, and Fourier transform spectroscopy identified the ink's binder as gelatin, probably made from animal skin. In July 2002, using Raman spectroscopy, the presence of significant quantities of anatase in the map ink was confirmed by British researchers Katherine Brown and Robin Clark, and the remaining traces of black pigment in the ink were found to consist essentially of soot-type carbon.\nVarious scientists have formed their own theories to explain how the 20th century manufactured anatase in the Vinland Map ink could have got into genuine medieval ink. The first was chemist Jacqueline Olin, then a researcher with the Smithsonian Institution, who in the 1970s conducted experiments which produced anatase at an early stage of a medieval iron-gall ink production process. Examination of her anatase by a colleague, mineralogist Kenneth Towe, showed that it was very different from the neat, rounded crystals found in the Vinland Map and modern pigments. Towe himself, a clay specialist, briefly considered the possibility that the anatase could have come from clay, where it is present in trace amounts, but on checking McCrone's data found no significant traces of clay minerals. Shortly before the Raman analysis was published, historian Douglas McNaughton based a mistaken theory about the ink around McCrone's emphasis on the chromium-rich black particle, having obtained unpublished data on the similar particles in M\u00f6ller's report.\nOlin published a paper that identifies the anatase in the Vinland Map ink as being truncated bi-pyramidal rather than rounded crystals (however, this is not vastly different from the McCrones' 1974 description of the crystals as \"smooth, rounded rhomb shapes\").\nDating of parchment.\nRadiocarbon dating, begun in 1995 by physicist Douglass Donahue and chemists Jacqueline Olin and Garman Harbottle, placed the origin of the parchment somewhere between 1423 and 1445. The initial results were confusing because the unknown substance the British Museum had found across the whole map, effectively ignored by later researchers who were concentrating on the ink, turned out to be trapping tiny traces of fallout deep within the parchment from 1950s nuclear tests. Although there was none of this 1950s substance on top of the ink, further tests, starting with a detailed chemical analysis, were needed to confirm whether the lines were drawn after it soaked into the parchment.\nIn 2008, Harbottle's attempt to explain a possible medieval origin for the ink was published, but he was shown by Towe and others to have misunderstood the significance of the various analyses, rendering his theory meaningless.\n\"VMTR 95\".\nThe expanded 30th anniversary edition of the 1965 official book, \"The Vinland Map and the Tartar Relation\", was notable for its exclusion of most of the evidence against the map's authenticity, concentrating instead on vindications by George Painter, and Thomas Cahill with colleague Bruce Kusko (in which they claimed specifically that they had not analyzed the loose particles they took from the map at the time of their PIXE research), but it did reprint an essay written in 1989 by the original book dealer Laurence Witten. He stated that, when the McCrone investigation concluded the map to be a forgery in 1974, he was asked by Yale to reveal its provenance as a matter of urgency, and to discuss the possible return of Mr Mellon's money. He replied that he had no idea where the map came from, beyond Ferrajoli (who was convicted of theft shortly after the sale, and died shortly after release from prison). On the subject of the money, he said he could not pay it all back because he had paid agreed shares of his profit to Ferrajoli and to another dealer who had introduced him. For his part, Mellon did not ask for the return of any money. The essay also revealed that Witten had, on Ferrajoli's recommendation, met with Irving Davis after buying the map volume in 1957.\nRegardless of the controversy, the map, which had been valued for insurance purposes at over $750,000 in the 1960s, was claimed in 1996 to be worth $25,000,000.\n\"Maps, Myths, and Men\", 2004.\nIn 2004, Kirsten A. Seaver published \"Maps, Myths, and Men: The Story of the Vinland Map\", a wide-ranging review of the arguments and evidence presented to that date. Seaver was hailed as the Vinland map's \"most thorough and outspoken critic in recent years\" for her \"exemplary interdisciplinary study\". She also theorized that the forger could have been Father Josef Fischer (1858\u20131944), an Austrian cartographer and Jesuit scholar. However, subsequent research into the provenance of the Vinland map documents (see below) suggests that they are unlikely to have spent any time in Fischer's possession. Robert Baier, a forensic handwriting analyst, examined the map text and correspondence of Fischer, and his opinion was that \"they are not the same writer.\"\nDanish investigation, 2005\u20132009.\nIn 2005, a team from the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts, led by Ren\u00e9 Larsen, studied the map and its accompanying manuscripts to make recommendations on the best ways to preserve it. Among other findings, this study confirmed that the two halves of the map were entirely separate, though they might have been joined in the past. A few months earlier, Kirsten Seaver had suggested that a forger could have found two separate blank leaves in the original \"Speculum Historiale\" volume, from which the first few dozen pages appeared to be missing, and joined them together with the binding strip. On the other hand, at the International Conference on the History of Cartography in July 2009, Larsen revealed that his team had continued their investigation after publishing their original report, and he told the press that \"All the tests that we have done over the past five years\u2014on the materials and other aspects\u2014do not show any signs of forgery\". The formal report of his presentation showed that his work ignored rather than contradicted earlier studies. For example, he experimented only with artificial wormholes, and did not follow up the observation made at the 1966 Conference, that live bookworms were a known tool of the fake antiquities trade. Similarly, he claimed that the anatase in the ink could have come from sand used to dry it (the hypothetical source of the sand being gneiss from the Binnenthal area of Switzerland) but his team had not examined the crystals microscopically, and Kenneth Towe responded that this was an essential test, given that crystal size and shape should distinguish commercial anatase from anatase found in sand.\nMembers of the Danish team later joined with others to perform microanalyses of the remaining piece from the 1995 carbon dating sample. They found a significant quantity of monostearin (glycerol monostearate) which is commonly used in the food and pharmaceutical industries, with additional aromatic compounds. It was thought that if it was not purely localised contamination from handling by somebody using something like hand lotion, it was likely to be the unidentified post-1950 chemical soaked into the parchment. Their microscopic examination confirmed that the parchment had been treated very roughly at some time, with 95% of fibres damaged.\n\"A Sorry Saga\" 2018.\nIn June 2013, it was reported in the British press that a Scottish researcher, John Paul Floyd, claimed to have discovered two pre-1957 references to the Yale \"Speculum\" and \"Tartar Relation\" manuscripts which shed light on the provenance of the documents. According to one of these sources (an exhibition catalogue), a 15th-century manuscript volume containing books 21-24 of the \"Speculum Historiale\" and C. de Bridia's \"Historia Tartarorum\" was lent by the Archdiocese of Zaragoza for display at the 1892\u201393 \"Exposici\u00f3n Hist\u00f3rico-Europea\" (an event held in Madrid, Spain to commemorate the voyages of Columbus). Floyd noted that Spanish priest and scholar Crist\u00f3bal P\u00e9rez Pastor also reported having seen such a codex, in historical notes organised and published posthumously in 1926. Neither the catalogue entry nor P\u00e9rez Pastor's description mentioned the presence of a map. It is known that Enzo Ferrajoli, who offered the Vinland manuscript for sale in 1957, was convicted of having stolen manuscripts from the Cathedral Library of La Seo, Zaragoza, in the 1950s. \nSeparately, Floyd also observed that the creator of the Vinland Map had evidently made use of an 18th-century engraving of the 1436 Bianco map by Vincenzio Formaleoni (1752\u201397), since the Vinland Map reproduces several of Formaleoni's copying errors. He argued that this furnished a new and decisive proof that the map is inauthentic.\nFloyd's book appeared in 2018 under the title, \"A Sorry Saga: Theft, Forgery, Scholarship... and the Vinland Map\".\nIdentification as a forgery, 2018.\nAs controversy has swirled around the map almost since its acquisition, authorities at Yale University chose not to comment on the authenticity of the parchment document. In 2002, Yale librarian Alice Prochaska commented that \"We regard ourselves as the custodians of an extremely interesting and controversial document... and we watch the scholarly work on it with great interest.\" In 2011, Yale's Chester D. Tripp Professor of History, Paul Freedman, expressed his view that the map was \"unfortunately a fake\".\nAt the 2018 Vinland Map Symposium, Yale conservation scientist Richard Hark revealed the results of new global chemical analyses of the map and the Tartar Relation, which established that the ink lines of the map contain varying amounts of anatase \"consistent with modern manufacture\". So too do two small patches on the first page of the Tartar Relation, where the original iron-gall ink appears to have been erased and replaced.\nRaymond Clemens, Curator of Early Books and Manuscripts at Yale's Beinecke Rare Book &amp; Manuscript Library, considers that the latest historical and scientific research proves \"beyond a doubt\" that the Vinland map \"was a forgery, not a medieval product as it claimed to be.\" In a March 2019 article, Clemens highlights the fact that \"historical investigations by John Paul Floyd have revealed that the Vinland Map is based not on Bianco\u2019s 1436 map, but on a printed facsimile map made in 1782. Floyd discovered this by noting mistakes in the 1782 map that were replicated on the Vinland map, but could be found nowhere else.\" Furthermore, the map has been studied at the Beinecke Library using new technology. \"In the case of the Vinland map we were able to prove... [the map] was clearly a 20th century fake.\" Despite the map's forged origins, Clemens stated that the map would remain at the Beinecke Library, as it had \"become an historical object in and of itself.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66186", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66186", "title": "Bastille", "text": "Former Parisian fortress\nThe Bastille (, ) was a medieval fortress in Paris, known as the Bastille Saint-Antoine. It played an important role in the internal conflicts of France and for most of its history was used as a state prison by the kings of France. It was stormed by a crowd on 14 July 1789, in the French Revolution, becoming an important symbol for the French Republican movement. It was later demolished and replaced by the Place de la Bastille.\nThe castle was built to defend the eastern approach to the city from potential English attacks during the Hundred Years' War. Construction was underway by 1357, but the main construction occurred from 1370 onwards, creating a strong fortress with eight towers that protected the strategic gateway of the Porte Saint-Antoine heading out to the east. The innovative design proved influential in both France and England and was widely copied. The Bastille figured prominently in France's domestic conflicts, including the fighting between the rival factions of the Burgundians and the Armagnacs in the 15th century, and the Wars of Religion in the 16th. The fortress was declared a state prison in 1417; this role was expanded further, first under the English occupiers of the 1420s and 1430s, and then under Louis XI in the 1460s. The defences of the Bastille were fortified in response to the Imperial threat during the 1550s, with a bastion constructed to the east of the fortress. The Bastille played a key role in the rebellion of the Fronde and the Battle of the Faubourg St Antoine, which was fought beneath its walls in 1652.\nLouis XIV used the Bastille as a prison for upper-class members of French society who had opposed or angered him including, after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, French Protestants. From 1659 onwards, the Bastille functioned primarily as a state penitentiary; by 1789, 5,279 prisoners had passed through its gates. Under Louis XV and XVI, the Bastille was used to detain prisoners from more varied backgrounds, and to support the operations of the Parisian police, especially in enforcing government censorship of the printed media. Although inmates were kept in relatively good conditions, criticism of the Bastille grew during the 18th century, fuelled by autobiographies written by former prisoners. Reforms were implemented and prisoner numbers were considerably reduced. In 1789, the royal government's financial crisis and the formation of the National Assembly gave rise to a swelling of republican sentiments among city-dwellers. On 14 July, the Bastille was stormed by a revolutionary crowd, primarily residents of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine who sought to commandeer the valuable gunpowder held within the fortress. Seven remaining prisoners were found and released and the Bastille's governor, Bernard-Ren\u00e9 de Launay, was killed by the crowd. The Bastille was demolished by order of the Committee of the H\u00f4tel de Ville. Souvenirs of the fortress were transported around France and displayed as icons of the overthrow of despotism. Over the next century, the site and historical legacy of the Bastille featured prominently in French revolutions, political protests and popular fiction, and it remained an important symbol for the French Republican movement.\nAlmost nothing is left of the Bastille, except some remains of its stone foundation that were relocated to the side of Boulevard Henri IV. Historians were critical of the Bastille in the early 19th century, and believe the fortress to have been a relatively well-administered example of French policing and political control during the 18th century.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\n14th century.\nThe Bastille was built to defend Paris during the Hundred Years' War between France and England. Prior to the Bastille, the main royal castle in Paris was the Louvre, in the west of the capital, but the city had expanded by the middle of the 14th century and the eastern side was now vulnerable to English attacks. The situation worsened after the imprisonment of John II in England following the French defeat at the Battle of Poitiers, and in his absence the Provost of Paris, \u00c9tienne Marcel, took steps to improve the capital's defences. In 1357, Marcel expanded the city walls and protected the Porte Saint-Antoine with two high stone towers and a ditch. A fortified gateway of this sort was called a \"bastille\", and was one of two created in Paris, the other being built outside the Porte Saint-Denis. Marcel was subsequently removed from his post and executed in 1358.\nIn 1369, Charles V became concerned about the vulnerability of the eastern side of Paris to potential attacks by English forces and mercenaries. Charles instructed Hugues Aubriot, the new provost, to build a much larger fortification on the same site as Marcel's \"bastille\". Work began in 1370 with another pair of towers being built behind the first \"bastille\", followed by two towers to the north, and finally two towers to the south. The fortress was probably not finished by the time Charles died in 1380, and was completed by his son, Charles VI. The resulting structure became known simply as the Bastille, with the eight irregularly built towers and linking curtain walls forming a structure wide and deep, the walls and towers high and thick at their bases. Built to the same height, the roofs of the towers and the tops of the walls formed a broad, crenellated walkway all the way around the fortress. Each of the six newer towers had underground \"cachots\", or dungeons, at its base, and curved \"calotte\", literally \"shell\", rooms in their roofs.\nGarrisoned by a captain, a knight, eight squires and ten crossbowmen, the Bastille was encircled with ditches fed by the River Seine, and faced with stone. The fortress had four sets of drawbridges, which allowed the Rue Saint-Antoine to pass eastwards through the Bastille's gates while giving easy access to the city walls on the north and south sides. The Bastille overlooked the Saint-Antoine gate, which by 1380 was a strong, square building with turrets and protected by two drawbridges of its own. Charles V chose to live close to the Bastille for his own safety and created a royal complex to the south of the fortress called the H\u00f4tel Saint-Pol, stretching from the Porte Saint-Paul up to the Rue Saint-Antoine.\nHistorian Sidney Toy has described the Bastille as \"one of the most powerful fortifications\" of the period, and the most important fortification in late medieval Paris. The Bastille's design was highly innovative: it rejected both the 13th-century tradition of more weakly fortified quadrangular castles, and the contemporary fashion set at Vincennes, where tall towers were positioned around a lower wall, overlooked by an even taller keep in the centre. In particular, building the towers and the walls of the Bastille at the same height allowed the rapid movement of forces around the castle, as well as giving more space to move and position cannons on the wider walkways. The Bastille design was copied at Pierrefonds and Tarascon in France, while its architectural influence extended as far as Nunney Castle in south-west England.\n15th century.\nDuring the 15th century, the French kings continued to engage in conflict with the English, Burgundians and Armagnacs. The Bastille was strategically vital during the period, both because of its role as a royal fortress and safe-haven inside the capital, and because it controlled a critical route in and out of Paris. In 1418, for example, the future Charles VII took refuge in the Bastille during the Burgundian-led \"Massacre of the Armagnacs\" in Paris, before successfully fleeing the city through the Porte Saint-Antoine.\nThe Bastille was occasionally used to hold prisoners, including its creator, Hugues Aubriot, who was the first person to be imprisoned there. In 1417, in addition to being a royal fortress, it formally became a state prison.\nDespite the improved Parisian defences, Henry V of England captured Paris in 1420 and the Bastille was garrisoned by the English for the next sixteen years. Henry V appointed Thomas Beaufort, Duke of Exeter, as the new captain of the Bastille. The English made more use of the Bastille as a prison; in 1430 there was a minor rebellion when some prisoners overpowered a sleeping guard and attempted to seize control of the fortress; this incident includes the first reference to a dedicated gaoler at the Bastille.\nParis was finally recaptured by Charles VII of France in 1436. When the French king re-entered the city, his enemies in Paris fortified themselves in the Bastille; after a siege, they eventually ran out of food, surrendered and were allowed to leave the city after the payment of a ransom. The castle remained a key Parisian fortress, but was successfully seized by the Burgundians in 1464, when they convinced royal troops to surrender: once taken, this allowed their faction to make a surprise attack into Paris, almost resulting in the capture of the king.\nThe Bastille was being used to hold prisoners once again by the reign of Louis XI, who began to use it extensively as a state penitentiary. An early escapee from the Bastille during this period was Antoine de Chabannes, Count of Dammartin and a member of the League of the Public Weal, who was imprisoned by Louis and escaped by boat in 1465. The captains of the Bastille during this period were primarily officers and royal functionaries; Philippe de Melun was the first captain to receive a salary in 1462, being awarded 1,200 livres a year. Despite being a state prison, the Bastille retained the other traditional functions of a royal castle, and was used to accommodate visiting dignitaries, hosting some lavish entertainments given by Louis XI and Francis I.\n16th century.\nDuring the 16th century the area around the Bastille developed further. Early modern Paris continued to grow, and by the end of the century it had around 250,000 inhabitants and was one of the most populous cities in Europe, though still largely contained within its old city walls \u2013 open countryside remained beyond the Bastille. The Arsenal, a large military-industrial complex tasked with the production of cannons and other weapons for the royal armies, was established to the south of the Bastille by Francis I, and substantially expanded under Charles IX. An arms depot was later built above the Porte Saint-Antoine, all making the Bastille part of a major military centre.\nDuring the 1550s, Henry II became concerned about the possibility of an attack on Paris by England or the Holy Roman Empire, and strengthened the defences of the Bastille in response. The southern gateway into the Bastille became the principal entrance to the castle in 1553, the other three gateways being closed. A bastion, a large earthwork projecting eastwards from the Bastille, was built to provide additional protective fire for the Bastille and the Arsenal; the bastion was reached from the fortress across a stone abutment using a connecting drawbridge that was installed in the Bastille's Comt\u00e9 tower. In 1573 the Porte Saint-Antoine was also altered \u2013 the drawbridges were replaced with a fixed bridge, and the medieval gatehouse was replaced with a triumphal arch.\nThe Bastille was involved in the numerous wars of religion fought between Protestant and Catholic factions with support from foreign allies during the second half of the 16th century. Religious and political tensions in Paris initially exploded in the Day of the Barricades on 12 May 1588, when hard-line Catholics rose up in revolt against the relatively moderate Henry III. After a day's fighting had occurred across the capital, Henry III fled and the Bastille surrendered to Henry I, Duke of Guise, the leader of the Catholic League, who appointed Bussy-Leclerc as his new captain. Henry III responded by having the Duke and his brother murdered later that year, whereupon Bussy-Leclerc used the Bastille as a base to mount a raid on the Parlement of Paris, arresting the president and other magistrates, whom he suspected of having royalist sympathies, and detaining them in the Bastille. They were not released until the intervention of Charles, Duke of Mayenne, and the payment of substantial ransoms. Bussy-Leclerc remained in control of the Bastille until December 1592, when, following further political instability, he was forced to surrender the castle to Charles and flee the city.\nIt took Henry IV several years to retake Paris. By the time he succeeded in 1594, the area around the Bastille formed the main stronghold for the Catholic League and their foreign allies, including Spanish and Flemish troops. The Bastille itself was controlled by a League captain called du Bourg. Henry entered Paris early on the morning of 23 March, through the Porte-Neuve rather than the Saint-Antoine and seized the capital, including the Arsenal complex that neighboured the Bastille. The Bastille was now an isolated League stronghold, with the remaining members of the League and their allies clustering around it for safety. After several days of tension, an agreement was finally reached for this rump element to leave safely, and on 27 March du Bourg surrendered the Bastille and left the city himself.\nEarly 17th century.\nThe Bastille continued to be used as a prison and a royal fortress under both Henry IV and his son, Louis XIII. When Henry clamped down on a Spanish-backed plot among the senior French nobility in 1602, for example, he detained the ringleader Charles de Gontaut, duc de Biron, in the Bastille, and had him executed in the courtyard. Louis XIII's chief minister, Cardinal Richelieu, is credited with beginning the modern transformation of the Bastille into a more formal organ of the French state, further increasing its structured use as a state prison. Richelieu broke with Henry IV's tradition of the Bastille's captain being a member of the French aristocracy, typically a Marshal of France such as Fran\u00e7ois de Bassompierre, Charles d'Albert or Nicolas de L'Hospital, and instead appointed P\u00e8re Joseph's brother to run the facility. The first surviving documentary records of prisoners at the Bastille also date from this period.\nIn 1648, the Fronde insurrection broke out in Paris, prompted by high taxes, increased food prices and disease. The \"Parlement of Paris\", the Regency government of Anne of Austria and rebellious noble factions fought for several years to take control of the city and wider power. On 26 August, during the period known as the First Fronde, Anne ordered the arrest of some of the leaders of the Parlement of Paris; violence flared as a result, and the 27 August became known as another Day of the Barricades. The governor of the Bastille loaded and readied his guns to fire on the H\u00f4tel de Ville, controlled by the parliament, although the decision was eventually taken not to shoot. Barricades were erected across the city and the royal government fled in September, leaving a garrison of 22 men behind in the Bastille. On 11 January 1649, the Fronde decided to take the Bastille, giving the task to Elbeuf, one of their leaders. Elbeuf's attack required only a token effort: five or six shots were fired at the Bastille, before it promptly surrendered on 13 January. Pierre Broussel, one of the Fronde leaders, appointed his son as the governor and the Fronde retained it even after the ceasefire that March.\nDuring the Second Fronde, between 1650 and 1653, Louis, the Prince of Cond\u00e9, controlled much of Paris alongside the Parlement, while Broussel, through his son, continued to control the Bastille. In July 1652, the Battle of the Faubourg St Antoine took place just outside the Bastille. Cond\u00e9 had sallied out of Paris to prevent the advance of the royalist forces under the command of Turenne. Cond\u00e9's forces became trapped against the city walls and the Porte Saint-Antoine, which the Parlement refused to open; he was coming under increasingly heavy fire from the Royalist artillery and the situation looked bleak. In a famous incident, La Grande Mademoiselle, the daughter of Gaston, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, convinced her father to issue an order for the Parisian forces to act, before she then entered the Bastille and personally ensured that the commander turned the fortress's cannon on Turenne's army, causing significant casualties and enabling Cond\u00e9's army's safe withdrawal. Later in 1652, Cond\u00e9 was finally forced to surrender Paris to the royalist forces in October, effectively bringing the Fronde to an end: the Bastille returned to royal control.\nReign of Louis XIV and the Regency (1661\u20131723).\nThe area around the Bastille was transformed in the reign of Louis XIV. Paris' growing population reached 400,000 during the period, causing the city to spill out past the Bastille and the old city into the arable farmland beyond, forming more thinly populated \"faubourgs\", or suburbs. Influenced by the events of the Fronde, Louis XIV rebuilt the area around the Bastille, erecting a new archway at the Porte Saint-Antoine in 1660, and then ten years later pulling down the city walls and their supporting fortifications to replace them with an avenue of trees, later called Louis XIV's boulevard, which passed around the Bastille. The Bastille's bastion survived the redevelopment, becoming a garden for the use of the prisoners.\nLouis XIV made extensive use of the Bastille as a prison, with 2,320 individuals being detained there during his reign, approximately 43 a year. Louis used the Bastille to hold not just suspected rebels or plotters but also those who had simply irritated him in some way, such as differing with him on matters of religion. The typical offences that inmates were accused of were espionage, counterfeiting and embezzlement from the state; a number of financial officials were detained in this way under Louis, most famously including Nicolas Fouquet, his supporters Henry de Gu\u00e9negaud, Jeannin and Lorenzo de Tonti. In 1685 Louis revoked the Edict of Nantes, which had previously granted various rights to French Protestants; the subsequent royal crackdown was driven by the king's strongly anti-Protestant views. The Bastille was used to investigate and break up Protestant networks by imprisoning and questioning the more recalcitrant members of the community, in particular upper-class Calvinists; some 254 Protestants were imprisoned in the Bastille during Louis's reign.\nBy Louis's reign, Bastille prisoners were detained using a \"lettre de cachet\", a letter under royal seal, issued by the king and countersigned by a minister, ordering a named person to be held. Louis, closely involved in this aspect of government, personally decided who should be imprisoned at the Bastille. The arrest itself involved an element of ceremony: the individual would be tapped on the shoulder with a white baton and formally detained in the name of the king. Detention in the Bastille was typically ordered for an indefinite period and there was considerable secrecy over who had been detained and why: the legend of the \"Man in the Iron Mask\", a mysterious prisoner who finally died in 1703, symbolises this period of the Bastille. Although in practice many were held at the Bastille as a form of punishment, legally a prisoner in the Bastille was only being detained for preventative or investigative reasons: the prison was not officially supposed to be a punitive measure in its own right. The average length of imprisonment in the Bastille under Louis XIV was approximately three years.\nUnder Louis, only between 20 and 50 prisoners were usually held at the Bastille at any one time, although as many as 111 were held for a short period in 1703. These prisoners were mainly from the upper classes, and those who could afford to pay for additional luxuries lived in good conditions, wearing their own clothes, living in rooms decorated with tapestries and carpets or taking exercise around the castle garden and along the walls. By the late 17th century, there was a rather disorganised library for the use of inmates in the Bastille, although its origins remain unclear.\nLouis reformed the administrative structure of the Bastille, creating the post of governor, although this post was still often referred to as the captain-governor. During Louis's reign the policing of marginal groups in Paris was greatly increased: the wider criminal justice system was reformed, controls over printing and publishing extended, new criminal codes were issued and the post of the Parisian lieutenant general of police was created in 1667, all of which would enable the Bastille's later role in support of the Parisian police during the 18th century. By 1711, a 60-strong French military garrison had been established at the Bastille. It continued to be an expensive institution to run, particularly when the prison was full, such as during 1691 when numbers were inflated by the campaign against French Protestants and the annual cost of running the Bastille rose to 232,818 livres.\nBetween 1715 \u2013 the year of Louis's death \u2013 and 1723, power transferred to the \"R\u00e9gence\"; the regent, Philippe d'Orl\u00e9ans, maintained the prison but the absolutist rigour of Louis XIV's system began to weaken somewhat. Although Protestants ceased to be kept in the Bastille, the political uncertainties and plots of the period kept the prison busy and 1,459 were imprisoned there under the Regency, an average of around 182 a year. During the Cellamare conspiracy, the alleged enemies of the Regency were imprisoned in the Bastille, including Marguerite De Launay. While in the Bastille, de Launay fell in love with a fellow prisoner, the Chevalier de M\u00e9nil; she also infamously received an invitation of marriage from the Chevalier de Maisonrouge, the governor's deputy, who had fallen in love with her himself.\nReigns of Louis XV and Louis XVI (1723\u20131789).\nArchitecture and organisation.\nBy the late 18th century, the Bastille had come to separate the more aristocratic quarter of The Marais in the old city from the working class district of the faubourg Saint-Antoine that lay beyond the Louis XIV boulevard. The Marais was a fashionable area, frequented by foreign visitors and tourists, but few went beyond the Bastille into the faubourg. The faubourg was characterised by its built-up, densely populated areas, particularly in the north, and its numerous workshops producing soft furnishings. Paris as a whole had continued to grow, reaching slightly less than 800,000 inhabitants by the reign of Louis XVI, and many of the residents around the faubourg had migrated to Paris from the countryside relatively recently. The Bastille had its own street address, being officially known as No. 232, rue Saint-Antoine.\nStructurally, the late-18th century Bastille was not greatly changed from its 14th-century predecessor. The eight stone towers had gradually acquired individual names: running from the north-east side of the external gate, these were La Chapelle, Tr\u00e9sor, Comt\u00e9, Bazini\u00e8re, Bertaudi\u00e8re, Libert\u00e9, Puits and Coin. La Chapelle contained the Bastille's chapel, decorated with a painting of Saint Peter in chains. Tr\u00e9sor took its name from the reign of Henry IV, when it had contained the royal treasury. The origins of the name of Comt\u00e9 tower are unclear; one theory is that the name refers to the County of Paris. Bazini\u00e8re was named after Bertrand de La Bazini\u00e8re, a royal treasurer who was imprisoned there in 1663. Bertaudi\u00e8re was named after a medieval mason who died building the structure in the 14th century. Libert\u00e9 tower took its name either from a protest in 1380, when Parisians shouted the phrase outside the castle, or because it was used to house prisoners who had more freedom to walk around the castle than the typical prisoner. Puits tower contained the castle well, while Coin formed the corner of the Rue Saint-Antoine.\nThe main castle courtyard, accessed through the southern gateway, was 120 feet long by 72 feet wide (37 m by 22 m), and was divided from the smaller northern yard by a three-office wing, built around 1716 and renovated in 1761 in a modern, 18th-century style. The office wing held the council room that was used for interrogating prisoners, the Bastille's library, and servants' quarters. The upper stories included rooms for the senior Bastille staff, and chambers for distinguished prisoners. An elevated building on one side of the courtyard held the Bastille's archives. A clock was installed by Antoine de Sartine, the lieutenant general of police between 1759 and 1774, on the side of the office wing, depicting two chained prisoners.\nNew kitchens and baths were built just outside the main gate to the Bastille in 1786. The ditch around the Bastille, now largely dry, supported a high stone wall with a wooden walkway for the use of the guards, known as \"la ronde\", or the round. An outer court had grown up around the south-west side of the Bastille, adjacent to the Arsenal. This was open to the public and lined with small shops rented out by the governor for almost 10,000 livres a year, complete with a lodge for the Bastille gatekeeper; it was illuminated at night to light the adjacent street.\nThe Bastille was run by the governor, sometimes called the captain-governor, who lived in a 17th-century house alongside the fortress. The governor was supported by various officers, in particular his deputy, the \"lieutenant de roi\", or lieutenant of the king, who was responsible for general security and the protection of state secrets; the major, responsible for managing the Bastille's financial affairs and the police archives; and the \"capitaine des portes\", who ran the entrance to the Bastille. Four warders divided up the eight towers between them. From an administrative perspective, the prison was generally well run during the period. These staff were supported by an official surgeon, a chaplain and could, on occasion, call upon the services of a local midwife to assist pregnant prisoners. A small garrison of \"invalides\" was appointed in 1749 to guard the interior and exterior of the fortress; these were retired soldiers and were regarded locally, as Simon Schama describes, as \"amiable layabouts\" rather than professional soldiers.\nUse of the prison.\nThe role of the Bastille as a prison changed considerably during the reigns of Louis XV and XVI. One trend was a decline in the number of prisoners sent to the Bastille, with 1,194 imprisoned there during the reign of Louis XV and only 306 under Louis XVI up until the Revolution, annual averages of around 23 and 20 respectively. A second trend was a slow shift away from the Bastille's 17th-century role of detaining primarily upper-class prisoners, towards a situation in which the Bastille was essentially a location for imprisoning socially undesirable individuals of all backgrounds \u2013 including aristocrats breaking social conventions, criminals, pornographers, thugs \u2013 and was used to support police operations, particularly those involving censorship, across Paris. Despite these changes, the Bastille remained a state prison, subject to special authorities, answering to the monarch of the day and surrounded by a considerable and threatening reputation.\nUnder Louis XV, around 250 Catholic convulsionnaires, often called Jansenists, were detained in the Bastille for their religious beliefs. Many of these prisoners were women and came from a wider range of social backgrounds than the upper-class Calvinists detained under Louis XIV; historian Monique Cottret argues that the decline of the Bastille's social \"mystique\" originates from this phase of detentions. By Louis XVI, the background of those entering the Bastille and the type of offences they were detained over had changed markedly. Between 1774 and 1789, the detentions included 54 people accused of robbery; 31 of involvement in the 1775 Famine Revolt; 11 detained for assault; 62 illegal editors, printers and writers \u2013 but relatively few detained over the grander affairs of state.\nMany prisoners still continued to come from the upper classes, particularly in those cases termed \"d\u00e9sordres des familles\", or disorders of the family. These cases typically involving members of the aristocracy who had, as historian Richard Andrews notes, \"rejected parental authority, disgraced the family reputation, manifested mental derangement, squandered capital or violated professional codes.\" Their families \u2013 often their parents, but sometimes husbands and wives taking action against their spouses \u2013 could apply for individuals to be detained at one of the royal prisons, resulting in an average imprisonment of between six months and four years. Such a detention could be preferable to facing a scandal or a public trial over their misdemeanours, and the secrecy that surrounded detention at the Bastille allowed personal and family reputations to be quietly protected. The Bastille was considered one of the best prisons for an upper-class prisoner to be detained at, because of the standard of the facilities for the wealthy. In the aftermath of the notorious \"Affair of the Diamond Necklace\" of 1786, involving Queen Marie Antoinette and accusations of fraud, all the eleven suspects were held in the Bastille, significantly increasing the notoriety surrounding the institution.\nIncreasingly, however, the Bastille became part of the system of wider policing in Paris. Although appointed by the king, the governor reported to the lieutenant general of police: the first of these, Gabriel Nicolas de la Reynie, made only occasional visits to the Bastille, but his successor, Marquis d'Argenson, and subsequent officers used the facility extensively and took a close interest in inspections of the prison. The lieutenant general reported in turn to the secretary of the \"Maison du Roi\", largely responsible for order in the capital; in practice together they controlled the issuing of the \"lettres\" in the king's name. The Bastille was unusual among Parisian prisons in that it acted on behalf of the king \u2013 prisoners could therefore be imprisoned secretly, for longer, and without normal judicial processes being applied, making it a useful facility for the police authorities. The Bastille was a preferred location for holding prisoners who needed extensive questioning or where a case required the analysis of extensive documents. The Bastille was also used to store the Parisian police archives; public order equipment such as chains and flags; and illegal goods, seized by order of the crown using a version of the \"lettre de cachet\", such as banned books and illicit printing presses.\nThroughout this period, but particularly in the middle of the 18th century, the Bastille was used by the police to suppress the trade in illegal and seditious books in France. In the 1750s, 40% of those sent to the Bastille were arrested for their role in manufacturing or dealing in banned material; in the 1760s, the equivalent figure was 35%. Seditious writers were also often held in the Bastille, although many of the more famous writers held in the Bastille during the period were formally imprisoned for more anti-social, rather than strictly political, offences. In particular, many of those writers detained under Louis XVI were imprisoned for their role in producing illegal pornography, rather than political critiques of the regime. The writer Laurent Angliviel de la Beaumelle, the philosopher Andr\u00e9 Morellet and the historian Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Marmontel, for example, were formally detained not for their more obviously political writings, but for libellous remarks or for personal insults against leading members of Parisian society.\nPrison regime.\nContrary to its later image, conditions for prisoners in the Bastille by the mid-18th century were in fact relatively benign, particularly by the standards of other prisons of the time. The typical prisoner was held in one of the octagonal rooms in the mid-levels of the towers. The \"calottes\", the rooms just under the roof that formed the upper storey of the Bastille, were considered the least pleasant quarters, being more exposed to the elements and usually either too hot or too cold. The \"cachots\", the underground dungeons, had not been used for many years except for holding recaptured escapees. Prisoners' rooms each had a stove or a fireplace, basic furniture, curtains and in most cases a window. A typical criticism of the rooms was that they were shabby and basic rather than uncomfortable. Like the \"calottes\", the main courtyard, used for exercise, was often criticised by prisoners as being unpleasant at the height of summer or winter, although the garden in the bastion and the castle walls were also used for recreation.\nThe governor received money from the Crown to support the prisoners, with the amount varying on rank: the governor received 19 livres a day for each political prisoner \u2013 with conseiller-grade nobles receiving 15 livres \u2013 and, at the other end of the scale, three livres a day for each commoner. Even for the commoners, this sum was around twice the daily wage of a labourer and provided for an adequate diet, while the upper classes ate very well: even critics of the Bastille recounted many excellent meals, often taken with the governor himself. Prisoners who were being punished for misbehaviour, however, could have their diet restricted as a punishment. The medical treatment provided by the Bastille for prisoners was excellent by the standards of the 18th century; the prison also contained a number of inmates suffering from mental illnesses and took, by the standards of the day, a very progressive attitude to their care.\nAlthough potentially dangerous objects and money were confiscated and stored when a prisoner first entered the Bastille, most wealthy prisoners continued to bring in additional luxuries, including pet dogs or cats to control the local vermin. The Marquis de Sade, for example, arrived with an elaborate wardrobe, paintings, tapestries, a selection of perfume, and a collection of 133 books. Card games and billiards were played among the prisoners, and alcohol and tobacco were permitted. Servants could sometimes accompany their masters into the Bastille, as in the cases of the 1746 detention of the family of Lord Morton and their entire household as British spies: the family's domestic life continued on inside the prison relatively normally. The prisoners' library had grown during the 18th century, mainly through ad hoc purchases and various confiscations by the Crown, until by 1787 it included 389 volumes.\nThe length of time that a typical prisoner was kept at the Bastille continued to decline, and by Louis XVI's reign the average length of detention was only two months. Prisoners would still be expected to sign a document on their release, promising not to talk about the Bastille or their time within it, but by the 1780s this agreement was frequently broken. Prisoners leaving the Bastille could be granted pensions on their release by the Crown, either as a form of compensation or as a way of ensuring future good behaviour \u2013 Voltaire was granted 1,200 livres a year, for example, while Latude received an annual pension of 400 livres.\nCriticism and reform.\nDuring the 18th century, the Bastille was extensively criticised by French writers as a symbol of ministerial despotism, which ultimately resulted in reforms and plans for its abolition. The first major criticism was by Constantin de Renneville, who had been imprisoned in the Bastille for 11 years and published his accounts of the experience in 1715 in his book \"L'Inquisition fran\u00e7ois\". Renneville presented a dramatic account of his detention, explaining that, despite being innocent, he had been abused and left to rot in one of the Bastille's \"cachot\" dungeons, enchained next to a corpse. More criticism followed in 1719 when the Abb\u00e9 Jean de Bucquoy, who had escaped from the Bastille ten years previously, published an account of his adventures from the safety of Hanover. He gave a similar account to Renneville's and termed the Bastille the \"hell of the living\". Voltaire added to the notorious reputation of the Bastille when he wrote about the case of the \"Man in the Iron Mask\" in 1751, and later criticised the way he himself was treated while detained in the Bastille, labelling the fortress a \"palace of revenge\".\nIn the 1780s, prison reform became a popular topic for French writers and the Bastille was increasingly condemned as a symbol of arbitrary despotism. Two authors were particularly influential during that period. The first was Simon-Nicholas Linguet, who was arrested and detained at the Bastille in 1780, after publishing a critique of Mar\u00e9chal Duras. After his release, he published his \"M\u00e9moires sur la Bastille\" in 1783, a damning critique of the institution. Linguet criticised, sometimes inaccurately, the physical conditions in which he was kept, but went further by capturing in detail the more psychological effects of the prison regime upon an inmate. Linguet also encouraged Louis XVI to destroy the Bastille, publishing an engraving depicting the king announcing to the prisoners \"may you be free and live!\", a phrase borrowed from Voltaire.\nLinguet's work was followed by another prominent autobiography, Henri Latude's \"Le despotisme d\u00e9voil\u00e9\". Latude was a soldier who was imprisoned in the Bastille following a sequence of complex misadventures, including the sending of a letter bomb to Madame de Pompadour, the King's mistress. Latude became famous for managing to escape from the Bastille by means of climbing up the chimney of his cell and then descending the walls with a home-made rope ladder, before being recaptured in Amsterdam by French agents. Latude was released in 1777, but was rearrested following his publication of a book entitled \"Memoirs of Vengeance\". Pamphlets and magazines publicised Latude's case until he was finally released in 1784. Latude became a popular figure with the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise, or French Academy, and his autobiography, although inaccurate in places, did much to reinforce the public perception of the Bastille as a despotic institution.\nModern historians of the period, such as Hans-J\u00fcrgen L\u00fcsebrink, Simon Schama and Monique Cottret concur that the actual treatment of prisoners in Bastille was much better than the public impression left through those writings. Nonetheless, fuelled by the secrecy that still surrounded the Bastille, official as well as public concern about the prison, and the system that supported it, also began to mount, prompting reforms. As early as 1775, Louis XVI's minister Malesherbes had authorised all prisoners to be given newspapers to read, and to be allowed to correspond with their family and friends. In the 1780s, Breteuil, the Secretary of State of the Maison du Roi, began a substantial reform of the system of \"lettres de cachet\" that sent prisoners to the Bastille: such letters were now required to list the length of time a prisoner would be detained for, and the offence for which they were being held.\nMeanwhile, in 1784, the architect Alexandre Brogniard proposed that the Bastille be demolished and converted into a circular public space with colonnades. Director-General of Finance Jacques Necker, having examined the cost of running the Bastille, amounting to well over 127,000 livres in 1774, proposed closing the institution on the grounds of economy alone. Similarly, Pierre-Fran\u00e7ois de Rivi\u00e8re du Puget, the Bastille's \"lieutenant de roi\", submitted reports in 1788 suggesting that the authorities close the prison, demolish the fortress and sell the real estate off. In June 1789, the Acad\u00e9mie royale d'architecture proposed a similar scheme to Brogniard's, in which the Bastille would be transformed into an open public area, with a tall column at the centre surrounded by fountains, dedicated to Louis XVI as the \"restorer of public freedom\".\nThe number of prisoners held in the Bastille at any one time declined sharply towards the end of Louis's reign. It contained ten prisoners in September 1782 and, despite a small increase at the beginning of 1788, by July 1789 only seven prisoners remained in custody. Before any official scheme to close the prison could be enacted, however, disturbances across Paris brought a more violent end to the Bastille.\nThe French Revolution.\nStorming of the Bastille.\nBy July 1789, revolutionary sentiment was rising in Paris. The Estates-General was convened in May and members of the Third Estate proclaimed the Tennis Court Oath in June, calling for the king to grant a written constitution. Violence between loyal royal forces, mutinous members of the royal Gardes Fran\u00e7aises and local crowds broke out at Vend\u00f4me on 12 July, leading to widespread fighting and the withdrawal of royal forces from the centre of Paris. Revolutionary crowds began to arm themselves during 13 July, looting royal stores, gunsmiths and armourers' shops for weapons and gunpowder.\nThe commander of the Bastille at the time was Bernard-Ren\u00e9 de Launay, a conscientious but minor military officer. Tensions surrounding the Bastille had been rising for several weeks. Only seven prisoners remained in the fortress, \u2013 the Marquis de Sade had been transferred to the asylum of Charenton, after addressing the public from his walks on top of the towers and, once this was forbidden, shouting from the window of his cell. Sade had claimed that the authorities planned to massacre the prisoners in the castle, which resulted in the governor removing him to an alternative site in early July.\nAt de Launay's request, an additional force of 32 soldiers from the Swiss Salis-Samade regiment had been assigned to the Bastille on 7 July, adding to the existing 82 invalides pensioners who formed the regular garrison. De Launay had taken various precautions, raising the drawbridge in the Comt\u00e9 tower and destroying the stone abutment that linked the Bastille to its bastion to prevent anyone from gaining access from that side of the fortress. The shops in the entranceway to the Bastille had been closed and the gates locked. The Bastille was defended by 30 small artillery pieces, but nonetheless, by 14 July de Launay was very concerned about the Bastille's situation. The Bastille, already hugely unpopular with the revolutionary crowds, was now the only remaining royalist stronghold in central Paris, in addition to which he was protecting a recently arrived stock of 250 barrels of valuable gunpowder. To make matters worse, the Bastille had only two days' supply of food and no source of water, making it impossible to withstand a long siege.\nOn the morning of 14 July around 900 people formed outside the Bastille, primarily working-class members of the nearby faubourg Saint-Antoine, but also including some mutinous soldiers and local traders. The crowd had gathered in an attempt to commandeer the gunpowder stocks known to be held in the Bastille, and at 10:00\u00a0am de Launay let in two of their leaders to negotiate with him. Just after midday, another negotiator was let in to discuss the situation, but no compromise could be reached: the revolutionary representatives now wanted both the guns and the gunpowder in the Bastille to be handed over, but de Launay refused to do so unless he received authorisation from his leadership in Versailles. By this point it was clear that the governor lacked the experience or the skills to defuse the situation.\nJust as negotiations were about to recommence at around 1:30\u00a0pm, chaos broke out as the impatient and angry crowd stormed the outer courtyard of the Bastille, pushing toward the main gate. Confused firing broke out in the confined space and chaotic fighting began in earnest between de Launay's forces and the revolutionary crowd as the two sides exchanged fire. At around 3:30\u00a0pm, more mutinous royal forces arrived to reinforce the crowd, bringing with them trained infantry officers and several cannons. After discovering that their weapons were too light to damage the main walls of the fortress, the revolutionary crowd began to fire their cannons at the wooden gate of the Bastille. By now around 83 of the crowd had been killed and another 15 mortally wounded; only one of the Invalides had been killed in return.\nDe Launay had limited options: if he allowed the Revolutionaries to destroy his main gate, he would have to turn the cannon directly inside the Bastille's courtyard on the crowds, causing great loss of life and preventing any peaceful resolution of the episode. De Launay could not withstand a long siege, and he was dissuaded by his officers from committing mass suicide by detonating his supplies of powder. Instead, de Launay attempted to negotiate a surrender, threatening to blow up the Bastille if his demands were not met. In the midst of this attempt, the Bastille's drawbridge suddenly came down and the revolutionary crowd stormed in. Popular myth believes Stanislas-Marie Maillard was the first revolutionary to enter the fortress. De Launay was dragged outside into the streets and killed by the crowd, and three officers and three soldiers were killed during the course of the afternoon by the crowd. The soldiers of the Swiss Salis-Samade Regiment, however, were not wearing their uniform coats and were mistaken for Bastille prisoners; they were left unharmed by the crowds until they were escorted away by French Guards and other regular soldiers among the attackers. The valuable powder and guns were seized and a search begun for the other prisoners in the Bastille.\nDestruction.\nWithin hours of its capture the Bastille began to be used as a powerful symbol to give legitimacy to the revolutionary movement in France. The faubourg Saint-Antoine's revolutionary reputation was firmly established by their storming of the Bastille and a formal list began to be drawn up of the \"vainqueurs\", or \"the victorious\", who had taken part so as to honour both the fallen and the survivors. Although the crowd had initially gone to the Bastille searching for gunpowder, historian Simon Schama observes how the captured prison \"gave a shape and an image to all the vices against which the Revolution defined itself\". Indeed, the more despotic and evil the Bastille was portrayed by the pro-revolutionary press, the more necessary and justified the actions of the Revolution became. Consequently, the late governor, de Launay, was rapidly vilified as a brutal despot. The fortress itself was described by the revolutionary press as a \"place of slavery and horror\", containing \"machines of death\", \"grim underground dungeons\" and \"disgusting caves\" where prisoners were left to rot for up to 50 years.\nAs a result, in the days after 14 July, the fortress was searched for evidence of torture: old pieces of armour and bits of a printing press were taken out and presented as evidence of elaborate torture equipment. Latude returned to the Bastille, where he was given the rope ladder and equipment with which he had escaped from the prison many years before. The former prison warders escorted visitors around the Bastille in the weeks after its capture, giving colourful accounts of the events in the castle. Stories and pictures about the rescue of the fictional Count de Lorges \u2013 supposedly a mistreated prisoner of the Bastille incarcerated by Louis XV \u2013 and the similarly imaginary discovery of the skeleton of the \"Man in the Iron Mask\" in the dungeons, were widely circulated as fact across Paris. In the coming months, over 150 broadside publications used the storming of the Bastille as a theme, while the events formed the basis for a number of theatrical plays.\nDespite a thorough search, the revolutionaries discovered only seven prisoners in the Bastille, rather fewer than had been anticipated. Of these, only one \u2013 de Whyte de Malleville, an elderly and white-bearded man \u2013 closely resembled the public image of a Bastille prisoner; despite being mentally ill, he was paraded through the streets, where he waved happily to the crowds. Of the remaining six liberated prisoners, four were convicted forgers who quickly vanished into the Paris streets; one was the Count Hubert de Solages, who had been imprisoned on the request of his family for sexual misdemeanours; the sixth was Auguste-Claude Tavernier, who also proved to be mentally ill and, along with Whyte, was in due course reincarcerated in the Charenton asylum.\nAt first the revolutionary movement was uncertain whether to destroy the prison, to reoccupy it as a fortress with members of the volunteer guard militia, or to preserve it intact as a permanent revolutionary monument. The revolutionary leader Mirabeau eventually settled the matter by symbolically starting the destruction of the battlements himself, after which a panel of five experts was appointed by the Permanent Committee of the H\u00f4tel de Ville to manage the demolition of the castle. One of these experts was Pierre-Fran\u00e7ois Palloy, a bourgeois entrepreneur who claimed vainqueur status for his role during the taking of the Bastille, and he rapidly assumed control over the entire process. Palloy's team worked quickly and by November most of the fortress had been destroyed.\nThe ruins of the Bastille rapidly became iconic across France. Palloy had an altar set up on the site in February 1790, formed out of iron chains and restraints from the prison. Old bones, probably of 15th century soldiers, were discovered during the clearance work in April and, presented as the skeletons of former prisoners, were exhumed and ceremonially reburied in Saint-Paul's cemetery. In the summer, a huge ball was held by Palloy on the site for the National Guardsmen visiting Paris for the 14 July celebrations. A memorabilia industry surrounding the fall of the Bastille was already flourishing and as the work on the demolition project finally dried up, Palloy started producing and selling memorabilia of the Bastille. Palloy's products, which he called \"relics of freedom\", celebrated the national unity that the events of July 1789 had generated across all classes of French citizenry, and included a very wide range of items. Palloy also sent models of the Bastille, carved from the fortress's stones, as gifts to the French provinces at his own expense to spread the revolutionary message. In 1793 a large revolutionary fountain featuring a statue of Isis was built on the former site of the fortress, which became known as the Place de la Bastille.\n19th\u201320th century political and cultural legacy.\nThe Bastille remained a powerful and evocative symbol for French republicans throughout the 19th century. Napoleon Bonaparte overthrew the French First Republic that emerged from the Revolution in 1799, and subsequently attempted to marginalise the Bastille as a symbol. Napoleon was unhappy with the revolutionary connotations of the Place de la Bastille, and initially considered building his Arc de Triomphe on the site instead. This proved an unpopular option, and so instead he planned the construction of a huge bronze statue of an imperial elephant. The project was delayed, eventually indefinitely, and all that was constructed was a large plaster version of the bronze statue, which stood on the former site of the Bastille between 1814 and 1846, when the decaying structure was finally removed. After the restoration of the French Bourbon monarchy in 1815, the Bastille became an underground symbol for Republicans. The July Revolution in 1830 used images such as the Bastille to legitimise their new regime and in 1833, the former site of the Bastille was used to build the July Column to commemorate the revolution. The short-lived Second Republic was symbolically declared in 1848 on the former revolutionary site.\nThe storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789 had been celebrated annually since 1790, initially through quasi-religious rituals, and then later during the Revolution with grand, secular events including the burning of replica Bastilles. Under Napoleon the events became less revolutionary, focusing instead on military parades and national unity in the face of foreign threats. During the 1870s, the 14 July celebrations became a rallying point for Republicans opposed to the early monarchist leadership of the Third Republic; when the moderate Republican Jules Gr\u00e9vy became president in 1879, his new government turned the anniversary of the fall of the Bastille into a national holiday. The anniversary remained contentious, with hard-line Republicans continuing to use the occasion to protest against the new political order and right-wing conservatives protesting about the imposition of the holiday. The July Column itself remained contentious, and Republican radicals unsuccessfully tried to blow it up in 1871.\nMeanwhile, the legacy of the Bastille proved popular among French novelists. Alexandre Dumas, for example, used the Bastille and the legend of the \"Man in the Iron Mask\" extensively in his d'Artagnan Romances; in these novels the Bastille is presented as both picturesque and tragic, a suitable setting for heroic action. By contrast, in many of Dumas's other works, such as \"Ange Pitou\", the Bastille takes on a much darker appearance, being described as a place in which a prisoner is \"forgotten, bankrupted, buried, destroyed\". In England, Charles Dickens took a similar perspective when he drew on popular histories of the Bastille in writing \"A Tale of Two Cities\", in which Doctor Manette is \"buried alive\" in the prison for 18 years; many historical figures associated with the Bastille are reinvented as fictional individuals in the novel, such as Claude Cholat, reproduced by Dickens as \"Ernest Defarge\". Victor Hugo's 1862 novel \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\", set just after the Revolution, gave Napoleon's plaster Bastille elephant a permanent place in literary history. In 1889 the continued popularity of the Bastille with the public was illustrated by the decision to build a replica in stone and wood for the Exposition Universelle world fair in Paris, manned by actors in period costumes.\nDue in part to the diffusion of national and Republican ideas across France during the second half of the Third Republic, the Bastille lost an element of its prominence as a symbol by the 20th century. Nonetheless, the Place de la Bastille continued to be the traditional location for left wing rallies, particularly in the 1930s, the symbol of the Bastille was widely evoked by the French Resistance during the Second World War and until the 1950s Bastille Day remained the single most significant French national holiday.\nRemains.\nDue to its destruction after 1789, very little remains of the Bastille in the 21st century. During the excavations for the M\u00e9tro underground train system in 1899, the foundations of the Libert\u00e9 Tower were uncovered and moved to the corner of the Boulevard Henri IV and the Quai de Celestins, where they can still be seen today. The Pont de la Concorde contains stones reused from the Bastille.\nSome relics of the Bastille survive: the Carnavalet Museum holds objects including one of the stone models of the Bastille made by Palloy and the rope ladder used by Latude to escape from the prison roof in the 18th century, while the mechanism and bells of the prison clock are exhibited in Mus\u00e9e Europ\u00e9en d'Art Campanaire at L'Isle-Jourdain. The key to the Bastille was given to George Washington in 1790 by Lafayette and is displayed in the historic house of Mount Vernon. The Bastille's archives are now held by the Biblioth\u00e8que nationale de France.\nThe Place de la Bastille still occupies most of the location of the Bastille, and the Op\u00e9ra Bastille was built on the square in 1989 to commemorate the bicentennial anniversary of the storming of the prison. The surrounding area has largely been redeveloped from its 19th-century industrial past. The ditch that originally linked the defences of the fortress to the River Seine had been dug out at the start of the 19th century to form the industrial harbour of the Bassin de l'Arsenal, linked to the Canal Saint Martin, but is now a marina for pleasure boats, while the Promenade plant\u00e9e links the square with redeveloped parklands to the east.\nHistoriography.\nA number of histories of the Bastille were published immediately after July 1789, usually with dramatic titles promising the uncovering of secrets from the prison. By the 1830s and 1840s, popular histories written by Pierre Joigneaux and by the trio of Auguste Maquet, Auguste Arnould and Jules-\u00c9douard Alboize de Pujol presented the years of the Bastille between 1358 and 1789 as a single long period of royal tyranny and oppression, epitomised by the fortress; their works featured imaginative 19th-century reconstructions of the medieval torture of prisoners. As living memories of the Revolution faded, the destruction of the Bastille meant that later historians had to rely primarily on memoires and documentary materials in analysing the fortress and the 5,279 prisoners who had come through the Bastille between 1659 and 1789. The Bastille's archives, recording the operation of the prison, had been scattered in the confusion after the seizure; with some effort, the Paris Assembly gathered around 600,000 of them in the following weeks, which form the basis of the modern archive. After being safely stored and ignored for many years, these archives were rediscovered in 1840 (under the kitchen floor at the Arsenal library) by the French historian Fran\u00e7ois Ravaisson, who catalogued and used them for research between 1866 and 1904.\nAt the end of the 19th century the historian Frantz Funck-Brentano used the archives to undertake detailed research into the operation of the Bastille, focusing on the upper-class prisoners in the Bastille, disproving many of the 18th-century myths about the institution and portraying the prison in a favourable light. Modern historians today consider Funck-Brentano's work slightly biased by his anti-Republican views, but his histories of the Bastille were highly influential and were largely responsible for establishing that the Bastille was a well-run, relatively benign institution. Historian Fernand Bournon used the same archive material to produce the \"Histoire de la Bastille\" in 1893, considered by modern historians to be one of the best and most balanced 19th-century histories of the Bastille. These works inspired the writing of a sequence of more popular histories of the Bastille in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, including Auguste Coeuret's anniversary history of the Bastille, which typically focused on a handful of themes and stories involving the more glamorous prisoners from the upper classes of French society.\nOne of the major debates on the actual taking of the Bastille in 1789 has been the nature of the crowds that stormed the building. Hippolyte Taine argued in the late 19th century that the crowd consisted of unemployed vagrants, who acted without real thought; by contrast, the post-war left-wing intellectual George Rud\u00e9 argued that the crowd was dominated by relatively prosperous artisan workers. The matter was reexamined by Jacques Godechot in the post-war years; Godechot showing convincingly that, in addition to some local artisans and traders, at least half the crowd that gathered that day were, like the inhabitants of the surrounding faubourg, recent immigrants to Paris from the provinces. Godechot used this to characterise the taking of the Bastille as a genuinely national event of wider importance to French society.\nIn the 1970s French sociologists, particularly those interested in critical theory, re-examined this historical legacy. The Annales School conducted extensive research into how order was maintained in pre-revolutionary France, focusing on the operation of the police, concepts of deviancy and religion. Histories of the Bastille since then have focused on the prison's role in policing, censorship and popular culture, in particular how these impacted on the working classes. Research in West Germany during the 1980s examined the cultural interpretation of the Bastille against the wider context of the French Revolution; Hanse L\u00fcsebrink and Rolf Reichardt's work, explaining how the Bastille came to be regarded as a symbol of despotism, was among the most prominent. This body of work influenced English historian Simon Schama's 1989 book on the Revolution, which incorporated cultural interpretation of the Bastille with a controversial critique of the violence surrounding the storming of the Bastille. The Biblioth\u00e8que nationale de France held a major exhibition on the legacy of the Bastille between 2010 and 2011, resulting in a substantial edited volume summarising the current academic perspectives on the fortress.\nNotes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66189", "revid": "1310587903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66189", "title": "Mesomeric effect", "text": "Chemical polarity due to interactions between pi bonds or lone pairs\nIn chemistry, the mesomeric effect (or resonance effect) is a property of substituents or functional groups in a chemical compound. It is defined as the polarity produced in the molecule by the interaction of two pi bonds or between a pi bond and lone pair of electrons present on an adjacent atom. This change in electron arrangement results in the formation of resonance structures that hybridize into the molecule's true structure. The pi electrons then move away from or toward a particular substituent group. The mesomeric effect is stronger in compounds with a lower ionization potential. This is because the electron transfer states will have lower energies.\nRepresentations of the mesomeric effect.\nThe effect is used in a qualitative way and describes the electron withdrawing or releasing properties of substituents based on relevant resonance structures and is symbolized by the letter M. The mesomeric effect is negative (\u2212M) when the substituent is an electron-withdrawing group, and the effect is positive (+M) when the substituent is an electron donating group. Below are two examples of the +M and \u2212M effect. Additionally, the functional groups that contribute to each type of resonance are given below.\n+M effect.\nThe +M effect, also known as the positive mesomeric effect, occurs when the substituent is an electron donating group. The group must have one of two things: a lone pair of electrons, or a negative charge. In the +M effect, the pi electrons are transferred from the group towards the conjugate system, increasing the density of the system. Due to the increase in electron density, the conjugate system will develop a more negative charge. As a result, the system under the +M effect will be more reactive towards electrophiles, which can take away the negative charge, than a nucleophile.\n+M effect order:\n\u2212M effect.\nThe \u2212M effect, also known as the negative mesomeric effect, occurs when the substituent is an electron-withdrawing group. In order for a negative mesomeric (\u2212M) effect to occur, the group must have a positive charge or an empty orbital in order to draw the electrons towards it. In the \u2212M effect, the pi electrons move away from the conjugate system and towards the electron drawing group. In the conjugate system, the density of electrons decreases and the overall charge becomes more positive. With the \u2212M effect the groups and compounds become less reactive towards electrophiles, and more reactive toward nucleophiles, which can give up electrons and balance out the positive charge.\n\u2212M effect order:\nMesomeric effect vs. inductive effect.\nThe net electron flow from or to the substituent is determined also by the inductive effect. The mesomeric effect as a result of \"p\"-orbital overlap (resonance) has absolutely no effect on this inductive effect, as the inductive effect has purely to do with the electronegativity of the atoms and their topology in the molecule (which atoms are connected to which). Specifically the inductive effect is the tendency for the substituents to repel or attract electrons purely based on electronegativity and not dealing with restructuring. The mesomeric effect however, deals with restructuring and occurs when the electron pair of the substituents shift around. The inductive effect only acts on alpha carbons, while the mesomeric utilizes pi bonds between atoms. While these two paths often lead to the similar molecules and resonance structures, the mechanism is different. As such, the mesomeric effect is stronger than the inductive effect.\nThe concepts of mesomeric effect, mesomerism and mesomer were introduced by Ingold in 1938 as an alternative to Pauling's synonymous concept of resonance. \"Mesomerism\" in this context is often encountered in German and French literature, but in English literature the term \"resonance\" dominates.\nMesomerism in conjugated systems.\nMesomeric effect can be transmitted along any number of carbon atoms in a conjugated system. This accounts for the resonance stabilization of the molecule due to delocalization of charge. It is important to note that the energy of the actual structure of the molecule, i.e. the resonance hybrid, may be lower than that of any of the contributing canonical structures. The difference in energy between the actual inductive structure and the (most stable contributing structures) worst kinetic structure is called the resonance energy or resonance stabilization energy. For the quantitative estimation of the mesomeric/resonance effect strength, various substituent constants are used, i.e. the Swain-Lupton resonance constant, Taft resonance constant or Oziminski and Dobrowolski pEDA parameter.\nAdditionally, the resulting resonance structures can give the molecule properties that are not inherently evident from looking at one structure. Some of these properties include different reactivities, local diamagnetic shielding in aromatics, deshielding, and acid and base strengths."}
{"id": "66191", "revid": "34573757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66191", "title": "Fourth Geneva Convention", "text": "One of the treaties of the Geneva Convention\nThe Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (), more commonly referred to as the Fourth Geneva Convention and abbreviated as GCIV, is one of the four treaties of the Geneva Conventions. It was adopted in August 1949, and came into force in October 1950. While the first three conventions dealt with combatants, the Fourth Geneva Convention was the first to deal with humanitarian protections for civilians in a war zone. There are currently 196 countries party to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, including this and the other three treaties.\nAmong its numerous provisions, the Fourth Geneva Convention explicitly prohibits the transfer of the population of an occupying power into the territory it occupies.\nThe Fourth Geneva Convention only concerns protected civilians in occupied territory rather than the effects of hostilities, such as the strategic bombing during World War II.\nThe 1977 Additional Protocol 1 to the Geneva Conventions (AP-1) prohibits all intentional attacks on \"the civilian population and civilian objects.\" It also prohibits and defines \"indiscriminate attacks\" as \"incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians, damage to civilian objects, or a combination thereof, which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated.\" This rule is referred to by scholars as the principle of proportionality. Until well after World War II ended in 1945, the norm of reciprocity provided a justification for conduct in armed conflict.\nIn 1993, the United Nations Security Council adopted a report from the Secretary-General and a Commission of Experts which concluded that the Geneva Conventions had passed into the body of customary international humanitarian law, thus making them binding on non-signatories to the Conventions whenever they engage in armed conflicts. \nPart I. General provisions.\nThis sets out the overall parameters for GCIV:\nArticle 2: Application of the Convention.\nArticle 2 states that signatories are bound by the convention both in war, armed conflicts where war has not been declared, and in an occupation of another country's territory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In addition to the provisions which shall be implemented in peacetime, the present Convention shall apply to all cases of declared war or of any other armed conflict which may arise between two or more of the High Contracting Parties, even if the state of war is not recognized by one of them.\nThe scope of Article 2 is broad:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although one of the Powers in conflict may not be a party to the present Convention, the Powers who are parties thereto shall remain bound by it in their mutual relations.\nIn the commentary to the article Jean Pictet writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They [conventions] are coming to be regarded less and less as contracts concluded on a basis of reciprocity in the national interests of the parties and more and more as a solemn affirmation of principles respected for their own sake, a series of unconditional engagements on the part of each of the Contracting Parties ' vis-\u00e0-vis ' the others.\nArticle 3: Conflicts not of an international character.\nArticle 3 states that even where there is not a conflict of international character, the parties must as a minimum adhere to minimal protections described as: non-combatants, members of armed forces who have laid down their arms, and combatants who are \"hors de combat\" (out of the fight) due to wounds, detention, or any other cause \"shall in all circumstances be treated humanely\", with the following prohibitions:\nArticle 4: Definition of protected persons.\nArticle 4 defines who is \"protected person\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Persons protected by the Convention are those who, at a given moment and in any manner whatsoever, find themselves, in case of a conflict or occupation, in the hands of a Party to the conflict or Occupying Power of which they are not nationals.\nIt explicitly excludes \"Nationals of a State which is not bound by the Convention\" and the citizens of a neutral state in the territory of a belligerent power or nationals of a co-belligerent state (i.e., allied nation) if that state has normal diplomatic relations \"within the State in whose hands they are.\" Dr. Ola Engdahl wrote \"[t]he purpose of excluding [these] nationals from the category of protected persons was that they could rely on diplomatic protection of the state of nationality. Persons are either protected persons under the convention or can benefit from the diplomatic protection of their state of nationality.\" \nA number of articles specify how \"protecting powers\", \"ICRC\" and \"other humanitarian organizations\" may aid \"protected persons\".\nThe definition of \"protected person\" in this article is arguably the most important article in this section because many of the articles in the rest of GCIV only apply to \"protected persons\".\nArticle 5: Derogations.\nArticle 5 provides for the suspension of persons' rights under the convention for the duration of time that this is \"prejudicial to the security of such State\", although \"such persons shall nevertheless be treated with humanity and, in case of trial, shall not be deprived of the rights of fair and regular trial prescribed by the present Convention.\"\nThe common interpretation of article 5 is that its scope is very limited. Derogation is limited to individuals \"definitely suspected of\" or \"engaged in activities hostile to the security of the State.\" In paragraph two of the article, \"spy or saboteur\" is mentioned.\nPart II. General Protection of Populations Against Certain Consequences of War.\nArticle 13: Field of application of part II.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The provisions of Part II cover the whole of the populations of the countries in conflict, without any adverse distinction based, in particular, on race, nationality, religion or political opinion, and are intended to alleviate the sufferings caused by war.\nThe list of basis on which distinction might be drawn is not exhaustive.\nArticle 16: Wounded and Sick: General Protection.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Rule 113 Treatment of the dead. The obligation to take all possible measures to prevent the dead from being despoiled (or pillaged)\nPart III. Status and Treatment of Protected Persons.\nSection I. Provisions common to the territories of the parties to the conflict and to occupied territories.\nArticle 32: Prohibition of corporal punishment, torture, etc..\nA protected person may not have anything done \"of such a character as to cause physical suffering or extermination\u00a0... the physical suffering or extermination of protected persons in their hands. This prohibition applies to murder, torture, corporal punishments, mutilation and medical or scientific experiments not necessitated by the medical treatment. While popular debate remains on what constitutes a legal definition of torture, the ban on corporal punishment simplifies the matter; even the most mundane physical abuse is thereby forbidden by Article 32, as a precaution against alternate definitions of torture.\nThe prohibition on scientific experiments was added, in part, in response to experiments by German and Japanese doctors during World War II of whom Josef Mengele was the most infamous.\nArticle 33: Individual responsibility, collective penalties, pillage and reprisals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNo protected person may be punished for any offense he or she has not personally committed. Collective penalties and likewise all measures of intimidation or of terrorism are prohibited. \nPillage is prohibited.\nReprisals against protected persons and their property is prohibited.\nUnder the 1949 Geneva Conventions, collective punishment is a war crime. By collective punishment, the drafters of the Geneva Conventions had in mind the reprisal killings of World War I and World War II. In the First World War, the Germans executed Belgian villagers in mass retribution for resistance activity during the Rape of Belgium. In World War II, both German and Japanese forces carried out a form of collective punishment to suppress resistance. Entire villages or towns or districts were held responsible for any resistance activity that occurred at those places. The conventions, to counter this, reiterated the principle of individual responsibility. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Commentary to the conventions states that parties to a conflict often would resort to \"intimidatory measures to terrorize the population\" in hopes of preventing hostile acts, but such practices \"strike at guilty and innocent alike. They are opposed to all principles based on humanity and justice\".\nAdditional Protocol II of 1977 is about the protection of victims of non-international armed conflicts explicitly forbidding collective punishment. But as fewer states have ratified this protocol than GCIV, GCIV Article 33 is the one more commonly quoted.\nSection III. Occupied territories.\nArticles 47\u201378 impose substantial obligations on occupying powers. As well as numerous provisions for the general welfare of the inhabitants of an occupied territory, an occupier may not forcibly deport protected persons, or deport or transfer parts of its own civilian population into occupied territory (Art.49).\nArticle 49: Deportations, transfers, evacuations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticle 49. Individual or mass forcible transfers, as well as deportations of protected persons from occupied territory to the territory of the Occupying Power or to that of any other country, occupied or not, are prohibited, regardless of their motive.\nNevertheless, the Occupying Power may undertake total or partial evacuation of a given area if the security of the population or imperative military reasons so demand. Such evacuations may not involve the displacement of protected persons outside the bounds of the occupied territory except when for material reasons it is impossible to avoid such displacement. Persons thus evacuated shall be transferred back to their homes as soon as hostilities in the area in question have ceased.\nThe Occupying Power undertaking such transfers or evacuations shall ensure, to the greatest practicable extent, that proper accommodation is provided to receive the protected persons, that the removals are effected in satisfactory conditions of hygiene, health, safety and nutrition, and that members of the same family are not separated.\nThe Protecting Power shall be informed of any transfers and evacuations as soon as they have taken place.\nThe Occupying Power shall not detain protected persons in an area particularly exposed to the dangers of war unless the security of the population or imperative military reasons so demand.\nThe Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its own civilian population into the territory it occupies.\nThe reference in the last paragraph to \"deportation\", is commonly understood as the \"expulsion\" of foreign nationals, whereas the expulsion of nationals would be called \"extradition, banishment\" or \"exile\". If ethnic groups are affected by \"deportation\", it may also be referred to as population transfer. \"Transfer\" in this case literally means to move or pass from one place to another. The ICRC has expressed the opinion, \"that international humanitarian law prohibits the establishment of settlements, as these are a form of population transfer into occupied territory\".\nArticle 50: Children.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Article 50. The Occupying Power shall, with the cooperation of the national and local authorities, facilitate the proper working of all institutions devoted to the care and education of children.\nThe Occupying Power shall take all necessary steps to facilitate the identification of children and the registration of their parentage. It may not, in any case, change their personal status, nor enlist them in formations or organizations subordinate to it.\nShould the local institutions be inadequate for the purpose, the Occupying Power shall make arrangements for the maintenance and education, if possible by persons of their own nationality, language and religion, of children who are orphaned or separated from their parents as a result of the war and who cannot be adequately cared for by a near relative or friend.\nA special section of the Bureau set up in accordance with Article 136 shall be responsible for taking all necessary steps to identify children whose identity is in doubt. Particulars of their parents or other near relatives should always be recorded if available.\nThe Occupying Power shall not hinder the application of any preferential measures in regard to food, medical care and protection against the effects of war which may have been adopted prior to the occupation in favour of children under fifteen years, expectant mothers, and mothers of children under seven.\nArticle 51: Recruitment of Protected persons.\nThe Occupying Power may not compel protected persons to serve in its armed or auxiliary forces. No pressure or propaganda which aims at securing voluntary enlistment is permitted.\nThe Occupying Power may not compel protected persons to work unless they are over eighteen years of age, and then only on work which is necessary either for the needs of the army of occupation, or for the public utility services, or for the feeding, sheltering, clothing, transportation or health of the population of the occupied country. Protected persons may not be compelled to undertake any work which would involve them in the obligation of taking part in military operations. The Occupying Power may not compel protected persons to employ forcible means to ensure the security of the installations where they are performing compulsory labour.\nThe work shall be carried out only in the occupied territory where the persons whose services have been requisitioned are. Every such person shall, so far as possible, be kept in his usual place of employment. Workers shall be paid a fair wage and the work shall be proportionate to their physical and intellectual capacities. The legislation in force in the occupied country concerning working conditions, and safeguards as regards, in particular, such matters as wages, hours of work, equipment, preliminary training and compensation for occupational accidents and diseases, shall be applicable to the protected persons assigned to the work referred to in this Article.\nIn no case shall requisition of labour lead to a mobilization of workers in an organization of a military or semi-military character.\nArticle 53: Prohibited destruction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Article 53. Any destruction by the Occupying Power of real or personal property belonging individually or collectively to private persons, or to the State, or to other public authorities, or to social or cooperative organizations, is prohibited, except where such destruction is rendered absolutely necessary by military operations.\nIn The Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949. Commentary, Jean Pictet writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To dissipate any misconception in regard to the scope of Article 53, it must be pointed out that the property referred to is not accorded general protection; the Convention merely provides here for its protection in occupied territory. The scope of the Article is therefore limited to destruction resulting from action by the Occupying Power. It will be remembered that Article 23 (g) of the Hague Regulations forbids the unnecessary destruction of enemy property; since that rule is placed in the section entitled \"hostilities\", it covers all property in the territory involved in a war; its scope is therefore much wider than that of the provision under discussion, which is only concerned with property situated in occupied territory.\nArticle 56: Hygiene and public health.\nArticle 56 describes the medical obligations the occupying power has in the occupied territory:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To the fullest extent of the means available to it, the Occupying Power has the duty of ensuring and maintaining, with the cooperation of national and local authorities, the medical and hospital establishments and services, public health and hygiene in the occupied territory, with particular reference to the adoption and application of the prophylactic and preventive measures necessary to combat the spread of contagious diseases and epidemics. Medical personnel of all categories shall be allowed to carry out their duties.\nIf new hospitals are set up in occupied territory and if the competent organs of the occupied State are not operating there, the occupying authorities shall, if necessary, grant them the recognition provided for in Article 18. In similar circumstances, the occupying authorities shall also grant recognition to hospital personnel and transport vehicles under the provisions of Articles 20 and 21.\nIn adopting measures of health and hygiene and in their implementation, the Occupying Power shall take into consideration the moral and ethical susceptibilities of the population of the occupied territory.\nArticle 78: Security measures. Internment and assigned residence. Right of appeal.\nArticle 78 deals with internment. It allows the occupying power for \"imperative reasons of security\" to \"subject them [protected persons] to assigned residence or to internment\". The article does not allow the occupying power to take collective measures: each case must be decided separately.\nPart IV. Execution of the Convention.\nThis part contains \"the formal or diplomatic provisions which it is customary to place at the end of an international Convention to settle the procedure for bringing it into effect are grouped together under this heading\" (1). They are similar in all four Geneva Conventions.\nAnnexes.\nThe ICRC commentary on the Fourth Geneva convention states that when the establishment of hospital and safety zones in occupied territories were discussed reference was made to a draft agreement and it was agreed to append it as an annex I to the Fourth Geneva Convention.\nThe ICRC states that \"the Draft Agreement has only been put forward to States as a model, but the fact that it as carefully drafted at the Diplomatic Conference, which finally adopted it, gives it a very real value. It could usefully be taken as a working basis, therefore, whenever a hospital zone is to be established.\"\nThe ICRC states that Annex II is a \"draft which, according to Article 109 (paragraph 1) of the Convention, will be applied in the absence of special agreements between the Parties, deals with the conditions for the receipt and distribution of collective relief shipments. It is based on the traditions of the International Committee of the Red Cross which submitted it, and on the experience the Committee gained during the Second World War.\"\nAnnex III contains an example internment card, letter and correspondence card:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66192", "revid": "35383775", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66192", "title": "Copyhold", "text": "Customary land tenure in a manorial estate\nCopyhold was a form of customary land ownership common from the Late Middle Ages into modern times in England. The name for this type of land tenure is derived from the act of giving a copy of the relevant title deed that is recorded in the manorial court roll to the tenant, rather than the actual land deed itself. The legal owner of the manor land remained the mesne lord, who was legally the \"copyholder\", according to the titles and customs written down in the manorial roll. In return for being given land, a copyhold tenant was required to carry out specific manorial duties or services. The specific rights and duties of copyhold tenants varied greatly from one manor to another and many were established by custom. By the 19th century, many customary duties had been replaced with the payment of rent.\nCopyhold was directly descended from the feudal system of villeinage which involved giving service and produce to the local lord in return for land. Although feudalism in England had ended by the early 1500s, forms of copyhold tenure continued in England until being completely abolished by the Law of Property Act 1925.\nPrinciples.\nThe privileges granted to each tenant, and the exact services he was to render to the lord of the manor and/or lord paramount in return for them, were described in the roll or book kept by the steward, who gave a copy of the relevant entry to the tenant. Consequently, these tenants were afterwards called copyholders, in contrast to freeholders. The actual term \"copyhold\" is first recorded in 1483, and \"copyholder\" in 1511\u20131512. The specific rights and duties of copyholders varied greatly from one manor to another and many were established by custom. Initially, some works and services to the lord were required of copyholders (four days' work per year for example), but these were commuted later to a rent equivalent. Each manor custom laid out rights to use various resources of the land such as wood and pasture, and numbers of animals allowed on the common. Copyholds very commonly required the payment of a type of death duty called a heriot to the lord of the manor upon the decease of the copyholder.\nInheritance.\nTwo main kinds of copyhold tenure developed:\nCopyhold land often did not appear in a will. This is because its inheritance was already pre-determined by custom, as just described. It could not therefore be given or devised in a will to any other person. In some instances, the executor of the estate held the copyhold for the term of one year after the decease of the testator, which was called the \"executor's year\", in parallel with the same concept in common law. Language regarding the disposal of the profits of the executor's year or of a heriot often indicates a copyhold.\nAbolition.\nCopyholds were gradually enfranchised (turned into ordinary holdings of land \u2013 either freehold or 999-year leasehold) as a result of the Copyhold Acts during the 19th century. By this time, servitude to the lord of the manor was merely token, discharged on purchasing the copyhold by payment of a \"fine in respite of fealty\". The &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Copyhold Act 1841 (4 &amp; 5 Vict. c. 35), &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Copyhold Act 1843 (6 &amp; 7 Vict. c. 23), &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Copyhold Act 1844 (7 &amp; 8 Vict. c. 55), &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Copyhold Act 1852 (15 &amp; 16 Vict. c. 51), &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Copyhold Act 1858 (21 &amp; 22 Vict. c. 94) and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Copyhold Act 1887 (50 &amp; 51 Vict. c. 73) were consolidated in the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Copyhold Act 1894 (57 &amp; 58 Vict. c. 46).\nPart V of the Law of Property Act 1925 (15 &amp; 16 Geo. 5. c. 20) finally abolished all remaining statutes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66193", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66193", "title": "Prefix code", "text": "Type of code system\nA prefix code is a type of code system distinguished by its possession of the prefix property, which requires that there is no whole code word in the system that is a prefix (initial segment) of any other code word in the system. It is trivially true for fixed-length codes, so only a point of consideration for variable-length codes.\nFor example, a code with code formula_1 has the prefix property; a code consisting of formula_2 does not, because 5 is a prefix of 59 and also of 55. A prefix code is a uniquely decodable code: given a complete and accurate sequence, a receiver can identify each word without requiring a special marker between words. However, there are uniquely decodable codes that are not prefix codes; for instance, the reverse of a prefix code is still uniquely decodable (it is a suffix code), but it is not necessarily a prefix code.\nPrefix codes are also known as prefix-free codes, prefix condition codes and instantaneous codes. Although Huffman coding is just one of many algorithms for deriving prefix codes, prefix codes are also widely referred to as \"Huffman codes\", even when the code was not produced by a Huffman algorithm. The term comma-free code is sometimes also applied as a synonym for prefix-free codes but in most mathematical books and articles (e.g.) a comma-free code is used to mean a self-synchronizing code, a subclass of prefix codes.\nUsing prefix codes, a message can be transmitted as a sequence of concatenated code words, without any out-of-band markers or (alternatively) special markers between words to frame the words in the message. The recipient can decode the message unambiguously, by repeatedly finding and removing sequences that form valid code words. This is not generally possible with codes that lack the prefix property, for example formula_3: a receiver reading a 1 at the start of a code word would not know whether that was the complete code word 1, or merely the prefix of the code word 10 or 11; so the string 10 could be interpreted either as a single codeword or as the concatenation of the words 1 then 0.\nThe variable-length Huffman codes, country calling codes, the country and publisher parts of ISBNs, the Secondary Synchronization Codes used in the UMTS W-CDMA 3G Wireless Standard, and the instruction sets (machine language) of most computer microarchitectures are prefix codes.\nPrefix codes are not error-correcting codes. In practice, a message might first be compressed with a prefix code, and then encoded again with channel coding (including error correction) before transmission.\nFor every uniquely decodable code there is a prefix code that has the same code word lengths. Kraft's inequality characterizes the sets of code word lengths that are possible in a uniquely decodable code.\nTechniques.\nIf every word in the code has the same length, the code is called a fixed-length code, or a block code (though the term block code is also used for fixed-size error-correcting codes in channel coding). For example, ISO 8859-15 letters are always 8 bits long. UTF-32/UCS-4 letters are always 32 bits long. ATM cells are always 424 bits (53 bytes) long. A fixed-length code of fixed length formula_4 bits can encode up to formula_5 source symbols.\nA fixed-length code is necessarily a prefix code. It is possible to turn any code into a fixed-length code by padding fixed symbols to the shorter prefixes in order to meet the length of the longest prefixes. Alternately, such padding codes may be employed to introduce redundancy that allows autocorrection and/or synchronisation. However, fixed length encodings are inefficient in situations where some words are much more likely to be transmitted than others.\nTruncated binary encoding is a straightforward generalization of fixed-length codes to deal with cases where the number of symbols \"n\" is not a power of two. Source symbols are assigned codewords of length formula_4 and formula_7, where formula_4 is chosen so that formula_9\".\nHuffman coding is a more sophisticated technique for constructing variable-length prefix codes. The Huffman coding algorithm takes as input the frequencies that the code words should have, and constructs a prefix code that minimizes the weighted average of the code word lengths. (This is closely related to minimizing the entropy.) This is a form of lossless data compression based on entropy encoding.\nSome codes mark the end of a code word with a special \"comma\" symbol (also called a Sentinel value), different from normal data. This is somewhat analogous to the spaces between words in a sentence; they mark where one word ends and another begins. If every code word ends in a comma, and the comma does not appear elsewhere in a code word, the code is automatically prefix-free. However, reserving an entire symbol only for use as a comma can be inefficient, especially for languages with a small number of symbols. Morse code is an everyday example of a variable-length code with a comma. The long pauses between letters, and the even longer pauses between words, help people recognize where one letter (or word) ends, and the next begins. Similarly, Fibonacci coding uses a 11 to mark the end of every code word.\nSelf-synchronizing codes are prefix codes that allow frame synchronization.\nRelated concepts.\nA suffix code is a set of words none of which is a suffix of any other; equivalently, a set of words which are the reverse of a prefix code. As with a prefix code, the representation of a string as a concatenation of such words is unique. A bifix code is a set of words which is both a prefix and a suffix code.\nAn optimal prefix code is a prefix code with minimal average length. That is, assume an alphabet of n symbols with probabilities formula_10 for a prefix code C. If C' is another prefix code and formula_11 are the lengths of the codewords of C', then formula_12.\nPrefix codes in use today.\nExamples of prefix codes include:\nTechniques.\nCommonly used techniques for constructing prefix codes include Huffman codes and the earlier Shannon\u2013Fano codes, and universal codes such as:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "66196", "revid": "15534247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66196", "title": "Rapture", "text": "Eschatological concept in Christianity\nThe Rapture is an eschatological (end-times) concept held by some Christians, particularly those of American evangelicalism, consisting of an event when all dead Christian believers will be resurrected and, joined with Christians who are still alive, together will rise \"in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air.\"\nMany different timelines have been asserted which tie to ideas of a seven-year Great Tribulation (e.g. pretribulation, midtribulation, prewrath, and posttribulation raptures) and to a thousand year age of Messianic rule (Millennialism) (premillennialism, postmillennialism, amillennialism, preterism). \nThe origin of the term extends from the First Epistle to the Thessalonians in the Bible, which uses the Greek word (), meaning \"to snatch away\" or \"to seize\". The idea of a rapture as it is defined in dispensational premillennialism is not found in historic Christianity and is a relatively recent doctrine originating from the 1830s. \nMost Christian denominations, and the numerically largest, do not subscribe to rapture theology and have a different interpretation of the aerial gathering described in 1 Thessalonians 4. They do not use \"rapture\" as a specific theological term, nor do they generally subscribe to the dispensational theology associated with its use. Instead they typically interpret \"rapture\" in the sense of the elect gathering with Christ in Heaven directly after the Second Coming and reject outright the idea that a large portion of humanity will be left behind on earth for an extended tribulation period after the events of 1 Thessalonians 4:17.\nEtymology.\n\"Rapture\" is derived from Middle French , via the Medieval Latin (\"seizure, kidnapping\"), which derives from the Latin (\"a carrying off\").\nGreek.\nThe Koine Greek of 1 Thessalonians 4:17 uses the verb form (), which means \"we shall be caught up\" or \"we shall be taken away\". The dictionary form of this Greek verb is (). This use is also seen in such texts as Acts 8:39, 2 Corinthians 12:2\u20134, and Revelation 12:5. Linguist, Dr. Douglas Hamp, notes that Greek scholar Spiros Zodhiates lists as the first-person plural future passive indicative of the Greek stem, \"harpag\u0113\" (har-pag-ay), \u201cthe act of plundering, plunder, spoil.\u201d The future passive indicative of \"harp\u00e1z\u014d\" (although not used by Paul in 1 Thess. 4:17) can be viewed at verbix.com: \u1f01\u03c1\u03c0\u03b1\u03c3\u03b8\u03b7\u03c3\u03cc\u03bc\u03b5\u03b8\u03b1 (\"harpasth\u0113sometha\"). GS724 \"harpag\u0113\" means\":\" 1. the act of plundering, robbery; 2. plunder, spoil. When the rapture and the \"restoration of all things\" (Acts 3:20-21) are viewed as simultaneous events (according to Romans 8:19-21) then it makes sense why Paul would use \"shall be plundered\" to match the verbiage of the distortion of the Earth described in Isaiah 24:3, \"The land shall be entirely emptied and utterly plundered...\".\nLatin.\nThe Latin Vulgate translates the Greek as meaning \"we will be caught up\" or \"we will be taken away\" from the Latin verb meaning \"to catch up\" or \"take away\".\nEnglish.\nEnglish translations of the Bible have translated 1 Thessalonians 4:17 in various ways:\nDoctrinal position.\nA pretribulational rapture view is most commonly found among American Fundamentalist Baptists, Bible churches, Brethren churches, certain Methodist denominations, Pentecostals, non-denominational evangelicals, and various other evangelical groups. \nThe Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox Church, the Lutheran Churches, the Anglican Communion, and Reformed denominations have no tradition of a preliminary return of Christ. The Eastern Orthodox Church, for example, favors the amillennial interpretation of prophetic Scriptures and thus rejects a preliminary, premillennial return. Most Methodists do not adhere to the dispensationalist view of the rapture.\nAquinas and Augustine of Hippo.\nIn his \"Compendium Theologiae\", Thomas Aquinas quotes another Doctor of the Church, St Augustine, to explain that no one is spared death and the separation of the soul from the body. The rapture of the Church, on the other hand, concerns the death of the faithful and their immediate resurrection of the flesh immediately after death:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Accordingly those who are found alive at the Lord\u2019s coming will be marked off from those who have died before, not for the reason that they will never die, but because in the very act by which they are taken up \u201cin the clouds to meet Christ, into the air\u201d (1 Thessalonians 4: 16), they will die and immediately rise again, as Augustine teaches.\u2014\u200a\nViews.\nOne or two events.\nMost premillennialists distinguish the Rapture and the Second Coming as separate events. Some dispensational premillennialists (including many evangelicals) hold the return of Christ to be two distinct events (i.e., Christ's second coming in two stages). According to this view, 1 Thessalonians 4:15\u201317 is a description of a preliminary event to the return described in Matthew 24:29\u201331. Although both describe a coming of Jesus, these are seen to be different events. The first event is a coming where the saved are to be 'caught up,' whence the term \"rapture\" is taken. The second event is described as the second coming. The majority of dispensationalists hold that the first event precedes the period of tribulation, even if not immediately (see chart for additional dispensationalist timing views). Dispensationalists distinguish these events as a result of their own literal understanding of Paul's words.\nAmillennialists deny the interpretation of a literal thousand-year earthly rule of Christ. There is considerable overlap in the beliefs of amillennialists (including most Catholics, Eastern Orthodox, Anglicans, and Lutherans), postmillennialists (including Presbyterians), and historic premillennialists (including some Calvinistic Baptists) with those who hold that the return of Christ will be a single, public event.\nSome proponents believe the doctrine of amillennialism originated with Alexandrian scholars such as Clement and Origen and later became Catholic dogma through Augustine.\nDestination.\nDispensationalists see the immediate destination of the raptured Christians as being Heaven. Catholic commentators, such as http:// (1912), identify the destination of the 1 Thessalonians 4:17 gathering as Heaven.\nWhile Anglicans have many views, some Anglican commentators, such as N. T. Wright, identify the destination as a specific place on Earth. This interpretation may sometimes be connected to Christian environmentalist concerns.\nViews of eschatological timing.\nThere are numerous views regarding the timing of the Rapture. Some maintain that Matthew 24:37\u201340 refers to the Rapture, pointing out similarities between the two texts, indicating that the Rapture would occur at the \"parousia\" of the Lord. Others point out that neither \"church\" nor \"rapture\" occur in Matthew 24 and there are significant differences between Matthew 24:37\u201340 and 1 Thessalonians 4:13\u201318. As a result, these two texts receive the overwhelming focus within discussions about the Rapture's timing. The two texts are as follows:\nIn the amillennial and postmillennial views there are no distinctions in the timing of the Rapture. These views regard that the Rapture, as it is described in 1 Thessalonians 4:15\u201317, would be identical to the Second Coming of Jesus as described in Matthew 24:29\u201331 after the spiritual/symbolic millennium.\nIn the premillennial view, the Rapture would be before a literal, earthly millennium. Within premillennialism, the pretribulation position distinguishes between the Rapture and the Second Coming as two different events. There are also other positions within premillennialism that differ with regard to the timing of the Rapture.\nPremillennialist views.\nIn the earliest days of the church, chiliastic teaching (i.e., early premillennialism) was the dominant view. Eusebius wrote, \"To these [written accounts] belong his [Papias of Hierapolis] statement that there will be a period of some thousand years after the resurrection of the dead, and that the kingdom of Christ will be set up in the material form on this very earth. [...] But it was due to him that so many of the Church Fathers after him adopted a like opinion, urging in their own support the antiquity of the man; as for instance Irenaeus and anyone else that may have proclaimed similar views.\"\nThe 19th-century scholar Schaff notes that, \"The most striking point in the eschatology of the ante-Nicene age is the prominent chiliasm, or millennarianism, that is the belief of a visible reign of Christ in glory on earth with the risen saints for a thousand years, before the general resurrection and judgment.\"\nOver time, however, a clash surfaced between two schools of interpretation, the Antiochene and Alexandrian schools. The Alexandrian school's roots can be traced back to the influence of Philo, a Hellenized Jew who sought to reconcile God's veracity with what he thought were errors in the Tanakh. Alexandrian theologians viewed the Millennium as a symbolic reign of Christ from Heaven. Through the influence of Origen and Augustine\u2014students of the Alexandrian school\u2014allegorical interpretation rose to prominence, and its eschatology became the majority view for more than a thousand years. As a reaction to the rise of allegorical interpretation the Antiochene school insisted on a literal hermeneutic. but did little to counter the Alexandrian's symbolic Millennium.\nIn the twelfth century futurism became prominent again when Joachim of Fiore (1130\u20131202) wrote a commentary on Revelation and insisted that the end was near and taught that God would restore the earth, the Jews would be converted, and the Millennium would take place on earth. His teaching influenced much of Europe.\nThough the Catholic Church does not generally regard Biblical prophecy in texts such as Daniel and Revelation as strictly future-based (when viewed from the standpoint of our present time), in 1590 Francisco Ribera, a Catholic Jesuit, taught futurism. He also taught that a gathering-of-the-elect event (similar to what is now called the rapture) would happen 45 days before the end of a 3.5-year tribulation.\nThe concept of the rapture, in connection with premillennialism, was expressed by the 17th-century American Puritans Increase Mather and Cotton Mather. They held to the idea that believers would be caught up in the air, followed by judgments on earth, and then the millennium.\nOther 17th-century expressions of the rapture are found in the works of Robert Maton, Nathaniel Holmes, John Browne, Thomas Vincent, Henry Danvers, and William Sherwin.\nThe term \"rapture\" was used by Philip Doddridge and John Gill in their New Testament commentaries, with the idea that believers would be caught up prior to judgment on earth and Jesus' second coming.\nAn 1828 edition of Matthew Henry's \"An Exposition of the Old and New Testament\" uses the word \"rapture\" in explicating 1 Thessalonians 4:17.\nAlthough not using the term \"rapture\", the idea was more fully developed by Edward Irving (1792\u20131834). In 1825, Irving directed his attention to the study of prophecy and eventually accepted the one-man Antichrist idea of James Henthorn Todd, Samuel Roffey Maitland, Robert Bellarmine, and Francisco Ribera, yet he went a step further. Irving began to teach the idea of a two-phase return of Christ, the first phase being a secret rapture prior to the rise of the Antichrist. Edward Miller described Irving's teaching like this: \"There are three gatherings:\u00a0\u2013 First, of the first-fruits of the harvest, the wise virgins who follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth; next, the abundant harvest gathered afterwards by God; and lastly, the assembling of the wicked for punishment.\"\nPretribulational premillennialism.\nThe pretribulation position advocates that the rapture will occur before the beginning of a seven-year tribulation period, while the second coming will occur at the end of it. Pretribulationists often describe the rapture as Jesus coming \"for\" the church and the second coming as Jesus coming \"with\" the church. Pretribulation educators and preachers include Jimmy Swaggart, Robert Jeffress, J. Dwight Pentecost, Tim LaHaye, J. Vernon McGee, Perry Stone, Chuck Smith, Hal Lindsey, Jack Van Impe, Skip Heitzig, Chuck Missler, Grant Jeffrey, Thomas Ice, David Jeremiah, John F. MacArthur, and John Hagee.\nJohn Nelson Darby first solidified and popularized the pretribulation rapture in 1827. Despite vague notions of this view existing in a few Puritan theologians prior to Darby, he was the first person to place it into a larger theological framework . This view was accepted among many other Plymouth Brethren movements in England. Darby and other prominent Brethren were part of the Brethren movement which impacted American Christianity, especially with movements and teachings associated with Christian eschatology and fundamentalism, primarily through their writings. Influences included the Bible Conference Movement, starting in 1878 with the Niagara Bible Conference. These conferences, which were initially inclusive of historicist and futurist premillennialism, led to an increasing acceptance of futurist premillennial views and the pretribulation rapture especially among Presbyterian, Baptist, and Congregational members.11 Popular books also contributed to acceptance of the pretribulation rapture, including William E. Blackstone's book \"Jesus is Coming\", published in 1878, which sold more than 1.3 million copies, and the Scofield Reference Bible, published in 1909 and 1919 and revised in 1967.\nSome pretribulation proponents, such as Grant Jeffrey, maintain that the earliest known extra-Biblical reference to the pretribulation rapture is from a 7th-century tract known as the Apocalypse of Pseudo-Ephraem the Syrian. Different authors have proposed several different versions of the text as authentic and there are differing opinions as to whether it supports belief in a pretribulation rapture. One version of the text reads, \"For all the saints and Elect of God are gathered, prior to the tribulation that is to come, and are taken to the Lord lest they see the confusion that is to overwhelm the world because of our sins.\" In addition, \"The Apocalypse of Elijah\" and \"The History of Brother Dolcino\" both state that believers will be removed prior to the Tribulation.\nThere exists at least one 18th-century and two 19th-century pretribulation references: in an essay published in 1788 in Philadelphia by the Baptist Morgan Edwards which articulated the concept of a pretribulation rapture, in the writings of Catholic priest Manuel Lacunza in 1812, and by John Nelson Darby in 1827. Manuel Lacunza (1731\u20131801), a Jesuit priest (under the pseudonym Juan Josafat Ben Ezra), wrote an apocalyptic work entitled \"La venida del Mes\u00edas en gloria y majestad\" (\"The Coming of the Messiah in Glory and Majesty\"). The book appeared first in 1811, 10 years after his death. In 1827, it was translated into English by the Scottish minister Edward Irving.\nDuring the 1970s, belief in the rapture became popular in wider circles, in part because of the books of Hal Lindsey, including \"The Late Great Planet Earth\", which has reportedly sold between 15 million and 35 million copies, and the movie \"A Thief in the Night\", which based its title on the scriptural reference . Lindsey proclaimed that the rapture was imminent, based on world conditions at the time.\nIn 1995, the doctrine of the pretribulation rapture was further popularized by Tim LaHaye's \"Left Behind\" series of books, which sold close to 80 million copies and was made into several movies and four real-time strategy video games.\nAccording to Thomas Ice a belief in the imminence of Christ's return, key to modern pretribulation theology, can be found in various Church Fathers and early Christian writings.\nMidtribulational premillennialism.\nThe mid-tribulation position espouses that the rapture will occur at some point in the middle of what is popularly called the tribulation period, or during Daniel's 70th Week. The tribulation is typically divided into two periods of 3.5 years each. Midtribulationists hold that the saints will go through the first period (Beginning of Travail) but will be raptured into Heaven before the severe outpouring of God's wrath in the second half of what is popularly called the Great Tribulation. Midtribulationists appeal to which says the saints will be given over to tribulation for \"time, times, and half a time,\" \u2013 interpreted to mean 3.5 years. At the halfway point of the tribulation, the Antichrist will commit the \"abomination of desolation\" by desecrating the Jerusalem temple. Midtribulationist teachers include Harold Ockenga, James O. Buswell (a reformed, Calvinistic Presbyterian), and Norman Harrison. This position is a minority view among premillennialists.\nPrewrath premillennialism.\nThe prewrath rapture view also places the rapture at some point during the tribulation period before the second coming. This view holds that the tribulation of the church begins toward the latter part of a seven-year period, being Daniel's 70th week, when the Antichrist is revealed in the temple. This latter half of a seven-year period [i.e. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442 years] is defined as the great tribulation, although the exact duration is not known. References from Matthew 24, Mark 13, and Luke 21 are used as evidence that this tribulation will be cut short by the coming of Christ to deliver the righteous by means of the rapture, which will occur after specific events in Revelation, in particular after the sixth seal is opened and the sun is darkened and the moon is turned to blood. However, by this point many Christians will have been slaughtered as martyrs by the Antichrist. After the rapture will come God's seventh-seal wrath of trumpets and bowls (a.k.a. \"the Day of the Lord\"). The Day of the Lord's wrath against the ungodly will follow during the remainder of the seventh year.\nPartial rapture premillennialism.\nThe partial, conditional or selective rapture theory holds that all obedient Christians will be raptured before the great tribulation depending on one's personal fellowship (or closeness) between her or him and God, which is not to be confused with the relationship between the same and God (which is believer, regardless of fellowship). Therefore, it is believed by some that the rapture of a believer is determined by the timing of his conversion before the great tribulation. Other proponents of this theory hold that only those who are faithful in their relationship with God (having true fellowship with him) will be raptured, and the rest resurrected during the great tribulation, between the 5th and 6th seals of Revelation, having lost their lives during. Still others hold the rest will either be raptured during the tribulation or at its end. As stated by Ira David (a proponent of this view): \"The saints will be raptured in groups during the tribulation as they are prepared to go.\" Some notable proponents of this theory are G. H. Lang, Robert Chapman, G. H. Pember, Robert Govett, D. M. Panton, Watchman Nee, Ira E. David, J. A. Seiss, Hudson Taylor, Anthony Norris Groves, John Wilkinson, G. Campbell Morgan, Otto Stockmayer and Rev. J. W. (Chip) White Jr.\nPosttribulational premillennialism.\nIn the posttribulation premillennial position, the rapture would be identical to the second coming of Jesus or as a meeting in the air with Jesus that immediately precedes his return to the Earth before a literal millennium. The posttribulation position places the rapture at the end of the tribulation period. Posttribulation writers define the tribulation period in a generic sense as the entire present age, or in a specific sense of a period of time preceding the second coming of Christ. The emphasis in this view is that the church will undergo the tribulation. \u2013 \"Immediately after the Tribulation of those days...they shall gather together his elect...\" \u2013 is cited as a foundational scripture for this view. Posttribulationists perceive the rapture as occurring simultaneously with the second coming of Christ. Upon Jesus's return, believers will meet him in the air and will then accompany him in his return to the Earth. \nIn the Epistles of Paul, most notably in (\"the dead in Christ shall rise first\") and , a trumpet is described as blowing at the end of the tribulation to herald the return of Christ; further supports this view. Moreover, after chapters 6\u201319, and after 20:1\u20133 when Satan is bound, says, \"and they lived, and reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. This \"is\" the first resurrection. Blessed and holy \"is\" he that hath part in the first resurrection.\"\nAuthors and teachers who support the posttribulational view include Pat Robertson, Walter R. Martin, John Piper, George E. Ladd, Robert H. Gundry, and Douglas Moo.\nPostmillennialism.\nIn the postmillennialist view the millennium is seen as an indefinitely long time thus precluding literal interpretation of a thousand-year period. According to Loraine Boettner \"the world will be Christianized, and the return of Christ will occur at the close of a long period of righteousness and peace, commonly called the millennium.\" Postmillennialists commonly view the rapture of the Church as one and the same event as the second coming of Christ. According to them the great tribulation was already fulfilled in the Jewish-Roman War of AD 66\u201373 that involved the destruction of Jerusalem. Authors who have expressed support for this view include the Puritan John Bunyan of \"Pilgrim's Progress\", Congregationalist theologian Jonathan Edwards, and Second Great Awakening figure Charles Finney.\nAmillennialism.\nAmillennialists view the millennial rule of Christ as the current, but indefinite period that began with the foundation of the church and that will end with the Second Coming\u2014a period where Christ already reigns with his saints through the Eucharist and his church. They view the life of the church as Christ's kingdom already established (inaugurated on the day of the Pentecost described in the first chapter of Acts), but not to be made complete until his second coming. This framework precludes a literal interpretation of the thousand-year period mentioned in chapter twenty of Revelation, viewing the number \"thousand\" as numerologically symbolic and pertaining to the current age of the church. \nAmillennialists generally do not use \"rapture\" as a theological term, but they do view a similar event coinciding with the second coming\u2014primarily as a mystical gathering with Christ. To amillennialists the final days already began on the day of the Pentecost, but that the great tribulation will occur during the final phase or conclusion of the millennium, with Christ then returning as the alpha and omega at the end of time. Unlike premillennialists who predict the millennium as a literal thousand-year reign by Christ after his return, amillennialists emphasize the continuity and permanency of his reign throughout all periods of the New Covenant, past, present and future. They do not regard mentions of Jerusalem in the chapter twenty-one of Revelation as pertaining to the present geographical city, but to a future new Jerusalem or \"new heaven and new earth\", for which the church through the twelve apostles (representing of the twelve tribes of Israel) currently lays the foundation in the messianic kingdom already present. Unlike certain premillennial dispensationalists, they do not view the rebuilding of the temple of Jerusalem as either necessary or legitimate, because the practice of animal sacrifices has now been fulfilled in the life of the church through Christ's ultimate sacrifice on the cross. Authors who have expressed support for the amillennialist view include St. Augustine. The amillennialist viewpoint is the position held by the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Anglican churches, as well as mainline Protestant bodies, such as Lutherans, Methodists, Presbyterians and many Reformed congregations.\nPreterist Rapture.\nThis view, associated with Victorian Congregationalist J. Stuart Russell is that the rapture already occurred in the lifetime of the St John, leaving an empty husk institution: the Christian church was not restored until the Reformation.\nDate.\nSince the origin of the concept, some believers have made predictions regarding the date of the event. All have failed in their attempt to set a date.\nFailed predictions.\nNotable predictions of the date of the Second Coming of Jesus, which may or may not refer to the rapture, include the following:\nPredictions of the date of the rapture include the following:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66199", "revid": "35842430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66199", "title": "Osip Mandelstam", "text": "Russian and Soviet poet (1891\u20131938)\nOsip Emilyevich Mandelstam (, ; 14 January\u00a0[O.S. 2 January]\u00a01891 \u2013 27 December 1938) was a Russian and Soviet poet. He was one of the foremost members of the Acmeist school.\nOsip Mandelstam was arrested during the repressions of the 1930s and sent into internal exile with his wife, Nadezhda Mandelstam. Given a reprieve of sorts, they moved to Voronezh in southwestern Russia. In 1938, Mandelstam was arrested again and sentenced to five years in a corrective-labour camp in the Soviet Far East. He died that year at a transit camp near Vladivostok.\nLife and work.\nMandelstam was born on 14 January 1891 in Warsaw, Congress Poland, Russian Empire, to a wealthy Polish-Jewish family. His father, a leather merchant by trade, was able to receive a dispensation freeing the family from the Pale of Settlement. Soon after Osip's birth, they moved to Saint Petersburg. In 1900, Mandelstam entered the prestigious Tenishev School. His first poems were printed in 1907 in the school's almanac. As a schoolboy, he was introduced by a friend to members of the illegal Socialist Revolutionary Party, including Mark Natanson, and the revolutionary Grigory Gershuni.\nIn April 1908, Mandelstam decided to enter the Sorbonne in Paris to study literature and philosophy, but he left the following year to attend the University of Heidelberg in Germany. In 1911, he decided to continue his education at the University of Saint Petersburg, from which Jews were excluded. He converted to Methodism and entered the university the same year. He did not complete a formal degree.\nMandelstam's poetry, acutely populist in spirit after the first Russian revolution in 1905, became closely associated with symbolist imagery. In 1911, he and several other young Russian poets formed the \"Poets' Guild\", under the formal leadership of Nikolai Gumilyov and Sergei Gorodetsky. The nucleus of this group became known as Acmeists. Mandelstam wrote the manifesto for the new movement: \"The Morning Of Acmeism\" (1913, published in 1919). In 1913 he published his first collection of poems, \"The Stone\"; it was reissued in 1916 under the same title, but with additional poems included.\nPolitical persecution and death.\nIn 1922, Mandelstam and Nadezhda moved to Moscow. At this time, his second book of poems, \"Tristia\", was published in Berlin. For several years after that, he almost completely abandoned poetry, concentrating on essays, literary criticism, memoirs \"The Noise Of Time\", \"Feodosiya\" \u2013 both 1925; (\"Noise of Time\" 1993 in English) and small-format prose \"The Egyptian Stamp\" (1928). As a day job, he translated literature into Russian (19 books in 6 years), then worked as a correspondent for a newspaper.\nFirst arrest.\nIn the autumn of 1933, Mandelstam composed the poem \"Stalin Epigram\", which he recited at a few small private gatherings in Moscow. The poem deliberately insulted the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nHis thick fingers are bulky and fat like live-baits,\nAnd his accurate words are as heavy as weights.\nCucaracha\u2019s moustaches are screaming,\nAnd his boot-tops are shining and gleaming.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn the original version, the one that was handed in to the police, he called Stalin the \"peasant slayer\", as well as pointing out that he had fat fingers. Six months later, on the night of 16\u201317 May 1934, Mandelstam was arrested by three NKVD officers who arrived at his flat with a search warrant signed by Yakov Agranov. His wife hoped at first that this was over a fracas that had taken place in Leningrad a few days earlier, when Mandlestam slapped the writer Alexei Tolstoy because of a perceived insult to Nadezhda, but under interrogation he was confronted with a copy of the Stalin Epigram, and immediately admitted to being its author, believing that it was wrong in principle for a poet to renounce his own work. Neither he nor Nadezhda had ever risked writing it down, suggesting that one of the trusted friends to whom he recited it had memorised it, and handed a written copy to the police. It has never been established who it was.\nMandelstam anticipated that insulting Stalin would carry the death penalty, but Nadezhda and Anna Akhmatova started a campaign to save him, and succeeded in creating \"a kind of special atmosphere, with people fussing and whispering to each other.\" The Lithuanian ambassador in Moscow, Jurgis Baltru\u0161aitis warned delegates at a conference of journalists that the regime appeared to be on the verge of killing a renowned poet. Boris Pasternak \u2013 who disapproved of the tone of the Epigram \u2013 nonetheless appealed to the eminent Bolshevik, Nikolai Bukharin, to intervene. Bukharin, who had known the Mandelstams since the early 1920s and had frequently helped them, approached the head of the NKVD, and wrote a note to Stalin.\nExile.\nOn 26 May, Mandelstam was sentenced neither to death, nor even the Gulag, but to three years' exile in Cherdyn in the Northern Ural, where he was accompanied by his wife. This escape was looked upon as a \"miracle\" \u2013 but the strain of his interrogation had driven Mandelstam to the verge of insanity. He later wrote that \"at my side, my wife did not sleep for five nights\" \u2013 but when they arrived at Cherdyn, she fell asleep, in the upper floor of a hospital, and he attempted suicide by throwing himself out of the window. His brother, Alexander, appealed to the police for his brother to be given proper psychiatric care, and on 10 June, there was a second \"miracle\", which banished Mandelstam from the twelve largest Soviet cities, but otherwise allowed him to choose his place of exile.\nMandelstam and his wife chose Voronezh, possibly, partly, because the name appealed to him. In April 1935, he wrote a four line poem that included the pun \u2013 \"Voronezh \u2013 blazh', Voronezh \u2013 voron, nozh\" meaning 'Voronezh is a whim, Voronezh \u2013 a raven, a knife.'. Just after their arrival, Boris Pasternak received a phone call from Stalin \u2013 his only conversation with the dictator, in which Stalin wanted to know whether Mandelstam really was a talented poet. \"He's a genius, isn't he?\" he is reputed to have asked Pasternak.\nDuring these three years, Mandelstam wrote a collection of poems known as the \"Voronezh Notebooks\", which included the cycle \"Verses on the Unknown Soldier\". \nActually, the fact that Stalin had given an order to \"isolate and preserve\" Mandelstam meant that he was safe from further persecution, temporarily. In Voronezh, he was even granted a face-to-face meeting with the local head of the NKVD, Semyon Dukelsky, who told him \"write what you like\", and turned down an offer by Mandelstam to send in every poem he wrote to police headquarters. After that meeting, NKVD agents ceased shadowing the couple. There is a story, possibly apocryphal, that Mandelstam even rang Dukelsky to recite poetry over the phone.\nSecond arrest and death.\nMandelstam's three-year period of exile ended in May 1937, when the Great Purge was under way. The previous winter, he had forced himself to write his \"Ode to Stalin,\" hoping it would protect him against further persecution. The couple no longer had the right to live in Moscow, so lived in nearby Kalinin (Tver), and visited the capital, where they relied on friends to put them up. In the spring of 1938, Mandelstam was granted an interview with the head of the Writers' Union Vladimir Stavsky, who granted him a two-week holiday for two in a rest home outside Moscow. This was a trap. The previous month, on 16 March \u2013 the day after the Mandelstams' former protector, Nikolai Bukharin had been sentenced to death \u2013 Stavsky had written to the head of the NKVD, Nikolay Yezhov, denouncing Mandelstam. Getting him out of Moscow made it possible to arrest him without setting off a reaction. He was arrested while on holiday, on 5 May (ref. camp document of 12 October 1938, signed by Mandelstam), and charged with \"counter-revolutionary activities.\"\nFour months later, on 2 August 1938, Mandelstam was sentenced to five years in correction camps. He arrived at the Vtoraya Rechka (Second River) transit camp near Vladivostok in Russia's Far East. From the Vladperpunkt transit camp he sent his last letter to his brother and his wife, writing: \"I'm in Vladivostok, SVITL, barracks 11. I got 5 years for K.R.D. [counterrevolutionary activity] by the decision of the OSO. From Moscow, left from Butyrka on September 9, arrived on October 12. Health is very poor. Exhausted to the extreme. Have lost weight, almost unrecognizable. But I don't know if there is any sense in sending clothes, food and money. Try it, all the same. I'm freezing without proper things.\"\nOn 27 December 1938, three weeks before his 48th birthday, Osip Mandelstam died in a transit camp of typhoid fever. His death was described later in a short story \"Cherry Brandy\" by Varlam Shalamov, who notes that his fellow inmates concealed his death for two days so they could continue to collect his rations. His body lay unburied until spring, along with the other deceased. Then the entire \"winter stack\" was buried in a mass grave.\nMandelstam's own prophecy was fulfilled: \"Only in Russia is poetry respected, it gets people killed. Is there anywhere else where poetry is so common a motive for murder?\" Nadezhda wrote memoirs about her life and times with her husband in \"Hope against Hope\" (1970) and \"Hope Abandoned\". She also managed to preserve a significant part of Mandelstam's unpublished work.\nMarriage and family.\nIn 1916, Mandelstam was passionately involved with the poet Marina Tsvetayeva. According to her biographer, \"Of the many love affairs with men that Marina embarked upon with such intensity during this period, it was probably the only one that was physically consummated.\" Mandelstam was said to have had an affair with the poet Anna Akhmatova. She insisted throughout her life that their relationship had always been a very deep friendship, rather than a sexual affair. In the 1910s, he was in love, secretly and unrequitedly, with a Georgian princess and St. Petersburg socialite Salomea Andronikova, to whom Mandelstam dedicated his poem \"Solominka\" (1916).\nIn 1922, Mandelstam married Nadezhda Mandelstam in Kiev, Ukraine, where she lived with her family, but the couple settled in Moscow. He continued to be attracted to other women, sometimes seriously. Their marriage was threatened by his falling in love with other women, notably Olga Vaksel in 1924\u201325 and Mariya Petrovykh in 1933\u201334. Nadezha Mandelstam formed a lifelong friendship with Anna Akhmatova, who was a guest in the Mandelstam's apartment when he was arrested for the first time, but complained that she could never be friendly with Tsvetayeva, partly because \"I had decided on Akhmatova as 'top' woman poet\". She also complained that Tsvetayeva could not take her eyes off her husband, and that \"she accused me of being jealous of her.\"\nDuring Mandelstam's years of imprisonment in 1934\u201338, Nadezhda accompanied him into exile. Given the real danger that all copies of Osip's poetry would be destroyed, she worked to memorize his entire corpus, as well as to hide and preserve select paper manuscripts, all the while dodging her own arrest. In the 1960s and 1970s, as the political climate thawed, she was largely responsible for arranging clandestine republication of Mandelstam's poetry.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66200", "revid": "42879427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66200", "title": "Exquisite corpse", "text": "Surrealist automatic writing &amp; art technique\nExquisite corpse (from the original French term , lit.\u2009'exquisite cadaver') is a method by which a collection of words or images is assembled. Each collaborator adds to a composition in sequence, either by following a rule (e.g., \"The \"adjective\" \"noun\" \"adverb\" \"verb\" the \"adjective\" \"noun\".\" as in \"The green duck sweetly sang the dreadful dirge.\") or by being allowed to see only the end of what the previous person contributed.\nHistory.\nThis technique was invented by surrealists and is similar to an old parlour game called consequences in which players write in turn on a sheet of paper, fold it to conceal part of the writing, and then pass it to the next player for a further contribution. Surrealism principal founder Andr\u00e9 Breton reported that it started in fun, but became playful and eventually enriching. Breton said the diversion started about 1925, but Pierre Reverdy wrote that it started much earlier, at least as early as 1918.\nThe name is derived from a phrase that resulted when Surrealists first played the game, \" (\"The exquisite corpse shall drink the new wine.\") Andr\u00e9 Breton writes that the game developed at the residence of friends at an old house in Montparnasse, 54 rue du Ch\u00e2teau (no longer existing). Besides himself he mentions Marcel Duhamel, Jacques Pr\u00e9vert, Yves Tanguy and Benjamin P\u00e9ret as original participants.\nHenry Miller often played the game to pass time in French caf\u00e9s during the 1930s.\nIn 1932, artists Frida Kahlo and Lucienne Bloch created two near-nude exquisite corpses. One is titled \"Frida\" and the other \"Diego\" (likely meant to represent Kahlo herself and her husband, muralist Diego Rivera).\nPicture consequences.\nLater the game was adapted to drawing and collage, in a version called picture consequences, with portions of a person replacing the written sentence fragments of the original. The person is traditionally drawn in four steps: The head, the torso, the legs and the feet with the paper folded after each portion so that later participants cannot see earlier portions. The finished product is similar to children's books in which the pages were cut into thirds, the top third pages showing the head of a person or animal, the middle third the torso, and the bottom third the legs, with children having the ability to \"mix and match\" by turning pages.\nAnother variation of the exquisite corpse also called \"picture consequences\" is Telephone Pictionary, a game in which players alternate writing descriptions and matching illustrations based on the previous step.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66201", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66201", "title": "Smart car", "text": "Smart car may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "66202", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66202", "title": "Dragon (Middle-earth)", "text": ""}
{"id": "66203", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66203", "title": "Chinese dragon", "text": "Legendary creature in Chinese mythology\nThe Chinese dragon or loong is a legendary creature in Chinese mythology, Chinese folklore, and Chinese culture generally. Chinese dragons have many animal-like forms, such as turtles and fish, but are most commonly depicted as snake-like with four legs. Academicians have identified four reliable theories on the origin of the Chinese dragon: snakes, Chinese alligators, thunder worship and nature worship. They traditionally symbolize potent and auspicious powers, particularly control over water and weather.\nSymbolism.\nHistorically, the Chinese dragon was associated with the emperor of China and used as a symbol to represent imperial power. Liu Bang, the founder of the Han dynasty, claimed that he was conceived after his mother dreamt of a dragon. During the Tang dynasty, emperors wore robes with dragon motif as an imperial symbol, and high officials might also be presented with dragon robes. In the Yuan dynasty, the two-horned, five-clawed dragon was designated for use by the Son of Heaven or emperor only, while the four-clawed dragon was used by the princes and nobles. Similarly, during the Ming and Qing dynasty, the five-clawed dragon was strictly reserved for use by the emperor only. The dragon in the Qing dynasty appeared on the flag of the Qing dynasty.\nThe dragon is sometimes used in the West as a national emblem of China, though such use is not commonly seen in the People's Republic of China or Taiwan. Instead, it is generally used as the symbol of culture. In Hong Kong, the dragon was a component of the coat of arms under British rule. It was later to become a feature of the design of Brand Hong Kong, a government promotional symbol.\nThe Chinese dragon has very different connotations from the European dragon \u2013 in European cultures, the dragon is a fire-breathing creature with aggressive connotations, whereas the Chinese dragon is a spiritual and cultural symbol that represents prosperity and good luck, as well as a rain deity that fosters harmony. It was reported that the Chinese government decided against using the dragon as its official 2008 Summer Olympics mascot because of the aggressive connotations that dragons have outside of China and chose more \"friendly\" symbols instead.\nSometimes Chinese people use the term \"Descendants of the Dragon\" () as a sign of ethnic identity, as part of a trend started in the 1970s when different Asian nationalities were looking for animal symbols as representations. For example, the wolf may be used by the Mongols as it is considered to be their legendary ancestor.\nState usage.\nThe dragon was the symbol of the Chinese emperor for many dynasties. During the Qing dynasty, the Azure Dragon was featured on the first Chinese national flag. It was featured again on the Twelve Symbols national emblem, which was used during the Republic of China, from 1913 to 1928.\nThe dragon has been used as a state symbol in Vietnam. During the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty, the dragon was featured on the imperial standards. It was also featured on the coats of arms of the State of Vietnam, and later South Vietnam.\nWorship.\nOrigin.\nThe ancient Chinese self-identified as \"the gods of the dragon\" because the Chinese dragon is an imagined reptile that represents evolution from the ancestors and \"qi\" energy. Dragon-like motifs of a zoomorphic composition in reddish-brown stone have been found at the Chahai site (Liaoning) in the Xinglongwa culture (6200\u20135400 BC).\nThe presence of dragons within Chinese culture dates back several thousands of years with the discovery of a dragon statue dating back to the fifth millennium BC from the Yangshao culture in Henan in 1987, and jade badges of rank in coiled form have been excavated from the Hongshan culture c.\u20094700\u20132900 BC. Some of the earliest Dragon artifacts are the pig dragon carvings from the Hongshan culture.\nThe coiled dragon or snake form played an important role in early Chinese culture. The character for \"dragon\" in the earliest Chinese writing has a similar coiled form, as do later jade dragon amulets from the Shang period.\nAncient Chinese referred to unearthed fossil bones as \"dragon bones\" and documented them as such. For example, Chang Qu in 300 BC documents the discovery of \"dragon bones\" in Sichuan. \"Dragon bones\" have been used both historically and in modern times in traditional Chinese medicine. Scientific examination of \"dragon bones\" from the 19th century to the present suggests they most commonly are remains of fossil Cenozoic mammals, such as the extinct horse \"Hipparion\".\nIn mythology.\nFrom its origins as totems or the stylized depiction of natural creatures, the Chinese dragon evolved to become a mythical animal. The Han dynasty scholar Wang Fu recorded Chinese myths that \"long\" dragons had nine anatomical resemblances.The people paint the dragon's shape with a horse's head and a snake's tail. Further, there are expressions such as 'three joints' and 'nine resemblances' (of the dragon), to wit: from head to shoulder, from shoulder to breast, and from breast to tail. These are the joints; as to the nine resemblances, they are the following: his antlers resemble those of a stag, his head that of a camel, his eyes those of a demon, his neck that of a snake, his belly that of a clam (\"shen\", ), his scales those of a carp, his claws those of an eagle, his soles those of a tiger, his ears those of a cow. Upon his head, he has a thing like a broad eminence (a big lump), called [\"chimu\"] (). If a dragon has no [\"chimu\"], he cannot ascend to the sky.\nFurther sources give variant lists of the nine animal resemblances. Sinologist Henri Dor\u00e9 lists these characteristics of an authentic dragon: \"The antlers of a deer. The head of a crocodile. A demon's eyes. The neck of a snake. A tortoise's viscera. A hawk's claws. The palms of a tiger. A cow's ears. And it hears through its horns, its ears being deprived of all power of hearing\". He notes that, \"Others state it has a rabbit's eyes, a frog's belly, a carp's scales\".\nChinese dragons were considered to be physically concise. Of the 117 scales, 81 are of the yang essence (positive) while 36 are of the yin essence (negative). Initially, the dragon was benevolent, wise, and just, but the Buddhists introduced the concept of malevolent influence among some dragons. Just as water destroys, they said, so can some dragons destroy via floods, tidal waves, and storms. They suggested that some of the worst floods were believed to have been the result of a mortal upsetting a dragon.\nMany pictures of Chinese dragons show a flaming pearl under their chin or in their claws. The pearl is associated with spiritual energy, wisdom, prosperity, power, immortality, thunder, or the moon. Chinese art often depicts a pair of dragons chasing or fighting over a flaming pearl.\nChinese dragons are occasionally depicted with bat-like wings growing out of the front limbs, but most do not have wings, as their ability to fly (and control rain/water, etc.) is mystical and not seen as a result of their physical attributes.\nEven without wings the Chinese dragons can supposedly ascend to the sky and fly. According to legend, the dragon's flight is enabled by something on its head named \"chimu\" (Wade-Giles: \"ch'ih-mu\", , lit. 'foot-long wood/tree') that resembled the \"boshan\" (Wade-Giles: \"Po-shan\", incense burner, i.e. \"boshanlu\" or \"Hill censer\"), without which the dragon cannot fly. This piece of lore attested in the Tang dynasty tract \"Youyang zazu\".\nThis description accords with the artistic depictions of the dragon down to the present day. The dragon has also acquired an almost unlimited range of supernatural powers. It is said to be able to disguise itself as a silkworm, or become as large as our entire universe. It can fly among the clouds or hide in water (according to the \"Guanzi\"). It can form clouds, turn into water, change color as an ability to blend in with their surroundings, and be an effective form of camouflage or glow in the dark (according to the \"Shuowen Jiezi\").\nIn many other countries, folktales speak of the dragon having all the attributes of the other 11 creatures of the zodiac, this includes the whiskers of the Rat, the face and horns of the Ox, the claws and teeth of the Tiger, the belly of the Rabbit, the body of the Snake, the legs of the Horse, the goatee of the Goat, the wit of the Monkey, the crest of the Rooster, the ears of the Dog, and the snout of the Pig.\nIn some circles, it is considered bad luck to depict a dragon facing downward, as it is seen as disrespectful to place a dragon in such a manner that it cannot ascend to the sky. Also, depictions of dragons in tattoos are prevalent as they are symbols of strength and power, especially criminal organisations where dragons hold a meaning all on their own. As such, it is believed that one must be fierce and strong enough, hence earning the right to wear the dragon on his skin, lest his luck be consumed by the dragons.\nAccording to an art historian John Boardman, depictions of Chinese Dragon and Indian Makara might have been influenced by \"Cetus\" in Greek mythology possibly after contact with silk-road images of the \"K\u0113tos\" as Chinese dragon appeared more reptilian and shifted head-shape afterwards.\nRule over weather and water.\nChinese dragons are strongly associated with water and weather in popular religion. They are believed to be the rulers of moving bodies of water, such as waterfalls, rivers, or seas. The Dragon god is the dispenser of rain as well as the zoomorphic representation of yang, the masculine power of generation. In this capacity as the rulers of water and weather, the dragon is more anthropomorphic in form, often depicted as a humanoid, dressed in a king's costume, but with a dragon head wearing a king's headdress.\nThere are four major Dragon Kings, representing each of the Four Seas: the East Sea (corresponding to the East China Sea also, parts of the Pacific), the South Sea (corresponding to the South China Sea, West Philippines Sea ), the West Sea (The Qinghai Lake sometimes also, referred to Indian Ocean and the Bay of Bengal), and the North Sea corresponding to the (Lake Baikal, sometimes also the Sea of Japan and the Arctic Ocean). \"\"\nBecause of this association, they are seen as \"in charge\" of water-related weather phenomena. In premodern times, many Chinese villages (especially those close to rivers and seas) had temples dedicated to their local \"dragon king\". In times of drought or flooding, it was customary for the local gentry and government officials to lead the community in offering sacrifices and conducting other religious rites to appease the dragon, either to ask for rain or a cessation thereof.\nThe King of Wuyue in the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period was often known as the \"Dragon King\" or the \"Sea Dragon King\" because of his extensive hydro-engineering schemes which \"tamed\" the sea.\nIn coastal regions of China, Korea, Vietnam, traditional legends and worshipping of whale gods as the guardians of people on the sea have been referred to Dragon Kings after the arrival of Buddhism.\nSymbol of Imperial authority.\nAccording to Chinese legend, both Chinese primogenitors, the earliest Door and the Yellow Emperor, were closely related to the dragon. At the end of his reign, the first legendary ruler, the Yellow Emperor, was said to have been immortalized into a dragon that resembled his emblem, and ascended to Heaven. The other legendary ruler, the Yan Emperor, was born by his mother's telepathy with a mythical dragon. This legend also contributed towards the use of the Chinese dragon as a symbol of imperial power.\nDragons (usually with five claws on each foot) were a symbol for the emperor in many Chinese dynasties. During the Qing dynasty, the imperial dragon was colored yellow or gold, and during the Ming dynasty it was red. The imperial throne was referred to as the \"Dragon Throne\". During the late Qing dynasty, the dragon was even adopted as the national flag. Dragons are featured in carvings on the stairs and walkways of imperial palaces and imperial tombs, such as at the Forbidden City in Beijing.\nIn some Chinese legends, an emperor might be born with a birthmark in the shape of a dragon. For example, one legend tells the tale of a peasant born with a dragon birthmark who eventually overthrows the existing dynasty and founds a new one; another legend might tell of the prince in hiding from his enemies who is identified by his dragon birthmark.\nIn contrast, the empress of China was often identified with the Chinese phoenix.\nModern practice.\nWorship of the Dragon god is celebrated throughout China with sacrifices and processions during the fifth and sixth moons, and especially on the date of his birthday the thirteenth day of the sixth moon. A folk religious movement of associations of good-doing in modern Hebei is primarily devoted to a generic Dragon god whose icon is a tablet with his name inscribed, for which it has been named the \"movement of the Dragon Tablet\".\nDepictions.\nNeolithic.\nDragons or dragon-like depictions have been found extensively in Neolithic-period archaeological sites throughout China. Some of earliest depictions of dragons were found at Xinglongwa culture sites. Yangshao culture sites in Xi'an have produced clay pots with dragon motifs. A burial site Xishuipo in Puyang which is associated with the Yangshao culture shows a large dragon mosaic made out of clam shells. The Liangzhu culture also produced dragon-like patterns. The Hongshan culture sites in present-day Inner Mongolia produced jade dragon objects in the form of pig dragons which are the first 3-dimensional representations of Chinese dragons.\nOne such early form was the pig dragon. It is a coiled, elongated creature with a head resembling a boar. The character for \"dragon\" in the earliest Chinese writing has a similar coiled form, as do later jade dragon amulets from the Shang dynasty. A snake-like dragon body painted on red pottery wares was discovered at Taosi (Shanxi) from the second phase of the Longshan Culture, and a dragon-like object coated with approximately 2000 pieces of turquoise and jade was discovered at Erlitou.\nClassical era.\nChinese literature and myths refer to many dragons besides the famous \"long\". The linguist Michael Carr analyzed over 100 ancient dragon names attested in Chinese classic texts.\nFewer Chinese dragon names derive from the word \"long\" :\nSome additional Chinese dragons are not named \"long\", for instance,\nChinese scholars have classified dragons in diverse systems. For instance, Emperor Huizong of Song canonized five colored dragons as \"kings\". \"\"\nWith the addition of the Yellow Dragon of the center to Azure Dragon of the East, these Vermilion, White, and Black Dragons coordinate with the Four Symbols, including the Vermilion Bird of the South, White Tiger of the West, and Black Tortoise of the North. \nDragons were varyingly thought to be able to control and embody various natural elements in their \"mythic form\" such as \"water, air, earth, fire, light, wind, storm, [and] electricity\". Some dragons who were able to breathe fire were thought to be exiled from \"ti\u0101n\" and banished to Earth.\nNine sons of the dragon.\nSeveral Ming dynasty texts list what were claimed as the Nine Offspring of the Dragon (), and subsequently these feature prominently in popular Chinese stories and writings. The scholar Xie Zhaozhe (1567\u20131624) in his work \"Wu Za Zu\" Wuzazu (c. 1592) gives the following listing, as rendered by M. W. de Visser:\nA well-known work of the end of the sixteenth century, the \"Wuzazu\" , informs us about the nine different young of the dragon, whose shapes are used as ornaments according to their nature.\nFurther, the same author enumerates nine other kinds of dragons, which are represented as ornaments of different objects or buildings according to their liking prisons, water, the rank smell of newly caught fish or newly killed meat, wind and rain, ornaments, smoke, shutting the mouth (used for adorning key-holes), standing on steep places (placed on roofs), and fire.\nThe \"Sheng'an waiji\" () collection by the poet Yang Shen (1488\u20131559) gives different 5th and 9th names for the dragon's nine children: the \"taotie\", form of beasts, which loves to eat and is found on food-related wares, and the \"ji\u0101o t\u00fa\" (), which looks like a conch or clam, does not like to be disturbed, and is used on the front door or the doorstep. Yang's list is \"b\u00ec x\u00ec\", \"ch\u012b w\u011bn\" or \"ch\u00e1o f\u0113ng\", \"p\u00fa l\u00e1o\", \"b\u00ec \u00e0n\", \"t\u0101o ti\u00e8\", \"qi\u00fa ni\u00fa\", \"y\u00e1 z\u00ec\", \"su\u0101n n\u00ed\", and \"ji\u0101o t\u00fa\". In addition, there are some sayings including \"b\u0101 xi\u00e0\" , Hybrid of reptilia animal and dragon, a creature that likes to drink water, and is typically used on bridge structures.\nThe oldest known attestation of the \"children of the dragon\" list is found in the \"Shuyuan zaji\" (, \"Miscellaneous records from the bean garden\") by Lu Rong (1436\u20131494); however, he noted that the list enumerates mere synonyms of various antiques, not children of a dragon. The nine sons of the dragon were commemorated by the Shanghai Mint in 2012's year of the dragon with two sets of coins, one in silver, and one in brass. Each coin in the sets depicts one of the 9 sons, including an additional coin for the father dragon, which depicts the nine sons on the reverse. It's also a Chinese idiom, which means among brothers each one has his good points.\nDragon claws.\nOriginally, early Chinese dragons are mostly depicted with three claws, but they can range from two to five claws. Different countries that adopted the Chinese dragon have different preferences; in Mongolia and Korea, four-clawed dragons are used, while in Japan, three-clawed dragons are common. In China, three-clawed dragons were popularly used on robes during the Tang dynasty. The usage of the dragon motif was codified during the Yuan dynasty, and the five-clawed dragons became reserved for use by the emperor while the princes used four-clawed dragons. Phoenixes and five-clawed two-horned dragons may not be used on the robes of officials and other objects such as plates and vessels in the Yuan dynasty. It was further stipulated that for commoners, \"it is forbidden to wear any cloth with patterns of Qilin, Male Fenghuang (Chinese phoenix), White rabbit, Lingzhi, Five-Toe Two-Horn Dragon, Eight Dragons, Nine Dragons, 'Ten thousand years', Fortune-longevity character and Golden Yellow etc.\"\nThe Hongwu Emperor of the Ming dynasty emulated the Yuan dynasty rules on the use of the dragon motif and decreed that the dragon would be his emblem and that it should have five claws. The four-clawed dragon would be used typically for imperial nobility and certain high-ranking officials. The three-clawed dragon was used by lower ranks and the general public (widely seen on various Chinese goods in the Ming dynasty). The dragon, however, was only for select royalty closely associated with the imperial family, usually in various symbolic colors, and it was a capital offense for anyone\u2014other than the emperor himself\u2014to ever use the completely gold-colored, five-clawed \"Long\" dragon motif. Improper use of claw number or colors was considered treason, punishable by execution of the offender's entire clan. During the Qing dynasty, the Manchus initially considered three-clawed dragons the most sacred and used that until 1712 when it was replaced by five-clawed dragons, and portraits of the Qing emperors were usually depicted with five-clawed dragons.\nIn works of art that left the imperial collection, either as gifts or through pilfering by court eunuchs (a long-standing problem), where practicable, one claw was removed from each set, as in several pieces of carved lacquerware, for example the Chinese lacquerware table in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London.\nCultural references.\nNumber nine.\nThe number nine is special in China as it is seen as the number of heaven, and Chinese dragons are frequently connected with it. For example, a Chinese dragon is normally described in terms of nine attributes and usually has 117 (9\u00d713) scales\u201481 (9\u00d79) Yang and 36 (9\u00d74) Yin.\nThis is also why there are nine forms of the dragon and nine sons of the dragon (see Classical depictions above). The Nine-Dragon Wall is a spirit wall with images of nine different dragons, and is found in imperial Chinese palaces and gardens. Because nine was considered the number of the emperor, only the most senior officials were allowed to wear nine dragons on their robes\u2014and then only with the robe completely covered with surcoats. Lower-ranking officials had eight or five dragons on their robes, again covered with surcoats; even the emperor himself wore his dragon robe with one of its nine dragons hidden from view.\nThere are a number of places in China called \"Nine Dragons\", the most famous being Kowloon in Hong Kong. The part of the Mekong in Vietnam is known as \"C\u1eedu Long\", with the same meaning.\nChinese zodiac.\nThe dragon is one of the 12 animals in the Chinese zodiac which is used to designate years in the Chinese calendar. It is thought that each animal is associated with certain personality traits. Dragon years are usually the most popular to have children. There are more people born in Dragon years than in any other animal years of the zodiac.\nConstellations.\nThe Azure Dragon is considered to be the primary of the four celestial guardians, the other three being the Vermilion Bird, White Tiger, Black Tortoise. In this context, the Azure Dragon is associated with the East and the element of Wood.\nDragon boat racing.\nAt special festivals, especially the Dragon Boat Festival, dragon boat races are an important part of festivities. Typically, these are boats paddled by a team of up to 20 paddlers with a drummer and steersman. The boats have a carved dragon as the head and tail of the boat. Dragon boat racing is also an important part of celebrations outside of China, such as at Chinese New Year.\nA similar racing is popular in India in the state of Kerala called Vallamkali and there are records on Chinese traders visiting the seashores of Kerala centuries back (Ibn Batuta). \"\"\nDragon dance.\nOn auspicious occasions, including Chinese New Year and the opening of shops and residences, festivities often include dancing with dragon puppets. These are \"life sized\" cloth-and-wood puppets manipulated by a team of people, supporting the dragon with poles. They perform choreographed moves to the accompaniment of drums, drama, and music. They also wore good clothing made of silk.\nWith Fenghuang.\nFenghuang (), known in Japanese as H\u014d-\u014d or Hou-ou, are phoenix-like birds found in East Asian mythology that reign over all other birds. In Chinese symbolism, it is a feminine entity that is paired with the masculine Chinese dragon, as a visual metaphor of a balanced and blissful relationship, symbolic of both a happy marriage and a regent's long reign.\nAs N\u0101ga.\nIn South and Southeast Asian countries, the concept of the n\u0101ga has been merged with local traditions of great and wise serpents or dragons, as depicted in this stairway image of a multi-headed n\u0101ga emerging from the mouth of a Makara in the style of a Chinese dragon at Phra Maha Chedi Chai Mongkol on the premises of Wat Pha Namthip Thep Prasit Vararam in Nong Phok District, Roi Et Province, Thailand. \nThe concept of \"Dragon King/Longwang\" for \"Loongs\" in China came from Indian concept of \"Nagaraja\" vis Buddhism. \nWith Tigers.\nThe tiger is considered to be the eternal rival to the dragon, thus various artworks depict a dragon and tiger fighting an epic battle, also the resemblances of Yin and Yang. A common chengyu to describe equal rivals is \"dragon versus Tiger\". In Chinese martial arts, \"Dragon style\" is used to describe styles of fighting based more on understanding movement, while \"Tiger style\" is based on brute strength and memorization of techniques. \nBotany.\nThe elm cultivar \"Ulmus pumila\" 'Pendula', from northern China, called 'weeping Chinese elm' in the West, is known locally as \"Lung chao y\u00fc shu\" ('Dragon's-claw elm') owing to its branching.\nLanguage.\nA number of Chinese proverbs and idioms feature references to a dragon, such as \"Hoping one's child will become a dragon\" ().\nIn popular culture.\nAs a part of traditional folklore, dragons appear in a variety of mythological fiction. Chinese dragons appear in innumerable media across popular culture today, including but not at all limited to: Japanese anime films and television shows, manga, and in Western political cartoons as a personification of the People's Republic of China.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66205", "revid": "4441371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66205", "title": "Maryam (2002 film)", "text": "Maryam is a 2002 film about a young woman who is an Iranian immigrant living in the United States at the time of the Iran hostage crisis. The film was written and directed by Ramin Serry. Mariam Parris plays the young woman. The film also features Shaun Toub as her father, Shohreh Aghdashloo as her mother, and David Ackert as her cousin, Ali, who becomes an Islamic fundamentalist.\nMaryam was featured in the third in 2001.\nThe word \"Maryam\" is the Aramaic name of Mary, the mother of Jesus and means the same in Persian language. Maryam also means Tuberose in Persian and is a common first name in Iran."}
{"id": "66206", "revid": "44422690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66206", "title": "Paul Verhoeven", "text": "Dutch filmmaker (born 1938)\nPaul Verhoeven (; born 18 July 1938) is a Dutch filmmaker, who has worked variously in the Netherlands, the United States, and in France. He is known for directing genre films with strong satirical elements, often featuring graphic violence and sexual content. Many of his films are considered provocative, and were controversial when released.\nAfter receiving attention for the TV series \"Floris\" in his native Netherlands, Verhoeven's breakthrough film was the romantic drama \"Turkish Delight\" (1973), starring frequent collaborator Rutger Hauer, which received an Oscar nomination for Best Foreign-Language Film. He later directed successful Dutch films including the period film \"Keetje Tippel\" (1975), the World War II film \"Soldier of Orange\" (1977), the adolescent drama \"Spetters\" (1980) and the Gerard Reve-adapted psychological thriller \"The Fourth Man\" (1983). \nIn 1985, Verhoeven made his first Hollywood film \"Flesh and Blood\" and later had a successful career in the United States, directing science fiction films such as \"RoboCop\" (1987), \"Total Recall\" (1990), \"Starship Troopers\" (1997) and \"Hollow Man\" (2000), as well as the erotic thriller \"Basic Instinct\" (1992). He also directed the 1995 film \"Showgirls,\" which was critically panned on initial release but has developed a cult following and undergone critical re-evaluation.\nVerhoeven later returned to Europe, making the Dutch war film \"Black Book\" (2006), French psychological thriller \"Elle\" (2016) and the religious drama \"Benedetta\" (2021), all receiving positive reviews. \"Black Book\" and \"Elle\" were both nominated for BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language and \"Elle\" won Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film and C\u00e9sar Award for Best Film. \"Black Book\" was also voted by the Dutch public, in 2008, as the best Dutch film ever made. Verhoeven's films have received a total of nine Academy Award nominations, mainly for editing and effects.\nEarly life.\nPaul Verhoeven was born in Amsterdam on 18 July 1938, the son of a schoolteacher, Wim Verhoeven, and a hatmaker, Nel van Schaardenburg. Despite what is sometimes reported, he is not related to German filmmaker Michael Verhoeven, whose father was also named Paul Verhoeven. \nIn 1943, the family moved to The Hague, the location of the German headquarters in the Netherlands during World War II. The Verhoeven house was near a German military base with V1- and V2-rocket launchers, which was repeatedly bombed by Allied forces. Their neighbours' house was hit and Verhoeven's parents were almost killed when bombs fell on a street crossing. From this period, Verhoeven mentioned in interviews, he remembers images of violence, burning houses, dead bodies on the street, and continuous danger. As a small child, he experienced the war as an exciting adventure, and has compared himself with the character Bill Rowan in \"Hope and Glory\" (1987).\nVerhoeven's father became headteacher at the Van Heutszschool in The Hague, and Paul attended this school. Sometimes the two watched informative films at home with the school's film projector. \nVerhoeven and his father went to see \"The War of the Worlds\" (1953) ten times. Verhoeven was a fan of the Dutch comic \"Dick Bos\", a private detective who fights crime using jujutsu. Verhoeven liked comic drawing; he created \"The Killer\", a character in a detailed story of revenge. Other fiction he liked included \"Frankenstein\" and the Edgar Rice Burroughs Barsoom series.\nVerhoeven attended public secondary school \"Gymnasium Haganum\" in The Hague. Later, beginning in 1956, he studied at Leiden University. He graduated in 1964 with a doctorandus (MSc) in mathematics as a major and physics as a minor.\nCareer.\nShort films and TV series (1960\u20131969).\nVerhoeven made his first film \"\u00c9\u00e9n hagedis teveel\" (\"\"One Lizard Too Many\") for the anniversary of his students' corps in 1960. In his last years at university Verhoeven also attended classes at the Netherlands Film Academy. After this he made three more short films: \"Nothing Special\" (1961), \"The Hitchhikers\" (1962) and \"Let's Have a Party\" (1963).\nVerhoeven has not professionally used his mathematics and physics degree, opting instead to invest his energies in a career in film. After his studies, he entered the Royal Dutch Navy as a conscript. He made the documentary \"Het Korps Mariniers\" (\"The Marine Corps\"\", 1965), which won the French 'Golden Sun' award for military films.\nWhen he left the Navy, Verhoeven took his skills to Dutch television. First, he made a documentary about Anton Mussert titled \"Mussert\" (1968). His first major success was the 1969 television series \"Floris\", starring Rutger Hauer in the title role. The concept of \"Floris\" was inspired by foreign series such as \"Ivanhoe\" and \"Thierry La Fronde\".\nFirst feature films (1969\u20131983).\nVerhoeven's first feature film \"Business Is Business\" was released in 1971 and was not well received. His first national success came in 1973 with \"Turkish Delight\", starring Rutger Hauer and Monique van de Ven. Based on a novel by bestselling Dutch author Jan Wolkers, \"Turkish Delight\" tells the passionate love story of an artist and a young liberal girl from a conservative background. It received an Academy Award nomination for Best Foreign Language Film in 1974. In 1999, the film won a Golden Calf for Best Dutch Film of the Century. \"Katie Tippel\" (1975) again featured Hauer and van de Ven, but it did not match the success of \"Turkish Delight\".\nVerhoeven built on his reputation and achieved international success with the Golden Globe-nominated \"Soldier of Orange\" (1977), starring Rutger Hauer and Jeroen Krabb\u00e9. Based on a true story about the Dutch resistance in World War II, it was written by Erik Hazelhoff Roelfzema. \"Soldier of Orange\" received the 1979 LA Film Critics Award for best foreign-language film, and it was also nominated for a Golden Globe in 1980.\nIn 1980, Verhoeven made \"Spetters\" with Ren\u00e9e Soutendijk and Rutger Hauer. The story is sometimes compared to \"Saturday Night Fever\", but it has more explicit violence and sexuality (in this case also homosexuality), which are sometimes seen as the director's trademarks. \"The Fourth Man\" (1983) is a horror film starring Jeroen Krabb\u00e9 and Ren\u00e9e Soutendijk. It was written by Gerard Soeteman from a novel by the Dutch writer Gerard Reve, and was Verhoeven's last Dutch production until \"Black Book\" (2006).\n\"The Seattle Times\" praised Verhoeven by saying he \"often appears to be a one-man Dutch movie industry\". \"The San Diego Union-Tribune\" called Verhoeven \"a busy bee whose movies pollinate the festival circuit\".\nFilmmaking in the United States (1983\u20132000).\nGerard Soeteman also wrote the script for Verhoeven's first English-language film, \"Flesh and Blood\" (1985), which starred Rutger Hauer and Jennifer Jason Leigh. Verhoeven moved to Hollywood for a wider range of opportunities in filmmaking. Working in the U.S., he made a serious change in style, directing big-budget, violent, special-effects-heavy hits \"RoboCop\" (1987) and \"Total Recall\" (1990)\u2060 \u2014 each of which won an Academy Special Achievement Award: \"RoboCop\" for Sound Effects Editing and \"Total Recall\" for Visual Effects.\nVerhoeven followed those successes with \"Basic Instinct\" (1992), an erotic thriller. The film's most notorious scene shows Sharon Stone's character in a police interrogation, where she uncrosses her legs, briefly revealing her vulva (she does not wear underwear underneath her skirt). The film received two Academy Award nominations, for Film Editing and for Original Music, and was the ninth-highest-grossing film of the year.\nDuring this time, Verhoeven also worked on creating an historical epic based around the Crusades that would have starred Arnold Schwarzenegger. It went into pre-production in 1993, but a year later the studio backing it, Carolco, pulled funding for the project. Verhoeven would continue to discuss it throughout the 1990s.\nVerhoeven's next film was the poorly received, NC-17-rated \"Showgirls\" (1995), about a stripper in Las Vegas trying to make a career as a showgirl. It won seven Golden Raspberry Awards, including Worst Film and Worst Director; Verhoeven became the first director to accept his award in person. To date, he is one of the few people to have accepted their Golden Raspberry awards in person, and the first to directly attend the ceremony to receive it. \"Showgirls\" enjoyed a large amount of success on the home video market, generating more than $100\u00a0million from video rentals, and became one of MGM's top twenty all-time bestsellers.\nAfter \"Basic Instinct\" and \"Showgirls\", Verhoeven returned to the science fiction genre, utilizing the graphic violence and special-effects tropes that had marked his earlier films, making \"Starship Troopers\" (1997), loosely based on the novel of the same name by Robert A. Heinlein, as well as \"Hollow Man\" (2000). Each film received an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects. He also served as an executive producer on an animated TV series called \"\", which was based on the movie and novel of \"Starship Troopers\". The series only ran for a single season, from August 1999 until April 2000.\nReturn to Europe (2006\u20132021).\nAfter about twenty years of working and living in the United States, Verhoeven returned to the Netherlands for the shooting of a new film. Together with his screenwriter Gerard Soeteman, Verhoeven made \"Black Book\" (2006). The director was hailed by the host of the Netherlands Film Festival with the words \"The return of a hero\". \"Black Book\" won six Golden Calves at this festival, including Best Director. When the shooting of \"Black Book\" was delayed due to financial issues, there was speculation about a new production. \"Beast of Bataan\" had been announced, but once the shooting for \"Black Book\" resumed, the other film was not made.\nVerhoeven was knighted in the Order of the Netherlands Lion in 2007.\nSince \"Black Book\", Verhoeven has been connected to a large number of projects, but in the first decade after his return, none came to fruition. Some of those titles were produced with other directors at the helm, such as \"The Paperboy\". In 2016, however, Verhoeven followed \"Black Book\" by directing a French film: \"Elle\", an adaptation of a novel by Philippe Djian. A psychological thriller in which Isabelle Huppert plays a rape victim, \"Elle\" was selected for the Official Competition at the Cannes International Film Festival, where it obtained very favourable reviews.\nIn December 2016, it was announced that Verhoeven would be the president of the jury for the 67th Berlin International Film Festival, scheduled to take place in February 2017.\nIn April 2017, it was announced that filming of \"Benedetta\", his next French film, would begin in August of the same year. It is a biopic about the life of Benedetta Carlini, portrayed by \"Elle\" co-star Virginie Efira, and is an adaptation of the non-fiction book \"\" by Judith C. Brown. In May 2018, it was announced that Charlotte Rampling would play a key supporting role. The film premiered at the 2021 Cannes Film Festival in competition for the Palme d'Or.\nReturn to filmmaking in the United States (2022\u2013present).\nVerhoeven is currently preparing his next film, \"Young Sinner\", which reunites him with \"RoboCop\" screenwriter Edward Neumeier. An erotic political thriller, it is set in Washington DC and is about a \"young staffer who works for a powerful Senator [and] is drawn into a web of international intrigue and danger.\" Verhoeven hoped to begin shooting \"Young Sinner\" in 2024, but in November of that year, he was still trying to secure financing. \nOther activities.\nVerhoeven was a member of the Jesus Seminar, and he was the only member who does not have a degree in biblical studies. He graduated with a degree in mathematics and physics from the University of Leiden. Since he is not a professional biblical exegete, his membership in the Jesus Seminar has occasionally been cited by opponents of the Seminar as a sign that this group is less scholarly than it claims. For example, Luke Timothy Johnson criticizes the Jesus Seminar's methods on exegetical grounds, and also criticizes what he perceives to be a dependence on the theatrical and an attempt to manipulate the mainstream media. He singles out Verhoeven as a key player in the media activities of the Jesus Seminar. On the other hand, some Jesus Seminar members were unhappy with Verhoeven's portrayal of Jesus as an eschatological prophet.\nIn 2007, Verhoeven wrote the book \"Jesus of Nazareth\" () about the life of Jesus of Nazareth. The book reviews the ideas of Jesus of Nazareth and the alleged corruption of these same ideas over the last 2,000 years. Co-written with Verhoeven's biographer Rob Van Scheers, the book is the culmination of the research Verhoeven conducted in preparation for \"Jesus: The Man\", a motion picture about the life of Christ. The book tells about the Jewish uprising against Roman rule and characterizes Jesus as a radical political activist, downplaying any supernatural events and miracles as unproved or unprovable. \"Jesus of Nazareth: A Realistic Portrait\" was released in September 2008 in Dutch, and was published in English in May 2010 by Seven Stories Press.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1967, Verhoeven married Martine Tours, with whom he has two daughters.\nFilmography.\nTelevision.\nDirector\nExecutive producer\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66207", "revid": "28021428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66207", "title": "Ebertfest", "text": "American film festival\nEbertfest is an annual film festival held every April in Champaign, Illinois, United States, organized by the College of Media at the University of Illinois. Roger Ebert, the TV and \"Chicago Sun-Times\" film critic, was a native of the adjoining town of Urbana, Illinois, and is an alumnus of the University. Founded in 1999 as Roger Ebert's Overlooked Film Festival, this event is the only long-running film festival created by a critic. Despite Ebert's death in 2013, the festival continues to operate based on Ebert's notes and vision for the kinds of films he championed.\nThe 2020 festival was postponed due to the coronavirus pandemic. The 22nd edition of the event was rescheduled three times, eventually opening on April 20, 2022.\nIn September 2025, it was announced that the 2025 event marked its final year in Champaign, citing \"financial considerations\". The announcement did not include specific details about the future of the festival, but said that festival founders \"are actively exploring inspired ideas for reinventing Ebertfest\".\nOrigins.\nThe festival is a direct descendant of a program put on at the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign in 1997 called Cyberfest which used the supposed birthday of HAL (the computer in the film \"\") to highlight the University's involvement in the history of computers and computing. The film was to be shown as part of Cyberfest, Roger Ebert had agreed to host and actor Gary Lockwood was a special guest.\nIt was suggested that the film should ideally be shown as it was originally, in 70\u00a0mm format. The original plan was to have the screening at the University's performing arts center but time constraints vs. the need to install projection equipment and elaborate six channel sound made this impossible. Someone suggested looking at the Virginia Theatre, as 70\u00a0mm films had been shown there in the past. At this point the theatre was in the hands of a local live theatre group and had not run films since sold by a theatre chain. All concerned were pleasantly surprised to learn the chain had left behind not only what is reputed to be the finest 35/70\u00a0mm projector made but also the screen and speakers. The rest of the equipment was brought in for the special showing which went perfectly.\nVenue.\nSince its inception in 1999 through the 2025 festival, Ebertfest was held at the Virginia Theatre, an old-time movie palace in Champaign built in 1921 and listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The theatre is now owned by the Champaign Park District. Ebert spoke of having attended films at the Virginia while growing up in Champaign-Urbana and attending the University. It was Ebert's intention that all festival attendees see all of the films in a single theatre in order to create a sense of community among film lovers.\nIn 2014, a bronze statue of Roger Ebert was unveiled outside of the Virginia Theatre as tribute to both Ebert and Ebertfest.\nIn September 2025, festival administrators cited \"financial considerations facing both universities and film festivals\" as a reason for discontinuing the festival in Champaign, as it had been for 26 years. They said there is \"not a clearly sustainable path for the festival in its present form\". The announcement did not include future plans for the festival, other than to say that Chaz Ebert and festival director Nate Kohn \"are actively exploring inspired ideas for reinventing Ebertfest and will be sharing updates as those plans crystallize\".\nGrowth.\nThrough donations, the Virginia has been able to fully equip its projection and sound system with a second projector, the latest in digital sound equipment and top quality lenses. The theatre's screen is 56 feet wide by 23 feet high, with a viewable image of up to 50 feet wide x 21\u00bd feet high. The main speakers sit directly behind the screen during film presentations and are augmented by 36 surround sound speakers.\nInstrumental in these upgrades has been notable Chicago-based projection expert James Bond who doubles as one of the projectionists during the festival.\nCapacity.\nSince 2013, the Virginia Theatre has a seating capacity of 1,463. The theatre was closed from 2012 until April 2013 for renovations that included replacing all of the seats. Capacity dropped from about 1,550 to 1,463 but the new seats are more comfortable and the theatre offers wheelchair and companion access.\nName change.\nIn April 2007, it was announced that beginning in 2008 with the tenth festival \"Overlooked\" would be dropped from the name and subsequent events would be known as \"Roger Ebert's Film Festival\", but commonly referred to as simply Ebertfest. This did not necessarily indicate any change in the philosophy or theme but simply eliminated the need to explain when current or even unreleased films were included which had sometimes been the case. They had sometimes been jokingly referred to as \"pre-overlooked.\"\nSelection criteria.\nUnlike typical film festivals, Ebertfest does not accept submissions. Roger Ebert selected films for the festival which in his opinion are excellent, but have been overlooked by the public or by film distribution companies. All films were selected from those that Ebert saw in the course of his normal reviewing work. Since Ebert's death, all films have been selected by the Festival Committee.\nThe original purpose of the Overlooked Film Festival, as reflected in the name, was to showcase films that had not been given enough attention by the public, film critics, or even distributors. Ebert had cheerfully admitted that he could bend the definition of \"overlooked\" to accommodate any film that he would like to include, since entire genres and formats can be overlooked as well as individual films. The selection philosophy is expected to continue, but with the name change there will no longer be a need to come up with a pretext for including any film.\n70 mm.\nFor many years, the festival opened with a film in the 70 mm format. The films may be major releases, like \"\" or \"Patton\", or less well-known, like 2005's showing of the French film \"Playtime.\" These films were all chosen primarily due to their use of the 70\u00a0mm process, which Ebert felt was overlooked.\nSilent film.\nEach year a silent film is shown with live orchestral accompaniment. The films selected are generally well-known (for example, \"Nosferatu\"), but Ebert felt that silent films in general are overlooked by the majority of moviegoers. The festival also strives to include a musical film for the same reason. Performers providing live accompaniment have included the Champaign-Urbana Symphony Orchestra and the Alloy Orchestra.\nFestival format.\nTwelve to fourteen films are presented at each festival, opening with a single film on a Wednesday night and concluding with a single movie the following Sunday. On each day during the interim three or four films are presented. As of 2019, the format excluded the Sunday screening.\nFor the first eight festivals, before each screening Roger Ebert would make a few introductory remarks. After the film was shown he would have a discussion on stage with the filmmakers or others connected with the film, sometimes hosting a brief panel discussion.\nAfter Ebert lost his speaking voice due to cancer, starting with the ninth festival in 2007, his wife Chaz assumed many of the hosting duties. Post-show panels are led by his \"Far-Flung Correspondents\" or other respected film professionals, such as film historian David Bordwell and film critic Christy Lemire.\nOn April 4, 2013, Ebert died after a long battle with cancer. Despite his death, the film festival went along as scheduled, simultaneously acting as a tribute to Ebert's legacy. At the opening of the 15th annual Ebertfest, it was announced by Ebert's wife, Chaz, that his alma mater, the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign, will be establishing a new Film Studies program within the College of Media in honor of his legacy. The program will be funded in part by a $1 million grant from Ebert and his wife to the University. The non-degree program will be both a collection of film-related seminars and classes as well as a platform for Ebertfest to continue.\nFestival guests.\nSince its inception, many film directors, actors, producers, cinematographers and other crew members, as well as studio executives have been invited to participate in Ebertfest. Examples include Werner Herzog, Spike Lee, and Tilda Swinton.\nFor the tenth Ebertfest in 2010, many of the international invited guests were unable to attend due to the volcanic eruptions in Iceland that disrupted air travel in Europe.\nFor the 2022 festival, actor Gilbert Gottfried was scheduled to appear as a panelist to discuss the documentary film about him, \"Gilbert\". In the aftermath of his death on April 12, 2022, Ebertfest announced it was dedicating the event to the memories of Gottfried and Sidney Poitier.\nAwards.\nAs a non-competitive film festival, Ebertfest does not have jury or audience awards. But beginning with the sixth festival in 2004, all invited guests have been given an award originally referred to by Ebert as the Order of the Silver Thumb, but subsequently known as the Golden Thumb Award. The Golden Thumb trophy is a casting of Roger Ebert's thumb in the up position, made by the R.S. Owens &amp; Company, which is the same business that makes the Oscar statuette.\nThe first Roger Ebert Humanitarian Award was presented in 2016 to co-directors Andrew Young and Stephen Apkon for their documentary film \"Disturbing the Peace\". The film focuses on the work of Combatants for Peace, a group of former Israeli soldiers and Palestinian fighters who put down their weapons and began working together for peace in the region.\nIn 2017, the second Ebert Humanitarian Award was presented to Norman Lear for \"a lifetime of empathy\". Lear was the first person to receive the award, because the 2016 award was given to the film \"Disturbing the Peace\". Lear was a special guest at the 2017 festival, to screen the documentary about his life.\nIn 2019, the third Ebert Humanitarian Award was presented to Morgan Neville for his film \"Won't You Be My Neighbor?\". That same year, Chaz Ebert presented the first-ever Ebertfest Icon Award to Rita Coburn Whack for the documentary film she co-directed about poet and civil rights activist Maya Angelou, titled \"Maya Angelou: And Still I Rise\".\nAcademic panel discussions.\nCo-sponsored by the University of Illinois College of Media, every Ebertfest since its inception has included panel discussions with invited festival guests and scholars from academia, covering a variety of film-related topics. These discussions are free and open to the public, and are held in the mornings during the festival. From 1999 to 2016, the panels were held on the University of Illinois campus. Beginning in 2017, the panel discussions are held in a hotel close to the Virginia Theatre.\nLive streaming.\nBeginning in 2010, the panel discussions, film introductions, and post-film discussions/question and answer sessions with festival guests have been streamed live, and then archived on https://.\nAdmission.\nFestival goers can purchase tickets to individual shows or full-festival passes. The number of passes sold is limited to 1,000 with the remainder of seats allotted for individual tickets or sponsors. As passholders do not necessarily attend every show, it is often possible to obtain tickets at the last minute after empty seats are counted. At every festival since 2002, all patrons waiting in line for sold-out films were able to gain entry to the theatre.\nPasses for the first Ebertfest in 1999 cost $30, and individual film tickets were $5. In 2016, passes cost $150, and individual film tickets were $15. In 2023, passes cost $200 and individual film tickets were $20.\nThe first sell-out of passes was in 2004.\nFestival administration.\nFestival founder, programmer and host, 1999\u20132012: Roger Ebert\nFestival producer, 1999\u20132006: Nancy Casey\nFestival producer and host, 2007\u2013present: Chaz Ebert\nFestival director, 1999\u2013present: Nate Kohn\nFilms.\nThe following is a complete list of films presented at Ebertfest.\n2025.\nFestival schedule\n2024.\nFestival schedule\n2023.\nFestival schedule\n2022.\nFestival schedule\n2019.\nFestival schedule\n2018.\nFestival schedule\n2017.\nFestival schedule\n2016.\nFestival schedule\n2015.\nFestival schedule\n2014.\nFestival schedule\n2013.\nFestival schedule\n2012.\nFestival schedule\n2011.\nFestival schedule\n2010.\nFestival schedule\n2009.\nFestival schedule\n2008.\nFestival schedule\n2007.\nFestival schedule\n2006.\nFestival schedule\n2005.\nFestival schedule\n2004.\nFestival schedule\n2003.\nFestival schedule\n2002.\nFestival schedule\n2001.\nFestival schedule\n2000.\nFestival schedule\n1999.\nFestival schedule\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66209", "revid": "11180883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66209", "title": "Daimler-Benz", "text": ""}
{"id": "66214", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66214", "title": "Trade Union", "text": ""}
{"id": "66215", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66215", "title": "Night Gallery", "text": "American anthology TV series (1970\u20131973)\nNight Gallery is an American anthology television series that aired on NBC from December 16, 1970, to May 27, 1973, featuring stories of horror and the macabre. Rod Serling, who had gained fame from an earlier series, \"The Twilight Zone\", served both as the on-air host of \"Night Gallery\" and as a major contributor of scripts, although he did not have the same control of content and tone as he had on \"The Twilight Zone\". Serling viewed \"Night Gallery\" as a logical extension of \"The Twilight Zone\", but while both series shared an interest in thought-provoking dark fantasy, more of \"Zone\"'s offerings were science fiction while \"Night Gallery\" focused on horrors of the supernatural.\nBackground.\nFormat and style.\nSerling appeared in an art gallery setting as the curator and introduced the macabre tales that made up each episode by unveiling paintings (by artists Thomas J. Wright and Jaroslav \"Jerry\" Gebr) that depicted the stories. His intro usually was, \u201cGood evening, and welcome to a private showing of three paintings, displayed here for the first time. Each is a collector\u2019s item in its own way\u2014not because of any special artistic quality, but because each captures on a canvas, suspended in time and space, a frozen moment of a nightmare.\u201d\n\"Night Gallery\" regularly presented adaptations of classic fantasy tales by authors such as H. P. Lovecraft, as well as original works, many of which were by Serling himself. \"Night Gallery\"'s multi-segment presentation mirrored the EC horror comics of the 1950s, and hadn't been seen on television before, except for on the one-off \"Trio for Terror\" episode of \"Thriller\" in 1961.\nThe series was introduced with a pilot television film consisting of three segments or movies, that aired on November 8, 1969. All three were written by Serling, with the second segment of the film, \"Eyes\", being the directorial debut of Steven Spielberg, as well as one of the last acting performances by Joan Crawford. Spielberg went on to direct a segment in the first season in 1970, titled \"Make Me Laugh\", which was another Serling teleplay. This segment was shot as one long take, and Spielberg said it \"appalled\" network executives due to its unorthodox style.\nAccording to Rod Serling's wife Carol, NBC envisioned \"Night Gallery\" as being a show about \"action, ghouls and gore\". While Serling was fine with having horror elements, he wanted it to be infused with social commentary. Some of Serling's scripts were rejected by producer Jack Laird. He was a fan of the classic Universal Monsters horror films, and preferred NBC's vision of the show.\n\"Night Gallery\" was initially part of a wheel series called \"Four in One\". This 1970\u20131971 television series rotated three other shows with \"Night Gallery\", including \"McCloud\", \"San Francisco International Airport\" and \"The Psychiatrist\". When \"Four in One\" was cancelled, \"McCloud\" joined another wheel series, \"The NBC Mystery Movie\", and \"Night Gallery\" was spun off as a standalone series.\nIn its second season, \"Night Gallery\" included original comic blackout sketches between the longer story segments in some episodes, conceived by Jack Laird. Most of the blackout sketches were written by Laird himself, and they often featured supernatural characters (such as vampires) in black comedy situations. The inclusion of the short blackout sketches meant that some episodes in the second season had up to four different segments. One of the blackout sketches in the second season, titled \"A Matter of Semantics\", included Count Dracula (played by Cesar Romero) trying to withdraw blood from a blood bank. The actress who played the blood bank's nurse, E.J. Peaker, later said in 1998 that she remembered the director of \"A Matter of Semantics\" to be Steven Spielberg. However, Spielberg said in 2023 that he was fired from the show after directing \"Make Me Laugh\". Jack Laird is officially credited as director of \"A Matter of Semantics\".\nRod Serling opposed the presence of the blackout sketches on the show due to their tone, and several of them have no introduction from Serling. He said, \"I thought they [the blackout sketches] distorted the thread of what we were trying to do on \"Night Gallery\". I don't think one can show Edgar Allan Poe and then come back with Flip Wilson for 34 seconds. I just don't think they fit.\" In another interview, he referred to them as \"foreign and substantially incorrect\", complaining that \"you can't sustain the mood of horror or suspense and then intersperse light laughter in the middle of it and then expect to be able to go back in a neutral fashion to an element of horror. You spend fifteen minutes creating a mood for an audience and then you dispel it arbitrarily by trying to make them laugh.\" These types of segments were much less frequent in the third and final season, which had a restrictive budget and a shorter half-hour format. Each episode consisted of a single segment or a short segment and one short blackout sketch. During this season, NBC explicitly forbade the philosophical stories for which \"The Twilight Zone\" was known, and demanded fewer adaptations of classic horror fiction, in favor of more contemporary American stories. NBC moved the show from Wednesday to Sunday in the same 10 p.m. timeslot. Regarding these changes, Serling said at the time, \"I'm fucking furious. These people are taking what could have been a good series and they're so commercializing it it's not going to be commercial.\" Serling added that they wanted \"considerable action as opposed to anything insightful, cerebral or sensitive.\" It has been claimed that NBC pushed for \"Night Gallery\" to become strictly an action show for the third season, with no supernatural elements, although this would not end up being the case.\nWriting.\nSerling wrote many of the teleplays, including \"Camera Obscura\" (based on a short story by Basil Copper), \"The Caterpillar\" (based on a short story by Oscar Cook), \"Class of '99\", \"Cool Air\" (based on a short story by H.P. Lovecraft), \"The Doll\", \"Green Fingers\", \"Lindemann's Catch\", and \"The Messiah on Mott Street\" (heavily influenced by Bernard Malamud's \"Angel Levine\"). Non-Serling efforts include \"The Dead Man\", \"I'll Never Leave You\u2014Ever\", \"Pickman's Model\" (based on a short story by H.P. Lovecraft), \"A Question of Fear\", \"Silent Snow, Secret Snow\", and \"The Sins of the Fathers\".\nRobert Bloch wrote two teleplays for the show. \"Logoda's Heads\" was based on the story by August Derleth. \"Last Rites for a Dead Druid\" originally was an adaptation by Bloch of the H.P. Lovecraft/Hazel Heald collaboration \"Out of the Aeons\"; however, Bloch's script was not used, and the episode was rewritten and retitled. As a result, \"Last Rites for a Dead Druid\" bears no resemblance to \"Out of the Aeons\".\nMusic.\nThe show featured various composers. The original pilot theme and background music was composed by Billy Goldenberg. The theme for the first two seasons, composed by Gil Mell\u00e9, is noted for being one of the first television openings to use electronic instruments. For the third season, Mell\u00e9's theme was replaced with a more frantic orchestral piece by Eddie Sauter. Currently, no music from the show has been released commercially.\nLegacy.\nWhile Serling was displeased with the creative interference on \"Night Gallery\", he still mentioned \"They're Tearing Down Tim Riley's Bar\" as one of the best pieces of work he'd written, putting it above even his \"Twilight Zone\" material. Serling's \"Night Gallery\" introductions were parodied on \"The Simpsons\"' fourth annual Treehouse of Horror special in 1993. It had a wraparound structure featuring Bart Simpson in the Serling role, introducing several paintings. \"Night Gallery\" was also parodied on a 1995 episode of \"Tiny Toons\", titled \"Night Ghoulery\". The series was produced by former \"Night Gallery\" director Steven Spielberg, who also directed a segment for the in 1983, and who created his own similar anthology series titled \"Amazing Stories\" (1985).\nMexican director Guillermo del Toro has cited the show as a major influence. In 2023, \"Entertainment Weekly\" included it on their list of the 21 best horror anthology shows of all time.\nAward nominations.\n\"Night Gallery\" was nominated for an Emmy Award for its first-season episode \"They're Tearing Down Tim Riley's Bar\" as the Outstanding Single Program on American television in 1971. In 1972, the series received another nomination (Outstanding Achievement in Makeup) for the second-season episode \"Pickman's Model\". Serling himself received an Edgar Allan Poe Award for writing the pilot.\nSyndication.\nShortly after \"Night Gallery\" was cancelled, the 60-minute episodes from the first two seasons were re-edited for a 30-minute time slot. This was done by producer Universal in order to increase the number of episodes that were available for syndication. Many segments were severely cut, and others extended by inserting \"new\" scenes of recycled, previously discarded, or stock footage to fill up the time. For example, the segment \"The Different Ones\" was extended from 15 minutes to 24 minutes, which made it long enough to air as its own stand-alone episode. This was achieved by using footage from two Universal library films (\"Fahrenheit 451\" and \"Silent Running\") in addition to using stock footage from the Apollo space missions. One of the most heavily cut segments was \"They're Tearing Down Tim Riley's Bar\", which was edited down from 41 minutes to 24 minutes. For time reasons, some of the segments were paired with segments that they didn't originally air alongside. The three segments from the 1969 TV movie pilot were not included as part of the syndication package, because they had already entered syndication as a stand-alone movie.\nThe syndication edits for \"Night Gallery\" were overseen by Universal's Harry Tatelman, who had experience in re-editing old films. In their book \"Rod Serling's Night Gallery: An After-Hours Tour\", authors Scott Skelton and Jim Benson identify 39 of the 98 individual segments that were produced for \"Night Gallery\" as being \"severely altered\" in syndication. Segments such as \"Green Fingers\" and \"Lindemann's Catch\" had new music inserted, which leaned towards more of a typical horror sound. The music was changed in an attempt to heighten the tension, and it was also a by-product of having to either cut down segments or pad them out. Richard Bracken, one of Harry Tatelman's editors on \"Night Gallery\", later said \"Harry was given the assignment by the studio and it was a job he knew that he could do one way or the other, and he did. I don't know if there was any particular glee in changing the style and content of the show, as much as getting the job done.\"\n25 episodes of an unrelated, short-lived supernatural series from 1972, \"The Sixth Sense\", were also incorporated into the syndicated version of the series. The show was also produced by Universal and shared many of the same actors as \"Night Gallery\". Serling was paid $100,000 dollars to film introductions for the episodes from \"The Sixth Sense\", with new paintings also being commissioned for them. Serling's introductions for \"The Sixth Sense\" were written by an unknown member of Harry Tatelman's staff. As \"The Sixth Sense\" was originally a one-hour show, these episodes were all severely edited to fit into the half-hour timeslot. In order to have more commercials, some television stations required a few extra minutes be cut from episodes, in addition to the edits that had already been made by Tatelman. These edits were done by people working at their respective stations, and are described as having less care put into them when compared to Tatelman's edits. In later years, stations would simply speed up the episodes instead of creating their own edits, which would lead to a higher pitch in the voice of the actors.\nRod Serling and Jack Laird were both said to be \"livid\" with the syndication edits. Some directors were allowed input before their segments were edited for syndication, including Jeannot Szwarc. When asked what he thought about the show's syndicated version, Szwarc said in 1998, \"what they've done to it is absolutely criminal. But they don't give a shit. That has always been the disease of Hollywood. They don't care about the past, all they care about is making a lot of money \"now\".\" Szwarc additionally said that he had stopped watching the show, since the syndicated version was still being heavily used on television at that point.\nThe original, uncut and un-edited hour-long version of the series (and without the additional \"Sixth Sense\" episodes) has been shown on STARZ!\u2019s Encore Mystery premium movie cable network. The show has aired in the 30-minute syndicated format in several markets through the Retro Television Network in the past.\nMeTV had broadcast rights for \"Night Gallery\" and aired the show in its syndicated, 30-minute format, including the edited \"The Sixth Sense\" episodes.\nFrom May 21 to May 23, 2016, Decades aired a marathon of the series.\nOn December 6, 2018, Syfy announced that it had plans to revive the \"Night Gallery\" series.\nOn April 6, 2020, Comet TV began airing the syndicated version of the show.\nHome media.\nUniversal Studios has released all 3 seasons on DVD in Region 1 as well as the first season on DVD in the UK. The first season DVD plastered the 1997 Universal Pictures logo at the beginning of the episodes, although the second and third season DVDs kept the old Universal logo from the 1970s.\nOn September 12, 2017, Universal released \"Night Gallery: The Complete Series\" on DVD in Region 1, and between 2021 and 2022, all three seasons were released onto Blu-Ray. The series is not currently available to stream on NBCUniversal's streaming service Peacock, unlike Serling's \"Twilight Zone\", which is streaming on Paramount+ due to being tied to CBS/Paramount rather than NBCUniversal.\nSee also.\nSimilar series\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66217", "revid": "35874198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66217", "title": "Anagrams (game)", "text": "Tile-based word game\nAnagrams (also published under names including Anagram, Snatch and Word Making and Taking) is a tile-based word game that involves rearranging letter tiles to form words.\nThe game pieces are a set of tiles with letters on one side. Tiles are shuffled face-down then turned over one by one, players forming words by combining them with existing words, their own or others'. The game has never been standardized and there are many varieties of sets and rules. Anagrams is often played with tiles from another word game, such as \"Scrabble\" or \"Bananagrams\".\nHistory.\nReputed to have originated as a Victorian word game, Anagrams has appeared in many versions since then.\nAn early modern version is Charles Hammett's \"Word Making and Taking\", released in 1877. The first version to include the word \"Anagrams\" in its name may have been \"The Game of Letters and Anagrams on Wooden Blocks\", published by Parker Brothers around 1890. Another game called \"Anagrams\" was published in 1934 by Selchow and Righter, which published \"Scrabble\" in 1953. \"Spelling and Anagrams\" (a set incorporating two distinct games, \"Spelling\" and \"Anagrams\") was also published in the 1930s. In 1975, Selchow published \"Scrabble Scoring Anagrams\", which featured tiles with point values like those in \"Scrabble\". Another version was published in the 1960s by the now defunct Transogram. The Embossing Company, formerly Halsam Products Company, also produced a yellow-on-black \"Eye-Rest\" set. Leslie Scott (the creator of \"Jenga\") published a variation called \"Swipe\" in the early 1980s, and since 1990, Scott's company, Oxford Games Ltd, has published \"Anagram\". Tyco published \"Up For Grabs\" in 1995. Prodijeux has been marketing a variant, \"WordXchange\", since 2000, and Portobello Games produced a version, \"Snatch-It\", in 2001. \"One Up!\" is a version that adds a \"wild\" tile that can be any letter, like a blank tile in \"Scrabble\".\nSome players use several sets of tiles from games such as \"Scrabble\" or \"Upwords\" to play Anagrams, and a version of the game is popular among tournament \"Scrabble\" players. Writers John Ciardi, James Merrill, John Malcolm Brinnin, and Richard Wilbur reputedly played together regularly in Key West, Florida, sometimes also with novelist John Hersey.\nRules.\nDifferent editions of the game use different rules, and players now often play by house rules, but most are variants of the rules given here, taken from Snatch-It.\nTo begin, all tiles are placed face down in a pool in the middle of the table. Players then take turns flipping over tiles until somebody notices a word of three or more letters. A word can be formed by either:\nWhen a player sees a word, they call it immediately (irrespective of who flipped the last tile) and place the word in front of them. The game then continues with further tiles being flipped.\nAll words must be at least three letters long. When a word is expanded with tiles from the pool, the added tiles may not simply be a suffix (like -S or -ING).\nThe game ends when all tiles are face up and no further words can be formed. Players then score according to the words they have in front of them: a 3-letter word is worth 1 point, a 4-letter word 2 points, and so on.\nVariations.\nA host of variations come from both different versions and players' house rules.\nScoring.\nOther scoring systems include:\nWord length.\nThe minimum acceptable word length can be adjusted to a player's skill level (for example, in a game with adults and children playing together, the children may be permitted to form four-letter words while the adults are restricted to words of at least five or six letters). Tournament \"Scrabble\" players often play with a minimum length of six or seven.\nTurn-taking.\nIn some editions of the game, such as the Milton Bradley and Selchow &amp; Righter versions, only the player whose turn it is may form words. In the Selchow &amp; Righter edition, a word may be stolen by any player \"immediately\" after it was made if they form a longer word with tiles from the pool.\nNational \"Scrabble\" Association.\nThe National Scrabble Association has published a set of rules for competitive Anagrams play in tournament setting. On a player's turn, after revealing a tile, they have a ten-second window during which only they can call a word. If a player calls a word on their own turn they take an extra turn. After 100 turns, the order of play reverses. Minimum word length is six letters.\nTile banks.\nOne variation is to have each player have a \"bank\" of tiles in front of themselves, which affords players a clearer view of the \"pool\" of face-up letter tiles in the middle of the table.\nAlaskan rules.\nA faster-paced version\u2014sometimes known as \"Alaskan rules\"\u2014has each of the players (or several, if there are too many) simultaneously put a tile into the pool. This results in many more possibilities being available at a time.\nMiscellaneous variations.\nPlayers may not create a word by creating a word that is already on the table or steal one resulting in such a word.\nSome versions of the game name the winner as the person who, after the round of turns has finished, first acquires eight words. If more than one player has done so, then the winner is the player is the one with the most tiles. There may be a tie. A very similar rule found in The Embossing Company set simply says the \"first player to complete ten words, wins.\"\nPlayers are permitted to combine two or more existing words with zero or more letters from the pool to create a single new word. This is often difficult in practice.\nIn popular culture.\nA game of Anagrams is played in the Alfred Hitchcock 1941 thriller film \"Suspicion\".\nA game of Anagrams is played in Ira Levin's debut novel, \"A Kiss Before Dying\".\nLetter distribution.\nThough there are many variants, one standard letter distribution of 188 letters (given in the Rust Hills article) is as follows: \nA variant with 220 letters:\nThe distribution of 180 letters for \"Scrabble Scoring Anagrams\" (according to a review on funagain.com):\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66219", "revid": "1150605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66219", "title": "Love and Mr Lewisham", "text": "1900 novel by H. G. Wells\nLove and Mr Lewisham (subtitled \"The Story of a Very Young Couple\") is a 1900 novel set in the 1880s by H. G. Wells. It was among his first fictional writings outside the science fiction genre. Wells took considerable pains over the manuscript and said that \"the writing was an altogether more serious undertaking than I have ever done before.\" He later included it in a 1933 anthology, \"Stories of Men and Women in Love\".\nEvents in the novel closely resemble events in Wells's own life. According to Geoffrey H. Wells: \"referring to the question of autobiography in fiction, H. G. Wells has somewhere made a remark to the effect that it is not so much what one has done that counts, as where one has been, and the truth of that statement is particularly evident in this novel. ... Both Mr Lewisham and Mr Wells were at the age of eighteen, assistant masters at country schools, and that three years later both were commencing their third year at The Normal School of Science, South Kensington, as teachers in training under Thomas Henry Huxley. The account of the school, of the students there and of their social life and interests, may be taken as true descriptions of those things during the period 1883-1886.\"\nPlot.\nAt the beginning of the novel, Mr Lewisham is an 18-year-old teacher at a boys' school in Sussex, earning forty pounds a year. He meets and falls in love with Ethel Henderson, who is paying a visit to relatives. His involvement with her makes him lose his position, but he is unable to find her when he moves to London.\nAfter a two-and-a-half-year break in the action, Mr Lewisham is in his third year of study at the Normal School of Science in South Kensington. He has become a socialist, declaring his politics with a red tie, and is an object of interest to Alice Heydinger, an older student. However, chance brings him together again with his first love at a s\u00e9ance. Ethel's stepfather, Mr Chaffery, is a spiritualist charlatan, and Mr Lewisham is determined to extricate her from association with Chaffery's dishonesty.\nThey marry, and Mr Lewisham is forced to abandon his plans for a brilliant scientific career followed by a political ascent. When Chaffery absconds to Continental Europe with money he has embezzled from his clients, Lewisham agrees to move into his shabby Clapham house to look after Ethel and Ethel's elderly mother (Chaffery's abandoned wife). Wells's friend Sir Richard Gregory wrote to him after reading the novel: \"I cannot get that poor devil Lewisham out of my mind head, and I wish I had an address, for I would go to him and rescue him from the miserable life in which you leave him.\"\nReception.\n\"Love and Mr Lewisham\" was well received, and Charles Masterman told Wells that he believed that along with \"Kipps\", it was the novel most likely to endure. Sir Richard Gregory compared the novel to Thomas Hardy's \"Jude the Obscure\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Happily, Mr Wells is a man of varying moods. ... \n... Like Dickens, with whom he has much more in common than Gissing had, he shows a happier touch in revealing the merits of the meek and lowly than in exposing the failings of the rich and noble. Vivid as is the gift of satire which he exhibits in other directions, he cannot get a scantling of truth and sharpness into his caricatures of overbearing village squires and supercilious ladies of the manor. But how fresh and clear, on the other hand, is the picture of the poor rustic scholar in 'Love and Mr Lewisham'! How tender the humor, and how light and telling the touch with which the story of his struggle between love and ambition is depicted!\nMore recent critics have also praised the novel. Richard Higgins claims the novel elaborates a \"close examination of the relationship between class and the emotions\", adding that \"these emotions have much to add to conventional class analysis. Many of these emotions are more prosaic than we have been accustomed to observe\u2014more passive frustration, for example, than class rage.\" And Adam Roberts argues that the novel uses Chaffrey's fake s\u00e9ance as an expressive metaphor for a Wellsian engagement with questions of sexual desire and disillusionment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66220", "revid": "50815268", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66220", "title": "Political corruption", "text": "Use of power by government officials for illegitimate private gain\nPolitical corruption is the use of powers by government officials or their network contacts for illegitimate private gain. Forms of corruption vary but can include bribery, lobbying, extortion, cronyism, nepotism, parochialism, patronage, influence peddling, graft, and embezzlement. Corruption may facilitate criminal enterprise, such as drug trafficking, money laundering, and human trafficking, although it is not restricted to these activities. \nOver time, corruption has been defined differently. For example, while performing work for a government or as a representative, it is unethical to accept a gift. Any free gift could be construed as a scheme to lure the recipient towards some biases. In most cases, the gift is seen as an intention to seek certain favors, such as work promotion, tipping in order to win a contract, job, or exemption from certain tasks in the case of junior worker handing in the gift to a senior employee who can be key in winning the favor.\nSome forms of corruption, now called \"institutional corruption\", are distinguished from bribery and other kinds of obvious personal gain. For example, certain state institutions may consistently act against the interests of the public, such as by misusing public funds for their own interest, or by engaging in illegal or immoral behavior with impunity. Bribery and overt criminal acts by individuals may not necessarily be evident but the institution nonetheless acts immorally as a whole. The mafia state phenomenon is an example of institutional corruption.\nAn illegal act by an officeholder constitutes political corruption only if the act is directly related to their official duties, is done under color of law or involves trading in influence. The activities that constitute illegal corruption differ depending on the country or jurisdiction. For instance, some political funding practices that are legal in one place may be illegal in another. In some cases, government officials have broad or ill-defined powers, which make it difficult to distinguish between legal and illegal actions. Worldwide, bribery alone is estimated to involve over 1 trillion US dollars annually. A state of unrestrained political corruption is known as a kleptocracy, literally meaning \"rule by thieves\".\nDefinition.\nCorruption is a difficult concept to define. A proper definition of corruption requires a multi-dimensional approach. Machiavelli popularized the oldest dimension of corruption as the decline of virtue among political officials and the citizenry. The psychologist Horst-Eberhard Richter's modernized version defines corruption as the undermining of political values. Corruption as the decline of virtue has been criticized as too broad and far too subjective to be universalized. The second dimension of corruption is corruption as deviant behavior. Sociologist Christian H\u00f6ffling and economist J. J. Sentuira both characterized corruption as social illness; the latter defined corruption as the misuse of public power for one's profit. The third dimension is the quid pro quo. Corruption must always be an exchange between two or more persons/parties where one person/party possesses economic goods, and the other persons/parties possess a transferred power to be used, according to fixed rules and norms, toward a common good. Fourth, there are also different levels of societal perception of corruption. Heidenheimer divides corruption into three categories. The first category is called white corruption; this level of corruption is mostly viewed with tolerance and may even be lawful and legitimate; typically based on family ties and patron-client systems. The type of corruption often occurring in constitutional states or state transitioning to a more democratic society is called grey corruption is considered reprehensible according to a society's moral norms, but the persons involved are still mostly lacking any sense of doing something wrong. The third category, black corruption is so severe that it violates a society's norms and laws. The final dimension is called \"shadow politics\"; this is part of the informal political process that goes beyond legitimate informal political agreements to behavior that is purposefully concealed.\nConsequences.\nConsequences on politics, administration, and institutions.\nPolitical corruption undermines democracy and good governance by flouting or even subverting formal processes. Corruption in elections and in the legislature reduces accountability and distorts representation in policymaking; corruption in the judiciary compromises the rule of law; and corruption in public administration results in the inefficient provision of services. For republics, it violates a basic principle of republicanism regarding the centrality of civic virtue.\nMore generally, corruption erodes the institutional capacity of government if procedures are disregarded, resources are siphoned off, and public offices are bought and sold. Corruption undermines the legitimacy of government and democratic values such as political trust. Recent evidence suggests that variation in the levels of corruption amongst high-income democracies can vary significantly depending on the level of accountability of decision-makers.\nEvidence from fragile states shows that corruption and bribery can adversely impact trust in institutions. Corruption can also impact government's provision of goods and services. It increases the costs of goods and services which arise from efficiency loss. In the absence of corruption, governmental projects might be cost-effective at their true costs; however, once corruption costs are included projects may not be cost-effective so they are not executed distorting the provision of goods and services.\nConsequences on economy.\nIn the private sector, corruption increases the cost of business through the price of illicit payments themselves, the management cost of negotiating with officials and the risk of breached agreements or detection. Although some claim corruption reduces costs by cutting bureaucracy, the availability of bribes can also induce officials to contrive new rules and delays. Openly removing costly and lengthy regulations are better than covertly allowing them to be bypassed by using bribes. Where corruption inflates the cost of business, it also distorts the field of inquiry and action, shielding firms with connections from competition and thereby sustaining inefficient firms.\nCorruption may have a direct impact on the firm's effective marginal tax rate. Bribing tax officials can reduce tax payments of the firm if the marginal bribe rate is below the official marginal tax rate. However, in Uganda, bribes have a higher negative impact on firms' activity than taxation. Indeed, a one percentage point increase in bribes reduces firm's annual growth by three percentage points, while an increase in 1 percentage point on taxes reduces firm's growth by one percentage point.\nCorruption also generates economic distortion in the public sector by diverting public investment into capital projects where bribes and kickbacks are more plentiful. Officials may increase the technical complexity of public sector projects to conceal or pave the way for such dealings, thus further distorting investment. Corruption also lowers compliance with construction, environmental, or other regulations, reduces the quality of government services and infrastructure, and increases budgetary pressures on government. Economists argue that one of the factors behind the differing economic development in Africa and Asia is that in Africa, corruption has primarily taken the form of rent extraction with the resulting financial capital moved overseas rather than invested at home (hence the stereotypical, but often accurate, image of African dictators having Swiss bank accounts). In Nigeria, for example, more than $400 billion was stolen from the treasury by Nigeria's leaders between 1960 and 1999.\nUniversity of Massachusetts Amherst researchers estimated that from 1970 to 1996, capital flight from 30 Sub-Saharan countries totaled $187bn, exceeding those nations' external debts. (The results, expressed in retarded or suppressed development, have been modeled in theory by economist Mancur Olson.) In the case of Africa, one of the factors for this behavior was political instability and the fact that new governments often confiscated previous government's corruptly obtained assets. This encouraged officials to stash their wealth abroad, out of reach of any future expropriation. In contrast, Asian administrations such as Suharto's New Order often took a cut on business transactions or provided conditions for development, through infrastructure investment, law and order, etc.\nEnvironmental and social effects.\nCorruption is often most evident in countries with the smallest per capita incomes, relying on foreign aid for health services. Local political interception of donated money from overseas is especially prevalent in Sub-Saharan African nations, where it was reported in the 2006 World Bank Report that about half of the funds that were donated for health usages were never invested into the health sectors or given to those needing medical attention. Instead, the donated money was expended through \"counterfeit drugs, siphoning off of drugs to the black market, and payments to ghost employees\". Ultimately, there is a sufficient amount of money for health in developing countries, but local corruption denies the wider citizenry the resource they require.\nCorruption facilitates environmental destruction. While corrupt societies may have formal legislation to protect the environment, it cannot be enforced if officials can easily be bribed. The same applies to social rights worker protection, unionization prevention, and child labor. Violation of these laws rights enables corrupt countries to gain illegitimate economic advantage in the international market. The Nobel Prize-winning economist Amartya Sen has observed that \"there is no such thing as an apolitical food problem.\" While drought and other naturally occurring events may trigger famine conditions, it is government action or inaction that determines its severity, and often even whether or not a famine will occur.\nGovernments with strong tendencies towards kleptocracy can undermine food security even when harvests are good. Officials often steal state property. In Bihar, India, more than 80% of the subsidized food aid to poor is stolen by corrupt officials. Similarly, food aid is often robbed at gunpoint by governments, criminals, and warlords alike, and sold for a profit. The 20th century is full of many examples of governments undermining the food security of their own nations \u2013 sometimes intentionally.\nEffects on humanitarian aid.\nThe scale of humanitarian aid to the poor and unstable regions of the world grows, but it is highly vulnerable to corruption, with food aid, construction and other highly valued assistance as the most at risk. Food aid can be directly and physically diverted from its intended destination, or indirectly through the manipulation of assessments, targeting, registration and distributions to favor certain groups or individuals.\nIn construction and shelter there are numerous opportunities for diversion and profit through substandard workmanship, kickbacks for contracts and favouritism in the provision of valuable shelter material. Thus while humanitarian aid agencies are usually most concerned about aid being diverted by including too many, recipients themselves are most concerned about exclusion. Access to aid may be limited to those with connections, to those who pay bribes or are forced to give sexual favors. Equally, those able to do so may manipulate statistics to inflate the number of beneficiaries and siphon off additional assistance.\nMalnutrition, illness, wounds, torture, harassment of specific groups within the population, disappearances, extrajudicial executions and the forcible displacement of people are all found in many armed conflicts. Aside from their direct effects on the individuals concerned, the consequences of these tragedies for local systems must also be considered: the destruction of crops and places of cultural importance, and the breakdown of economic infrastructure and of health-care facilities such as hospitals.\nCorruption is said by Nazim et al, to play a huge role in health care system starting from the hospital to the government and lifted to the other institutions that promote quality and affordable health care to the people.\nTypes.\nBribery.\nIn the context of political corruption, a bribe may involve a payment given to a government official in exchange of his use of official powers. Bribery requires two participants: one to give the bribe, and one to take it. Either may initiate the corrupt offering; for example, a customs official may demand bribes to let through allowed (or disallowed) goods, or a smuggler might offer bribes to gain passage. In some countries the culture of corruption extends to every aspect of public life, making it extremely difficult for individuals to operate without resorting to bribes. Bribes may be demanded in order for an official to do something he is already paid to do. They may also be demanded in order to bypass laws and regulations. In addition to their role in private financial gain, bribes are also used to intentionally and maliciously cause harm to another (i.e. no financial incentive). In some developing nations, up to half of the population has paid bribes during the past 12 months.\nThe Council of Europe dissociates active and passive bribery and to incriminates them as separate offences:\nThis dissociation aims to make the early steps (offering, promising, requesting an advantage) of a corrupt deal already an offence and, thus, to give a clear signal (from a criminal-policy point-of-view) that bribery is not acceptable. Furthermore, such a dissociation makes the prosecution of bribery offences easier since it can be very difficult to prove that two parties (the bribe-giver and the bribe-taker) have formally agreed upon a corrupt deal. In addition, there is often no such formal deal but only a mutual understanding, for instance when it is common knowledge in a municipality that to obtain a building permit one has to pay a \"fee\" to the decision maker to obtain a favorable decision. A working definition of corruption is also provided as follows in article 3 of the Civil Law Convention on Corruption (ETS 174): For the purpose of this Convention, \"corruption\" means requesting, offering, giving or accepting, directly or indirectly, a bribe or any other undue advantage or prospect thereof, which distorts the proper performance of any duty or behavior required of the recipient of the bribe, the undue advantage or the prospect thereof.\nTrading in influence.\nTrading in influence, or influence peddling, refers to a person selling his/her influence over the decision-making process to benefit a third party (person or institution). The difference with bribery is that this is a tri-lateral relation. From a legal point of view, the role of the third party (who is the target of the influence) does not really matter although he/she can be an accessory in some instances.\nLegal.\nSome forms of lobbying can be difficult to distinction from some forms of illegal political corruption for instance law- or decision-makers can freely \"sell\" their vote, decision power or influence to those lobbyists who offer the highest compensation, including where for instance the latter act on behalf of powerful clients such as industrial groups who want to avoid the passing of specific environmental, social, or other regulations perceived as too stringent, etc. Where lobbying is (sufficiently) regulated, it becomes possible to provide for a distinctive criteria and to consider that trading in influence involves the use of \"improper influence\", as in article 12 of the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (ETS 173) of the Council of Europe.\nPatronage.\nPatronage refers to favoring supporters, for example with government employment. This may be legitimate, as when a newly elected government changes the top officials in the administration in order to effectively implement its policy. It can be seen as corruption if this means that incompetent persons, as a payment for supporting the regime, are selected before more able ones. In nondemocracies many government officials are often selected for loyalty rather than ability. They may be almost exclusively selected from a particular group (for example, Sunni Arabs in Saddam Hussein's Iraq, the nomenklatura in the Soviet Union, or the Junkers in Imperial Germany) that support the regime in return for such favors. A similar problem can also be seen in Eastern Europe, for example in Romania, where the government is often accused of patronage (when a new government comes to power it rapidly changes most of the officials in the public sector).\nNepotism and cronyism.\nFavoring relatives (nepotism) or personal friends (cronyism) of an official is a form of illegitimate private gain. This may be combined with bribery, for example demanding that a business should employ a relative of an official controlling regulations affecting the business. The most extreme example is when the entire state is inherited, as in North Korea or Syria. A lesser form might be in the Southern United States with Good ol' boys, where women and minorities are excluded. A milder form of cronyism is an \"old boy network\", in which appointees to official positions are selected only from a closed and exclusive social network \u2013 such as the alumni of particular universities \u2013 instead of appointing the most competent candidate. Seeking to harm enemies becomes corruption when official powers are illegitimately used as means to this end. For example, trumped-up charges are often brought up against journalists or writers who bring up politically sensitive issues, such as a politician's acceptance of bribes.\nGombeenism and parochialism.\nGombeenism refers to an individual who is dishonest and corrupt for the purpose of personal gain, often monetary, while parochialism, which is also known as parish pump politics, relates to placing local or vanity projects ahead of the national interest. For instance in Irish politics, populist left wing political parties will often apply these terms to mainstream establishment political parties and will cite the many cases of Corruption in Ireland, such as the Irish Banking crisis, which found evidence of bribery, cronyism and collusion, where in some cases politicians who were coming to the end of their political careers would receive a senior management or committee position in a company they had dealings with.\nElectoral fraud.\nElectoral fraud is illegal interference with the process of an election. Acts of fraud affect vote counts to bring about an election result, whether by increasing the vote share of the favored candidate, depressing the vote share of the rival candidates, or both. Also called voter fraud, the mechanisms involved include illegal voter registration, intimidation at polls, voting computer hacking, and improper vote counting.\nEmbezzlement.\nEmbezzlement is the theft of entrusted funds. It is political when it involves public money taken by a public official for use by anyone not specified by the public. Ponzi schemes are an example of embezzlement. Some embezzlers \"skim off the top\" so that they continually acquire a small amount over a particular time interval. This method reduces the likelihood of being caught. On the other hand, some embezzlers steal a very large amount of goods or funds in a single instance and then disappear. Sometimes company managers underreport income to their supervisors and keep the difference. A common type of embezzlement is that of personal use of entrusted government resources; for example, when an official assigns public employees to renovate his own house.\nKickbacks.\nA kickback is an official's share of misappropriated funds allocated from his or her organization to an organization involved in corrupt bidding. For example, suppose that a politician is in charge of choosing how to spend some public funds. He can give a contract to a company that is not the best bidder, or allocate more than they deserve. In this case, the company benefits, and in exchange for betraying the public, the official receives a kickback payment, which is a portion of the sum the company received. This sum itself may be all or a portion of the difference between the actual (inflated) payment to the company and the (lower) market-based price that would have been paid had the bidding been competitive. Another example of a kickback would be if a judge receives a portion of the profits that a business makes in exchange for his judicial decisions. Kickbacks are not limited to government officials; any situation in which people are entrusted to spend funds that do not belong to them are susceptible to this kind of corruption.\nUnholy alliance.\nAn unholy alliance is a coalition among seemingly antagonistic groups for ad hoc or hidden gain, generally some influential non-governmental group forming ties with political parties, supplying funding in exchange for favorable treatment. Like patronage, unholy alliances are not necessarily illegal, but unlike patronage, by its deceptive nature and often great financial resources, an unholy alliance can be more dangerous to the public interest. An early use of the term was by former United States president Theodore Roosevelt (\"To destroy this invisible Government, to dissolve the unholy alliance between corrupt business and corrupt politics is the first task of the statesmanship of the day\") from the 1912 Progressive Party platform, which is attributed to Roosevelt, and also quoted again in his autobiography, where he connects trusts and monopolies (sugar interests, Standard Oil, etc.) to Woodrow Wilson, Howard Taft, and consequently both major political parties.\nInvolvement in organized crime.\nAn illustrative example of official involvement in organized crime can be found from the 1920s and 1930s Shanghai, where Huang Jinrong was a police chief in the French concession, while simultaneously being a gang boss and co-operating with Du Yuesheng, the local gang ringleader. The relationship kept the flow of profits from the gang's gambling dens, prostitution, and protection rackets undisturbed and safe. The United States accused Manuel Noriega's government in Panama of being a \"narcokleptocracy\", a corrupt government profiting on illegal drug trade. Later the U.S. invaded Panama and captured Noriega.\nConditions favorable for corruption.\nSome research indicates that political corruption is contagious: the revelation of corruption in a sector leads others in the sector to engage in corruption. It is argued that the following conditions are favorable for corruption:\nMedia.\nThomas Jefferson observed a tendency for \"The functionaries of every government ... to command at will the liberty and property of their constituents. There is no safe deposit [for liberty and property] ... without information. Where the press is free, and every man able to read, all is safe.\" Recent research supports Jefferson's claim. Brunetti and Weder found \"evidence of a significant relationship between more press freedom and less corruption in a large cross-section of countries.\" They also presented \"evidence which suggests that the direction of causation runs from higher press freedom to lower corruption.\" Adser\u00e0, Boix, and Payne found that increases in newspaper readership led to increased political accountability and lower corruption in data from roughly 100 countries and from different states in the US.\nSnyder and Str\u00f6mberg found \"that a poor fit between newspaper markets and political districts reduces press coverage of politics. ... Congressmen who are less covered by the local press work less for their constituencies: they are less likely to stand witness before congressional hearings ... . Federal spending is lower in areas where there is less press coverage of the local members of congress.\" Schulhofer-Wohl and Garrido found that the year after the \"Cincinnati Post\" closed in 2007, \"fewer candidates ran for municipal office in the Kentucky suburbs most reliant on the Post, incumbents became more likely to win re-election, and voter turnout and campaign spending fell.\nAn analysis of the evolution of mass media in the United States and European Union since World War II noted mixed results from the growth of the Internet: \"The digital revolution has been good for freedom of expression [and] information [but] has had mixed effects on freedom of the press\": It has disrupted traditional sources of funding, and new forms of Internet journalism have replaced only a tiny fraction of what's been lost. Media responses to whistleblower incidents or reports, and to matters which generate skepticism in established law and government but may not technically be whistleblower incidents, are limited by the prevalence of political correctness and speech codes in many Western nations. In China and many other East Asian countries the state-enforced speech codes limit or, in their view, channel the efforts of the media and civil society to reduce public corruption.\nSize of public sector.\nExtensive and diverse public spending is, in itself, inherently at risk of cronyism, kickbacks, and embezzlement. Complicated regulations and arbitrary, unsupervised official conduct exacerbate the problem. This is one argument for privatization and deregulation. Opponents of privatization see the argument as ideological. The argument that corruption necessarily follows from the opportunity is weakened by the existence of countries with low to non-existent corruption but large public sectors, like the Nordic countries. These countries score high on the Ease of Doing Business Index, due to good and often simple regulations and have rule of law firmly established. Therefore, due to their lack of corruption in the first place, they can run large public sectors without inducing political corruption. Recent evidence that takes both the size of expenditures and regulatory complexity into account has found that high-income democracies with more expansive state sectors do indeed have higher levels of corruption.\nLike other governmental economic activities, privatization, such as in the sale of government-owned property, is particularly at the risk of cronyism. Privatizations in Russia, Latin America, and East Germany were accompanied by large-scale corruption during the sale of the state-owned companies. Those with political connections unfairly gained large wealth, which has discredited privatization in these regions. While media have reported widely the grand corruption that accompanied the sales, studies have argued that in addition to increased operating efficiency, daily petty corruption is, or would be, larger without privatization and that corruption is more prevalent in non-privatized sectors. Furthermore, there is evidence to suggest that extralegal and unofficial activities are more prevalent in countries that privatized less. In the European Union, the principle of subsidiarity is applied: a government service should be provided by the lowest, most local authority that can competently provide it. An effect is that distribution of funds in multiple instances discourages embezzlement because even small sums missing will be noticed. In contrast, in a centralized authority, even minute proportions of public funds can be large sums of money.\nConditions unfavorable for corruption.\nWealth and power can have a compounding effect on political corruption, however, the immunity from the law that money and influence bring will not come into effect when a powerful individual injures or harms another powerful individual. An example of this immunity being broken is Bernie Madoff, who while being rich and powerful himself, stole from other rich and powerful individuals. This resulted in his eventual arrest despite his status. Level of political competitiveness can affect the degree of political corruption. Increasing salaries can decrease political corruption in lower income countries, while another study found an increase of political corruption with larger salaries of politicians relative to the average wage. Lower political corruption was found for incumbent politicians seeking re-election.\nGovernmental corruption.\nIf the highest echelons of the governments take advantage of corruption or embezzlement from the state's treasury, it is sometimes referred to the neologism \"kleptocracy\". Members of the government can take advantage of the natural resources (e.g., diamonds and oil in a few prominent cases) or state-owned productive industries. A number of corrupt governments have enriched themselves via foreign aid. Indeed, there is a positive correlation between aid flows and high levels of corruption within recipient countries.\nCorruption in Sub-Saharan Africa consists primarily of extracting economic rent and moving the resulting financial capital overseas instead of investing at home. Authors Leonce Ndikumana and James K. Boyce estimate that from 1970 to 2008, capital flight from 33 sub-Saharan countries totalled $700 billion. A corrupt dictatorship typically results in many years of general hardship and suffering for the vast majority of citizens as civil society and the rule of law disintegrate. In addition, corrupt dictators routinely ignore economic and social problems in their quest to amass ever more wealth and power. The classic case of a corrupt, exploitive dictator often given is the regime of Marshal Mobutu Sese Seko, who ruled the Democratic Republic of the Congo (which he renamed Zaire) from 1965 to 1997. It is said that usage of the term kleptocracy gained popularity largely in response to a need to accurately describe Mobutu's regime. Another classic case is Nigeria, especially under the rule of General Sani Abacha who was \"de facto\" president of Nigeria from 1993 until his death in 1998. He is reputed to have stolen some US$3 billion\u20134 billion. He and his relatives are often mentioned in Nigerian 419 letter scams claiming to offer vast fortunes for \"help\" in laundering his stolen \"fortunes\", which in reality turn out not to exist. More than $400 billion was stolen from the treasury by Nigeria's leaders between 1960 and 1999.\nJudiciary corruption.\nThere are two methods of corruption of the judiciary: the state (through budget planning and various privileges), and the private. Budget of the judiciary in many transitional and developing countries is almost completely controlled by the executive. The latter undermines the separation of powers, as it creates a critical financial dependence of the judiciary. The proper national wealth distribution including the government spending on the judiciary is subject of the constitutional economics. Judicial corruption can be difficult to completely eradicate, even in developed countries.\nOpposition to corruption.\nMobile telecommunications and radio broadcasting help to fight corruption, especially in developing regions like Africa, where other forms of communications are limited. In India, the anti-corruption bureau fights against corruption, and a new ombudsman bill called Jan Lokpal Bill is being prepared. In the 1990s, initiatives were taken at an international level (in particular by the European Community, the Council of Europe, the OECD) to put a ban on corruption: in 1996, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, for instance, adopted a comprehensive Programme of Action against Corruption and, subsequently, issued a series of anti-corruption standard-setting instruments:\nThe purpose of these instruments was to address the various forms of corruption (involving the public sector, the private sector, the financing of political activities, etc.) whether they had a strictly domestic or also a transnational dimension. To monitor the implementation at national level of the requirements and principles provided in those texts, a monitoring mechanism \u2013 the Group of States Against Corruption (also known as GRECO) (French: Groupe d'Etats contre la corruption) was created. Further conventions were adopted at the regional level under the aegis of the Organization of American States (OAS or OEA), the African Union, and in 2003, at the universal level under that of the United Nations Convention against Corruption where it is enabled with mutual legal assistance between the states parties regarding investigations, processes and judicial actions related to corruption crimes, as established in article 46.\nWhistleblowers.\nA whistleblower (also written as whistle-blower or whistle blower) is a person who exposes any kind of information or activity that is deemed illegal, unethical, or not correct within an organization that is either private or public.\nMeasuring corruption.\nMeasuring corruption accurately is difficult if not impossible due to the illicit nature of the transaction and imprecise definitions of corruption. Few reliable measures of the magnitude of corruption exists and among those, there is a high level of heterogeneity. One of the most common ways to estimate corruption is through perception surveys. They have the advantage of good coverage, however, they do not measure corruption precisely. While \"corruption\" indices first appeared in 1995 with the Corruption Perceptions Index CPI, all of these metrics address different proxies for corruption, such as public perceptions of the extent of the problem. However, over time the refinement of methods and validation checks against objective indicators has meant that, while not perfect, many of these indicators are getting better at consistently and validly measuring the scale of corruption.\nTransparency International, an anti-corruption NGO, pioneered this field with the CPI, first released in 1995. This work is often credited with breaking a taboo and forcing the issue of corruption into high-level development policy discourse. Transparency International currently publishes three measures, updated annually: a CPI (based on aggregating third-party polling of public perceptions of how corrupt different countries are); a Global Corruption Barometer (based on a survey of general public attitudes toward and experience of corruption); and a Bribe Payers Index, looking at the willingness of foreign firms to pay bribes. The Corruption Perceptions Index is the best known of these metrics, though it has drawn much criticism and may be declining in influence. In 2013 Transparency International published a report on the \"Government Defence Anti-corruption Index\". This index evaluates the risk of corruption in countries' military sector.\nThe World Bank collects a range of data on corruption, including survey responses from over 100,000 firms worldwide and a set of indicators of governance and institutional quality. Moreover, one of the six dimensions of governance measured by the Worldwide Governance Indicators is Control of Corruption, which is defined as \"the extent to which power is exercised for private gain, including both petty and grand forms of corruption, as well as 'capture' of the state by elites and private interests.\" While the definition itself is fairly precise, the data aggregated into the Worldwide Governance Indicators is based on any available polling: questions range from \"is corruption a serious problem?\" to measures of public access to information, and not consistent across countries. Despite these weaknesses, the global coverage of these datasets has led to their widespread adoption, most notably by the Millennium Challenge Corporation.\nA number of parties have collected survey data, from the public and from experts, to try to gauge the level of corruption and bribery, as well as its impact on political and economic outcomes.\nA second wave of corruption metrics has been created by Global Integrity, the International Budget Partnership, and many lesser known local groups. These metrics include the Global Integrity Index, first published in 2004. These second wave projects aim to create policy change by identifying resources more effectively and creating checklists toward incremental reform. Global Integrity and the International Budget Partnership each dispense with public surveys and instead uses in-country experts to evaluate \"the opposite of corruption\" \u2013 which Global Integrity defines as the public policies that prevent, discourage, or expose corruption. These approaches complement the first wave, awareness-raising tools by giving governments facing public outcry a checklist which measures concrete steps toward improved governance.\nTypical second wave corruption metrics do not offer the worldwide coverage found in first wave projects and instead focus on localizing information gathered to specific problems and creating deep, \"unpackable\" content that matches quantitative and qualitative data. Alternative approaches, such as the British aid agency's Drivers of Change research, skips numbers and promotes understanding corruption via political economy analysis of who controls power in a given society. Another approach, suggested for when conventional measures of corruption are unavailable, is to look at the bodyfat of officials, after finding that obesity of cabinet ministers in post-Soviet states was highly correlated with more accurate measures.\nIn fiction.\nThe following are some examples of works of fiction that portray political corruption in various forms:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66221", "revid": "3211564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66221", "title": "ARC", "text": "ARC may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "66222", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66222", "title": "Jacques Roubaud", "text": "French poet, writer and mathematician (1932\u20132024)\nJacques Roubaud (; 5 December 1932 \u2013\u00a05 December 2024) was a French poet, writer, and mathematician.\nLife and career.\nJacques Roubaud taught mathematics at University of Paris X Nanterre and poetry at EHESS. A member of the Oulipo group, he has published poetry, plays, novels, and translated English poetry and books into French, such as Lewis Carroll's \"The Hunting of the Snark\". French poet and novelist Raymond Queneau had Roubaud's first book, a collection of mathematically structured sonnets, published by \u00c9ditions Gallimard, and then invited Roubaud to join the Oulipo as the organization's first new member outside the founders.\nRoubaud's fiction often suppresses the rigorous constraints of the Oulipo (while mentioning their suppression, thereby indicating that such constraints are indeed present), yet takes the Oulipian self-consciousness of the writing act to an extreme. This simultaneity both appears playfully, in his Hortense novels (\"Our Beautiful Heroine\", \"Hortense Is Abducted\" and \"Hortense in Exile\"), and with gravity and reflection in \"The Great Fire of London\", considered the pinnacle of his prose. \"The Great Fire of London\" (1989), \"The Loop\" (1993), and \"Mathematics\" (2012) are the first three volumes of a long, experimental, autobiographical work known as \"the project\" (or \"the minimal project\"), and the only volumes of \"the project\", at present, to have been translated into English. Seven volumes of \"the project\" have been completed and published in French. To compose \"The Loop\", Roubaud began with a childhood memory of a snowy night in Carcassonne and then wrote nightly, without returning to correct his writing from previous nights. Roubaud's goals in writing \"The Loop\" were to discover \"My \"own\" memory, how does it work?\" and to \"destroy\" his memories through writing them down.\nRoubaud participated in readings and lectures at the European Graduate School (2007), the Salon du Livre de Paris (2008), and the \"Dire Poesia\" series at Palazzo Leoni Montanari in Venice (2011).\nIn 1980, he married Alix Cl\u00e9o Roubaud; she died three years later. Jacques Roubaud died on 5 December 2024, his 92nd birthday."}
{"id": "66225", "revid": "4967956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66225", "title": "Curtis LeMay", "text": "U.S. Air Force general (1906\u20131990)\nCurtis Emerson LeMay (November 15, 1906 \u2013 October 1, 1990) was a US Air Force general who was a key American military commander during the Cold War. He served as Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force, from 1961 to 1965.\nLeMay joined the United States Army Air Corps, the precursor to the United States Air Force, in 1929 while studying civil engineering at Ohio State University. He had risen to the rank of major by the time of Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 and the United States's entry into World War II. He commanded the 305th Bombardment Group from October 1942 until September 1943, and the 3rd Air Division in the European theatre of World War II until August 1944, when he was transferred to the China Burma India Theater. He was then placed in command of strategic bombing operations against Japan, planning and executing a massive fire bombing campaign against Japanese cities, and Operation Starvation, a crippling minelaying campaign in Japan's internal waterways.\nAfter the war, he was assigned to command USAF Europe and coordinated the Berlin Airlift. He served as commander of the Strategic Air Command (SAC) from 1948 to 1957, where he presided over the transition to an all\u2013jet aircraft force that had a strong emphasis on the delivery of nuclear weapons in the event of war. As Chief of Staff of the Air Force, he called for the bombing of Cuban missile sites during the Cuban Missile Crisis and sought a sustained bombing campaign against North Vietnam during the Vietnam War.\nAfter retiring from the Air Force in 1965, LeMay agreed to serve as pro-segregation Alabama Governor George Wallace's running mate on the far-right American Independent Party ticket in the 1968 United States presidential election. The ticket won 46 electoral votes, 5 states, and 13.5% of the popular vote, a strong tally for a third party campaign, but the Wallace campaign came to see LeMay as a liability due to his controversial stance promoting the use of nuclear weapons. After the election, LeMay retired to Newport Beach, California, and he died in 1990 at age 83.\nEarly life.\nLeMay was born in Columbus, Ohio, on November 15, 1906. LeMay was of English and distant French Huguenot heritage. His father, Erving Edwin LeMay, was at times an ironworker and general handyman, but he never held a job longer than a few months. His mother, Arizona Dove (n\u00e9e Carpenter) LeMay, did her best to hold her family together. With very limited income, his family moved around the country as his father looked for work, going as far as Montana and California. Eventually they returned to his native city of Columbus. LeMay attended Columbus public schools, graduating from Columbus South High School, and studied civil engineering at Ohio State University. Working his way through college, he graduated with a bachelor's degree in civil engineering. While at Ohio State he was a member of the National Society of Pershing Rifles and the Professional Engineering Fraternity Theta Tau.\nCareer.\nLeMay was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Air Corps Reserve in October 1929. He received a regular commission in the United States Army Air Corps in January 1930. While finishing at Ohio State, he took flight training at Norton Field in Columbus, in 1931\u201332. On June 9, 1934, he married Helen Maitland.\nLeMay became a pursuit pilot with his first duty station at Selfridge Field with the 27th Pursuit Squadron. After having served in various assignments in fighter operations, LeMay transferred to bomber aircraft in 1937. While stationed in Hawaii, he became one of the first members of the Air Corps to receive specialized training in aerial navigation. In August 1937, as navigator under pilot and commander Caleb V. Haynes on a Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress, he helped locate the battleship despite being given the wrong coordinates by Navy personnel, in exercises held in misty conditions off California, after which the group of B-17s bombed it with water bombs. In March 1938, LeMay as a member of the 2nd Bombardment Group participated in a good will flight to Buenos Aires. For this flight, the 2nd Bombardment Group was awarded the Mackay Trophy in 1939. For Haynes again, in May 1938 he navigated three B-17s over the Atlantic Ocean to intercept the Italian liner to illustrate the ability of land-based airpower to defend the American coasts. In 1940 he was navigator for Haynes on the prototype Boeing XB-15 heavy bomber, flying a survey from Panama over the Galapagos islands. By the end of 1940, he was stationed at Westover Air Reserve Base, as the operations officer of the 34th Bombardment Group. War brought rapid promotion and increased responsibility.\nWhen his crews were not flying missions, they were subjected to relentless training, as LeMay believed that training was the key to saving their lives. \"You fight as you train\" was one of his cardinal rules. It expressed his belief that, in the chaos, stress, and confusion of combat (aerial or otherwise), troops or airmen would perform successfully only if their individual acts were second nature, performed nearly instinctively due to repetitive training. Throughout his career, LeMay was widely and fondly known among his troops as \"Old Iron Pants\", and the \"Big Cigar\".\nWorld War II.\nEuropean Theater.\nWhen the U.S. entered World War II in December 1941 after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, LeMay was a major in the United States Army Air Forces (he had been a first lieutenant as recently as 1940), and the commander of a newly created B-17 Flying Fortress unit, the 305th Bomb Group. He took this unit to England in October 1942 as part of the Eighth Air Force, and led it in combat until May 1943, notably helping to develop the combat box formation. In September 1943, he became the first commander of the newly formed 3rd Air Division. He personally led several dangerous missions, including the Regensburg section of the Schweinfurt\u2013Regensburg mission of August 17, 1943. In that mission, he led 146 B-17s to Regensburg, Germany, beyond the range of escorting fighters, and, after bombing, continued on to bases in North Africa, losing 24 bombers in the process.\nThe heavy losses in veteran crews on this and subsequent deep penetration missions in the autumn of 1943 led the Eighth Air Force to limit missions to targets within escort range. Finally, with the deployment in the European theater of the P-51 Mustang in January 1944, the Eighth Air Force gained an escort fighter with range to match the bombers.\nIn a discussion of a report into high abort rates in bomber missions during World War II, which Robert McNamara suspected was because of pilot cowardice, McNamara described LeMay's character:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One of the commanders was Curtis LeMay\u2014Colonel in command of a B-24 [\"sic\"] group. He was the finest combat commander of any service I came across in war. But he was extraordinarily belligerent, many thought brutal. He got the report. He issued an order. He said, 'I will be in the lead plane on every mission. Any plane that takes off will go over the target, or the crew will be court-martialed.' The abort rate dropped overnight. Now that's the kind of commander he was.\nBombing of Japan.\nIn August 1944, LeMay transferred to the China-Burma-India theater and directed first the XX Bomber Command in China and then the XXI Bomber Command in the Pacific. LeMay was later placed in charge of all strategic air operations against the Japanese home islands.\nLeMay soon concluded that the techniques and tactics developed for use in Europe against the Luftwaffe were unsuitable against Japan. His Boeing B-29 Superfortress bombers flying from China were dropping their bombs near their targets only 5% of the time. Operational losses of aircraft and crews were unacceptably high owing to Japanese daylight air defenses and continuing mechanical problems with the B-29. In January 1945, LeMay was transferred from China to relieve Brigadier General Haywood S. Hansell as commander of the XXI Bomber Command in the Marianas.\nHe became convinced that high-altitude precision bombing would be ineffective, given the usually cloudy weather over Japan. Furthermore, bombs dropped from the B-29s at high altitude (above ) were often blown off of their trajectories by a consistently powerful jet stream over the Japanese home islands, which dramatically reduced the effectiveness of the high-altitude raids. Because Japanese air defenses made daytime bombing below jet stream-affected altitudes too perilous, LeMay finally switched to low-altitude nighttime incendiary attacks on Japanese targets, a tactic senior commanders had been preparing for some time, manufacturing and stockpiling incendiary bombs for this purpose. Japanese cities were largely constructed of combustible materials such as wood and paper. Precision high-altitude daylight bombing was ordered to proceed only when weather permitted or when specific critical targets were not vulnerable to area bombing.\nLeMay commanded subsequent B-29 Superfortress combat operations against Japan, including massive incendiary attacks on 67 Japanese cities and the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. This included the firebombing of Tokyo\u2014known in official documents as the \"Operation Meetinghouse\" air raid on the night of March 9\u201310, 1945\u2014which proved to be the single most destructive bombing raid of the war. For this first attack, LeMay ordered the defensive guns removed from 325 B-29s, loaded each plane with Model M-47 incendiary clusters, magnesium bombs, white phosphorus bombs, and napalm, and ordered the bombers to fly in streams at over Tokyo. LeMay described Operation Meetinghouse by saying \"the US had finally stopped swatting at flies and gone after the manure pile\".\nThe first pathfinder airplanes arrived over Tokyo just after midnight on March 10 and marked the target area with a flaming \"X\". In a three-hour period, the main bombing force dropped 1,665 tons of incendiary bombs, killing 100,000 civilians, destroying 250,000 buildings, and incinerating of the city. Aircrews at the tail end of the bomber stream reported that the stench of burned human flesh permeated the aircraft over the target.\nPrecise figures are not available, but the strategic bombing campaign against Japan, directed by LeMay between March 1945 and the Japanese surrender in August 1945, may have killed more than 500,000 Japanese civilians and left five million homeless. Official estimates from the United States Strategic Bombing Survey put the figures at 220,000 people killed. Some 40% of the built-up areas of 66 cities were destroyed, including much of Japan's war industry.\nLeMay was aware of the implication of his orders. \"The New York Times\" reported at the time, \"Maj. Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, commander of the B-29s of the entire Marianas area, declared that if the war is shortened by a single day, the attack will have served its purpose\". The argument was that it was his duty to carry out the attacks in order to end the war as quickly as possible, sparing further loss of life. He also remarked regarding the morality of the air effort against Japan, \"I suppose if I had lost the war, I would have been tried as a war criminal.\" This opinion was also reported by Robert McNamara in the 2003 documentary \"The Fog of War\".\nPresidents Roosevelt and Truman supported LeMay's strategy, referring to an estimate of one million Allied casualties if Japan had to be invaded. Japan had intentionally decentralized 90% of its war-related production into small subcontractor workshops in civilian districts, making remaining Japanese war industry largely immune to conventional precision bombing with high explosives. As the firebombing campaign took effect, Japanese war planners were forced to expend significant resources to relocate vital war industries to remote caves and mountain bunkers, reducing production of war materiel.\nLeMay also oversaw Operation Starvation, an aerial mining operation against Japanese waterways and ports that disrupted Japanese shipping and logistics. Although his superiors were unsupportive of this naval objective, LeMay gave it a high priority by assigning the entire 313th Bombardment Wing (four groups, about 160 airplanes) to the task. Aerial mining supplemented a tight Allied submarine blockade of the home islands, drastically reducing Japan's ability to supply its overseas forces to the point that postwar analysis concluded that it could have defeated Japan on its own had it begun earlier.\nJapan\u2013Washington flight.\nLeMay piloted one of three specially modified B-29s flying from Japan to the U.S. in September 1945, in the process breaking several aviation records, including the greatest USAAF takeoff weight, the longest USAAF non-stop flight, and the first ever non-stop Japan\u2013Chicago flight. One of the pilots was of higher rank: Lieutenant General Barney M. Giles. The other two aircraft used up more fuel than LeMay's in fighting headwinds, and they could not fly to Washington, D.C., the original goal. Their pilots landed in Chicago to refuel. LeMay's aircraft had sufficient fuel to reach Washington, but he was directed by the War Department to join the others by refueling at Chicago.\nCold War.\nBerlin Airlift.\nAfter World War II, LeMay was already thinking about deterrence theory and how the next war would be fought. He was briefly transferred to The Pentagon as deputy chief of Air Staff for Research &amp; Development. In 1947, LeMay returned to Europe as commander of USAF Europe, heading operations for the Berlin Airlift in 1948 in the face of a blockade by the Soviet Union and its satellite states that threatened to starve the civilian population of the Western occupation zones of Berlin. Under his direction, Douglas C-54 Skymasters that could each carry 10 tons of cargo began supplying the city on July 1. By late 1948, the airlift was bringing in an average of 5,000 tons of supplies a day with 500 daily flights. The airlift continued for 11 months, with 213,000 flights operated by six countries bringing in 1.7 million tons of food and fuel to Berlin. Faced with the failure of its blockade, the Soviet Union relented and reopened land corridors to the West. Though LeMay is sometimes publicly credited with the success of the Berlin Airlift, it was, in fact, instigated by General Lucius D. Clay when Clay called LeMay about the problem. LeMay initially started flying supplies into Berlin, but then decided that it was a job for a logistics expert and he found that person in Lt. General William H. Tunner, who took over the operational aspects of the Berlin Airlift.\nStrategic Air Command.\nIn 1948, he returned to the U.S. to head the Strategic Air Command (SAC) at Offutt Air Force Base, replacing Gen George Kenney. When LeMay took over command of SAC, it consisted of little more than a few understaffed B-29 bombardment groups left over from World War II. Less than half of the available aircraft were operational, and the crews were undertrained. Base and aircraft security standards were minimal. Upon inspecting a SAC hangar full of US nuclear strategic bombers, LeMay found a single Air Force sentry on duty, unarmed. After ordering a mock bombing exercise on Dayton, Ohio, LeMay was shocked to learn that most of the strategic bombers assigned to the mission missed their targets by one mile or more. \"We didn't have one crew, not one crew, in the entire command who could do a professional job\", noted LeMay.\nA meeting in November 1948, with Air Force Chief of Staff Hoyt Vandenberg, found the two men agreeing the primary mission of SAC should be the capability of delivering 80% of the nation's atomic bombs in one mission. At the Dualism Conference in December 1948, the Air Force leadership rallied behind LeMay's position that the service's highest priority was to deliver the SAC atomic offensive \"in one fell swoop telescoping mass and time\". \"To LeMay, demolishing everything was how you win a war.\" Towards this aim, LeMay delivered the first SAC Emergency War Plan in March 1949 which called for dropping 133 atomic bombs on 70 cities in the USSR within 30 days. LeMay predicted that World War III would last no longer than 30 days. Air power strategists called this type of pre-emptive strike \"killing a nation\". However, the Harmon committee released their unanimous report two months later stating such an attack would not end a war with the Soviets and their industry would quickly recover. This committee had been specifically created by the Joint Chiefs of Staff to study the effects of a massive nuclear strike against the Soviet Union. Nevertheless, within weeks, an ad hoc Joint Chiefs committee recommended tripling America's nuclear arsenal, and Air Force Chief of Staff Vandenberg called for enough bombs to attack 220 targets, up from the previous 70.\nUpon receiving his fourth star in 1951 at age 44, LeMay became the youngest American four-star general since Ulysses S. Grant. He would also become the longest serving person in that rank in American military history.\nIn 1954 LeMay remarked to pilot Hal Austin, whose plane had been damaged by a MiG-17 while on a reconnaissance mission over the Soviet Union, \"Well, maybe if we do this overflight right, we can get World War III started\". Hal Austin assumed that LeMay was joking, but years later, after LeMay retired, Austin saw him again and \"brought up the subject of the mission we had flown. And he remembered it like it was yesterday. We chatted about it a little bit. His comment again was, 'Well, we'd have been a hell of a lot better off if we'd got World War III started in those days'\".\nIn 1956 and 1957 LeMay implemented tests of 24-hour bomber and tanker alerts, keeping some bomber forces ready at all times. LeMay headed SAC until 1957, overseeing its transformation into a modern, efficient, all-jet force. LeMay's tenure was the longest over an American military command in nearly 100 years.\nThe \"Airpower Battle\".\nUSAF airpower development and LeMay's style.\nLeMay was instrumental in SAC's acquisition of a large fleet of new strategic bombers, establishment of a vast aerial refueling system, the formation of many new units and bases, development of a strategic ballistic missile force, and establishment of a strict command and control system with an unprecedented readiness capability. All of this was protected by a greatly enhanced and modernized security force, the Strategic Air Command Elite Guard. LeMay insisted on rigorous training and very high standards of performance for all SAC personnel, be they officers, enlisted men, aircrews, mechanics, or administrative staff, and reportedly commented, \"I have neither the time nor the inclination to differentiate between the incompetent and the merely unfortunate.\" \n\"Life\" magazine reported that LeMay once took the co-pilot's seat of a SAC bomber to observe the mission, complete with lit cigar. When asked by the pilot to put out the cigar, LeMay asked why. When the pilot explained that fumes inside the fuselage could explode, LeMay growled, \"It wouldn't dare\". The incident was used as the basis for a fictional scene in the 1955 film \"Strategic Air Command\". In his controversial and factually disputed memoir \"War's End\", Major General Charles Sweeney related an alleged 1944 incident that may have been the basis for the \"It wouldn't dare\" comment. Sweeney stated that a similar incident occurred in 1944 when a B-29 crew chief reminded General LeMay of his lit cigar while LeMay was undergoing B-29 familiarization with (then-Colonel) Paul Tibbets' 509th Composite Group.\nDespite his uncompromising attitude regarding performance of duty, LeMay was also known for his concern for the physical well-being and comfort of his men. LeMay found ways to encourage morale, individual performance, and the reenlistment rate through a number of means: encouraging off-duty group recreational activities, instituting spot promotions based on performance, and authorizing special uniforms, training, equipment, and allowances for ground personnel as well as flight crews.\nOn LeMay's departure, SAC was composed of 224,000 airmen, close to 2,000 heavy bombers, and nearly 800 tanker aircraft.\nLeMay was appointed Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force in July 1957, serving until 1961.\nChief of Staff of the United States Air Force, 1961\u20131965.\nFollowing service as USAF Vice Chief of Staff (1957\u20131961), LeMay was made the fifth chief of staff of the United States Air Force on the retirement of Gen Thomas White. His belief in the efficacy of strategic air campaigns over tactical strikes and ground support operations became Air Force policy during his tenure as chief of staff.\nAs chief of staff, LeMay clashed repeatedly with Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Air Force Secretary Eugene Zuckert, and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Army General Maxwell Taylor. At the time, budget constraints and successive nuclear war fighting strategies had left the armed forces in a state of flux. Each of the armed forces had gradually jettisoned realistic appraisals of future conflicts in favor of developing its own separate nuclear and nonnuclear capabilities. At the height of this struggle, the U.S. Army had even reorganized its combat divisions to fight land wars on irradiated nuclear battlefields, developing short-range atomic cannon and mortars in order to win appropriations. The United States Navy in turn proposed delivering strategic nuclear weapons from supercarriers intended to sail into range of the Soviet air defense forces. Of all these various schemes, only LeMay's command structure of SAC survived complete reorganization in the changing reality of Cold War-era conflicts.\nLeMay was not an enthusiast of the ICBM program, considering ballistic missiles to be little more than toys and no substitute for the strategic nuclear bomber force.\nThough LeMay lost significant appropriation battles for the Skybolt ALBM and the proposed Boeing B-52 Stratofortress replacement, the North American XB-70 Valkyrie, he was largely successful at expanding Air Force budgets. Despite LeMay's disdain for missiles, he did strongly support the use of military space programs to perform satellite reconnaissance and gather electronic intelligence. For comparison, the US Army and Navy frequently suffered budgetary cutbacks and program cancellations by Congress and Secretary McNamara.\nKennedy years.\nLeMay was bitterly critical of the Kennedy administration. He described the so-called \"Whiz Kids\" in the Department of Defense as \"the most egotistical people that I have ever seen in my whole life. They had no faith in the military at all. They felt that the Harvard Business School method of solving problems would solve any problem in the world\".\nDuring the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962, LeMay clashed again with U.S. President John F. Kennedy and Defense Secretary McNamara, arguing that he should be allowed to bomb nuclear missile sites in Cuba. He opposed the naval blockade and, after the end of the crisis, suggested that Cuba be invaded anyway, even after the Soviets agreed to withdraw their missiles. Kennedy refused LeMay's requests, and the naval blockade was successful. \nLeMay told Kennedy that his refusal to invade Cuba was \"almost as bad as the appeasement at Munich\" and the \"greatest defeat in our history\". Twenty-five years later, LeMay still believed that \"We could have gotten not only the missiles out of Cuba, we could have gotten the Communists out of Cuba at that time.\"\nStrategic philosophy.\nThe memorandum from LeMay, chief of staff, USAF, to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, January 4, 1964, illustrates LeMay's reasons for keeping bomber forces alongside ballistic missiles: \"It is important to recognize, however, that ballistic missile forces represent both the U.S. and Soviet potential for strategic nuclear warfare at the highest, most indiscriminate level, and at a level least susceptible to control. The employment of these weapons in lower level conflict would be likely to escalate the situation, uncontrollably, to an intensity which could be vastly disproportionate to the original aggravation. The use of ICBMs and SLBMs is not, therefore, a rational or credible response to provocations which, although serious, are still less than an immediate threat to national survival. For this reason, among others, I consider that the national security will continue to require the flexibility, responsiveness, and discrimination of manned strategic weapon systems throughout the range of cold, limited, and general war\".\nVietnam War.\nLeMay's dislike for tactical aircraft and training foreshadowed events in the low-intensity conflict of Vietnam, where existing Air Force fighter aircraft and standard attack profiles proved incapable of carrying out sustained tactical bombing campaigns in the face of hostile North Vietnamese antiaircraft defenses. LeMay said, \"Flying fighters is fun. Flying bombers is important\". Aircraft losses on tactical attack missions soared, and Air Force commanders soon realized that their large, missile-armed jet fighters were exceedingly vulnerable not only to antiaircraft shells and missiles but also to cannon-armed, maneuverable Soviet fighters.\nLeMay advocated a sustained strategic bombing campaign against North Vietnamese cities, harbors, ports, shipping, and other strategic targets. His advice was ignored. Instead, an incremental policy, Operation Rolling Thunder, was implemented that focused on limited interdiction bombing of fluid enemy supply corridors in Vietnam; two similar incremental policies, Operation Barrel Roll and Operation Steel Tiger, focused on Laos. This limited campaign failed to destroy significant quantities of enemy war supplies or diminish enemy ambitions. Bombing limitations were imposed by President Lyndon Johnson for geopolitical reasons, as he surmised that bombing Soviet and Chinese ships in port and killing Soviet advisers would bring the Soviets and Chinese more directly into the war.\nIn his 1965 autobiography (co-written with MacKinlay Kantor), LeMay is quoted as saying his response to North Vietnam would be to demand that \"they've got to draw in their horns and stop their aggression, or we're going to bomb them back into the Stone Age. And we would shove them back into the Stone Age with Air power or Naval power\u2014not with ground forces\". LeMay subsequently rejected misquotes of the famous \"Stone Age\" quote. Later, in a \"Washington Post\" interview LeMay said that \"I never said we should bomb them back to the Stone Age. I said we had the capability to do it. I want to save lives on both sides\".\nSome military historians have argued that LeMay's theories were eventually proven correct. Near the war's end in December 1972, President Richard Nixon ordered Operation Linebacker II, a high-intensity Air Force, Navy, and Marine Corps aerial bombing campaign, which included hundreds of B-52 bombers that struck previously untouched North Vietnamese strategic targets, including heavily populated areas in Hanoi and Haiphong. Linebacker II was followed by renewed negotiations that led to the Paris Peace Agreement, appearing to support the claim. However, consideration must be given to significant differences in terms of both military objectives and geopolitical realities between 1968 and 1972, including the impact of Nixon's recognition and exploitation of the Sino-Soviet split to gain a \"free hand\" in Vietnam and the shift of Communist opposition from an organic insurgency (the Viet Cong) to a conventional mechanized offensive that was by its nature more reliant on industrial output and traditional logistics. In effect, Johnson and Nixon were waging two different wars.\nPost-military career.\nEarly political life and developments.\nBecause of his unrelenting opposition to the Johnson administration's Vietnam policy and what was widely perceived as his hostility to McNamara, LeMay was essentially forced into retirement in February 1965. Moving to California, he was approached by conservatives to challenge moderate Republican Thomas Kuchel for his seat in the United States Senate in 1968, but he declined.\nVice presidential candidacy, 1968.\nFor the 1968 presidential election, LeMay originally supported former Republican Vice President Richard Nixon; he turned down two requests by former Alabama Governor George Wallace to join his newly formed American Independent Party, that year, on the grounds that a third-party candidacy might hurt Nixon's chances at the polls. (By coincidence, Wallace had served as a sergeant in a unit commanded by LeMay during World War II before LeMay had Wallace transferred to the 477th Bombardment Group.)\nIn 1968 LeMay threw his support to Wallace and became his vice-presidential running mate on the American Independent Party ticket. The campaign saw Wallace's record on racial segregation heavily scrutinized. \nWallace's staff began to consider LeMay to be \"politically tone-deaf\" as LeMay made several comments at campaign events speculating about the possibility of nuclear war, including the press conference where Wallace introduced LeMay as his running mate, where LeMay voiced his belief that there were many situations where the use of nuclear weapons would be efficient and that dropping nuclear bombs would result in positive outcomes for the environment. LeMay's arguments that the American public had a \"phobia\" of atomic weapons failed to change the perception that some American voters had of the Wallace-LeMay ticket.\nThe Wallace-LeMay AIP ticket received 13.5% of the popular vote, higher than most third party candidacies in the US, and carried five states for a total of 46 electoral votes.\nHonors.\nLeMay was honored by several countries for his military service. His U.S. military decorations included the Distinguished Service Cross, the Distinguished Service Medal with two oak leaf clusters, the Silver Star, the Distinguished Flying Cross with two oak leaf clusters, and the Air Medal with three oak leaf clusters. He was also a recipient of the French L\u00e9gion d'honneur and on December 7, 1964 the Japanese government conferred on him the First Order of Merit with the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun. He was elected to the Alfalfa Club in 1957 and served as a general officer for 21 years.\nIn 1977, LeMay was inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame at the San Diego Air &amp; Space Museum.\nThe Air Force has the General Curtis E. LeMay Award named in his honor. The award recognizes the best large installation-level Force Support Squadron.\nPersonal life.\nOn June 9, 1934, LeMay married Helen Estelle Maitland (died 1992), with whom he had one child, Patricia Jane LeMay Lodge, known as Janie.\nCurtis LeMay was also initiated to the York Rite Freemasonry in the Lakewood Lodge No. 601, Lakewood, Ohio.\nDeath.\nLeMay resided in Newport Beach, California, starting in 1969. In 1989, he moved to Air Force Village West, a retirement community for former Air Force officers near March Air Force Base in Riverside. He died on October 1, 1990, of complications from a heart attack, in the 22nd Strategic Hospital on the grounds of March AFB. He is buried in the United States Air Force Academy Cemetery at Colorado Springs, Colorado.\nMiscellaneous.\nAmateur radio operator.\nLeMay was a Heathkit customer and active amateur radio operator and held a succession of call signs; K0GRL, K4FRA, and W6EZV. He held these calls respectively while stationed at Offutt AFB, Washington, D.C., and when he retired in California. K0GRL is still the call sign of the Strategic Air Command Memorial Amateur Radio Club. He was famous for being on the air on amateur bands while flying on board SAC bombers. LeMay became aware that the new single sideband (SSB) technology offered a big advantage over amplitude modulation (AM) for SAC aircraft operating long distances from their bases. In conjunction with Heath engineers and Art Collins (W0CXX) of Collins Radio, he established SSB as the radio standard for SAC bombers in 1957.\nSports car racing.\nLeMay was also a sports car owner and enthusiast who owned an Allard J2. As the \"SAC era\" began to wind down, LeMay loaned out facilities of SAC bases for use by the Sports Car Club of America, as the era of early street races began to die out. Turner Air Force Base hosted the first SCCA race on a military installation in 1952, while SAC's operating base at Offutt welcomed the SCCA National Sports Car Championship the following year. LeMay was not permitted to race himself, so he allowed those like SCCA president Fred Wacker and Roy Scott to drive his Allard when the association raced at Offutt. Revenue from the races were used to improve living quarters at the bases or donated to the Air Force Aid Society and local charities. Racing at SAC installations ended in 1954 after a Congressional investigation over using public funding to organize the events.\nHe was awarded the Woolf Barnato Award, SCCA's highest award, for contributions to the Club, in 1954. LeMay was inducted into the Nebraska Auto Racing Hall of Fame in 2004 and the SCCA Hall of Fame in 2007.\nAir Force Academy exemplar.\nOn March 13, 2010, LeMay was named the class exemplar for the United States Air Force Academy class of 2013.\nExecutive Jet Aviation pioneer.\nIn 1964, LeMay became one of the founding board members of Executive Jet Aviation (EJA) (now called NetJets), along with fellow USAF generals Paul Tibbets and Olbert Lassiter, Washington lawyer and former military pilot Bruce Sundlun, and entertainers James Stewart (who was also an Air Force general in the reserves) and Arthur Godfrey.\nIt was the first private business jet charter and aircraft management company in the world.\nJudo.\nJudo's resurgence after the war was due primarily to two individuals, Kyuzo Mifune and LeMay. The pre-war death of Jigor\u014d Kan\u014d (\"the father of judo\"), wartime demands on the Japanese, their surrender, postwar occupation, and the martial-arts ban all contributed to a time of uncertainty for judo. As assistant to General Douglas MacArthur during the occupation of Japan, LeMay made practicing judo a routine part of Air Force tours of duty in Japan. Many Americans brought home stories of a \"tiny old man\" (Mifune) throwing down healthy, young men without any apparent effort. LeMay became a promoter of judo training and provided political support for judo in the early years after the war. For this, he was awarded the license of \"Shihan\". In addition, LeMay promoted judo within the armed forces of the United States.\nRank history.\nLeMay held the following ranks over the course of his Air Force career. LeMay's first contact with military service occurred in September 1924 when he enrolled as a student in the Army ROTC program at Ohio State University. By his senior year, LeMay was listed on the ROTC rolls as a \"cadet lieutenant colonel\". On June 14, 1928, the summer before the start of his senior year, LeMay accepted a commission as a second lieutenant in the Field Artillery Reserve of the U.S. Army. In September 1928, LeMay was approached by the Ohio National Guard and asked to accept a state commission, also as a second lieutenant, which LeMay accepted.\nOn September 29, 1928, LeMay enlisted in the Army Air Corps as an aviation cadet. For the next 13 months, he was on the enlisted rolls of the Regular Army as a cadet and he held commissions in the National Guard and Army Reserve. His status changed on October 2, 1929, when LeMay's Guard and Reserve commissions were terminated. These commissions were revoked after an Army personnel officer, realizing that LeMay was holding officer and enlisted status simultaneously, called him to discuss the matter and LeMay verbally resigned these commissioned ranks over the telephone.\nAll officer commissions were terminated on October 2, 1929, pending completion of flight training and commissioning as an officer in the Army Air Corps.\nOn October 12, 1929, LeMay finished his flight training and was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Army Air Corps Reserve. This was the third time he had been appointed a second lieutenant in just under two years. He held this reserve commission until June 1930, when he was appointed as a Regular Army officer in the Army Air Corps.\nLeMay experienced slow advancement throughout the 1930s, as did most officers of the seniority-driven Regular Army. At the start of 1940 he was promoted to captain after serving nearly eleven years in the lieutenant grades. Beginning in 1941, LeMay began to receive temporary advancements in grade in the expanding Army Air Forces and advanced from captain to brigadier general in less than four years; by 1944, he was a major general in the Army Air Forces. When World War II ended, he was appointed to the permanent rank of brigadier general in the Regular Army and then promoted to permanent major general rank (two star) when the Air Force became its own separate branch of service. LeMay was simultaneously appointed to temporary three star general rank in the Air Force and promoted to the full rank of general, permanent in the Air Force, in 1951. LeMay held this rank until his retirement in 1965. He was the youngest ever to achieve the rank of 4 stars (age 44). He was noted for this quote (when firing a subordinate): \"I can't tell if you are inept or unfortunate - but I don't have time for either one.\"\nCurtis LeMay retired from the United States Air Force on February 1, 1965, with the rank of full (four star) general.\nFurther promotions\nAccording to letters in LeMay's service record, while he was in command of SAC during the 1950s several petitions were made by Air Force service members to have LeMay promoted to the rank of General of the Air Force (five stars). The Air Force leadership, however, felt that such a promotion would lessen the prestige of this rank, which was seen as a wartime rank to be held only in times of extreme national emergency.\nPer the chief of the Air Force General Officers Branch, in a letter dated February 28, 1962:\nIt is clear that a grateful nation, recognizing the tremendous contributions of the key military and naval leaders in World War II, created these supreme grades as an attempt to accord to these leaders the prestige, the clear-cut leadership, and the emolument of office befitting their service to their country in war. It is the conviction of the Department of the Air Force that this recognition was and is appropriate. Moreover, appointments to this grade during periods other than war would carry the unavoidable connotation of downgrading of those officers so honored in World War II.\nThus, no serious effort was ever made to promote LeMay to the rank of General of the Air Force, and the matter was eventually dropped after his retirement from active service in 1965.\nAwards and decorations.\nLeMay received recognition for his work from thirteen countries, receiving two badges and thirty-two different medals and decorations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1972, LeMay was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in Dayton, Ohio.\nLeMay, Curtis E.\nBrigadier General (then Colonel), U.S. Army Air Forces\n4th Bomb Wing, Eighth Air Force\nDate of Action: August 17, 1943\nCitation:\nDistinguished Service Cross citation.\nThe President of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress July 9, 1918, takes pleasure in presenting the Distinguished Service Cross to Brigadier General [then Colonel (Air Corps)] Curtis Emerson LeMay, United States Army Air Forces, for extraordinary heroism in connection with military operations against an armed enemy while serving as Pilot of a B-17 Heavy Bomber and Commander of the 4th Bomb Wing, Eighth Air Force, while participating in a bombing mission on 17 August 1943, against enemy ground targets in the European Theater of Operations. General LeMay, fully realizing the extent of the hazards involved, although not required to participate through obligation or reason of duty, undertook the responsibility of directing this mission. In spite of heavy enemy fighter attack and antiaircraft fire, General LeMay led the formation to target, accomplished his mission, and led the return to a friendly base. His courage, coolness, and skill on this occasion were an inspiration to his men and reflect great credit upon himself, the 8th Air Force, and the United States Army Air Forces.\nCultural legacy.\nAccording to Michael S. Sherry, \"Few American military officers of this century have been more feared, reviled, and ridiculed than Curtis E. LeMay.\" According to Fred Kaplan:\"Dr. Strangelove\", Stanley Kubrick's 1964 film about nuclear-war plans run amok, is widely heralded as one of the greatest satires in American political or movie history. ... It was no secret\u2014it would have been obvious to many viewers in 1964\u2014that General Ripper looked a lot like Curtis LeMay, the cigar-chomping, gruff-talking general.\" \nUniversity of Notre Dame Professor Dan Lindley points out parallels between LeMay and the characters of Buck Turgidson and Jack D. Ripper in Stanley Kubrick's \"Dr. Strangelove\", including close paraphrasing of statements by LeMay.\nJohn Milius wrote a script about Le May's life for Robert Zemeckis but as of 2025 it has not been filmed.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66226", "revid": "15959676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66226", "title": "Curtis E. LeMay", "text": ""}
{"id": "66228", "revid": "50775233", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66228", "title": "Fredrikstad", "text": "Fredrikstad (; previously \"Frederiksstad\"; literally \"Fredrik's Town\") is a port city and municipality in \u00d8stfold county, Norway. The administrative centre of the municipality is the city of Fredrikstad.\nThe city of Fredrikstad was founded in 1567 by King Frederick II, and established as a municipality on 1 January 1838 (see \"formannskapsdistrikt\"). The rural municipality of Glemmen was merged with Fredrikstad on 1 January 1964. The rural municipalities of Borge, Ons\u00f8y, Kr\u00e5ker\u00f8y, and Rolvs\u00f8y were merged with Fredrikstad on 1 January 1994.\nThe city straddles the river Glomma where it meets the Skagerrak, about from the Sweden border. Along with neighboring Sarpsborg, Fredrikstad forms the fifth largest city in Norway: Fredrikstad/Sarpsborg. As of 31 December 2024, according to Statistics Norway, these two municipalities have a total population of 146,001 with 85,862 in Fredrikstad and 60,139 in Sarpsborg.\nFredrikstad was built at the mouth of Glomma as a replacement after Sarpsborg ( upstream) was burnt down by the Swedish Army in the 1500s. Some of the citizens stayed behind and rebuilt their old town at its original site and got their city status back in 1839.\nThe city centre is on the west bank of the Glomma, while the old town on the east bank is Northern Europe's best preserved fortified town.\nFredrikstad used to have a large sawmill industry and was an important harbour for timber export, then later on shipbuilding, until the main yard was closed in 1988. The main industries are currently various chemical plants and other light industry.\nIn 2005, Fredrikstad was the final host port for the Tall Ships' Race, attracting thousands to the city. In 2019, it was the first host port.\nIn 2017, Fredrikstad won the national award for most attractive city. The award is given yearly by the Norwegian government on the basis of social, economic and environmental factors.\nGeneral information.\nName.\nThe city was named after the Danish king Frederick II in 1569. The last element \"stad\" means \"city\".\nPrior to 1877, the name was spelled \"Frederiksstad\", then from 1877 to 1888 it was written as \"Fredriksstad\", and finally since 1889 it has been spelled in its current form: \"Fredrikstad\".\nCoat-of-arms.\nThe coat-of-arms is from modern times. They were granted on 21 April 1967. The old arms are based on the oldest known seal of the city, which dates from 1610. They showed a fortress being guarded by a bear. Strangely, Fredrikstad had no fortifications in 1610 (it received some at the end of the 17th century). Fredrikstad was founded by citizens of Sarpsborg and both the fortress and the bear are taken from the old arms of Sarpsborg. The composition of the seal was also used as arms since the beginning of the 19th century. The new arms were granted at the 400th anniversary of the city in 1967 and show a more modern variation on the fortress and bear.\nThe government has asked all municipalities, to receive refugees on behalf of the government; in 2025, the municipality said \"no\", for that year.\nHistory.\nAfter Sarpsborg, which was founded by Olav the Holy in 1016, was burned to the ground by the Swedes during the Northern Seven Years' War, the ruling king, Frederik II, decided by royal decree to build a new town south of the original location. The new town was founded in 1567 as Sarpsborg, regarded as a reconstruction of the original town. This new site's proximity to the sea and the accessible open land surrounding it made it a better location than the old one. The name Fredrikstad was first used in a letter from the King dated 6 February 1569. The temporary fortification built during the Hannibal War (1644\u20131645) between Sweden and Denmark-Norway, became permanent in the 1660s.\nThe work on the fortifications was first led by Willem Coucheron and later Johan Caspar von Cicignon. During the next 60 years, several fortifications at the Fredrikstad Fortress were built, including Isegran, Kongsten, and Cicignon. In 1735, a suburb on the western side of Glomma, \"Vestsiden\", was founded. This part later grew faster than\nthe old city, and became the dominant city centre. Most of the buildings in the old city burned down during a fire in 1764.\nIn the 1840s, timber exporting from Fredrikstad started to gain momentum. In the 1860s, several steam powered saws were built along the river, and in 1879 the railway reached Fredrikstad, leading to further growth. With the decline of the timber exports as a result of the modernization of wood-processing industries in the early 1900s, Fredrikstad's production changed to other types of products. It later became one of Norway's most important industrial centres, famous for its large shipyard, Fredrikstad Mekaniske Verksted.\nEducation.\nFredrikstad has three high schools. Frederik II Upper Secondary School offers general studies and financial / administrative studies. It is a merger of the former Frydenberg Gymnastic and Christianslund Handelsgymnasium. Glemmen High School offers professional training and study. Wang Toppidrett Frederikstad offers sports, science, languages, social sciences and economics. In addition, there is a Steiner school, a private educational alternative.\n\u00d8stfold University College offers higher education (master's and bachelor's studies) at the Academy of Performing Arts, Faculty of Health and Social Care and the Faculty of Engineering at Kr\u00e5ker\u00f8y. \u00d8stfold Vocational College offers short professional craft or technical courses. The Department of Journalism offers primarily continuing education for journalists and editors.\nFredrikstad Museum.\nFredrikstad Museum is located in Old Fredrikstad. The museum shows the history of the city and the surrounding region. The museum also manages Elingaard Manor in Ons\u00f8y and Torgauten Fort. Fredrikstad Museum was founded in 1903. Since 2003, the museum's management has been located in T\u00f8ihuset in Old Town.\nSport.\nFredrikstad is home to nine-time Norway football winners Fredrikstad FK who play at the Fredrikstad Stadion. Egil Olsen, manager for the Norwegian national football team, is from Fredrikstad. There is also an American football team, the Fredrikstad Eagles.\nFredrikstad has a top-division handball team, Fredrikstad BK, and a top-division ice hockey team, Stjernen Hockey.\nThe city also has a number of floorball teams, including Slevik IBK, Fredrikstad IBK and St. Croix Pirates.\nTransport.\nThe city doesn't have an airport, the nearest airport is Sandefjord Airport which is located west of Fredrikstad. Oslo Airport is also located north of Fredrikstad.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nThe following cities are twinned with Fredrikstad:\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66230", "revid": "48475498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66230", "title": "Peshawar", "text": "Capital of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan\nPeshawar is the capital and largest city of the Pakistani province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. It is the eighth-most populous Pakistani city, with a population of over 1.9 million. It is situated in the north-west of the country, lying in the Valley of Peshawar, a broad area situated east of the Khyber Pass. \nPeshawar's recorded history dates back to at least sixth century BC, making it one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in South Asia. One of the principal cities of the ancient Gandhara, Peshawar served as the capital of the Kushan Empire during the rule of Kanishka the Great, in the second century CE. A variety of Muslim empires ruled the city following the conquest of Peshawar by the Ghaznavids from the Hindu Shahis, in 1001 CE. It was an important trading centre in the Mughal Empire, later serving as the winter capital of the Durrani Empire from 1776 until the capture of the city by the Sikh Empire in 1823. In 1849, the city was captured by the East India Company and subsequently became part of British Raj. In 1901, Peshawar became capital of the North-West Frontier Province after it was created from the northwestern districts of Punjab Province. Following the Partition of British India it became part of Pakistan, in 1947.\nPeshawar is a major cultural, political and economic centre of the region. During the colonial period and well into the early years after independence, the \"lingua franca\" of Peshawar was Hindko; in the succeeding decades, the rapid urbanization and the high rate of migration from the rural and tribal areas of the province, as well as the influx of Afghan refugees following the Soviet-Afghan War, transformed Peshawar from Hindko to a Pashto-speaking city. Today Peshawar is largely populated by Pashtuns, although the original urban population, known as Peshoris, still has a significant presence in the central areas of the old Walled City.\nEtymology.\nThe modern name of the city \"Peshawar\" is possibly derived from the [reconstructed] Sanskrit word \"Purushapura\" ( \"Puru\u1e63apura\", meaning \"City of Men\" or \"City of Purusha\"). It was named so by Mughal Emperor Akbar from its old name \"Parashawar\", the meaning of which Akbar did not understand. The ruler of the city during its founding may have been a Hindu raja named Purush; the word \"pur\" means \"city\" in Sanskrit. Sanskrit, written in the Kharosthi script, was the literary language (along with Gandhari Prakrit) employed by the Buddhist kingdoms which ruled over the area during its earliest recorded period. The city's name may also be derived from the Sanskrit name for \"City of Flowers,\" \"Poshapura,\" a name found in an ancient Kharosthi inscription that may refer to Peshawar\".\"\nChinese Buddhist monk Xuanzang's seventh-century account of a city in Gandhara called the city \"Po-la-sha-pu-lo\" (Chinese: \u5e03\u8def\u6c99\u5e03\u908f, \"b\u00f9l\u00f9sh\u0101b\u00f9l\u00f3\")\",\" and an earlier fifth-century account by Faxian records the city's name as \"Fou-lou-sha\" (Chinese: \u5f17\u6a13\u6c99, \"f\u00f9l\u00f3ush\u0101\")\",\" the Chinese equivalent of the Sanskrit name of the city, Purushapura. An ancient inscription from the Shapur era identifies a city in the Gandhara valley by the name \"pskbvr,\" which may be a reference to Peshawar.\nThe Arab historian and geographer al-Masudi noted that by the mid-tenth century, the city was known as \"Parash\u0101war\". The name was noted to be \"Purshawar\" and \"Purushavar\" by al-Biruni.\nThe city began to be known as \"Pesh\u0101war\" by the era of Emperor Akbar. The current name is said by some to have been based upon the Persian word for \"frontier town\" or, more literally, \"forward city\", though transcription errors and linguistic shifts may account for the city's new name. One theory suggests that the city's name is derived from the Persian name \"Pesh Awardan\", meaning \"place of first arrival\" or \"frontier city\", as Peshawar was the first city in the Indian subcontinent after crossing the Khyber Pass. Akbar's bibliographer, Abu'l-Fazl ibn Mubarak, lists the city's name as both \"Parash\u0101war\", transcribed in Persian as , and \"Pesh\u0101war\" ().\nHistory.\nAncient history.\nFoundation.\nPeshawar was established as the city of \"Puru\u1e63apura\", on the Gandhara Plains in the broad Valley of Peshawar, after the 100 CE. It may have been named after a Hindu raja, who ruled the city, who was known as Purush. The city likely first existed as a small village in the fifth century BCE, near the ancient Gandharan capital city of Pushkalavati, near present-day Charsadda.\nGreek invasion.\nIn the winter of 327\u201326 BCE, Alexander the Great subdued the Valley of Peshawar during his invasion of the Indus Valley, as well as the nearby Swat and Buner valleys. Following Alexander's conquest, the Valley of Peshawar came under the suzerainty of Seleucus I Nicator, founder of the Seleucid Empire. A locally made vase fragment that was found in Peshawar depicts a scene from Sophocles' play \"Antigone\".\nMauryan empire.\nFollowing the Seleucid\u2013Mauryan war, the region was ceded to the Mauryan Empire in 303 BCE. Around 300 BCE, the Greek diplomat and historian Megasthenes noted that Purushapura was the western terminus of a Mauryan road that connected the city to the empire's capital at \"Pataliputra\", near the city of Patna in the modern-day Indian state of Bihar.\nAs Mauryan power declined, the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom based in modern Afghanistan declared its independence from the Seleucid Empire, and quickly seized the region around 190 BCE. The city was then captured by Gondophares, founder of the Indo-Parthian Kingdom. Gondophares established the nearby \"Takht-i-Bahi\" monastery in 46 CE.\nKushan empire.\nIn the first century CE, Purushapura came under control of Kujula Kadphises, founder of the Kushan Empire. It was made the empire's winter capital. The Kushan's summer capital at \"Kapisi\" (modern Bagram, Afghanistan) was seen as the secondary capital of the empire, while Puru\u1e63apura was considered to be the empire's primary capital. Ancient Peshawar's population was estimated to be 120,000, which would make it the seventh-most populous city in the world at the time. As a devout Buddhist, the emperor built the grand \"Kanishka Mahavihara\" monastery. After his death, the magnificent Kanishka stupa was built in Peshawar to house Buddhist relics. The golden age of Kushan empire in Peshawar ended in 232 CE with the death of the last great Kushan king, Vasudeva I.\nAround 260 CE, the armies of the Sasanid Emperor Shapur I launched an attack against Peshawar, and severely damaged Buddhist monuments and monasteries throughout the Valley of Peshawar. Shapur's campaign also resulted in damage to the city's monumental stupa and monastery. The Kushans were made subordinate to the Sasanids and their power rapidly dwindled, as the Sasanids blocked lucrative trade routes westward out of the city.\nKushan Emperor Kanishka III was able to temporarily reestablish control over the entire Valley of Peshawar after Shapur's invasion, but the city was then captured by the Central Asian Kidarite kingdom in the early 400s CE.\nWhite Huns.\nThe White Huns devastated ancient Peshawar in the 460s CE, and ravaged the entire region of Gandhara, destroying its numerous monasteries. The Kanishka stupa was rebuilt during the White Hun era with the construction of a tall wooden superstructure, built atop a stone base, and crowned with a 13-layer copper-gilded \"chatra\". In the 400s CE, the Chinese Buddhist pilgrim \"Faxian\" visited the structure and described it as \"the highest of all the towers\" in the \"terrestrial world\", which ancient travelers claimed was up to tall, though modern estimates suggest a height of .\nIn 520 CE the Chinese monk Song Yun visited Gandhara and ancient Peshawar during the White Hun era, and noted that it was in conflict with nearby \"Kapisa\". The Chinese monk and traveler Xuanzang visited ancient Peshawar around 630 CE, after \"Kapisa\" victory, and expressed lament that the city and its great Buddhist monuments had decayed to ruin\u2014although some monks studying Theravada Buddhism continued to study at the monastery's ruins. Xuanzang estimated that only about 1,000 families continued in a small quarter among the ruins of the former grand capital.\nMedieval history.\nUntil the mid-seventh century, the residents of ancient Peshawar were ruled by Kabul Shahis, who were then displaced by the Hindu Shahis of Kabul. Islam is believed to have been first introduced to the Buddhist, Hindu and other indigenous inhabitants of Puru\u1e63apura in the later seventh century.\nGhaznavid empire.\nIn 986\u201387 CE, Peshawar's first encounter with Muslim armies occurred when Sabuktigin invaded the area and fought the Hindu Shahis under their king, Anandpal.\nOn 28 November 1001, Sabuktigin's son Mahmud Ghazni decisively defeated the army of Raja Jayapala, son of Anandpal, at the Battle of Peshawar, and established rule of the Ghaznavid Empire in the Peshawar region. During the Ghaznavid era, Peshawar served as an important stop between the Afghan plateau, and the Ghaznavid garrison city of Lahore. During the tenth\u201312th century, Peshawar served as a headquarters for Hindu Nath Panthi Yogis, who in turn are believed to have extensively interacted with Muslim Sufi mystics. \nAs the first Pashtun tribe to settle in the region, the Dilazak Pashtuns began settling in the Valley of Peshawar, and are believed to have settled regions up to the Indus River by the 11th century. The Arab historian and geographer al-Masudi noted that by the mid tenth century, the city had become known as \"Parash\u0101war\".\nDelhi sultanate.\nIn 1179\u201380, Muhammad Ghori captured Peshawar, though the city was then destroyed in the early 1200s at the hands of the Mongols. Peshawar was an important regional centre under the Lodi dynasty of Delhi Sultanate.\nSeveral other Pashtun tribe began settling rural regions around Peshawar in the late 15th and 16th centuries. The Ghoryakhel and Khashi \"Khel\" tribe pushed the Dilazak Pashtun tribes east of the Indus River following a battle in 1515 near the city of Mardan. Hindko continued to be the language of trade and business in the city.\nEarly modern history.\nMughal empire.\nIn July 1526, Emperor Babur captured Peshawar. During Babur's rule, the city was known as \"Begram\", and he rebuilt the city's fort. Babur used the city as a base for expeditions to other nearby towns. Peshawar remained an important centre on trade routes between India and Central Asia during Mughal period. The Peshawar region was a cosmopolitan region in which goods, peoples, and ideas would pass along trade routes. Its importance as a trade centre is highlighted by the destruction of over one thousand camel-loads of merchandise following an accidental fire at Bala Hissar fort in 1586. Under the reign of Babur's son, Humayun, direct Mughal rule over the city was briefly challenged with the rise of the Pashtun king, Sher Shah Suri, who began construction of the famous Grand Trunk Road in the 16th century. Mughal rule in the area was tenuous, as Mughal suzerainty was only firmly exercised in the Peshawar valley, while the neighbouring valley of Swat was under Mughal rule only during the reign of Akbar.\nPeshawar was an important trading centre on the Grand Trunk Road. During Akbar's rule, the name of the city changed from \"Begram\" to \"Peshawar\". In 1586, Pashtuns rose against Mughal rule during the Roshani Revolt under the leadership of Bayazid Pir Roshan, founder of the egalitarian Roshani movement, who assembled Pashtun armies in an attempted rebellion against the Mughals. The Roshani followers laid siege to the city until 1587.\nPeshawar was bestowed with its own set of \"Shalimar Gardens\" during the reign of Shah Jahan, which no longer exist. Emperor Aurangzeb's governor of Kabul, Mohabbat Khan used Peshawar as his winter capital during the 17th century, and bestowed the city with its famous Mohabbat Khan Mosque in 1630.\nYusufzai tribes rose against Mughal rule during the Yusufzai Revolt of 1667, and engaged in pitched-battles with Mughal battalions nearby Attock. Afridi tribes resisted Mughal rule during the Afridi Revolt of the 1670s. The Afridis massacred a Mughal battalion in the nearby Khyber Pass in 1672 and shut the pass to lucrative trade routes. Mughal armies led by Emperor Aurangzeb himself regained control of the entire area in 1674.\nFollowing Aurangzeb's death in 1707, his son Bahadur Shah I, former governor of Peshawar and Kabul, was selected to be the Mughal Emperor. As Mughal power declined following the death of Emperor Aurangzeb, the empire's defenses were weakened.\nOn 18 November 1738, Peshawar was captured from the Mughal governor Nawab Nasir Khan by the Afsharid armies during the Persian invasion of the Mughal Empire under Nader Shah.\nDurrani Empire.\nIn 1747, Peshawar was taken by Ahmad Shah Durrani, founder of the Afghan Durrani Empire. The city was captured in spring of 1758 by the Maratha Confederacy in alliance with the Sikhs. Before that, the fort of Peshawar was being guarded by Durrani troops under Timur Shah Durrani and Jahan Khan. When Raghunathrao, Malhar Rao Holkar and Sikh alliance of Charat Singh and Jassa Singh Ahluwalia left Peshawar, Tukoji Rao Holkar was appointed as the representative in this area ofgain the sub-continent.\nIn the following year Ahmad Shah agin occupied the city. Under the reign of his son Timur Shah, the Mughal practice of using Kabul as a summer capital and Peshawar as a winter capital was reintroduced, with the practice maintained until the Sikh invasion. Peshawar's Bala Hissar Fort served as the residence of Afghan kings during their winter stay in Peshawar, and it was noted to be the main centre of trade between Bukhara and India by British explorer William Moorcroft during the late 1700s. Peshawar was at the centre of a productive agricultural region that provided much of north India's dried fruit.\nTimur Shah's grandson, Mahmud Shah Durrani, became king, and quickly seized Peshawar from his half-brother, Shah Shuja Durrani. Shah Shujah was then himself proclaimed king in 1803, and recaptured Peshawar while Mahmud Shah was imprisoned at Bala Hissar fort until his eventual escape. In 1809, the British sent an emissary to the court of Shah Shujah in Peshawar, marking the first diplomatic meeting between the British and Afghans. His half-brother Mahmud Shah then allied himself with the \"Barakzai\" Pashtuns, and captured Peshawar once again and reigned until the Battle of Nowshera in March 1823.\nSikh Empire.\nRanjit Singh invaded Peshawar in 1818, but handed its rule to Peshawar Sardars as vassals. Following the Sikh victory against Azim Khan at the Nowshera in March 1823, Ranjit Singh captured Peshawar again and reinstated Yar Mohammed as the governor. By 1830, Peshawar's economy was noted by Scottish explorer Alexander Burnes to have sharply declined, with Ranjit Singh's forces having destroyed the city's palace and agricultural fields.\nMuch of Peshawar's caravan trade from Kabul ceased on account of skirmishes between Afghan and Sikh forces, as well as a punitive tax levied on merchants by Ranjit Singh's forces. Singh's government also required Peshawar to forfeit much of its leftover agricultural output to the Sikhs as tribute, while agriculture was further decimated by a collapse of the dried fruit market in north India. Singh appointed Neapolitan mercenary Paolo Avitabile as administrator of Peshawar, who is remembered for having unleashed a reign of terror. His time in Peshawar is known as a time of \"gallows and gibbets\". The city's famous Mahabat Khan, built in 1630 in the Jeweler's Bazaar, was badly damaged and desecrated by the Sikh conquerors.\nThe Sikh Empire formally annexed Peshawar in 1834 following advances from the armies of Hari Singh Nalwa\u2014bringing the city under direct control of the Sikh Empire's \"Lahore Durbar\". An 1835 attempt by Dost Muhammad Khan to re-occupy the city was unsuccessful after being unable to breach the Peshawar fort's defenses. Sikh settlers from Punjab were settled in the city during Sikh rule. The city's only remaining Gurdwaras were built by Hari Singh Nalwa to accommodate the newly settled Sikhs. The Sikhs also rebuilt the Bala Hissar fort during their occupation of the city.\nBritish Raj.\nFollowing the defeat of the Sikhs in the First Anglo-Sikh War in 1845\u201346 and the Second Anglo-Sikh War in 1849, some of their territories were captured by the British East India Company. The British re-established stability in the wake of ruinous Sikh rule. During the Sepoy Rebellion of 1857, the 4,000 members of the native garrison were disarmed without bloodshed; the absence of conflict during the rebellion meant that Peshawar was not affected by the widespread devastation that was experienced throughout the rest of British India and local chieftains sided with the British after the incident.\nThe British laid out the vast Peshawar Cantonment to the west of the city in 1868, and made the city its frontier headquarters. Additionally, several projects were initiated in Peshawar, including linkage of the city by railway to the rest of British India and renovation of the Mohabbat Khan mosque that had been desecrated by the Sikhs. British suzerainty over regions west of Peshawar was cemented in 1893 by Sir Mortimer Durand, foreign secretary of the British Indian government, who collaboratively demarcated the border between British controlled territories in India and Afghanistan.\nThe British built Cunningham clock tower in celebration of the Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria, and in 1906 built the Victoria Hall (now home of the Peshawar Museum) in memory of Queen Victoria. The British introduced Western-style education into Peshawar with the establishment of Edwardes College and Islamia College in 1901 and 1913, along with several schools run by the Anglican Church. For better administration of the region, Peshawar and the adjoining districts were separated from the Punjab Province in 1901; the North-West Frontier Province was separated from Punjab Province in 1901, after which Peshawar became capital of the new province.\nCommunal riots broke out in the old city of Peshawar during the spring of 1910, when the annual Hindu festival of Holi coincided with Barawafat, the annual Muslim day of mourning, resulting in a considerable loss of life along with hundreds of looted businesses and injuries. A month prior, in February 1910, prominent community religious leaders met with officials and agreed that Holi would be solely celebrated in predominantly Hindu neighbourhoods of the city, notably in Andar Shehr and Karim Pura. On 21 March 1910, however, rumors of musicians from Amritsar and a dancing boy from Haripur being brought into the city for Holi celebrations, led to a group of individuals who were marking Barawafat into forming a mob with the intention of stopping the procession. Despite Muslim and Hindu community leaders calling for calm, both parties ultimately clashed at the Asamai Gate, when the Holi procession was \"en route\" to Dargah Pir Ratan Nath Jee, with a Hindu procession member stabbing a Muslim individual in the mob. Riots ensued for the following three days, involved individuals from outlying tribal regions who had entered the city, with a mob at Bara Bazar allegedly chanting \"Maro Hindu Ko\" (Kill the Hindus). Estimates detail the riots resulted in a total of 451 damaged shops and homes, primarily belonging to members of the Hindu community, while at least 4 Muslims and 6 Hindus were killed, alongside hundreds of injuries.\nPeshawar emerged as a centre for both Hindkowan and Pashtun intellectuals during the British era. Hindko speakers, known as Peshoris, were responsible for the dominant culture for most of the time that Peshawar was under British rule. Peshawar was also home to a non-violent resistance movement led by Ghaffar Khan, a disciple of Mahatma Gandhi. In April 1930, Khan, leading a large group of his followers, protested in Qissa Khwani Bazaar against discriminatory laws that had been enacted by the colonial government; hundreds were killed when a detachment of the British Indian Army opened fire on the demonstrators.\nModern era.\nIn 1947, Peshawar became part of the newly created state of Pakistan, and emerged as a cultural centre in the country's northwest. The partition of India saw the departure of many Hindko-speaking Hindus and Sikhs who held key positions in the economy of Peshawar, weakening the historical presence of Hindko language in the city. The University of Peshawar was established in the city in 1950, and augmented by the amalgamation of nearby British-era institutions into the university. Until the mid-1950s, Peshawar was enclosed within a city wall and sixteen gates. In the 1960s, Peshawar was a base for a CIA operation to spy on the Soviet Union, with the 1960 U-2 incident resulting in an aircraft shot down by the Soviets that flew from Peshawar. From the 1960s until the late 1970s, Peshawar was a major stop on the famous Hippie trail.\nDuring the Soviet\u2013Afghan War in the 1980s, Peshawar served as a political centre for the CIA and the Inter-Services Intelligence-trained mujahideen groups based in the camps of Afghan refugees. It also served as the primary destination for large numbers of Afghan refugees. By 1980, 100,000 refugees a month were entering the province, with 25% of all refugees living in Peshawar district in 1981. The arrival of large numbers of Afghan refugees strained Peshawar's infrastructure, and drastically altered the city's demography.\nLike much of northwest Pakistan, Peshawar has been severely affected by violence from the attacks by the terrorist group, Tehrik-i-Taliban. Local poets' shrines have been targeted by the Pakistani Taliban, a suicide bomb attack targeted the historic All Saints Church in 2013, and most notably the 2014 Peshawar school massacre in which Taliban militants killed 132 school children. Peshawar suffered 111 acts of terror in 2010, which had declined to 18 in 2014, before the launch of Operation Zarb-e-Azb, which further reduced acts of violence throughout Pakistan. A large attack on a Shiite mosque in the city killed dozens and injured 200 people on 4 March 2022. In January 2023, another terrorist attack occurred at Peshawar in which 100 people were killed.\nGeography.\nTopography.\nPeshawar is located in the broad Valley of Peshawar, which is surrounded by mountain ranges on three sides, with the fourth opening to the Punjab plains. The city is located in the generally level base of the valley, known as the Gandhara Plains.\nClimate.\nWith an influence from the local steppe climate, Peshawar features a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen \"BSh\"), with very hot, prolonged summers and brief, mild to cool winters. Winter in Peshawar starts in November and ends in late March, though it sometimes extends into mid-April, while the summer months are from mid-May to mid-September. The mean maximum summer temperature surpasses during the hottest month, and the mean minimum temperature is . The mean minimum temperature during the coolest month is , while the maximum is .\nPeshawar is not a monsoon region, unlike other parts of Pakistan; however, rainfall occurs in both winter and summer. Due to western disturbances, the winter rainfall shows a higher record between the months of February and April. The highest amount of winter rainfall, measuring , was recorded in February 2007, while the highest summer rainfall of was recorded in July 2010; during this month, a record-breaking rainfall level of fell within a 24-hour period on 29 July 2010\u2014the previous record was of rain, recorded in April 2009. The average winter rainfall levels are higher than those of summer. Based on a 30-year record, the average annual precipitation level was recorded as and the highest annual rainfall level of was recorded in 2003. Wind speeds vary during the year, from in December to in June. The relative humidity varies from 46% in June to 76% in August. The highest temperature of was recorded on 18 June 1995, while the lowest occurred on 7 January 1970.\nAccording to the World Air Quality Report 2024, Peshawar is one of the world's most polluted city.\nCityscape.\nPeshawar's urban typology is similar to other ancient cities in South Asia, such as Lahore, Multan and Delhi \u2013 all of which were founded near a major river, and included an old walled city, as well as a royal citadel.\nHistorically, the old city of Peshawar was a heavily guarded citadel that consisted of high walls. In the 21st century, only remnants of the walls remain, but the houses and havelis continue to be structures of significance. Most of the houses are constructed of unbaked bricks, with the incorporation of wooden structures for protection against earthquakes, with many composed of wooden doors and latticed wooden balconies. Numerous examples of the city's old architecture can still be seen in areas such as Sethi Mohallah. In the old city, located in inner-Peshawar, many historic monuments and bazaars exist in the 21st century, including the Mohabbat Khan Mosque, Kotla Mohsin Khan, Chowk Yadgar and the Qissa Khawani Bazaar. Due to the damage caused by rapid growth and development, the old walled city has been identified as an area that urgently requires restoration and protection.\nThe walled city was surrounded by several main gates that served as the main entry points into the city \u2014 in January 2012, an announcement was made that the government plans to address the damage that has left the gates largely non-existent over time, with all of the gates targeted for restoration.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation.\nAccording to the 2023 census, Peshawar was the 8th largest city of Pakistan and the largest city in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa with a population of 1,905,975. Its population is five times higher than the second-largest city in the province.\nAfghan refugees.\nPeshawar has hosted Afghan refugees since the start of the Afghan civil war in 1978, though the rate of migration drastically increased following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979. The arrival of large numbers of Afghan refugees strained Peshawar's infrastructure, and drastically altered the city's demography. During the 1988 national elections, an estimated 100,000 Afghans refugees were illegally registered to vote in Peshawar. In 2012, it was estimated that Afghans constituted 28% of the city's total population, and that the numbers could be higher.\nWith the influx of Afghan refugees into Peshawar, the city became a hub for Afghan musicians and artists, as well as a major centre of Pashto literature. Some Afghan refugees have established successful businesses in Peshawar, and play an important role in the city's economy.\nPeshoris.\nPeshawaris, also known as \"Peshoris\", are the Hindko-speaking urban community which has inhabited the city since the ancient period, mostly associated with trade, business and education. Peshoris formed majority in the city until the 1960s. Today they are a minority ethnic group mostly confined to the old neighbourhoods in the Walled City.\nLanguages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPashto is the major language spoken in Peshawar city today, while Hindko was historically the language of street, and is still spoken in the Old City. Though English is used in the city's educational institutions, while Urdu is understood throughout the city \u2013 as the national language of the country. Hindko speakers in Peshawar increasingly assimilate elements of Pashto and Urdu into their speech.\nReligion.\nPeshawar is overwhelmingly Muslim, with Muslims making up 98.5% of the city's population in the 1998 census. Christians make up the second largest religious group with around 20,000 adherents, while over 7,000 members of the Ahmadiyya Community live in Peshawar. Hindus and Sikhs are also found in the city \u2212 though most of the city's Hindu and Sikh community migrated \"en masse\" to India following the Partition of British India in 1947.\nThough the city's Sikh population drastically declined after Partition, the Sikh community has been bolstered in Peshawar by the arrival of approximately 4,000 Sikh refugees from conflict in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas; In 2008, the largest Sikh population in Pakistan was located in Peshawar. Sikhs in Peshawar self-identify as Pashtuns and speak Pashto as their mother tongue. There was a small, but, thriving Jewish community until the late 1940s. After the partition and the emergence of the State of Israel, Jews left for Israel.\nEconomy.\nPeshawar's economic importance has historically been linked to its privileged position at the entrance to the Khyber Pass \u2013 the ancient travel route by which most trade between Central Asia and the Indian subcontinent passed. Peshawar's economy also benefited from tourism in the mid-20th century, as the city formed a crucial part of the Hippie trail.\nPeshawar's estimated monthly per capita income was \u20a855,246 in 2015, compared to \u20a8117,924 in Islamabad, and \u20a866,359 in Karachi. Peshawar's surrounding region is also relatively poor \u2212 Khyber Pakhtunkhwa's cities on average have an urban per capita income that is 20% less than Pakistan's national average for urban residents.\nPeshawar was noted by the World Bank in 2014 to be at the helm of a nationwide movement to create an ecosystem for entrepreneurship, freelance jobs, and technology. The city has been host to the World Bank assisted Digital Youth Summit \u2014 an annual event to connect the city and province's youths to opportunities in the digital economy. The 2017 event hosted 100 speakers including several international speakers, and approximately 3,000 delegates in attendance.\nIndustry.\nPeshawar's Industrial Estate on Jamrud Road is an industrial zone established in the 1960s on 868 acres. The industrial estate hosts furniture, marble industries, and food processing industries, though many of its plots remain underutilized. The Hayatabad Industrial Estate hosts 646 industrial units in Peshawar's western suburbs, though several of the units are no longer in use. As part of the China Pakistan Economic Corridor, 4 special economic zones are to be established in the province, with roads, electricity, gas, water, and security to be provided by the government. The nearby Hattar SEZ is envisioned to provide employment to 30,000 people, and is being developed at a cost of approximately $200 million with completion expected in 2017.\nEmployment.\nAs a result of large numbers of displaced persons in the city, only 12% of Peshawar's residents were employed in the formalized economy in 2012. Approximately 41% of residents in 2012 were employed in personal services, while 55% of Afghan refugees in the city in 2012 were daily wage earners. By 2016, Pakistan had adopted a policy to repatriate Afghan refugees. \nWages for unskilled workers in Peshawar grew on average 9.1% per year between 2002 and 2008. Following the outbreak of widespread Islamist violence in 2007, wages rose only 1.5% between 2008 and 2014. Real wages dropped for some skilled craftsmen during the period between 2008 and 2014.\nConstraints.\nPeshawar's economy has been negatively impacted by political instability since 1979 resulting from the War in Afghanistan and subsequent strain on Peshawar's infrastructure from the influx of refugees. The poor security environment resulting from Islamist violence also impacted the city's economy. With the launch of Operation Zarb-e-Azb in 2014, the country's security environment has drastically improved.\nThe metropolitan economy suffers from poor infrastructure. The city's economy has also been adversely impacted by shortages of electricity and natural gas. The $54 billion China Pakistan Economic Corridor will generate over 10,000 MW by 2018 \u2013 greater than the current electricity deficit of approximately 4,500 MW. \nPoor transportation is estimated to cause a loss of 4\u20136% of the Pakistani GDP. Peshawar for decades has suffered from chaotic, mismanaged, and inadequate public transportation and the poor public transportation also has been detrimental to the city's economy. Therefore, the government has since a new rapid bus service called BRT Peshawar covering the entire Peshawar. BRT Peshawar is now believed to be one the most advanced BRT of Pakistan\nTransportation.\nRoad.\nPeshawar's east\u2013west growth axis is centred on the historic Grand Trunk Road that connects Peshawar to Islamabad and Lahore. The road is roughly paralleled by the M-1 Motorway between Peshawar and Islamabad, while the M-2 Motorway provides an alternate route to Lahore from Islamabad. The Grand Trunk Road also provides access to the Afghan border via the Khyber Pass, with onwards connections to Kabul and Central Asia via the Salang Pass.\nPeshawar is to be completely encircled by the Peshawar Ring Road in order to divert traffic away from the city's congested centre. The road is currently under construction, with some portions open to traffic.\nThe Karakoram Highway provides access between the Peshawar region and western China, and an alternate route to Central Asia via Kashgar in the Chinese region of Xinjiang.\nThe Indus Highway provides access to points south of Peshawar, with a terminus in the southern port city of Karachi via Dera Ismail Khan and northern Sindh. The Kohat Tunnel south of Peshawar provides access to the city of Kohat along the Indus Highway.\nMotorways.\nPeshawar is connected to Islamabad and Rawalpindi by the 155 kilometre long M-1 Motorway. The motorway also links Peshawar to major cities in the province, such as Charsadda and Mardan. The M-1 motorway continues onwards to Lahore as part of the M-2 motorway.\nPakistan's motorway network links Peshawar to Faisalabad by the M-4 Motorway, while a new motorway network to Karachi is being built as part of the China Pakistan Economic Corridor.\nThe Hazara Motorway, constructed as part of CPEC, is providing control-access motorway travel all the way to Mansehra and Thakot via the M-1 and Hazara Motorways.\nRail.\nPeshawar Cantonment railway station serves as the terminus for Pakistan's -long Main Line-1 railway that connects the city to the port city of Karachi and passes through the Peshawar City railway station. The Peshawar to Karachi route is served by the \"Awam Express\", \"Khushhal Khan Khattak Express\", and the \"Khyber Mail\" services.\nThe entire Main Line-1 railway track between Karachi and Peshawar is to be overhauled at a cost of $3.65\u00a0billion for the first phase of the project, with completion by 2021. Upgrading the railway line will permit train travel at speeds of 160 kilometres per hour, versus the average speed currently possible on existing tracks.\nPeshawar was also once the terminus of the \"Khyber train safari\", a tourist-oriented train that provided rail access to Landi Kotal. The service was discontinued as the security situation west of Peshawar deteriorated with the beginning of the region's Taliban insurgency.\nAir.\nPeshawar is served by the Bacha Khan International Airport, located in the Peshawar Cantonment. The airport served 1,255,303 passengers between 2014 and 2015, the vast majority of whom were international travelers. The airport offers direct flights throughout Pakistan, as well as to Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates.\nPublic transit.\nBRT Peshawar is a modern &amp; third generation rapid bus service of Peshawar, which has started its service on 13 August 2020. It has 30 stations and 244 buses, which covers area from Chamkani to Karkhano Market. BRT Peshawar has replaced Peshawar's old, chaotic, dilapidated, and inadequate transportation system. The system has 30 stations and is mostly at grade, with four kilometres of elevated sections. The system also contains 3.5 kilometres of underpasses. BRT Peshawar is also complemented by a feeder system, with an additional 100 stations along those feeder lines.\nIntercity bus.\nPeshawar is well-served by private buses (locally referred to as \"flying coaches\") and vans that offer frequent connections to throughout Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, as well as all major cities of Pakistan. The city's Daewoo Express bus terminal is located along the G.T. Road adjacent to the departure points for several other transportation companies.\nAdministration.\nPolitics.\nPeshawar has historically served as the political centre of the region, and is currently the capital city of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. The city and province have been historically regarded to be strongholds of the Awami National Party \u2013 a secular left-wing and moderate-nationalist party. The Pakistan Peoples Party had also enjoyed considerable support in the province due to its socialist agenda.\nDespite being a centre for leftist politics in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Peshawar is still generally known throughout Pakistan for its social conservatism. Sunni Muslims in the city are regarded to be socially conservative, while the city's Shia population is considered to be more socially liberal.\nA plurality of voters in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, of which Peshawar is the capital, elected one of Pakistan's only religiously based provincial governments during the period of military dictatorship of Pervez Musharraf. A ground-swell of anti-American sentiment after the 2001 United States invasion of Afghanistan contributed to the Islamist coalition's victory.\nThe Islamists introduced a range of social restrictions following the election of the Islamist Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal coalition in 2002, though Islamic Shariah law was never fully enacted. Restrictions on public musical performances were introduced, as well as a ban prohibiting music to be played in any public places, including on public transportation \u2013 which lead to the creation of a thriving underground music scene in Peshawar. In 2005, the coalition successfully passed the \"Prohibition of Use of Women in Photograph Bill, 2005,\" leading to the removal of all public advertisements in Peshawar that featured women.\nThe religious coalition was swept out of power by the secular and leftist Awami National Party in elections after the fall of Musharraf in 2008, leading to the removal of the MMA's socially conservative laws. 62% of eligible voters voted in the election. The Awami National Party was targeted by Taliban militants, with hundreds of its members having been assassinated by the Pakistani Taliban.\nIn 2013, the centrist Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf was elected to power in the province on an anti-corruption platform. Peshawar city recorded a voter turnout of 80% for the 2013 elections.\nMunicipal services.\n86% of Peshawar's households have access to municipal piped water as of 2015, though 39% of Peshawar's households purchase water from private companies in 2015.\n42% of Peshawar households are connected to municipal sewerage as of 2015.\nCulture.\nMusic.\nAfter the 2002 Islamist government implemented restrictions on public musical performances, a thriving underground music scene took root in Peshawar. After the start of Pakistani Taliban insurgency in 2007\u20132008, militants began targeting members of Peshawar's cultural establishment. By 2007, Taliban militants began a widespread campaign of bombings against music and video shops across the Peshawar region, leading to the closure of many others. In 2009, Pashto musical artist Ayman Udas was assassinated by Taliban militants on the city's outskirts. In June 2012, a Pashto singer, Ghazala Javed, and her father were killed in Peshawar, after they had fled rural Khyber Pakhtunkhwa for the relative security of Peshawar.\nMusicians began to return to the city by 2016, with a security environment greatly improved following the Operation Zarb-e-Azb in 2014 to eradicate militancy in the country. In 2016, the provincial government announced a monthly income of $300 to 500 musicians in order to help support their work, as well as a $5 million fund to \"revive the rich cultural heritage of the province\".\nMuseums.\nThe Peshawar Museum was founded in 1907 in memory of Queen Victoria. The building features an amalgamation of British, South Asian, Hindu, Buddhist and Mughal Islamic architectural styles. The museum's collection has almost 14,000 items, and is well known for its collection of Greco-Buddhist art. The museum's ancient collection features pieces from the Gandharan, Kushan, Parthian, and Indo-Scythian periods.\nEducation.\nNumerous educational institutes \u2014 schools, colleges and universities \u2014 are located in Peshawar. 21.6% of children between the ages of 5 and 9 were not enrolled in any school in 2013, while 16.6% of children in the 10 to 14 age range were out of school.\nCurrently, Peshawar has universities for all major disciplines ranging from Humanities, General Sciences, Sciences, Engineering, Medical, Agriculture and Management Sciences. The first public sector university, University of Peshawar (UOP) was established in October 1950 by the first Prime Minister of Pakistan. University of Engineering and Technology, Peshawar was established in 1980 while Agriculture University Peshawar started working in 1981. The first private sector university CECOS University of IT and Emerging Sciences was established in 1986. Institute of Management Sciences started functioning in 1995, which become degree awarding institution in 2005.\nThere are currently 9 Medical colleges in Peshawar, 2 in public sector while 7 in private sector. The first Medical College, Khyber Medical College, was established in 1954 as part of University of Peshawar. The first Medical University, Khyber Medical University while a women only Medical college, Khyber Girls Medical College was established in 2007.\nAt the start of the 21st century, a host of new private sector universities started working in Peshawar. Qurtuba University, Sarhad University of Science and IT, Fast University, Peshawar Campus and City University of Science and IT were established in 2001 while Gandhara University was inaugurated in 2002 and Abasyn University in 2007.\nShaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University, the first women university of Peshawar, started working in 2009 while private sector IQRA National University was established in 2012.\nApart from good range of universities, Peshawar has host of high quality further education (Post School) educational institutes. The most renowned are, Edwardes College founded in 1900 by Herbert Edwardes, is the oldest college in the province and Islamia College Peshawar, which was established in 1913. Islamia College became university and named as Islamia College University in 2008.\nThe following is a list of some of the public and private universities and colleges in Peshawar:\nThe Pakistani military operates Army Public School Peshawar. It was the site of the 2014 Peshawar school massacre.\nLandmarks.\nThe following is a list of other significant landmarks in the city that still exist in the 21st century:\nSports.\nThere are hosts of sporting facilities in Peshawar. The most renowned are Arbab Niaz Stadium, and Hayatabad Cricket Stadium, which are the International cricket grounds of Peshawar and Qayyum Stadium, which is the multi sports facilities located in Peshawar Cantonment.\nCricket is the most popular sport in Peshawar with Arbab Niaz Stadium as the main ground coupled with Cricket Academy. There is also small cricket ground, Peshawar Gymkhana Ground, which is located adjacent to Arbab Niaz Stadium, a popular club cricket ground. The oldest international cricket ground in Peshawar however is Peshawar Club Ground, which hosted the first ever test match between Pakistan and India in 1955. The Peshawar Zalmi represents the city in the Pakistan Super League.\nIn 1975, the first sports complex, Qayyum Stadium was built in Peshawar while Hayatabad Sports Complex was built in the early 1990s. Both Qayyum Stadium and Hayatabad Sports Complexes are multiple sports complexes with facilities for all major indoor and outdoor sports such as football, Field Hockey ground, Squash, Swimming, Gymnasium, Board Games section, Wrestling, Boxing and Badminton. In 1991, Qayyum Stadium hosted Barcelona Olympics Qualifier Football match between Pakistan and Qatar plus it also hosted National Games in 2010. Hockey and squash are also popular in Peshawar.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nPeshawar is twinned with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66231", "revid": "46010350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66231", "title": "Home Army", "text": "Polish resistance movement in World War II\nThe Home Army (, ; abbreviated AK) was the dominant resistance movement in German-occupied Poland during World War II. The Home Army was formed in February 1942 from the earlier Zwi\u0105zek Walki Zbrojnej (Armed Resistance) established in the aftermath of the German and Soviet invasions in September 1939. Over the next two years, the Home Army absorbed most of the other Polish partisans and underground forces. Its allegiance was to the Polish government-in-exile in London, and it constituted the armed wing of what came to be known as the Polish Underground State. Estimates of the Home Army's 1944 strength range between 200,000 and 600,000. The latter number made the Home Army not only Poland's largest underground resistance movement but, along with Soviet and Yugoslav partisans, one of Europe's largest World War II underground movements.\nThe Home Army sabotaged German transports bound for the Eastern Front in the Soviet Union, destroying German supplies and tying down substantial German forces. It also fought pitched battles against the Germans, particularly in 1943 and in Operation Tempest from January 1944. The Home Army's most widely known operation was the Warsaw Uprising of August\u2013October 1944. The Home Army also defended Polish civilians against atrocities by Germany's Ukrainian and Lithuanian collaborators. Its attitude toward Jews remains a controversial topic.\nAs Polish\u2013Soviet relations deteriorated, conflict grew between the Home Army and Soviet forces. The Home Army's allegiance to the Polish government-in-exile caused the Soviet government to consider the Home Army to be an impediment to the introduction of a communist-friendly government in Poland, which hindered cooperation and in some cases led to outright conflict. On 19 January 1945, after the Red Army had cleared most Polish territory of German forces, the Home Army was disbanded. After the war, particularly in the 1950s and 1960s, communist government propaganda portrayed the Home Army as an oppressive and reactionary force. Thousands of ex-Home Army personnel were deported to gulags and Soviet prisons, while other ex-members, including a number of senior commanders, were executed. After the fall of communism in Central and Eastern Europe, the portrayal of the Home Army was no longer subject to government censorship and propaganda.\nOrigins.\nThe Home Army originated in the Service for Poland's Victory (\"S\u0142u\u017cba Zwyci\u0119stwu Polski\"), which General Micha\u0142 Karaszewicz-Tokarzewski set up on 27 September 1939, just as the coordinated German and Soviet invasions of Poland neared completion. Seven weeks later, on 17 November 1939, on orders from General W\u0142adys\u0142aw Sikorski, the Service for Poland's Victory was superseded by the Armed Resistance (\"Zwi\u0105zek Walki Zbrojnej\"), which in turn, a little over two years later, on 14 February 1942, became the Home Army. During that time, many other resistance organisations remained active in Poland, although most of them, merged with the Armed Resistance or with its successor, the Home Army, and substantially augmented its numbers between 1939 and 1944.\nThe Home Army was loyal to the Polish government-in-exile and to its agency in occupied Poland, the Government Delegation for Poland (\"Delegatura\"). The Polish civilian government envisioned the Home Army as an apolitical, nationwide resistance organisation. The supreme command defined the Home Army's chief tasks as partisan warfare against the German occupiers, the re-creation of armed forces underground and, near the end of the German occupation, a general armed rising to be prosecuted until victory. Home Army plans envisioned, at war's end, the restoration of the pre-war government following the return of the government-in-exile to Poland.\nThe Home Army, though in theory subordinate to the civil authorities and to the government-in-exile, often acted somewhat independently, with neither the Home Army's commanders in Poland nor the \"London government\" fully aware of the other's situation.\nAfter Germany started its invasion of the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, the Soviet Union joined the Allies and signed the Anglo-Soviet Agreement on 12 July 1941. This put the Polish government in a difficult position since it had previously pursued a policy of \"two enemies\". Although a Polish\u2013Soviet agreement was signed in August 1941, cooperation continued to be difficult and deteriorated further after 1943 when Nazi Germany publicised the Katyn massacre of 1940.\nUntil the major rising in 1944, the Home Army concentrated on self-defense (the freeing of prisoners and hostages, defense against German pacification operations) and on attacks against German forces. Home Army units carried out thousands of armed raids and intelligence operations, sabotaged hundreds of railway shipments, and participated in many partisan clashes and battles with German police and Wehrmacht units. The Home Army also assassinated prominent Nazi collaborators and Gestapo officials in retaliation against Nazi terror inflicted on Poland's civilian population; prominent individuals assassinated by the Home Army included Igo Sym (1941) and Franz Kutschera (1944).\nMembership.\nSize.\nIn February 1942, when the Home Army was formed from the Armed Resistance, it numbered around 100,000 members. Less than a year later, at the start of 1943, it had reached a strength of around 200,000. In the summer of 1944, when Operation Tempest began, the Home Army reached its highest membership: estimates of membership in the first half and summer of 1944 range from 200,000,234 through 300,000, 380,000 and 400,000 to 450,000\u2013500,000, though most estimates average at about 400,000; the strength estimates vary due to the constant integration of other resistance organisations into the Home Army, and that while the number of members was high and that of sympathizers was even higher, the number of armed members participating in operations at any given time was smaller\u2014as little as one per cent in 1943, and as many as five to ten per cent in 1944\u2014due to an insufficient number of weapons.234\nHome Army numbers in 1944 included a cadre of over 10,000\u201311,000 officers, 7,500 officers-in-training (singular: \"podchor\u0105\u017cy\") and 88,000 non-commissioned officers (NCOs). The officer cadre was formed from prewar officers and NCOs, graduates of underground courses, and elite operatives usually parachuted in from the West (the Silent Unseen). The basic organizational unit was the platoon, numbering 35\u201350 people, with an unmobilized skeleton version of 16\u201325; in February 1944, the Home Army had 6,287 regular and 2,613 skeleton platoons operational. Such numbers made the Home Army not only the largest Polish resistance movement, but one of the two largest in World War II Europe. Casualties during the war are estimated at 34,000 to 100,000, plus some 20,000\u201350,000 after the war (casualties and imprisonment).\nDemographics.\nThe Home Army was intended to be a mass organisation that was founded by a core of prewar officers. Home Army soldiers fell into three groups. The first two consisted of \"full-time members\": undercover operatives, living mostly in urban settings under false identities (most senior Home Army officers belonged to this group); and uniformed (to a certain extent) partisans, living in forested regions (\"le\u015bni\", or \"forest people\"), who openly fought the Germans (the forest people are estimated at some 40 groups, numbering 1,200\u20134,000 persons in early 1943, but their numbers grew substantially during Operation Tempest). The third, largest group were \"part-time members\": sympathisers who led \"double lives\" under their real names in their real homes, received no payment for their services, and stayed in touch with their undercover unit commanders but were seldom mustered for operations, as the Home Army planned to use them only during a planned nationwide rising.\nThe Home Army was intended to be representative of the Polish nation, and its members were recruited from most parties and social classes. Its growth was largely based on integrating scores of smaller resistance organisations into its ranks; most of the other Polish underground armed organizations were incorporated into the Home Army, though they retained varying degrees of autonomy. The largest organization that merged into the Home Army was the leftist Peasants' Battalions () around 1943\u20131944, and parts of the National Armed Forces (\"Narodowe Si\u0142y Zbrojne\") became subordinate to the Home Army. In turn, individual Home Army units varied substantially in their political outlooks, notably in their attitudes toward ethnic minorities and toward the Soviets. The largest group that completely refused to join the Home Army was the pro-Soviet, communist People's Army (\"Armia Ludowa\"), which numbered 30,000 people at its height in 1944.\nWomen.\nHome Army ranks included a number of female operatives. Most women worked in the communications branch, where many held leadership roles or served as couriers. Approximately a seventh to a tenth of the Home Army insurgents were female.\nNotable women in the Home Army included El\u017cbieta Zawacka, an underground courier who was sometimes called the only female \"Cichociemna\". Gra\u017cyna Lipi\u0144ska organised an intelligence network in German-occupied Belarus in 1942\u20131944. Janina Karasi\u00f3wna and Emilia Malessa were high-ranking officers described as \"holding top posts\" within the communication branch of the organisation. Wanda Kraszewska-Ancerewicz headed the distribution branch. Maria Cetys was a liaison officer with the Krysta branch with W\u0142adys\u0142aw Abramowicz. Janina Oszast was head of the Krakow branch's Bureau of Propaganda. Several all-female units existed within the AK structures, including \"Dysk\", an entirely female sabotage unit led by Wanda Gertz, who carried out assassinations of female Gestapo informants in addition to sabotage. During the Warsaw Uprising, two all-female units were created\u2014a demolition unit and a sewer system unit.\nMany women participated in the Warsaw Uprising, particularly as medics or scouts; they were estimated to form about 75% of the insurgent medical personnel. By the end of the uprising, there were about 5,000 female casualties among the insurgents, with over 2,000 female soldiers taken captive; the latter number reported in contemporary press caused a \"European sensation\".\nStructure.\nHome Army Headquarters was divided into five sections, two bureaus and several other specialized units:\nThe Home Army's commander was subordinate in the military chain of command to the Polish Commander-in-Chief (General Inspector of the Armed Forces) of the Polish government-in-exile and answered in the civilian chain of command to the Government Delegation for Poland.\nThe Home Army's first commander, until his arrest by the Germans in 1943, was Stefan Rowecki (\"nom de guerre\" \"Grot\", \"Spearhead\"). Tadeusz B\u00f3r-Komorowski (Tadeusz Komorowski, \"nom de guerre\" \"B\u00f3r\", \"Forest\") commanded from July 1943 until his surrender to the Germans when the Warsaw Uprising was suppressed in October 1944. Leopold Okulicki, \"nom de guerre\" \"Niedzwiadek\" (\"Bear\"), led the Home Army in its final days.\nRegions.\nThe Home Army was divided geographically into regional branches or areas (\"obszar\"), which were subdivided into subregions or subareas (\"podokr\u0119g\") or independent areas (\"okr\u0119gi samodzielne\"). There were 89 inspectorates (\"inspektorat\") and 280 (as of early 1944) districts (\"obw\u00f3d\") as smaller organisational units. Overall, the Home Army regional structure largely resembled Poland's interwar administration division, with an \"okr\u0119g\" being similar to a voivodeship (see Administrative division of Second Polish Republic).\nThere were three to five areas: Warsaw (\"Obszar Warszawski\", with some sources differentiating between left- and right-bank areas \u2013 \"Obszar Warszawski prawo- i lewobrze\u017cny\"), Western (\"Obszar Zachodni\", in the Pomerania and Pozna\u0144 regions), and Southeastern (\"Obszar Po\u0142udniowo-Wschodni\", in the Lw\u00f3w area); sources vary on whether there was a Northeastern Area (centered in Bia\u0142ystok \u2013 \"Obszar Bia\u0142ystocki\") or whether Bia\u0142ystok was classified as an independent area (\"Okr\u0119g samodzielny Bia\u0142ystok\").\nIn 1943 the Home Army began recreating the organization of the prewar Polish Army, its various units now being designated as platoons, battalions, regiments, brigades, divisions, and operational groups.\nOperations.\nIntelligence.\nThe Home Army supplied valuable intelligence to the Allies; 48 per cent of all reports received by the British secret services from continental Europe between 1939 and 1945 came from Polish sources. The total number of those reports is estimated at 80,000, and 85 per cent of them were deemed to be high quality or better. The Polish intelligence network grew rapidly; near the end of the war, it had over 1,600 registered agents.\nThe Western Allies had limited intelligence assets in Central and Eastern Europe. The extensive in-place Polish intelligence network proved a major resource; between the French capitulation and other Allied networks that were undeveloped at the time, it was even described as \"the only [A]llied intelligence assets on the Continent\". According to Marek Ney-Krwawicz, for the Western Allies, the intelligence provided by the Home Army was considered to be the best source of information on the Eastern Front.\nHome Army intelligence provided the Allies with information on German concentration camps and the Holocaust in Poland (including the first reports on this subject received by the Allies), German submarine operations, and, most famously, the V-1 flying bomb and V-2 rocket. In one Project Big Ben mission (Operation Wildhorn III; Polish cryptonym, \"Most III\", \"Bridge III\"), a stripped-for-lightness RAF twin-engine Dakota flew from Brindisi, Italy, to an abandoned German airfield in Poland to pick up intelligence prepared by Polish aircraft-designer Antoni Kocjan, including of V-2 rocket wreckage from a Peenem\u00fcnde launch, a \"Special Report 1/R, no. 242\", photographs, eight key V-2 parts, and drawings of the wreckage. Polish agents also provided reports on the German war production, morale, and troop movements. The Polish intelligence network extended beyond Poland and even beyond Europe: for example, the intelligence network organized by Mieczys\u0142aw Zygfryd S\u0142owikowski in North Africa has been described as \"the only [A]llied ... network in North Africa\". The Polish network even had two agents in the German high command itself.\nThe researchers who produced the first Polish\u2013British in-depth monograph on Home Army intelligence (\"Intelligence Co-operation Between Poland and Great Britain During World War II: Report of the Anglo-Polish Historical Committee\", 2005) described contributions of Polish intelligence to the Allied victory as \"disproportionally large\" and argued that \"the work performed by Home Army intelligence undoubtedly supported the Allied armed effort much more effectively than subversive and guerilla activities\".\nSubversion and propaganda.\nThe Home Army also conducted psychological warfare. Its Operation N created the illusion of a German movement opposing Adolf Hitler within Germany itself.\nThe Home Army published a weekly \"Biuletyn Informacyjny\" (Information Bulletin), with a top circulation (on 25 November 1943) of 50,000 copies.\nMajor operations.\nSabotage was coordinated by the Union of Retaliation and later by \"Wachlarz\" and \"Kedyw\" units.\nMajor Home Army military and sabotage operations included:\nThe largest and best-known of the Operation Tempest battles, the Warsaw Uprising, constituted an attempt to liberate Poland's capital and began on 1 August 1944. Polish forces took control of substantial parts of the city and resisted the German-led forces until 2 October (a total of 63 days). With the Poles receiving no aid from the approaching Red Army, the Germans eventually defeated the insurrectionists and burned the city, quelling the Uprising on 2 October 1944. Other major Home Army city risings included Operation Ostra Brama in Wilno and the Lw\u00f3w Uprising. The Home Army also prepared for a rising in Krak\u00f3w but aborted due to various circumstances. While the Home Army managed to liberate a number of places from German control\u2014for example, the Lublin area, where regional structures were able to set up a functioning government\u2014they ultimately failed to secure sufficient territory to enable the government-in-exile to return to Poland due to Soviet hostility.\nThe Home Army also sabotaged German rail- and road-transports to the Eastern Front in the Soviet Union. Richard J. Crampton estimated that an eighth of all German transports to the Eastern Front were destroyed or substantially delayed due to Home Army operations.\nAssassination of Nazi leaders.\nThe Polish Resistance carried out dozens of attacks on German commanders in Poland, the largest series being that codenamed \"Operation Heads\". Dozens of additional assassinations were carried out, the best-known being:\nWeapons and equipment.\nAs a clandestine army operating in an enemy-occupied country and separated by over a thousand kilometers from any friendly territory, the Home Army faced unique challenges in acquiring arms and equipment, though it was able to overcome these difficulties to some extent and to field tens of thousands of armed soldiers. Nevertheless, the difficult conditions meant that only infantry forces armed with light weapons could be fielded. Any use of artillery, armor or aircraft was impossible (except for a few instances during the Warsaw Uprising, such as the \"Kubu\u015b\" armored car). Even these light-infantry units were as a rule armed with a mixture of weapons of various types, usually in quantities sufficient to arm only a fraction of a unit's soldiers.234\nHome Army arms and equipment came mostly from four sources: arms that had been buried by the Polish armies on battlefields after the 1939 invasion of Poland, arms purchased or captured from the Germans and their allies, arms clandestinely manufactured by the Home Army itself, and arms received from Allied air drops. From arms caches hidden in 1939, the Home Army obtained 614 heavy machine guns, 1,193 light machine guns, 33,052 rifles, 6,732 pistols, 28 antitank light field guns, 25 antitank rifles, and 43,154 hand grenades. However, due to their inadequate preservation, which had to be improvised in the chaos of the September Campaign, most of the guns were in poor condition. Of those that had been buried in the ground and had been dug up in 1944 during preparations for Operation Tempest, only 30% were usable.\nArms were sometimes purchased on the black market from German soldiers or their allies, or stolen from German supply depots or transports. Efforts to capture weapons from the Germans also proved highly successful. Raids were conducted on trains carrying equipment to the front, as well as on guardhouses and gendarmerie posts. Sometimes weapons were taken from individual German soldiers accosted in the street. During the Warsaw Uprising, the Home Army even managed to capture several German armored vehicles, most notably a Jagdpanzer 38 Hetzer light tank destroyer renamed Chwat and an armored troop transport SdKfz 251 renamed Grey Wolf.\nArms were clandestinely manufactured by the Home Army in its own secret workshops, and by Home Army members working in German armaments factories. In this way the Home Army was able to procure submachine guns (copies of British Stens, indigenous \"B\u0142yskawicas\" and \"KIS\"), pistols (\"Vis\"), flamethrowers, explosive devices, road mines, and \"Filipinka\" and \"Sidol\u00f3wka\" hand grenades. Hundreds of people were involved in the manufacturing effort. The Home Army did not produce its own ammunition, but relied on supplies stolen by Polish workers from German-run factories.\nThe final source of supply was Allied air drops, which was the only way to obtain more exotic, highly useful equipment such as plastic explosives and antitank weapons such as the British PIAT. During the war, 485 air-drop missions from the West (about half of them flown by Polish airmen) delivered some 600 tons of supplies for the Polish resistance. \nBesides equipment, the planes also parachuted in highly qualified instructors (Cichociemni), 316 of whom were inserted into Poland during the war. Allied air drops to the Home Army were infrequent; deliveries from the Western Allies were limited by Joseph Stalin's refusal to let their planes land on Soviet territory, the low priority placed by Allied commanders on delivery flights to Poland and the extremely heavy losses sustained by Polish Special Duties Flight personnel. The Western Allies refused to provide significant supplies to the Home Army to avoid antagonizing Stalin. \nIn the end, despite all efforts, most Home Army forces had inadequate weaponry. In 1944, when the Home Army was at its peak strength (200,000\u2013600,000, according to various estimates), the Home Army had enough weaponry for only about 32,000 soldiers.\"234 On 1 August 1944, when the Warsaw Uprising began, only a sixth of Home Army fighters in Warsaw were armed.234\nRelations with ethnic groups.\nJews.\nHome Army members' attitudes toward Jews varied widely from unit to unit, and the topic remains controversial. The Home Army answered to the National Council of the Polish government-in-exile, where some Jews served in leadership positions (e.g. Ignacy Schwarzbart and Szmul Zygielbojm), though there were no Jewish representatives in the Government Delegation for Poland.110\u2013114 Traditionally, Polish historiography has presented the Home Army interactions with Jews in a positive light, while Jewish historiography has been mostly negative; most Jewish authors attribute the Home Army's hostility to endemic antisemitism in Poland. More recent scholarship has presented a mixed, ambivalent view of Home Army\u2013Jewish relations. Both \"profoundly disturbing acts of violence as well as extraordinary acts of aid and compassion\" have been reported. In an analysis by Joshua D. Zimmerman, postwar testimonies of Holocaust survivors reveal that their experiences with the Home Army were mixed even if predominantly negative. Jews trying to seek refuge from Nazi genocidal policies were often exposed to greater danger by open resistance to German occupation.\nMembers of the Home Army were named Righteous Among the Nations for risking their lives to save Jews, examples include Jan Karski, Aleksander Kami\u0144ski, Stefan Korbo\u0144ski, Henryk Woli\u0144ski, Jan \u017babi\u0144ski, W\u0142adys\u0142aw Bartoszewski, Mieczys\u0142aw Fogg, Henryk Iwa\u0144ski, and Jan Dobraczy\u0144ski. However, Polish historian Ewa Ko\u0142oma\u0144ska noted that many individuals associated with the Home Army, involved in rescuing the Jews, did not receive the Righteous title.243\nDaily operations.\nA Jewish partisan detachment served in the 1944 Warsaw Uprising, and another in Hanacz\u00f3w. The Home Army provided training and supplies to the Warsaw Ghetto's Jewish Combat Organization. It is likely that more Jews fought in the Warsaw Uprising than in the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, some fought in both. Thousands of Jews joined, or claimed to join, the Home Army in order to survive in hiding, but Jews serving in the Home Army were the exception rather than the rule. Most Jews in hiding could not pass as ethnic Poles and would have faced deadly consequences if discovered.\nIn February 1942, the Home Army Operational Command's Office of Information and Propaganda set up a Section for Jewish Affairs, directed by Henryk Woli\u0144ski. This section collected data about the situation of the Jewish population, drafted reports, and sent information to London. It also centralized contacts between Polish and Jewish military organizations. The Home Army also supported the Relief Council for Jews in Poland (\"\u017begota\") as well as the formation of Jewish resistance organizations.\nHolocaust.\nFrom 1940 onward, the Home Army courier Jan Karski delivered the first eyewitness account of the Holocaust to the Western powers, after having personally visited the Warsaw Ghetto and a Nazi concentration camp.110\u2013114 Another crucial role was played by Witold Pilecki, who was the only person to volunteer to be imprisoned at Auschwitz (where he would spend three and a half years) to organize a resistance on the inside and to gather information on the atrocities occurring there to inform the Western Allies about the fate of the Jewish population. Home Army reports from March 1943 described crimes committed by the Germans against the Jewish populace. AK commander General Stefan Rowecki estimated that 640,000 people had been murdered in Auschwitz between 1940 and March 1943, including 66,000 ethnic Poles and 540,000 Jews from various countries (this figure was revised later to 500,000). The Home Army started carrying out death sentences for szmalcowniks in Warsaw in the summer of 1943.\nAntony Polonsky observed that \"the attitude of the military underground to the genocide is both more complex and more controversial [than its approach towards \"szmalcowniks\"]. Throughout the period when it was being carried out, the Home Army was preoccupied with preparing for ... [the moment when] Nazi rule in Poland collapsed. It was determined to avoid premature military action and to conserve its strength (and weapons) for the crucial confrontation that, it was assumed, would determine the fate of Poland. ... [However,] to the Home Army, the Jews were not a part of 'our nation' and ... action to defend them was not to be taken if it endangered [the Home Army's] other objectives.\" He added that \"it is probably unrealistic to have expected the Home Army\u2014which was neither as well armed nor as well organized as its propaganda claimed\u2014to have been able to do much to aid the Jews. The fact remains that its leadership did not want to do so.\"68 Rowecki's attitudes shifted in the following months as the brutal reality of the Holocaust became more apparent, and the Polish public support for the Jewish resistance increased. Rowecki was willing to provide Jewish fighters with aid and resources when it contributed to \"the greater war effort\", but had concluded that providing large quantities of supplies to the Jewish resistance would be futile. This reasoning was the norm among the Allies, who believed that the Holocaust could only be halted by a significant military action.110\u2013122\nWarsaw Ghetto Uprising.\nThe Home Army provided the Warsaw Ghetto with firearms, ammunition, and explosives, but only after it was convinced of the eagerness of the Jewish Combat Organization (\"\u017bydowska Organizacja Bojowa\", \u017bOB) to fight,67 and after W\u0142adys\u0142aw Sikorski's intervention on the Organization's behalf. Zimmerman describes the supplies as \"limited but real\".121-122 Jewish fighters of the Jewish Military Union (\"\u017bydowski Zwi\u0105zek Wojskowy\", \u017bZW) received from the Home Army, among other things, 2 heavy machine guns, 4 light machine guns, 21 submachine guns, 30 rifles, 50 pistols, and over 400 grenades. Some supplies were also provided to the \u017bOB, but less than to \u017bZW with whom the Home Army had closer ties and ideological similarities. Antoni Chru\u015bciel, commander of the Home Army in Warsaw, ordered the entire armory of the Wola district transferred to the ghetto. In January 1943 the Home Army delivered a larger shipment of 50 pistols, 50 hand grenades, and several kilograms of explosives, along with a number of smaller shipments that carried a total of 70 pistols, 10 rifles, 2 hand machine guns, 1 light machine gun, ammunition, and over 150 kilograms of explosives. The number of supplies provided to the ghetto resistance has been sometimes described as insufficient, as the Home Army faced a number of dilemmas which forced it to provide no more than limited assistance to the Jewish resistance, such as supply shortages and the inability to arm its own troops, the view (shared by most of the Jewish resistance) that any wide-scale uprising in 1943 would be premature and futile, and the difficulty of coordinating with the internally divided Jewish resistance, coupled with the pro-Soviet attitude of the \u017bOB. During the 1943 Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, Home Army units tried to blow up the Ghetto wall twice, carried out diversionary actions outside the Ghetto walls, and attacked German sentries sporadically near the Ghetto walls. According to Marian Fuks, the Ghetto uprising would not have been possible without supplies from the Polish Home Army.\nA year later, during the 1944 Warsaw Uprising, the Zo\u015bka Battalion liberated hundreds of Jewish inmates from the G\u0119si\u00f3wka section of the Warsaw concentration camp.\nAttitude to fugitives.\nBecause it was the largest Polish resistance organization, the Home Army's attitude towards Jewish fugitives often determined their fate. According to Antony Polonsky the Home Army saw Jewish fugitives as security risks.66 At the same time, AK's \"paper mills\" supplied forged identification documents to many Jewish fugitives, enabling them to pass as Poles. Home Army published a leaflet in 1943 stating that \"Every Pole is obligated to help those in hiding. Those who refuse them aid will be punished on the basis of...treason to the Polish Nation\". Nevertheless, Jewish historians have asserted that the main cause for the low survival rates of escaping Jews was the antisemitism of the Polish population.\nAttitudes towards Jews in the Home Army were mixed. A few AK units actively hunted down Jews,238 and in particular two district commanders in the northeast of Poland (W\u0142adys\u0142aw Liniarski of Bia\u0142ystok and Janusz Szlaski of Nowogr\u00f3dek) openly and routinely persecuted Jewish partisans and fugitives; however, these were the only two provinces, out of seventeen, where such orders were issued by provincial commanders. The extent of such behaviors in the Home Army overall has been disputed; Tadeusz Piotrowski wrote that the bulk of the Home Army's antisemitic behavior can be ascribed to a small minority of members, often affiliated with the far-right National Democracy (ND, or \"Endecja\") party, whose National Armed Forces organization was mostly integrated into the Home Army in 1944.1745 Adam Pu\u0142awski has suggested that some of these incidents are better understood in the context of the Polish\u2013Soviet conflict, as some of the Soviet-affiliated partisan units that AK units attacked or was attacked by had a sizable Jewish presence. In general, AK units in the east were more likely to be hostile towards Jewish partisans, who in turn were more closely associated with the Soviet underground, while AK units in the west were more helpful towards the Jews. The Home Army had a more favorable attitude towards Jewish civilians and was more hesitant or hostile towards independent Jewish partisans, whom it suspected of pro-Soviet sympathies. General Rowecki believed that antisemitic attitudes in eastern Poland were related to Jewish involvement with Soviet partisans. Some AK units were friendly to Jews, and in Hanacz\u00f3w Home Army officers hid and protected an entire 250-person Jewish community, and supplied a Jewish Home Army platoon. The Home Army leadership punished a number of perpetrators of antisemitic violence in its ranks, in some cases sentencing them to death.\nMost of the underground press was sympathetic towards Jews, and the Home Army's Bureau of Information and Propaganda was led by operatives who were pro-Jewish and represented the liberal wing of Home Army; however, the bureau's anti-communist sub-division, created as a response to communist propaganda, was led by operatives who held strong anti-communist and anti-Jewish views, including the \"\u017bydokomuna\" stereotype. The perceived association between Jews and communists was actively reinforced by Operation Antyk, whose initial reports \"tended to conflate communists with Jews, dangerously disseminating the notion that Jewish loyalties were to Soviet Russia and communism rather than to Poland\", and which repeated the notion that antisemitism was a \"useful tool in the struggle against Soviet Russia\".\nLithuanians.\nAlthough the Lithuanian and Polish resistance movements had common enemies\u2014Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union\u2014they began working together only in 1944\u20131945, after the Soviet reoccupation, when both fought the Soviet occupiers. The main obstacle to unity was a long-standing territorial dispute over the Vilnius Region.\nThe Lithuanian Activist Front (\"Lietuvos Aktyvist\u0173 Frontas\", or LAF)163 cooperated with Nazi operations against Poles during the German occupation. In autumn 1943, the Home Army carried retaliatory out operations against the Nazis' Lithuanian supporters, mainly the Lithuanian \"Schutzmannschaft\" battalions, the Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force, and the Lithuanian Secret Police, killing hundreds of mostly Lithuanian policemen and other collaborators during the first half of 1944. In response, the Lithuanian Sonderkommando, who had already killed hundreds of Polish civilians since 1941 (particularly the Ponary massacre), intensified their operations against the Poles.\nIn April 1944, the Home Army in the Vilnius Region attempted to open negotiations with Povilas Plechavi\u010dius, commander of the Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force, and proposed a non-aggression pact and cooperation against Nazi Germany. The Lithuanian side refused and demanded that the Poles either leave the Vilnius region (disputed between Poles and Lithuanians) or subordinate themselves to the Lithuanians' struggle against the Soviets. In the May 1944 Battle of Murowana Oszmianka, the Home Army dealt a substantial blow to the Nazi-sponsored Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force, which resulted in a low-level civil war between anti-Nazi Poles and pro-Nazi Lithuanians that was encouraged by the German authorities; it culminated in the June 1944 massacres of Polish and Lithuanian civilians in the villages of Gliti\u0161k\u0117s (Glinciszki) and Dubingiai (Dubinki) respectively.\nPostwar assessments of the Home Army's activities in Lithuania have been controversial. In 1993, the Home Army's activities there were investigated by a special Lithuanian government commission. Only in recent years have Polish and Lithuanian historians been able to approach consensus, though still differing in their interpretations of many events.\nUkrainians.\nIn the Southeastern part of occupied Polish territories, there have been long-standing tensions between the Polish and Ukrainian populations. Poland's plans to restore its prewar borders were opposed by the Ukrainians, and some Ukrainian groups' collaboration with Nazi Germany had discredited their partisans as potential Polish allies. While the Polish government-in-exile considered tentative plans about providing a limited autonomy for Ukrainians, in 1942 the staff of the Home Army of Lviv recommended deporting 1\u20131.5 million Ukrainians to the Soviet Union and settling the remainder in other parts of Poland once the war ended. The situation escalated the next year when the Ukrainian Insurgent Army (\u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430 \u043f\u043e\u0432\u0441\u0442\u0430\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430 \u0430\u0440\u043c\u0456\u044f, \"Ukrayins'ka Povstans'ka Armiya\", UPA), a Ukrainian nationalist force and the military arm of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists (\u041e\u0440\u0433\u0430\u043d\u0456\u0437\u0430\u0446\u0456\u044f \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0438\u0445 \u041d\u0430\u0446\u0456\u043e\u043d\u0430\u043b\u0456\u0441\u0442\u0456\u0432, \"Orhanizatsiya Ukrayins'kykh Natsionalistiv\", OUN), directed most of its attacks against Poles and Jews. Stepan Bandera, one of UPA's leaders, and his followers concluded that the war would end in the exhaustion of both Germany and the Soviet Union, leaving only the Poles\u2014who laid claim to East Galicia (viewed by the Ukrainians as western Ukraine, and by the Poles as \"Kresy\")\u2014as a significant force, and therefore the Poles had to be weakened before the war's end.\nThe OUN decided to attack Polish civilians, who constituted about a third of the population of the disputed territories. It equated Ukrainian independence with ethnic homogeneity, which meant the Polish presence had to be completely removed. By February 1943 the OUN began a deliberate campaign of killing Polish civilians. In massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia, beginning in the spring of 1943, 100,000 Poles were killed. OUN forces targeted Polish villages, which prompted the formation of Polish self-defense units (e.g., the Przebra\u017ce Defence) and fights between the Home Army and the OUN. The Germans encouraged both sides against each other; Erich Koch said: \"We have to do everything possible so that a Pole, when meeting a Ukrainian, will be ready to kill him, and conversely, a Ukrainian will be ready to kill the Pole.\" A German commissioner from Sarny, when local Poles complained about massacres, answered: \"You want Sikorski, the Ukrainians want Bandera. Fight each other.\" On 10 July 1943, Zygmunt Rumel was sent to talk with local Ukrainians with the goal of ending the massacres; the mission was unsuccessful, and the Banderites killed the Polish delegation. On 20 July that year the Home Army command decided to establish partisan units in Volhynia. Several formations were created, most notably, in January 1944, the 27th Home Army Infantry Division. Between January and March 1944, the division fought 16 major battles with the UPA, expanding its operational base and securing Polish forces against the main attack. One of the largest battles between the Home Army and the UPA took place in Hanacz\u00f3w, where local self-defence forces managed to fend off two attacks. In March 1944 the Home Army also carried out reprisal attack against the UPA in the village of Sahry\u0144, remembered as the \"Sahry\u0144 massacre\", ending in ethnic cleansing operations in which about 700 Ukrainian civilians were killed.\nThe Polish government-in-exile in London was taken by surprise; it did not expect Ukrainian anti-Polish actions of such magnitude. There is no evidence that the Polish government-in-exile contemplated a general policy of revenge against the Ukrainians, but local Poles, including Home Army commanders, engaged in retaliatory actions. Polish partisans attacked the OUN, assassinated Ukrainian commanders, and carried out operations against Ukrainian villages. Retaliatory operations aimed at intimidating the Ukrainian population contributed to increased support for the UPA. The Home Army command tried to limit operations against Ukrainian civilians to a minimum. According to Grzegorz Motyka, the Polish operations resulted in 10,000 to 15,000 Ukrainian deaths in 1943\u201347, including 8,000-10,000 on territory of post-war Poland. From February to April 1945, mainly in \"Rzeszowszczyzna\" (the Rzesz\u00f3w area), Polish units (including affiliates of the Home Army) carried out retaliatory attacks in which about 3,000 Ukrainians were killed; one of the most infamous ones is known as the Paw\u0142okoma massacre.\nBy mid-1944, most of the disputed regions were occupied by the Soviet Red Army. Polish partisans disbanded or went underground, as did most Ukrainian partisans. Both the Poles and the Ukrainians would increasingly concentrate on the Soviets as their primary enemy\u00a0\u2013 and both would ultimately fail.\nRelations with the Soviet Union.\nHome Army relations with the Soviet Red Army grew worse as the war progressed. The Soviet Union invaded Poland on 17 September 1939 after the German invasion that began on 1 September 1939; even though the Germans invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, the Soviets saw Polish partisans loyal to the Polish government-in-exile more as a potential obstacle to Soviet plans to control postwar Poland than as a potential ally. On orders from the Soviet \"Stavka\" (high command) issued on 22 June 1943, Soviet partisans engaged Polish partisans in combat; it has also been claimed that they attacked the Poles more frequently than the Germans.\nIn late 1943 the actions of Soviet partisans, who had been ordered to destroy Home Army forces, even resulted in limited uneasy cooperation between some Home Army units and German forces. While the Home Army still treated the Germans as the enemy and conducted operations against them, some Polish units in the Nowogr\u00f3dek and Wilno areas accepted them when the Germans offered arms and supplies to the Home Army to be used against the Soviet partisans. However, such arrangements were purely tactical and indicated no ideological collaboration, as demonstrated by France's Vichy regime or Norway's Quisling regime. The Poles' main motive was to acquire intelligence on the Germans and to obtain much-needed equipment. There were no known joint Polish\u2013German operations, and the Germans were unsuccessful in recruiting the Poles to fight exclusively against the Soviet partisans. Furthermore, most cooperative efforts between local Home Army commanders and the Germans were condemned by Home Army headquarters.\nWith the Eastern Front entering Polish territories in 1944, the Home Army established an uneasy truce with the Soviets. Even so, the main Red Army and NKVD forces conducted operations against Home Army partisans, including during or directly after Poland's Operation Tempest, which the Poles had envisioned to be a joint Polish\u2013Soviet operation against the retreating Germans which would also establish Polish claims to those territories. The Home Army helped Soviet units with scouting assistance, uprisings, and assistance in liberating some cities (e.g., Operation Ostra Brama in Vilnius, and the Lw\u00f3w Uprising), only to find that Home Army troops were arrested, imprisoned, or executed immediately afterwards. \nLong after the war, Soviet forces continued engaging many Home Army soldiers, who received the moniker of \"cursed soldiers\".\nPostwar.\nThe Home Army was officially disbanded on 19 January 1945 to avoid civil war and armed conflict with the Soviets. However, many former Home Army units decided to continue operations. The Soviet Union, and the Polish communist government that it controlled, viewed the underground, still loyal to the Polish government-in-exile, as a force to be extirpated before they could gain complete control of Poland. Future Secretary General of the Polish United Workers' Party, W\u0142adys\u0142aw Gomu\u0142ka, is quoted as saying: \"Soldiers of the AK are a hostile element which must be removed without mercy.\" Another prominent Polish communist, Roman Zambrowski, said that the Home Army had to be \"exterminated.\"\nThe first Home Army structure designed primarily to deal with the Soviet threat had been NIE, formed in mid-1943. Its aim was not to engage Soviet forces in combat, but to observe them and to gather intelligence while the Polish Government-in-Exile decided how to deal with the Soviets; at that time, the exiled government still believed in the possibility of constructive negotiations with the Soviets. On 7 May 1945 NIE was disbanded and transformed into the Armed Forces Delegation for Poland (\"Delegatura Si\u0142 Zbrojnych na Kraj\"), but it was disbanded on 8 August 1945 to stop partisan resistance.\nThe first Polish communist government formed in July 1944\u2014the Polish Committee of National Liberation\u2014declined to accept jurisdiction over Home Army soldiers; as a result, for over a year Soviet agencies such as the NKVD took responsibility for disarming the Home Army. By the end of the war, around 60,000 Home Army soldiers were arrested, 50,000 of whom were deported to Soviet gulags and prisons; most of these soldiers had been taken captive by the Soviets during or after Operation Tempest when many Home Army units tried to work together with the Soviets in a nationwide uprising against the Germans. Other Home Army veterans were arrested when they approached Polish communist government officials after having been promised amnesty. Home Army soldiers stopped trusting the government after a number of broken promises in the first few years of communist control.\nThe third post-Home Army organization was Freedom and Independence (\"Wolno\u015b\u0107 i Niezawis\u0142o\u015b\u0107\", WiN). Its primary goal was not fighting; rather, it was designed to help Home Army soldiers transition from partisan to civilian life; while secrecy was necessary in light of increasing persecution of Home Army veterans by the communist government. WiN was in great need of funds to pay for false documents and provide resources for the partisans, many of whom had lost their homes and life savings in the war. WiN was far from efficient: it was viewed as an enemy of the state, starved of resources, and a vocal faction advocated armed resistance against the Soviets and their Polish proxies. In the second half of 1945, the Soviet NKVD and the newly created Polish secret police, the Department of Security (\"Urz\u0105d Bezpiecze\u0144stwa\", UB), managed to convince several Home Army and WiN leaders that they wanted to offer amnesty to Home Army members, and gained information about large numbers of Home Army and WiN people and resources in the following months. By the time the (imprisoned) Home Army and WiN leaders realised their mistake, the organizations had been crippled, with thousands of their members arrested. WiN was finally disbanded in 1952. By 1947 a colonel of the communist forces declared that \"The terrorist and political underground [had] ceased to be a threatening force, though there [were] still men of the forests\" to be dealt with.\nThe persecution of the Home Army was only part of the Stalinist repressions in Poland. In 1944\u201356, approximately 2 million people were arrested; over 20,000, including Pilecki, organizer of the resistance in Auschwitz, were executed in communist prisons, and 6 million Polish citizens (every third adult Pole) were classified as \"reactionary\" or \"criminal elements\", and were subjected to spying by state agencies.\nMost Home Army soldiers were captured by the NKVD or by Poland's UB political police. They were interrogated and imprisoned on various charges such as \"fascism\". Many were sent to Gulags, executed, or \"disappeared\". For example, all the members of \"Batalion Zo\u015bka\", which had fought in the Warsaw Uprising, were locked up in communist prisons between 1944 and 1956. In 1956 an amnesty released 35,000 former Home Army soldiers from prisons.\nEven then, some partisans remained in the countryside, and were unwilling or unable to rejoin the community; they became known as the cursed soldiers. Stanis\u0142aw Marchewka \"Ryba\" was killed in 1957, and the last AK partisan, J\u00f3zef \"Lalek\" Franczak, was killed in 1963\u00a0\u2013 almost two decades after World War II had ended. It was only four years later, in 1967, that Adam Boryczka\u2014a soldier of AK and a member of the elite, Britain-trained Cichociemny (\"Silent Unseen\") intelligence and support group\u2014was released from prison. Until the end of the People's Republic of Poland, Home Army soldiers remained under investigation by the secret police, and it was only in 1989, after the fall of communism, that the sentences of Home Army soldiers were finally declared null and void by Polish courts.\nMany monuments to the Home Army have since been erected in Poland, including the Polish Underground State and Home Army Monument near the Sejm building in Warsaw, unveiled in 1999. The Home Army is also commemorated in the Home Army Museum in Krak\u00f3w and in the Warsaw Uprising Museum in Warsaw.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66234", "revid": "19014806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66234", "title": "Homer E. Capehart", "text": "American politician (1897\u20131979)\nHomer Earl Capehart (June 6, 1897 \u2013 September 3, 1979) was an American businessman and politician from Indiana. After serving in the United States Army during World War I, he became involved in the manufacture of record players and other products. Capehart later served 18 years (1945\u20131963) in the U.S. Senate as a Republican from Indiana. Initially an isolationist on foreign policy, he took a more internationalist stance in later years; he retired after a narrow defeat for a fourth term in 1962.\nEarly life.\nCapehart was born in Algiers, Indiana, in Pike County, the son of Susan (Kelso) and Alvin T. Capehart, a tenant farmer. During World War I, he enlisted in the U.S. Army in 1917, served in the infantry and supply corps, and was discharged as a sergeant in 1919.\nBusiness career.\nCapehart attained fame as the father of the jukebox industry. He worked for the company Holcomb and Hoke, which made record players and popcorn machines, until 1928. He started his own company in 1928, and was forced out of the company by investors in 1931. The company was taken over as one of the divisions in the Philo Farnsworth's Farnsworth Television and Radio Company in 1939. In 1932, Capehart formed a new company called Packard. Packard developed the Simplex mechanism for automatic record changing, and sold the device to Wurlitzer. The entire company was eventually bought by Wurlitzer.\nPolitical career.\nCapehart's career in the music industry made him wealthy and provided a path to the national political stage. Being the center-point for a Republican Party revolution in Indiana and the Midwest, mainly by sponsoring a huge \"Cornfield-Conference\" on one of his farms in 1938. Capehart was first elected to the U.S. Senate in 1944, narrowly defeating Henry Schricker, going on to win subsequent victories in 1950 against Alexander M. Campbell and in 1956 against Claude R. Wickard. When first elected to the Senate at the height of World War II, Capehart supported efforts to compromise with the Japanese on terms of surrender in the summer of 1945 when minority leader Wallace H. White, Jr. stated that the war might end sooner if President Truman would state specifically in the upper chamber just what unconditional surrender meant for the Japanese. After 1945, Capehart was critical of the Truman administration and the military for their postwar policies in Germany, accusing Truman and General Dwight D. Eisenhower of a conspiracy to starve the remains of the German nation.\nThroughout the 1950s, Capehart was constantly at odds with his Senate colleague William E. Jenner, a staunch isolationist Republican who consistently opposed President Eisenhower's \"modern-Republicanism.\" Capehart, although an isolationist himself during his first term in the Senate, became increasingly more internationalist during his later years in the Senate and this eventually led to the split with Jenner.\nBy 1959, Jenner had retired and Democrat Vance Hartke had taken his place. Capehart was extremely critical of President Kennedy and his New Frontier programs, such as Medicare and the Peace Corps. In 1962, Capehart attained his greatest popularity and what would ultimately become his lasting legacy as one of the key figures in the Cuban Missile Crisis by calling for a \"crack-down on Cuba\" and warning of a missile build-up on the island. Kennedy, before receiving the famous spy-plane photos, thought Capehart was \"inventing an issue.\" This was not the case and Capehart, although not appreciated at the time, has come to be seen in a more positive light because of his early and aggressive stances on Cuba.\nCapehart also backed, with Senator Kenneth Wherry of Nebraska, legislation for building military family housing in the post-World War II era, when there were critical shortages of such housing. His support of public housing for veterans was part of his support of a strong defense, which he considered a legitimate use of public money. However, he opposed social welfare programs to give away houses to the poor at public expense as unconstitutional. In 1955, the U.S. Senate initiated a groundbreaking bill which authorized the construction of 540,000 public housing units over four years. Capehart, believing the bill was socialistic in nature, and lacking enough support to kill it, introduced an amendment which would have reduced the authorization to 35,000 units. Although Capehart thought he had enough votes to pass his amendment (even going so far as to tell majority leader Lyndon Johnson on the morning of the vote, \"this time I'm going to rub your nose in shit\"), his amendment was defeated by last-minute maneuvering engineered by Johnson. Capehart voted in favor of the Senate amendment to the Civil Rights Act of 1957 on August 7, 1957, but did not vote on the House amendment to the bill on August 29, 1957. Capehart voted in favor of the Civil Rights Act of 1960, but did not vote on the 24th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.\nCapehart was also an advocate of clean air legislation, and briefly served on the United States Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management with Kennedy, Barry Goldwater, and Karl Mundt.\nLater life.\nIn the 1962 election, Capehart was narrowly defeated by 34-year-old Birch Bayh. He retired to his farming and business interests in Indiana, occasionally returning to Washington to provide both foreign policy and domestic-issue advice; jaded by the Watergate scandal, he became increasingly critical of President Richard Nixon.\nCapehart died at age 82 at St. Vincent Hospital in Indianapolis in 1979 and is buried at its Crown Hill Cemetery.\nHe is honored (along with Indiana Senator Sherman Minton) in the Minton-Capehart Federal Building near the Indiana World War Memorial Plaza in downtown Indianapolis. His name is also memorialized in the Capehart Room in the Old Dorm Block of Reed College, which once contained a record player that Capehart had donated to the college.\nBoth his son Thomas C. Capehart and daughter-in-law were killed aboard Avianca Flight 671 on January 21, 1960.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66238", "revid": "47823921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66238", "title": "James Eastland", "text": "American politician (1904\u20131986)\nJames Oliver Eastland (November 28, 1904\u00a0\u2013 February 19, 1986) was an American attorney, plantation owner, and politician from Mississippi. A Democrat, he served in the United States Senate in 1941 and again from 1943 until his resignation in late 1978. Eastland was a segregationist who led the Southern resistance against racial integration during the civil rights movement, often speaking of African Americans as \"an inferior race\". Eastland has been called the \"Voice of the White South\" and the \"Godfather of Mississippi Politics\".\nThe son of prominent attorney, politician, and cotton planter Woods Eastland, he attended the local schools of Scott County, Mississippi, and took courses at the University of Mississippi, Vanderbilt University, and the University of Alabama. He completed his legal education by studying in his father's office, attaining admission to the bar in 1927. Eastland practiced law in Sunflower County, Mississippi, and took over management of his family's cotton plantation. Becoming active in politics as a Democrat, he served in the Mississippi House of Representatives from 1928 to 1932.\nWhen Senator Pat Harrison died in office in 1941, the governor appointed Eastland to fill the vacancy on the condition that Eastland not run in that year's special election to complete the term. Eastland served from June to September 1941. The special election was won by Wall Doxey. Eastland went on to defeat Doxey in the 1942 primary for the Democratic nomination for a full term. The Democratic Party was then essentially the only party in Mississippi, assuring Eastland's return to the Senate in January 1943. Eastland was reelected five times, serving until resigning in December 1978, days before the end of his final term. Eastland advanced through seniority to the chairmanship of the Senate Judiciary Committee, serving over 20 years, and President pro tempore of the Senate.\nEarly life.\nEastland was born in Doddsville, in the Mississippi Delta on November 28, 1904, the son of Woods Caperton Eastland, a lawyer and cotton planter, and Alma Teresa (Austin) Eastland. He was named James after his late uncle, who was allegedly murdered earlier in 1904 by Luther Holbert, who was subsequently lynched. In 1905 he moved with his parents to Forest, the county seat of Scott County, Mississippi. His father was active in Mississippi politics and served as a district attorney. The son attended the local segregated public schools and graduated from Forest High School in 1922.\nEastland attended the University of Mississippi (1922-1924), Vanderbilt University (1925-1926), and the University of Alabama (1926-1927). He studied law in his father's office, attained admission to the bar in 1927, and practiced in Sunflower County. Active in politics, he was elected to one term in the Mississippi House of Representatives, and served from 1928 to 1932. After completing his House term, Eastland remained active in politics and government. He was a sought-after campaign speaker, including speeches on behalf of the gubernatorial candidacies of Paul B. Johnson Sr. in 1935 and 1939. In addition, he was a member of the board of trustees of the state hospital for the insane.\nIn the 1930s, Eastland took over management of his family's Sunflower County plantation; he eventually expanded it to nearly . Even after entering politics, he considered himself first and foremost a cotton planter. Cotton plantations were adopting mechanization but he still had many African-American laborers on the plantation, most of whom worked as sharecroppers.\nSenate career.\nEastland was appointed to the U.S. Senate in June 1941 by Governor Paul B. Johnson Sr., following the death of Senator Pat Harrison. Johnson first offered the appointment to Woods Eastland, whom he had known since childhood; Woods Eastland declined and suggested his son. Johnson appointed James Eastland on the condition that he would not run later that year in the special election to complete the term, ensuring that no candidate would have the advantage of incumbency. Eastland kept his word, and served until November; the election was won by 2nd District Congressman Wall Doxey.\nIn 1942, Eastland was one of three candidates who challenged Doxey for a full term. Doxey had the support of President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Mississippi's senior U.S. Senator, Theodore G. Bilbo, but Eastland defeated him in the Democratic primary. At the time, Mississippi was effectively a one-party state, dominated by white Democrats since the disfranchisement of African Americans with the passage of the 1890 state constitution, which allowed poll taxes, literacy tests and white primaries to exclude them from the political system. This made winning the Democratic primary tantamount to election, and Eastland returned to the Senate on January 3, 1943. Roosevelt and Eastland developed a working relationship that enabled Eastland to oppose New Deal programs that were unpopular in Mississippi, while he supported the President's agenda on other issues. Eastland was effective in developing that type of arrangement with presidents of both parties during his long tenure in the Senate. Also effective because of his seniority, he gained major federal investment in the state, such as infrastructure construction including the Tennessee\u2013Tombigbee Waterway and federal relief after disasters such as Hurricane Camille.\nEarly 1947 saw a renewed effort by the Truman administration to promote civil rights with activities such as President Truman addressing the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and delivering an address to Congress entirely dedicated to the subject. Eastland, among many other Southerners who saw the civil rights backing of the administration as an attack on their \"way of life\", addressed the Senate floor a week after Truman's speech on the matter, saying Southerners were expected to \"remain docile\" in light of their laws and culture being destroyed \"under the false guise of another civil-rights bill.\" Six weeks before the 1948 United States presidential election, Eastland predicted the defeat of the incumbent President Harry Truman, telling an audience in Memphis, Tennessee that voting for him was a waste. After Truman's surprise victory, Eastland \"remained publicly undaunted\".\nIn 1956, Eastland was appointed chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, and he served in this position until his retirement from the Senate. He was re-elected five times. He did not face substantive Republican opposition until 1966, as party politics were realigning after passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. In 1966, freshman Representative Prentiss Walker, the first Republican to represent Mississippi at the federal level since Reconstruction, ran against Eastland. The Walker campaign was an early Republican effort to attract white conservatives to its ranks, because recently passed civil rights legislation had enabled African Americans in the South to begin participating in the political process, and most of them became active as liberals in the Democratic Party.\nFormer Republican Party state chairman Wirt Yerger had considered running against Eastland but bowed out after Walker announced his candidacy. Walker ran well to Eastland's right, accusing him of not having done enough to keep integration-friendly judges from being confirmed by the Senate. As is often the case when a one-term representative runs against a popular incumbent senator or governor, Walker was soundly defeated. Years later, Yerger said that Walker's decision to relinquish his House seat after one term for the vagaries of a Senate race against Eastland was \"very devastating\" to the growth of the Mississippi Republicans.\nIn February 1960, Senator Kenneth B. Keating made a motion to report an Eisenhower administration-backed civil rights bill out of the Senate Judiciary Committee. Olin D. Johnston objected on the grounds that the committee did not have permission to sit while the full Senate was meeting. Eastland upheld the objection. Keating later stated that Eastland intentionally refused to recognize him earlier, which prevented him from making his motion before the full Senate convened. Eastland disputed Keating's claim, stated that he had recognized Keating in an appropriate manner, and advised Keating not to repeat his claim to the full Senate. In September 1960, Eastland and Thomas Dodd said officials in the State Department cleared the way for the regime of Fidel Castro to reign in Cuba and that lower-ranking officials had misinformed Americans about the political climate of Cuba with assistance from the media. Incumbent Secretary of State Christian Herter responded to the claims by saying they were incorrect or misleading.\nEastland announced his support for United States Deputy Attorney General Byron White to replace the retiring Charles Evans Whittaker as Associate Justice on March 30, 1962, Eastland stating that White would be an able justice. White took office the following month. Eastland introduced an amendment that he stated would nullify the Supreme Court prayer decision on June 29, 1962. In September 1963, Eastland, fellow Mississippi Senator John Stennis, and Georgia Senator Richard Russell jointly announced their opposition to the ratification of the nuclear test ban treaty. The opposition was viewed as denting hopes of the Kennedy administration to be met with minimal disagreement during the treaty's appearance before the Senate.\nIn 1972, Eastland was reelected with 58 percent of the vote in his closest contest ever. His Republican opponent, Gil Carmichael, an automobile dealer from Meridian, was likely aided by President Richard Nixon's landslide reelection in 49 states, including taking 78 percent of Mississippi's popular vote. However, Nixon had worked \"under the table\" to support Eastland, a long-time personal friend. Nixon and other Republicans provided little support for Carmichael to avoid alienating conservative Southern Democrats, who increasingly supported Republican positions on many national issues. The Republicans worked to elect two House candidates, Trent Lott and Thad Cochran, both of whom later became influential U.S. senators. Recognizing that Nixon would handily carry Mississippi, Eastland did not endorse the Democratic presidential candidate, George McGovern of South Dakota, who was considered a liberal. Four years later, Eastland supported the candidacy of fellow Southern Democrat Jimmy Carter of Georgia, rather than Nixon's successor, President Gerald R. Ford. Eastland's former press secretary, Larry Speakes, a Mississippi native, served as a press spokesman for Gerald Ford and Ford's running mate, US Senator Robert J. Dole.\nIn January 1970, after G. Harrold Carswell was accused of harboring both sexist and racist beliefs, Eastland told reporters that he believed this was the first instance of a Supreme Court nominee being challenged on his views on the legal rights of women. In April, the Senate Judiciary Committee scheduled a vote for a plan that if enacted would give each state one electoral vote for each congressional district. During a meeting with reporters, Eastland espoused his view that the Senate would not approve any constitutional amendment reforming the presidential election system that year. In November, along with fellow Southerners Strom Thurmond and Sam J. Ervin Jr., Eastland was one of three senators to vote against an occupational safety bill that would establish federal supervision to oversee working conditions. Later that month, after President Nixon vetoed a curb on spending for political broadcasts, Republican leader Hugh Scott announced that he would offer comprehensive campaign reforms the following year and called for senators to join him in sustaining the veto. It was agreed by members of both parties that Eastland was one of eight senators who were essential to supporting Democratic opposition to the veto and thereby make the difference in overriding it.\nIn April 1971, Eastland introduced a six\u2010bill package intended to adjust the Internal Security Act of 1950 in addition to plugging loopholes noted by various decisions made by the Supreme Court, Eastland noting that his proposed version of the Internal Security Act would give the Subversive Activities Control Board more efficiency. In October 1971, after President Richard Nixon nominated Lewis F. Powell and William Rehnquist to the Supreme Court, Eastland announced his intent to hasten the hearings of Rehnquist and Powell while admitting his doubts that hearings would begin the following week given the Senate being in recess. In October 1974, Eastland was one of five senators to sponsor legislation authored by Jesse Helms permitting prayer in public schools and taking the issue away from the Supreme Court which had previously ruled in 1963 that school prayer violated the First Amendment to the United States Constitution through the establishment of a religion. In June 1976, Eastland joined a coalition of Democratic politicians who endorsed Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter for the presidency. \"The New York Times\" assessed Stennis and Eastland as jointly \"trying to pull Mississippi out for Mr. Carter\" in their first campaign for a national Democrat in decades.\nOn May 18, 1977, Eastland made a joint appearance with President Jimmy Carter in the Rose Garden in support of proposed foreign intelligence surveillance legislation. Eastland said the legislation was \"vitally needed in this country\" and that he was satisfied with its bipartisan support. Over the summer of 1977, the Justice Department enlisted the aid of Eastland as part of its effort to thwart \"balkanization\" of litigation authority, Eastland and Attorney General Griffin Bell moving to block six measures that if enacted would have permitted the independent agencies to go to court under certain circumstances in the event the Justice Department did not act on a case 45 days after it was referred to the department. By August 1977, the Carter administration reached a compromise plan to stem the flow of illegal aliens into the United States, Eastland, Attorney General Bell, and United States Secretary of Labor F. Ray Marshall agreeing to civil penalties up to $1,000 (~$ in 2024) for offending employers. By September 1977, the seventy-three-year-old Eastland was considering retirement, with discussions of Ted Kennedy assuming his position as Chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee. In October 1977, Eastland was one of several influential senators invited to meet with President Carter as the latter tried gaining support in the Senate for the Panama Canal treaties.\nNixon resignation.\nOn February 14, 1974, Special Prosecutor for the U.S. Department of Justice Leon Jaworski wrote to Eastland complaining that President Nixon had refused to give him material that he needed for his Watergate investigation including 27 tapes relating to the Watergate cover\u2010up in addition to political donations of milk producers and the activities of the plumbers unit of the White House. The contents of the letter to Eastland were disclosed to the public by Jaworski the following month. In May, the House Judiciary Committee opened impeachment hearings against President Nixon after the release of 1,200 pages of transcripts of White House conversations between him and his aides and the administration. That month, the Senate Judiciary Committee passed a resolution supporting Jaworski observing that he was \"acting within the scope of the authority conferred upon him\". Eastland's support for the resolution was seen by observers as part of a pattern of Nixon backers turning against him in light of the Watergate scandal. In August, \"Newsweek\" magazine released Eastland's name as one of thirty-six senators who the White House believed would support President Nixon remaining in office in the event of impeachment. The article mentioned the White House believing some of the supporters were shaky and that thirty-four of them would need to remain firm to override a potential conviction. Within days of the article's release, Nixon resigned the presidency in the face of near-certain impeachment.\nSenate President pro tempore.\nDuring his last Senate term, Eastland was the longest-serving member of the majority party and was elected President pro tempore. Eastland is the most recent President pro tempore to have served during a vacancy in the Vice Presidency. He did so twice during the tumultuous 1970s, first from October to December 1973, following Spiro Agnew's resignation until the swearing-in of Gerald Ford as Vice President, and then from August to December 1974, from the time that Ford became President until Nelson Rockefeller was sworn in as Vice President. Then, Eastland was second in the presidential line of succession, behind only Speaker of the House Carl Albert.\nPolitical positions.\nOpposition to civil rights.\nEastland opposed integration and the civil rights movement. During World War II, Eastland vocally opposed and denigrated the service of African American soldiers in the war. He incited protests and comparisons to Hitlerism following a vitriolic speech on the floor of the Senate in July 1945, in which he complained that the Negro soldier was physically, morally, and mentally incapable of serving in combat. Eastland claimed that the \"boys from the South were fighting to maintain white supremacy\". In 1944 Eastland said:I have no prejudice in my heart, but the white race is the superior race and the Negro race an inferior race and the races must be kept separate by law.The same year, he protested against \"Smith v. Allwright\", which banned white primaries:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This decision reveals an alarming tendency to destroy the sovereignty of the states. Our supreme court is usurping the legislative function, and Congress may yet prove the last citadel of constitutional government.As a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, Eastland would alongside fellow southerners Olin D. Johnston of South Carolina and Harley M. Kilgore of West Virginia be one of three senators to report negatively on Earl Warren when President Eisenhower nominated him to the Supreme Court. He later was one of eleven senators to vote against John Marshall Harlan II and one of seventeen to vote against Potter Stewart. When the Supreme Court issued its decision in the landmark case \"Brown v. Board of Education\", ruling that segregation in public schools was unconstitutional, Eastland, like the majority of Southern Democrats, denounced it. In a speech given in Senatobia, Mississippi on August 12, 1955, he announced:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On May 17, 1954, the Constitution of the United States was destroyed because of the Supreme Court's decision. You are not obliged to obey the decisions of any court which are plainly fraudulent sociological considerations.\nEastland would become actively involved with the White Citizens' Council, an organization which boasted 60,000 members across the South and was called \"the new Klan that enforces thought control by economic pressures.\" Eastland testified to the Senate ten days after the \"Brown\" decision:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Southern institution of racial segregation or racial separation was the correct, self-evident truth which arose from the chaos and confusion of the Reconstruction period. Separation promotes racial harmony. It permits each race to follow its own pursuits, and its own civilization. Segregation is not discrimination ... Mr. President, it is the law of nature, it is the law of God, that every race has both the right and the duty to perpetuate itself. All free men have the right to associate exclusively with members of their own race, free from governmental interference, if they so desire.\nOn July 24, 1957, interviewed by Mike Wallace on the occasion of the passing of the Civil Rights Act of 1957, Eastland said segregation was wanted by both races:As I said, we have more Nigra professional men, more businessmen, we have substantial Nigra cotton planters. In fact, they have made more progress in the South than in the North. The master-servant relationship today is largely a Northern product.In the 1960s, Eastland belonged to the Genetics Committee of the Pioneer Fund. Civil rights workers Mickey Schwerner, James Chaney, and Andrew Goodman went missing in Mississippi on June 21, 1964, during the Freedom Summer efforts to register African American voters. Eastland tried to convince President Lyndon Johnson that the incident was a hoax and there was no Ku Klux Klan in the state. He suggested that the three had gone to Chicago:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Johnson: Jim, we've got three kids missing down there. What can I do about it?\nEastland: Well, I don't know. I don't believe there's\u00a0... I don't believe there's three missing.\nJohnson: We've got their parents down here.\nEastland: I believe it's a publicity stunt ...\nJohnson once said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Jim Eastland could be standing right in the middle of the worst Mississippi flood ever known, and he'd say the niggers caused it, helped out by the Communists.\nEastland, like most of his Southern colleagues, opposed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibited segregation of public places and facilities. Its passage caused many Mississippi Democrats to support Barry Goldwater's presidential bid that year, but Eastland did not publicly oppose the election of Johnson. Four years earlier he had quietly supported John F. Kennedy's presidential campaign, but Mississippi voted that year for unpledged electors. Although Republican Senator Goldwater was strongly defeated by incumbent Johnson, he carried Mississippi with 87.14 percent of the popular vote, which constitutes the best-ever Republican showing in any state since the founding of that party. In 1964, almost all blacks in Mississippi remained excluded from voting, thus Goldwater's mammoth win essentially constituted the vote of the white population.\nEastland was often at odds with Johnson's policy on civil rights, but they retained a close friendship based on long years together in the Senate. Johnson often sought Eastland's support and guidance on other issues, such as the nomination of Abe Fortas in 1968 as Chief Justice of the United States. The Solid South opposed him. In the 1950s, Johnson was one of three senators from the South who did not sign the Southern Manifesto of resistance to \"Brown v. Board of Education\", but Eastland and most Southern senators did, vowing resistance to school integration.\nEastland lobbied for the appointment of his friend Harold Cox to a federal judgeship, promising John F. Kennedy, who planned to appoint Thurgood Marshall to the United States Court of Appeals, that he would permit Marshall's confirmation to go forward if Cox was also appointed to the bench. This was in keeping with Kennedy's approach to handling Eastland; not wanting to upset the powerful chairman of the Judiciary Committee, Kennedy generally acceded to Eastland's requests on judicial appointments in Mississippi, which resulted in white segregationists dominating the state's federal courts. Though Eastland agreed to allow Marshall's nomination to proceed, he and senators Robert Byrd, John McClellan, Olin D. Johnston, Sam Ervin, and Strom Thurmond, made unsuccessful attempts to block Marshall's confirmation to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals and the U.S. Supreme Court.\nIn early 1969, Eastland went to Rhodesia and came back praising the White minority regime for the \"racial harmony\" supposedly lacking from America. According to Ken Flower, head of the Rhodesian Central Intelligence Operation, Eastland once complained about the fact a hostel of Salisbury was integrated, stating \"You've inserted the thin end of the wedge by allowing stinking niggers into such a fine hotel\". When he considered running for reelection in 1978, Eastland sought black support from Aaron Henry, civil rights leader and president of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. Henry told Eastland that it would be difficult for him to earn the support of black voters given his \"master-servant philosophy with regard to blacks.\" Eastland decided not to seek re-election. Partly because of the independent candidacy of Charles Evers siphoning off votes from the Democratic nominee, Maurice Dantin, Republican 4th District Representative Thad Cochran won the race to succeed Eastland. Eastland resigned the day after Christmas, enabling the governor to appoint Cochran to complete the last few days of Eastland's term, which gave Cochran a seniority advantage over other senators elected in 1978. After his retirement, Eastland remained friends with Aaron Henry and sent contributions to the NAACP, but he said that he \"didn't regret a thing\" in his public career.\nAntisemitism.\nIn 1968, after opposing the nomination of Abe Fortas to Chief Justice, Eastland, as chair of the Judiciary committee, said \"After [Thurgood] Marshall, I could not go back to Mississippi if a Jewish chief justice swore in the next president.\" In 1977, Eastland \"sneer(ed) openly at Senator Jacob Javits, saying, 'I don't like you or your kind,' because Javits was Jewish.\"\nAnticommunism.\nEastland served on a subcommittee in the 1950s investigating the Communist Party in the United States. As chairman of the Internal Security Subcommittee, he subpoenaed some employees of \"The New York Times\" to testify about their activities. The paper was taking a strong position on its editorial page that Mississippi should adhere to the \"Brown\" decision, and claimed that Eastland was persecuting them on that account. The \"Times\" said in its January 5, 1956 editorial:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Our faith is strong that long after Senator Eastland and his present subcommittee are gone, long after segregation has lost its final battle in the South, long after all that was known as McCarthyism is a dim, unwelcome memory, long after the last Congressional committee has learned that it cannot tamper successfully with a free press, The \"New York Times\" will be speaking for the men who make it, and only for the men who make it, and speaking, without fear or favor, the truth as it sees it.\nEastland subsequently allowed the subcommittee to become dormant as communist fears receded.\nMarijuana.\nIn 1974, Eastland led congressional subcommittee hearings into marijuana, the report on which concluded:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... five years of research has provided strong evidence that, if corroborated, would suggest that marijuana in various forms is far more hazardous than originally suspected.\nRelationship with FBI.\nEastland was a staunch supporter of FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover, and shared intelligence with the FBI, including leaks from the State Department. An investigation initiated by Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy and executed by former FBI agent Walter Sheridan traced some of the unauthorized disclosures to Otto Otepka of the State Department Office of Security. Hoover received intelligence that Eastland was among members of Congress who had received money and favors from Rafael Trujillo, dictator of the Dominican Republic. Eastland had regularly defended him from the Senate floor. Hoover declined to pursue Eastland on corruption charges.\nLater years.\nIn his last years in the Senate, Eastland was recognized by most senators as one who knew how to wield the legislative powers he had accumulated. Many senators, including liberals who opposed many of his positions, acknowledged the fairness with which he chaired the Judiciary Committee, sharing staff and authority that chairmen of other committees jealously held for themselves. He maintained friendly personal ties with liberal Democrats such as Ted Kennedy, Walter Mondale, Joe Biden and Philip Hart, even though they disagreed on many issues. Following Johnson's retirement from the White House, Eastland frequently visited Johnson at his Texas ranch.\nIn an event recounted by Patrick Leahy in his 2022 memoir, Ted Kennedy once sought to advance in the Judiciary Committee a bill that Eastland opposed. Eastland promised Kennedy that if Kennedy secured enough votes for the measure to pass, Eastland would place it on the committee agenda, though Eastland would vote against it. Kennedy believed he had secured the votes, and true to his word, Eastland included it on the committee agenda. When the question was called, it failed by one vote. According to Leahy, Eastland questioned one senator who had cast a no vote as to whether he had given Kennedy his word to vote in favor. The senator indicated that he had, but that he had then changed his mind. Eastland told the lawmaker in question that when one senator gave his word to another, he was honor-bound to keep it. Eastland then changed his own vote to yes, allowing Kennedy's bill to pass. Afterward, the senator Eastland questioned never had one of his bills included on the committee agenda. Eastland's closest friend and confidant was Leander Perez.\nEastland died at a hospital in Greenwood, Mississippi, on February 19, 1986, from pneumonia as a complication of other health issues; he was 81.\nWhile at a fundraiser on June 18, 2019, presidential candidate Biden said that one of his greatest strengths was \"bringing people together\" and pointed to his relationships with Eastland and fellow segregationist senator Herman Talmadge as examples. While imitating a Southern drawl, Biden remarked, \"I was in a caucus with James O. Eastland. He never called me 'boy,' he always called me 'son.'\u201d New Jersey Senator Cory Booker was one of many Democrats to criticize Biden for the remarks, issuing a statement that said, \"You don't joke about calling black men 'boys.' Men like James O. Eastland used words like that, and the racist policies that accompanied them, to perpetuate white supremacy and strip black Americans of our very humanity\".\nPortrayal in popular culture.\nEastland was portrayed by actor Jeff Doucette in the 2016 HBO film \"All the Way\" and by Nicholas Bell in the 2022 film \"Elvis\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66240", "revid": "44719641", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66240", "title": "Henry Wadsworth Longfellow", "text": "American poet and educator (1807\u20131882)\nHenry Wadsworth Longfellow (February 27, 1807 \u2013 March 24, 1882) was an American poet and educator. His original works include the poems \"Paul Revere's Ride\", \"The Song of Hiawatha\", and \"Evangeline\". He was the first American to completely translate Dante Alighieri's \"Divine Comedy\" and was one of the fireside poets from New England.\nLongfellow was born in Portland, District of Maine, Massachusetts (now Portland, Maine). He graduated from Bowdoin College and became a professor there and, later, at Harvard College after studying in Europe. His first major poetry collections were \"Voices of the Night\" (1839) and \"Ballads and Other Poems\" (1841). He retired from teaching in 1854 to focus on his writing, and he lived the remainder of his life in the Revolutionary War headquarters of George Washington in Cambridge, Massachusetts.\nLongfellow's first wife, Mary Potter, died in 1835 after a miscarriage. His second wife, Frances Appleton, died in 1861 after sustaining burns when her dress caught fire. After her death, he had difficulty writing poetry for a time and focused on translating works from foreign languages. Longfellow died in 1882.\nLongfellow wrote many lyric poems known for their musicality and often presenting stories of mythology and legend. He became the most popular American poet of his day and had success overseas. He has been criticized for imitating European styles and writing poetry that was too sentimental.\nLife and work.\nEarly life and education.\nLongfellow was born on February 27, 1807, to Stephen Longfellow and Zilpah (Wadsworth) Longfellow in Portland, Maine, then a district of Massachusetts. Although he was born at the now-demolished 159\u2013161 Fore Street, he grew up in what is now known as the Wadsworth-Longfellow House on Congress Street. His father was a lawyer, and his maternal grandfather was Peleg Wadsworth, a general in the American Revolutionary War and a Member of Congress. His mother was descended from Richard Warren, a passenger on the \"Mayflower\". He was named after his mother's brother Henry Wadsworth, a Navy lieutenant who had died three years earlier at the Battle of Tripoli. He was the second of eight children.\nLongfellow was descended from English colonists who settled in New England in the early 1600s. They included \"Mayflower\" Pilgrims Richard Warren, William Brewster, and John and Priscilla Alden through their daughter Elizabeth Pabodie, the first child born in Plymouth Colony.\nLongfellow attended a dame school at the age of three and was enrolled by age six at the private Portland Academy. In his years there, he earned a reputation as being very studious and became fluent in Latin. His mother encouraged his enthusiasm for reading and learning, introducing him to \"Robinson Crusoe\" and \"Don Quixote\". He published his first poem at age 13 in the Portland \"Gazette\" on November 17, 1820, a patriotic and historical four-stanza poem called \"The Battle of Lovell's Pond\". He studied at the Portland Academy until age 14. He spent much of his summers as a child at his grandfather Peleg's farm in Hiram, Maine.\nIn the fall of 1822, 15-year-old Longfellow enrolled at Bowdoin College in Brunswick, Maine, along with his brother Stephen. His grandfather was a founder of the college and his father was a trustee. There Longfellow met Nathaniel Hawthorne who became his lifelong friend. He boarded with a clergyman for a time before rooming on the third floor in 1823 of what is now known as Winthrop Hall. He joined the Peucinian Society, a group of students with Federalist leanings. In his senior year, Longfellow wrote to his father about his aspirations:\nI will not disguise it in the least...the fact is, I most eagerly aspire after future eminence in literature, my whole soul burns most ardently after it, and every earthly thought centres in it...I am almost confident in believing, that if I can ever rise in the world it must be by the exercise of my talents in the wide field of literature.\nHe pursued his literary goals by submitting poetry and prose to various newspapers and magazines, partly due to encouragement from Professor Thomas Cogswell Upham. He published nearly 40 minor poems between January 1824 and his graduation in 1825. About 24 of them were published in the short-lived Boston periodical \"The United States Literary Gazette\". When Longfellow graduated from Bowdoin, he was ranked fourth in the class and had been elected to Phi Beta Kappa. He gave the student commencement address.\nEuropean tours and professorships.\nAfter graduating in 1825, Longfellow was offered a job as professor of modern languages at his alma mater. An apocryphal story claims that college trustee Benjamin Orr had been impressed by Longfellow's translation of Horace and hired him under the condition that he travel to Europe to study French, Spanish, and Italian.\nWhatever the catalyst, Longfellow began his tour of Europe in May 1826 aboard the ship \"Cadmus\". His time abroad lasted three years and cost his father $2,604.24, the equivalent of over $67,000 today. He traveled to France, Spain, Italy, Germany, back to France, then to England before returning to the United States in mid-August 1829. While overseas, he learned French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, and German, mostly without formal instruction. In Madrid, he spent time with Washington Irving and was particularly impressed by the author's work ethic. Irving encouraged the young Longfellow to pursue writing. While in Spain, Longfellow was saddened to learn that his favorite sister Elizabeth had died of tuberculosis at the age of 20 in May 1829.\nOn August 27, 1829, he wrote to the president of Bowdoin that he was turning down the professorship because he considered the $600 (~$ in 2024) salary \"disproportionate to the duties required\". The trustees raised his salary to $800 with an additional $100 to serve as the college's librarian, a post which required one hour of work per day. During his years teaching at the college, he translated textbooks from French, Italian, and Spanish; his first published book was a translation of the poetry of medieval Spanish poet Jorge Manrique in 1833.\nHe published the travel book \"Outre-Mer: A Pilgrimage Beyond the Sea\" in serial form before a book edition was released in 1835. Shortly after the book's publication, Longfellow attempted to join the literary circle in New York and asked George Pope Morris for an editorial role at one of Morris's publications. He considered moving to New York after New York University proposed offering him a newly created professorship of modern languages, but there would be no salary. The professorship was not created and Longfellow agreed to continue teaching at Bowdoin. It may have been joyless work. He wrote, \"I hate the sight of pen, ink, and paper ... I do not believe that I was born for such a lot. I have aimed higher than this\".\nOn September 14, 1831, Longfellow married Mary Storer Potter, a childhood friend from Portland. The couple settled in Brunswick, but the two were not happy there. Longfellow published several nonfiction and fiction prose pieces in 1833 inspired by Irving, including \"The Indian Summer\" and \"The Bald Eagle\".\nIn December 1834, Longfellow received a letter from Josiah Quincy III, president of Harvard College, offering him the Smith Professorship of Modern Languages with the stipulation that he spend a year or so abroad. There, he further studied German as well as Dutch, Danish, Swedish, Finnish, and Icelandic. In October 1835, his wife Mary had a miscarriage during the trip, about six months into her pregnancy. She did not recover and died after several weeks of illness at the age of 22 on November 29, 1835. Longfellow had her body embalmed immediately and placed in a lead coffin inside an oak coffin, which was shipped to Mount Auburn Cemetery near Boston. He was deeply saddened by her death and wrote: \"One thought occupies me night and day...She is dead\u00a0\u2013 She is dead! All day I am weary and sad\". Three years later, he was inspired to write the poem \"Footsteps of Angels\" about her. Several years later, he wrote the poem \"Mezzo Cammin\", which expressed his personal struggles in his middle years.\nLongfellow returned to the United States in 1836 and took up the professorship at Harvard. He was required to live in Cambridge to be close to the campus and, therefore, rented rooms at the Craigie House in the spring of 1837. The home was built in 1759 and was the headquarters of George Washington during the Siege of Boston beginning in July 1775. Elizabeth Craigie owned the home, the widow of Andrew Craigie, and she rented rooms on the second floor. Previous boarders included Jared Sparks, Edward Everett, and Joseph Emerson Worcester. It is preserved today as the Longfellow House\u2013Washington's Headquarters National Historic Site.\nLongfellow began publishing his poetry in 1839, including the collection \"Voices of the Night\", his debut book of poetry. The bulk of \"Voices of the Night\" was translations, but he included nine original poems and seven poems that he had written as a teenager. \"Ballads and Other Poems\" was published in 1841 and included \"The Village Blacksmith\" and \"The Wreck of the Hesperus\", which were instantly popular. He became part of the local social scene, creating a group of friends who called themselves the Five of Clubs. Members included Cornelius Conway Felton, George Stillman Hillard, and Charles Sumner; Sumner became Longfellow's closest friend over the next 30 years. Longfellow was well liked as a professor, but he disliked being \"constantly a playmate for boys\" rather than \"stretching out and grappling with men's minds.\"\nCourtship of Frances Appleton.\nLongfellow met Boston industrialist Nathan Appleton and his son Thomas Gold Appleton in the town of Thun, Switzerland. There he began courting Appleton's daughter Frances \"Fanny\" Appleton. The independent-minded Fanny was not interested in marriage, but Longfellow was determined. In July 1839, he wrote to a friend: \"Victory hangs doubtful. The lady says she \"will not\"! I say she \"shall\"! It is not \"pride\", but the madness of passion\". His friend George Stillman Hillard encouraged him in the pursuit: \"I delight to see you keeping up so stout a heart for the resolve to conquer is half the battle in love as well as war\". During the courtship, Longfellow frequently walked from Cambridge to the Appleton home in Beacon Hill in Boston by crossing the Boston Bridge. That bridge was replaced in 1906 by a new bridge which was later renamed the Longfellow Bridge.\nIn late 1839, Longfellow published \"Hyperion\", inspired by his trips abroad and his unsuccessful courtship of Fanny Appleton. Amidst this, he fell into \"periods of neurotic depression with moments of panic\" and took a six-month leave of absence from Harvard University to attend a health spa in the former Marienberg Benedictine Convent at Boppard in Germany. After returning, he published the play \"The Spanish Student\" in 1842, reflecting his memories from his time in Spain in the 1820s.\nThe small collection \"Poems on Slavery\" was published in 1842 as Longfellow's first public support of abolitionism. However, as Longfellow himself wrote, the poems were \"so mild that even a Slaveholder might read them without losing his appetite for breakfast\". A critic for \"The Dial\" agreed, calling it \"the thinnest of all Mr. Longfellow's thin books; spirited and polished like its forerunners; but the topic would warrant a deeper tone\". The New England Anti-Slavery Society, however, was satisfied enough with the collection to reprint it for further distribution.\nOn May 10, 1843, Longfellow received a letter from Fanny Appleton agreeing to marry him. He was too restless to take a carriage and walked 90 minutes to meet her at her house. They were soon married; Nathan Appleton bought the Craigie House as a wedding present, and Longfellow lived there for the rest of his life. His love for Fanny is evident in the following lines from his only love poem, the sonnet \"The Evening Star\" which he wrote in October 1845: \"O my beloved, my sweet Hesperus! My morning and my evening star of love!\" He once attended a ball without her and noted, \"The lights seemed dimmer, the music sadder, the flowers fewer, and the women less fair.\"\nHe and Fanny had six children: Charles Appleton (1844\u20131893), Ernest Wadsworth (1845\u20131921), Fanny (1847\u20131848), Alice Mary (1850\u20131928), Edith (1853\u20131915), and Anne Allegra (1855\u20131934). Their second-youngest daughter was Edith who married Richard Henry Dana III, son of Richard Henry Dana Jr. who wrote \"Two Years Before the Mast\". Their daughter Fanny was born on April 7, 1847, and Dr. Nathan Cooley Keep administered ether to the mother as the first obstetric anesthetic in the United States. Longfellow published his epic poem \"Evangeline\" for the first time a few months later on November 1, 1847. His literary income was increasing considerably; in 1840, he had made $219 from his work, but 1850 brought him $1,900.\nOn June 14, 1853, Longfellow held a farewell dinner party at his Cambridge home for his friend Nathaniel Hawthorne, who was preparing to move overseas. In 1854, he retired from Harvard, devoting himself entirely to writing. He was awarded an honorary doctorate of laws from Harvard in 1859.\nDeath of Frances.\nFrances was putting locks of her children's hair into an envelope on July 9, 1861 and attempting to seal it with hot sealing wax while Longfellow took a nap. Her dress suddenly caught fire, but it is unclear exactly how; burning wax or a lighted candle may have fallen onto it. Longfellow was awakened from his nap and rushed to help her, throwing a rug over her, but it was too small. He stifled the flames with his body, but she was badly burned. Longfellow's youngest daughter Annie explained the story differently some 50 years later, claiming that there had been no candle or wax but that the fire had started from a self-lighting match that had fallen on the floor. Both accounts state that Frances was taken to her room to recover, and a doctor was called. She was in and out of consciousness throughout the night and was administered ether. She died shortly after 10 the next morning, July 10, after requesting a cup of coffee. Longfellow had burned himself while trying to save her, badly enough that he was unable to attend her funeral. His facial injuries led him to stop shaving, and he wore a beard from then on which became his trademark.\nLongfellow was devastated by Frances's death and never fully recovered; he occasionally resorted to laudanum and ether to deal with his grief. He worried that he would go insane, begging \"not to be sent to an asylum\" and noting that he was \"inwardly bleeding to death\". He expressed his grief in the sonnet \"The Cross of Snow\" (1879) which he wrote 18 years later to commemorate her death:\nSuch is the cross I wear upon my breast\nThese eighteen years, through all the changing scenes\nAnd seasons, changeless since the day she died.\nLater life and death.\nLongfellow spent several years translating Dante Alighieri's \"Divine Comedy\". To aid him in perfecting the translation and reviewing proofs, he invited friends to meetings every Wednesday starting in 1864. The \"Dante Club\", as it was called, regularly included William Dean Howells, James Russell Lowell, and Charles Eliot Norton, as well as other occasional guests. The full three-volume translation was published in the spring of 1867, but Longfellow continued to revise it. It went through four printings in its first year. By 1868, Longfellow's annual income was over $48,000 (~$ in 2024). In 1874, Samuel Ward helped him sell the poem \"The Hanging of the Crane\" to \"The New York Ledger\" for $3,000 (~$ in 2024). At that time, this was the highest price ever paid for a poem.\nLongfellow supported abolitionism and especially hoped for reconciliation between the northern and southern states after the American Civil War. His son Charles was injured during the war, and he wrote the poem \"Christmas Bells\", later the basis of the carol \"I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day\". He wrote in his journal in 1878: \"I have only one desire; and that is for harmony, and a frank and honest understanding between North and South\". Longfellow accepted an offer from Joshua Chamberlain to speak at his fiftieth reunion at Bowdoin College, despite his aversion to public speaking. He read the poem \"Morituri Salutamus\" so quietly that few could hear him. The next year, he declined an offer to be nominated for the Board of Overseers at Harvard \"for reasons very conclusive to my own mind\".\nOn August 22, 1879, a female admirer traveled to Longfellow's house in Cambridge and, unaware to whom she was speaking, asked him: \"Is this the house where Longfellow was born?\" He told her that it was not. The visitor then asked if he had died here. \"Not yet\", he replied. In March 1882, Longfellow went to bed with severe stomach pain. He endured the pain for several days with the help of opium before he died surrounded by family on Friday, March\u00a024. He had been suffering from peritonitis. At the time of his death, his estate was worth an estimated $356,320 (~$ in 2024 terms). He is buried with both of his wives at Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts. His last few years were spent translating the poetry of Michelangelo. Longfellow never considered it complete enough to be published during his lifetime, but a posthumous edition was collected in 1883. Scholars generally regard the work as autobiographical, reflecting the translator as an aging artist facing his impending death.\nWriting.\nStyle.\nMuch of Longfellow's work is categorized as lyric poetry, but he experimented with many forms, including hexameter and free verse. His published poetry shows great versatility, using anapestic and trochaic forms, blank verse, heroic couplets, ballads, and sonnets. Typically, he would carefully consider the subject of his poetic ideas for a long time before deciding on the right metrical form for it. Much of his work is recognized for its melodious musicality. As he says, \"what a writer asks of his reader is not so much to \"like\" as to \"listen\"\".\nAs a very private man, Longfellow did not often add autobiographical elements to his poetry. Two notable exceptions are dedicated to the death of members of his family. \"Resignation\" was written as a response to the death of his daughter Fanny in 1848; it does not use first-person pronouns and is instead a generalized poem of mourning. The death of his second wife Frances, as biographer Charles Calhoun wrote, deeply affected Longfellow personally but \"seemed not to touch his poetry, at least directly\". His memorial poem to her was the sonnet \"The Cross of Snow\" and was not published in his lifetime.\nLongfellow often used didacticism in his poetry, but he focused on it less in his later years. Much of his poetry imparts cultural and moral values, particularly focused on life being more than material pursuits. He often used allegory in his work. In \"Nature\", for example, death is depicted as bedtime for a cranky child. Many of the metaphors that he used in his poetry came from legends, mythology, and literature. He was inspired, for example, by Norse mythology for \"The Skeleton in Armor\" and by Finnish legends for \"The Song of Hiawatha\".\nLongfellow rarely wrote on current subjects and seemed detached from contemporary American concerns. Even so, he called for the development of high quality American literature, as did many others during this period. In \"Kavanagh\", a character says:\nWe want a national literature commensurate with our mountains and rivers ... We want a national epic that shall correspond to the size of the country ... We want a national drama in which scope shall be given to our gigantic ideas and to the unparalleled activity of our people ... In a word, we want a national literature altogether shaggy and unshorn, that shall shake the earth, like a herd of buffaloes thundering over the prairies.\nHe was important as a translator; his translation of Dante became a required possession for those who wanted to be a part of high culture. He encouraged and supported other translators, as well. In 1845, he published \"The Poets and Poetry of Europe\", an 800-page compilation of translations made by other writers, including many by his friend and colleague Cornelius Conway Felton. Longfellow intended the anthology \"to bring together, into a compact and convenient form, as large an amount as possible of those English translations which are scattered through many volumes, and are not accessible to the general reader\". In honor of his role with translations, Harvard established the Longfellow Institute in 1994, dedicated to literature written in the United States in languages other than English.\nIn 1874, Longfellow oversaw a 31-volume anthology called \"Poems of Places\" which collected poems representing several geographical locations, including European, Asian, and Arabian countries. Emerson was disappointed and reportedly told Longfellow: \"The world is expecting better things of you than this ... You are wasting time that should be bestowed upon original production\". In preparing the volume, Longfellow hired Katherine Sherwood Bonner as an amanuensis.\nCritical response.\nFellow Portland, Maine, native John Neal published the first substantial praise of Longfellow's work. In the January 23, 1828, issue of his magazine \"The Yankee\", he wrote, \"As for Mr. Longfellow, he has a fine genius and a pure and safe taste, and all that he wants, we believe, is a little more energy, and a little more stoutness.\"\nLongfellow's early collections \"Voices of the Night\" and \"Ballads and Other Poems\" made him instantly popular. The \"New-Yorker\" called him \"one of the very few in our time who has successfully aimed in putting poetry to its best and sweetest uses\". The \"Southern Literary Messenger\" immediately put Longfellow \"among the first of our American poets\". Poet John Greenleaf Whittier said that Longfellow's poetry illustrated \"the careful moulding by which art attains the graceful ease and chaste simplicity of nature\". Longfellow's friend Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. wrote of him as \"our chief singer\" and one who \"wins and warms ... kindles, softens, cheers [and] calms the wildest woe and stays the bitterest tears!\"\nThe rapidity with which American readers embraced Longfellow was unparalleled in publishing history in the United States; by 1874, he was earning $3,000 (~$ in 2024) per poem. His popularity spread throughout Europe as well, and his poetry was translated during his lifetime into Italian, French, German, and other languages. Scholar Bliss Perry suggests that criticizing Longfellow at that time was almost a criminal act equal to \"carrying a rifle into a national park\". In the last two decades of his life, he often received requests for autographs from strangers, which he always sent. John Greenleaf Whittier suggested that it was this massive correspondence which led to Longfellow's death: \"My friend Longfellow was driven to death by these incessant demands\".\nContemporaneous writer Edgar Allan Poe wrote to Longfellow in May 1841 of his \"fervent admiration which [your] genius has inspired in me\" and later called him \"unquestionably the best poet in America\". Poe's reputation increased as a critic, however, and he later publicly accused Longfellow of plagiarism in what Poe biographers call \"The Longfellow War\". He wrote that Longfellow was \"a determined imitator and a dextrous adapter of the ideas of other people\", specifically Alfred, Lord Tennyson. His accusations may have been a publicity stunt to boost readership of the \"Broadway Journal\", for which he was the editor at the time. Longfellow did not respond publicly but, after Poe's death, he wrote: \"The harshness of his criticisms I have never attributed to anything but the irritation of a sensitive nature chafed by some indefinite sense of wrong\".\nMargaret Fuller judged Longfellow \"artificial and imitative\" and lacking force. Poet Walt Whitman considered him an imitator of European forms, but he praised his ability to reach a popular audience as \"the expressor of common themes\u2014of the little songs of the masses\". He added, \"Longfellow was no revolutionarie: never traveled new paths: of course never broke new paths.\" Lewis Mumford said that Longfellow could be completely removed from the history of literature without much effect.\nToward the end of his life, contemporaries considered him as more of a children's poet, as many of his readers were children. A reviewer in 1848 accused Longfellow of creating a \"goody two-shoes kind of literature ... slipshod, sentimental stories told in the style of the nursery, beginning in nothing and ending in nothing\". A more modern critic said, \"Who, except wretched schoolchildren, now reads Longfellow?\" A London critic in the \"London Quarterly Review\", however, condemned \"all\" American poetry\u2014\"with two or three exceptions, there is not a poet of mark in the whole union\"\u2014but he singled out Longfellow as one of those exceptions. An editor of the \"Boston Evening Transcript\" wrote in 1846, \"Whatever the miserable envy of trashy criticism may write against Longfellow, one thing is most certain, no American poet is more read\".\nLegacy.\nLongfellow was the most popular poet of his day. As a friend once wrote, \"no other poet was so fully recognized in his lifetime\". Many of his works helped shape the American character and its legacy, particularly with the poem \"Paul Revere's Ride\". He was such an admired figure in the United States during his life that his 70th birthday in 1877 took on the air of a national holiday, with parades, speeches, and the reading of his poetry. Longfellow's popularity rapidly declined, beginning shortly after his death and into the 20th century, as academics focused attention on other poets such as Walt Whitman, Edwin Arlington Robinson, and Robert Frost. In the 20th century, literary scholar Kermit Vanderbilt noted: \"Increasingly rare is the scholar who braves ridicule to justify the art of Longfellow's popular rhymings.\" Twentieth-century poet Lewis Putnam Turco concluded that \"Longfellow was minor and derivative in every way throughout his career ... nothing more than a hack imitator of the English Romantics.\" Author Nicholas A. Basbanes, in his 2020 book \"Cross of Snow: A Life of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow\", defended Longfellow as \"the victim of an orchestrated dismissal that may well be unique in American literary history\".\nOver the years, Longfellow's personality has become part of his reputation. He has been presented as a gentle, placid, poetic soul, an image perpetuated by his brother Samuel Longfellow who wrote an early biography which specifically emphasized these points. As James Russell Lowell said, Longfellow had an \"absolute sweetness, simplicity, and modesty\". At Longfellow's funeral, his friend Ralph Waldo Emerson called him \"a sweet and beautiful soul\". In reality, his life was much more difficult than was assumed. He suffered from neuralgia, which caused him constant pain, and he had poor eyesight. He wrote to friend Charles Sumner: \"I do not believe anyone \"can\" be perfectly well, who has a brain and a heart\". He had difficulty coping with the death of his second wife Frances. Longfellow was very quiet, reserved, and private; in later years, he was known for being unsocial and avoided leaving home.\nLongfellow had become one of the first American celebrities and was popular in Europe. It was reported that 10,000 copies of \"The Courtship of Miles Standish\" sold in London in a single day. Children adored him; \"The Village Blacksmith\"'s \"spreading chestnut-tree\" was cut down and the children of Cambridge had it converted into an armchair which they presented to him. In 1884, Longfellow became the first non-British writer for whom a commemorative bust was placed in Poet's Corner of Westminster Abbey in London; he remains the only American poet represented with a bust. The king of Italy conferred on him the Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus, but Longfellow declined it, explaining to a friend that he \"did not think it appropriate for a Republican and a protestant to receive a Catholic order of knighthood\".\nA public monument by Franklin Simmons was erected in Longfellow's birthplace of Portland, Maine, in September 1888. In 1909, a statue of Longfellow was unveiled in Washington, DC, sculpted by William Couper. He was honored in February 1940 and March 2007 when the United States Postal Service issued stamps commemorating him.\nAs a memorial to their father, Longfellow's children donated land across Brattle Street and facing the family home to the City of Cambridge, which became Longfellow Park. A monument featuring a bas relief of Miles Standish, Sadalphon, the Village Blacksmith, the Spanish Student, Evangeline, and Hiawatha, characters from Longfellow's works, was dedicated in October 1914.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nSources\nOther"}
{"id": "66241", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66241", "title": "Transparency International", "text": "International non-governmental organization\nTransparency International e.V. (TI) is a German registered association founded in 1993 by former employees of the World Bank. Based in Berlin, its nonprofit and non-governmental purpose is to take action to combat global corruption with civil societal anti-corruption measures and to prevent criminal activities arising from corruption. Its most notable publications include the Global Corruption Barometer and the Corruption Perceptions Index. TI serves as an umbrella organization. Since 1993 to the present day, its membership has grown from a few individuals to more than 100 national chapters, which engage in fighting perceived corruption in their home countries. TI is a member of G20 Think Tanks (T20) as well as Civil Society 20, UNESCO Consultative Status, United Nations Global Compact, Sustainable Development Solutions Network and shares the goals of peace, justice, strong institutions and partnerships of the United Nations Sustainable Development Group (UNSDG). TI is a social partner of Global Alliance in Management Education. TI confirmed the dis-accreditation of the national chapter of United States of America in 2017 and a new TI USA chapter was established in 2020. According to the 2016 Global Go To Think Tank Index Report, TI was number 9 of 100 in the \"Top Think Tanks Worldwide (non-U.S.)\" category and number 27 of 150 in the \"Top Think Tanks Worldwide (U.S. and non-U.S.)\" category.\nHistory.\nTransparency International was founded on 9 February 1993 in The Hague, Netherlands; it was formally registered on 15 June 1993 in Berlin, Germany. According to political scientist Ellen Gutterman, \"TI's presence in Germany, and indeed its organizational development and rise from a small operation to a prominent international TNGO , benefited from the activities and personal connections of at least three key German individuals: Peter Eigen, Hansjoerg Elshorst, and Michael Wiehen\". The other founding members included:\n Peter Conze (a former regional director of GTZ), Laurence Cockcroft, Fritz Heimann of General Electric, Michael J. Hershman of the U.S. military intelligence, Kamal Hossain (former Minister of Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh), Gerald Parfitt (formerly of PricewaterhouseCoopers Ukraine), Jeremy Pope, Roy Stacy, Frank Vogl (of the World Bank)\nAn important moment in its history was in 1995 when TI developed the Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI). The CPI ranks nations on the prevalence of corruption within each country, based upon surveys of business people. The CPI was subsequently published annually. It was initially criticized for poor methodology and unfair treatment of developing nations, while also being praised for highlighting corruption.\nAreas of work and products.\n\"Transparency International is the global civil society organization leading the fight against corruption. It brings people together in a powerful worldwide coalition to end the devastating impact of corruption on men, women and children around the world. TI's mission is to create change towards a world free of corruption\".\nThe organization defines corruption as \"the abuse of entrusted power for private gain\" which eventually hurts everyone who depends on the integrity of people in a position of authority. It develops tools for fighting corruption and works with other civil society organizations, companies and governments to implement them. Since 1995, TI has issued an annual Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI); it also publishes a Global Corruption Report, a Global Corruption Barometer, and a Bribe Payers Index. In the years leading up to 2030, Transparency International is dedicated to leading the global fight against corruption via its strategy: \"Holding Power to Account \u2013 A Global Strategy Against Corruption 2021-2030\". It sets out how the Movement aims to contribute to \"a more positive future; a world in which power is held to account, for the common good\".\nCorruption Perceptions Index.\nThe Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI) ranks countries and territories based on how corrupt their public sector is perceived to be. It is a composite index \u2013 a combination of polls \u2013 drawing on corruption-related data collected by a variety of reputable institutions. The CPI reflects the views of observers from around the world.\nThe Corruption Perceptions Index has been criticised for measuring \"perception\" and not \"reality\". The creators of the index argue that \"perceptions matter in their own right, since... firms and individuals take actions based on perceptions\". \nAccording to the newspaper \"Le Monde\": \"In its main surveys, Transparency International does not measure the weight of corruption in economic terms for each country. It develops a Corruption Perception Index (CPI) based on surveys conducted by private structures or other NGOs: the Economist Intelligence Unit, backed by the British liberal weekly newspaper \"The Economist\", the American neoconservative organization Freedom House, the World Economic Forum, or large corporations. (...) The CPI ignores corruption cases that concern the business world. So, the collapse of Lehman Brothers (2008) or the manipulation of the money market reference rate (Libor) by major British banks revealed in 2011 did not affect the ratings of the United States or United Kingdom.\" A common counter argument is that it is not plausible to ever measure the true scale and depth of a highly complex issue like corruption with a single number, and then rank countries accordingly.\nInternational Anti-Corruption Conference.\nFirst held in 1983, the International Anti-Corruption Conference (IACC) is a series of international conferences organised by the IACC Council, in association with local governments and organisations, with TI as its secretariat. The conferences take place every two years in different countries.\nGlobal Anti-Corruption Consortium (GACC).\nSince 2016, TI has partnered with the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP). The partnership enables knowledge and evidence gathered through OCCRP's corruption investigations to inform TI's policy and legal advocacy. The programme is co-funded by three governments, including the US, and private donors.\nThe movement.\nTransparency International consists of chapters \u2013 locally established, independent organizations \u2013 that address corruption in their respective countries. In Transparency International, the collective of chapters is referred to as \"The Movement\". \nAs chapters are staffed with local experts they are ideally placed to determine the priorities and approaches best suited to tackling corruption in their countries. This work ranges from visiting rural communities to provide free legal support to advising their government on policy reform. From small bribes to large-scale looting, corruption differs from country to country. \nCorruption does however not stop at national borders. The chapters play a crucial role in shaping its collective work and realising its regional and global goals. The ambition is for chapters to be self funded and autonomous. Correspondingly, the Secretariat in Berlin is called a Secretariat to differentiate it from a Headquarter.\nSecretariat.\nThe Secretariat based in Berlin is responsible for global operations whereas chapters are autonomous and responsible for work in their own respective countries. Ma\u00edra Martini took office as CEO of the Secretariat on 1 February 2025. She previously held the position of Head of Policy and Advocacy at the Secretariat.\nThe Movement is officially lead by the annual membership meeting of all the chapters. Between membership meetings, the TI Board of Directors lead the Movement, but delegate aspects to the CEO. TI's leadership structure includes an \"International council\", a group of individuals with extensive experience in TI's work. Drawn from diverse geographical, cultural and professional backgrounds, council members are appointed by the TI board of directors to advise them and to support the work of the organization as a whole.\nChapters.\nSome key chapters include:\nNot all chapters choose to adopt the TI name when they get selected to join the Movement. Some examples of that are:\nIn April 2015 Russia's Ministry of Justice added TI Russia to its list of \"foreign agents\". On 6 March 2023, TI was declared an undesirable organization in Russia.\nDisaccreditations.\nTI Croatia: Due to a \"lack of confidence\", TI's chapter in Croatia was disaccredited by the organization's board of directors in November 2015. The previous year, several leaders of the Croatia chapter challenged the legality of the chapter president's election. The president was accused of falsifying records, conflicts of interest, and arbitrarily expelling 10 chapter members who opposed the hiring of staff against the organization's rules. The Croatian government eventually revoked the president's appointment.\nTI USA: In January 2017, the TI Secretariat confirmed that its International Board of Directors decided on 10 January 2017 to strip its US affiliate \u2013 Transparency International USA \u2013 of its accreditation as the National Chapter in the United States.\nThe stated basis for the dis-accreditation was the board's recognition of differences in philosophies, strategies, and priorities between the former chapter and the Transparency International Movement. Elsewhere, it was reported that TI-USA came to be seen in the United States as a corporate front group, funded by multinational corporations. TI-USA's funding was provided by Bechtel Corporation, Deloitte, Google, Pfizer ($50,000 or more), Citigroup, ExxonMobil, Fluor, General Electric, Lockheed Martin, Marsh &amp; McLennan, PepsiCo, PricewaterhouseCoopers, Raytheon, Realogy, Tyco ($25,000\u2013$49,999), and Freeport-McMoRan and Johnson &amp; Johnson (up to $24,999). TI-USA previously awarded an annual corporate leadership award to one of its big corporate funders. In 2016, this award went to Bechtel. In April 2015 the Secretariat defended the decision by TI-USA to give Hillary Clinton its Integrity Award in 2012.\nA new TI USA Chapter was created January 1, 2020.\nFunding.\nAccording to their donation policy, TI receives funding from a range of donors, including government agencies, multilateral institutions, foundations, the private sector and individuals. Funding may be unrestricted or tied to specific projects or programmes. It is their policy to accept funding \u2013 whether monetary or in kind \u2013 from any donor, provided that acceptance does not impair the independence to pursue their mission or endanger the integrity and reputation. The funding sources vary between chapters and the Secretariat. Some chapters rely heavily on financial support from small private donations. The Secretariat and Chapters have independent fundraising efforts and the intention is for Chapters not to be financially dependent on the Secretariat.\nSiemens Integrity Initiative.\nIn January 2015 it was reported that TI accepted $3 million from a foundation set up by the German engineering multinational Siemens. Siemens had established the foundation subsequent to paying one of the largest corporate corruption fines in 2008 in history \u2013 $1.6 billion \u2013 for bribing government officials in numerous countries. In 2014, the Siemens Integrity Initiative funded a project at TI after pleading guilty in 2008 to bribery charges relating to widespread corrupt practices in Greece, Norway, Iraq, Vietnam, Italy, Israel, Argentina, Venezuela, China and Russia. TI applied for and received the project funding from the Siemens Integrity Initiative. At the time, this was controversial as TI's due diligence procedures prohibit the organization from accepting money from corporations that want to \"greenwash\" their reputations by making donations to TI. \"If any corporate donor is accused of having been involved in corruption, the donor can expect no protection from TI,\" the procedures state. Transparency International received the funding from the Siemens Integrity Initiative about a year after the Siemens foundation hired a TI staff member from their EU office. This raised media questions of a \"revolving door\" that could benefit both the organization and the company. According to 'Corporate Crime Reporter' who reported extensively on the case, several of TI's national chapters also have accepted money from the Siemens Integrity Initiative: $660,000 for TI USA, $600,000 for TI Italy, $450,000 for TI Bulgaria, and $230,000 for TI Mexico \u2013 each for a period of three years. TI's then managing director, Cobus de Swardt, said, \"We did not file an application to Siemens, we applied to the Siemens Integrity Initiative. There's a difference.\" The project funded by the Siemens Integrity Initiative over multiple years was called \"Integrity Pact\" and was deemed a significant success upon its completion. It focused on building national capacities to strengthen government procurement practices across multiple countries to prevent the kind of corruption that Siemens had engaged in. The model applied is now a format for government procurement worldwide. Transparency International argues that the seed funding from the Siemens Integrity Initiative has had significant positive impact in ensuring transparency in government procurement around there world and thereby limiting corruption risk.\nCriticisms.\n2013 stance on Edward Snowden.\nAt its annual members' meeting in November 2013 in Berlin, TI's national chapters from Germany and Ireland proposed a resolution calling for the \"end of the prosecution of Edward J. Snowden... He should be recognized as a whistleblower for his help to reveal the over-reaching and unlawful surveillance by secret services...He symbolizes the courage of numerous other whistleblowers around the world.\" The final resolution that was passed by the plenary excluded any reference to Snowden, and excluded a call for \"comprehensive protection on whistleblowers from all forms of retaliation\". The original resolution was weakened following the intervention of the TI USA. Five months earlier, in June 2013, representatives from TI met Snowden at the Moscow airport, where he asked for political asylum in Russia.\n2015 whistleblowing.\nIn August 2015 former TI staffer Anna Buzzoni went public regarding retaliation she and her colleagues faced after reporting to managers questionable financial dealings at TI's Water Integrity Network. Two of Buzzoni's project responsibilities were suspended and she was transferred against her will. She left TI shortly before internal whistleblower guidelines were adopted in June 2014.\n2017\u201321 reports of toxic culture at the Berlin Secretaratiat.\nIn 2017, Cobus de Swardt stood down as TI's managing director, following a dispute with the organisation's board of directors. De Swardt agreed a settlement with TI in a Labour Court in Berlin. In August 2019, accounts from seven current and former TI Secretariat staff were reported in \"The Guardian\" alleging a \"toxic\" workplace culture at the organisation. In 2021, de Swardt published a book accusing TI of abuse of power and of silencing him as a whistleblower in is former role as executive director. De Swardt also presented a video published on YouTube by his publisher, Springer, criticising TI.\nDe Swardt's successor, Patricia Moreira, left in 2020 after making similar accusations to those of De Swardt, accusing the Board of failing to protect her as a whistleblower. The German newspaper \"Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung\" reported that TI dismissed Moreira \"without giving any reasons\". The article added that, \"dozens of employees, including high-ranking ones, have left the organisation in recent years. Even long-standing and deeply committed employees complain that TI is involved in political intrigues in which some are only interested in their own progress.\" An investigator contracted by Moreira stated in a report that TI board's handling of the complaints process was beset by conflicts of interest and failed to address allegations of misconduct made against the board by Moreira.\nFollowing the departure of Moreira, Daniel P. Eriksson was appointed interim managing director in March 2020, and became CEO a year later. During his term leading up to January 2025, the organisation culture and work environment improved significantly.\n2024 TI Brazil accusations.\nSome sources have questioned the political impartiality and transparency of TI Brazil, based on conversations of prosecutors in Operation Car Wash, leaked to \"The Intercept\" following a hack. Members in the chat group included chief prosecutor Deltan Dallagnol as well as the head of TI Brazil. The chat group included posts on a \"backstage campaign\" to \"disarm resistance on the left\", fund selected candidates, and target others, seen as adversaries, using social media. Plans extended to preparing a series of false accusations (\"den\u00fancias sem materialidade\") intended to damage the reputation of former president and potential candidate Luiz In\u00e1cio Lula da Silva, and lead up to a chat in which participants celebrate the election of Jair Bolsonaro. In April 2022, Tribunal de Contas da Uni\u00e3o announced that it had opened an investigation against TI in relation to the imprisonment of Lula da Silva.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66243", "revid": "49917098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66243", "title": "Victor Gollancz", "text": "British publisher (1893\u20131967)\nSir Victor Gollancz (; 9 April 1893 \u2013 8 February 1967) was a British publisher and humanitarian. Gollancz was known as a supporter of left-wing politics. His loyalties shifted between liberalism and communism; he defined himself as a Christian socialist and an internationalist. He used his publishing house, Victor Gollancz Ltd, chiefly to promote pacifist and socialist non-fiction, and he launched the Left Book Club.\nIn the postwar era, he focused his attention on Germany and became known for his promotion of friendship and reconciliation based on his internationalism and his ethic of brotherly love. He founded the organisation Save Europe Now (SEN) in 1945 to campaign for humane treatment of German civilians, and drew attention to their suffering, especially children, and atrocities committed against German civilians. He received an honorary doctorate at the University of Frankfurt in 1949, the Gro\u00dfes Bundesverdienstkreuz of Germany in 1953 and the Peace Prize of the German Book Trade in 1960, and several streets in Germany, including the Gollanczstra\u00dfe in West Berlin, and two schools, the Victor Gollancz Elementary School and the Victor-Gollancz-Volkshochschule Steglitz-Zehlendorf, were named in his honour. He also campaigned for friendship with Soviet Russia. Gollancz once said: \"I hate everything that is pro and anti (different peoples). I am only one thing: I am pro-humanity.\" Since 2000, the Society for Threatened Peoples has awarded the Victor Gollancz Prize.\nEarly life.\nBorn in Maida Vale, London, to a family of German Jewish and Polish Jewish backgrounds, Gollancz was the son of a wholesale jeweller and the nephew of Rabbi Professor Sir Hermann Gollancz and Professor Sir Israel Gollancz. His grandfather, Rabbi Samuel Marcus Gollancz, had migrated to the United Kingdom in the mid-19th century from Witkowo, near Gniezno (then Gnesen in Prussia) to become cantor of the Hambro' Synagogue in London.\nAfter being educated at St Paul's School, London and taking a degree in classics at New College, Oxford, he became a schoolteacher. Gollancz was commissioned into the Northumberland Fusiliers in October 1915, although he did not see active service. In March 1916, he transferred to Repton School Junior Officers' Training Corps. Gollancz proved to be an innovative and inspiring teacher; he introduced the first civics class to be taught at an English public school and many of his students went on to become teachers themselves, including James Harford and James Darling. \nIn 1917, he became involved in the Reconstruction Committee, which was planning for post-war Britain. There he met Ernest Benn, who hired him to work in his publishing company, Ernest Benn Limited. Starting with magazines, Gollancz then brought out a series of art books, after which he started signing novelists.\nAs a publisher.\nGollancz formed his own publishing company in 1927, publishing works by writers such as Ford Madox Ford and George Orwell, who wrote that \"Gollancz is of course part of the Communism-racket,\" to Rayner Heppenstall in July 1937 (Orwell went to Secker and Warburg from \"Homage to Catalonia\" onwards). Orwell had initially proposed to Gollancz to publish \"Animal Farm\", but the latter had refused, according to Orwell, due to the fear of spoiling relations with a fundamental ally in the war against Nazism: \"I must tell you that it is I think completely unacceptable politically from your point of view (it is anti-Stalin)\". Gollancz became very angry at this insinuation, but on 4 April 1944, he recognized his error of judgment: \"You were right and I was wrong. I am so sorry. I have returned the manuscript\". The firm, Gollancz Ltd., published pacifist and socialist nonfiction as well as, by the mid-1930s, a solid selection of contemporary fiction, including authors such as Elizabeth Bowen, Daphne du Maurier, and Franz Kafka. While Gollancz published \"The Red Army Moves\" by Geoffrey Cox on the Winter War in 1941, he omitted some criticisms of the USSR.\nGollancz was one of the founders of the Left Book Club, the first book club in the UK. He had a knack for marketing, sometimes taking out full-page newspaper advertisements for the books he published, a novelty at the time. He also used eye-catching typography and book designs, and used yellow dust-covers on books. Starting in 1948, Gollancz made yearly scouting trips to the USA; by 1951 American books made up half of his publications.\nGollancz's politics started as those of the Liberal Party and Guild Socialism. By 1931 he had joined the Labour Party, and by the early 1930s he had started publishing left-wing political works, in addition to his more popular titles. Although he never joined the CPGB, Gollancz was closely allied to the Communist Party during the second half of the 1930s. He finally broke with the party after the signing of the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop pact in 1939, and pledged himself to Christian socialism. In the early 1940s, Gollancz was sympathetic to Richard Acland's socialist Common Wealth Party and gave talks for the group before the general election of 1945. Although he never thought the party would win an election, he believed it represented a useful, socialist pressure group.\nReligious faith was important part of Gollancz's life. His father was an Orthodox Jew with a very literal interpretation of his faith; Gollancz's dislike of this attitude coloured his approach to organised Judaism for much of his life, but he continued to practise many Jewish rituals at home. Gollancz often claimed to be a Christian, although he was never baptised and his understanding of the religion was highly idiosyncratic. Overall his personal syncretic faith drew on Pelagian Christianity, Judaism, and wide-ranging reading across religious traditions. \nHis faith manifested itself in a consciousness of bliss and his lifelong political and social campaigning. He compiled a number of books of religious writings, including \"A Year of Grace\", \"From Darkness to Light\", \"God of a Hundred Names\" and \"The New Year of Grace\". Gollancz was also a keen music lover, an enthusiasm he explained in his final book, \"Journey Towards Music\".\nGollancz was knighted in the 1965 Queen's Birthday Honours List.\nAs a campaigner.\nIn addition to his highly successful publishing business, Gollancz was a prolific writer on a variety of subjects, and put his ideas into action by establishing campaigning groups. The Left Book Club was not only a book club run along commercial lines, but also a campaigning group that aimed to propagate left-wing ideas in Britain. The founding of the club marked the end of his career solely as a publisher, after which he devoted much of his energy to campaigning.\nHis first few pamphlets addressed what he saw as the communist betrayal of left wing ideals, although after the Soviet Union was invaded by Nazi Germany in 1941 he founded the Anglo-Soviet Public Relations Association (ASPRA) to promote cordial relations between the Britain and the Soviet Union. This was followed by refutation of the anti-German (as opposed to anti-Nazi) doctrine of Sir Robert Vansittart in the pamphlet \"Shall Our Children Live or Die\" published in late 1941.\nAfter World War II, Gollancz criticized the rise of what he saw as excessive nationalism in the Allied countries (both Czechoslovakia and the UK), describing nationalism \"partly an invention of ambitious and unscrupulous politicians, and partly a drug from which the populace derives [. . .] a kind of bogus and vicarious satisfaction\".\n1943 publication of description of the Holocaust.\nGollancz publicised the anti-Semitism of the Nazi regime early on; in 1933 he had published the compilation volume \"The Little Brown Book of the Hitler Terror\" and Fritz Seidler's book on the Nazi persecution of the Jews \"The Bloodless Pogrom\" in 1934. \nIn the summer of 1942, Gollancz came to realise that he and the rest of the world had been seriously underestimating the horrific extent of the Nazi persecution of the Jews. He explained in his 16,000-word pamphlet \"Let My People Go\", written over Christmas 1942, that between one and two million Jews had already been murdered in Nazi-controlled Europe and \"unless something effective is done, within a very few months these six million Jews will all be dead.\". \nGollancz proposed a series of practical responses, centred around a rescue plan, and undertook a lecture and fundraising tour; he was also made vice-president of Eleanor Rathbone's \"National Committee for Rescue from Nazi Terror\". Published early in the new year of 1943, the pamphlet sold a quarter of a million copies within three months and was quoted in the Parliament of Canada in 1943, and in \"The Adelaide Advertiser\" on Saturday 15 May 1943. \nAlong with Rathbone, Gollancz was the foremost British campaigner during the Second World War on the issue of the Nazi extermination of European Jewry.\nTowards the end of June 1943, Gollancz suffered a serious nervous breakdown, believed to have been brought on by overwork (he had cut out holidays and reduced his social and cultural life) and his identification with the Nazis' victims. After his recovery he started work on a book to be called \"The Necessity for Zionism\"; although the book was never written, he did publish a number of books on Jewish topics. His work for Zionism at this time led to him being appointed as a governor of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. In May 1945, he wrote his last major contribution to Jewish refugees, the pamphlet \"Nowhere to Lay Their Heads: The Jewish tragedy in Europe and its solution\", a personal appeal for the opening up of Palestine for large-scale Jewish immigration from Europe, which he distributed for free and was a great success.\nOccupation of Germany after World War II.\nIn April 1945, Gollancz addressed the issue of German collective guilt in a pamphlet, \"What Buchenwald Really Means\" that explained that not all Germans were guilty. He maintained that hundreds of thousands of gentiles had been persecuted by the Nazis and many more had been terrorized into silence. He also argued that British citizens who had allegedly done nothing to save the Jews despite living in a democracy were not free of guilt. This marked a shift of Gollancz's attention towards the people of Germany. In September 1945, he started an organisation to campaign for the support of Germans, and over the next four years he wrote another eight pamphlets and books addressing the issue and visited the country several times.\nGollancz's campaign for the humane treatment of German civilians involved efforts to persuade the British government to end the ban on sending provisions to Germany and ask that it pursue a policy of reconciliation, as well as organising an airlift to provide Germany and other war-torn European countries with provisions and books. He wrote regular critical articles for, and letters to, British newspapers, and after a visit to the British Zone of Occupation in October and November 1946, he published these along with photographs of malnourished German children he took there in \"In Darkest Germany\" in January 1947.\nOn the expulsion of Germans after World War II he said: \"So far as the conscience of humanity should ever again become sensitive, will this expulsion be an undying disgrace for all those who remember it, who caused it or who put up with it. The Germans have been driven out, but not simply with an imperfection of excessive consideration, but with the highest imaginable degree of brutality.\" In his 1946 book \"Our Threatened Values\", Gollancz described the conditions Sudeten German prisoners faced in a Czech internment camp: \"They live crammed together in shacks without consideration for gender and age... They ranged in age from 4 to 80. Everyone looked emaciated... the most shocking sights were the babies... nearby stood another mother with a shrivelled bundle of skin and bones in her arms... Two old women lay as if dead on two cots. Only upon closer inspection, did one discover that they were still lightly breathing. They were, like those babies, nearly dead from hunger\".\nWhen Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery wanted to allot each German citizen a guaranteed diet of only 1,000 calories a day and justified this by referring to the fact that the prisoners of the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp had received only 800, Gollancz wrote in response about food shortages in Germany before the end of World War II, pointing out that many prisoners in Nazi concentration camps never even received 800 calories. \"There is really only one method of re-educating people\", explained Gollancz, \"namely the example that one lives oneself.\"\nGollancz explained his rationale thus, \"In the management of our helping actions should nothing, but absolutely nothing else, be decisive than the degree of need.\" For his biographer, Ruth Dudley Edwards, Gollancz's campaign was based in his concern for the moral underdog and his enjoyment in fighting for unpopular causes. The campaign led Gollancz's friend, Rev. John Collins, to start \"Christian Action\" in December 1946, an organisation with similar aims (which later became involved in the campaign against Apartheid). In 1960, Gollancz was awarded the Peace Prize of the German Book Trade for his work with SEN.\nOther issues.\nDuring the fighting that marked the creation of the state of Israel, Gollancz became concerned for the plight of the Arabs and in October 1948 he founded the Jewish Society for Human Service (JSHS), with Rabbi Leo Baeck as its president. This body was based on \"the universalist ethic of Judaism\" and aimed to work in the newly formed state of Israel \"to relieve the suffering of Jews and Arabs indifferently.\"\nIn February 1951, Victor Gollancz wrote a letter to \"The Manchester Guardian\" asking people to join an international struggle against poverty. Gollancz's letter called for a negotiated end to the Korean War and the creation of an international fund \"to turn swords into ploughshares\", readers were asked to send a postcard to Gollancz with the simple word 'yes'. He received 5,000 responses. This led to the founding of the Association for World Peace (AWP) with Gollancz as chairman and Canon Charles Raven the vice-chairman. In May 1951, Gollancz invited Harold Wilson to chair an AWP committee and write a pamphlet which was eventually called 'War on Want \u2013 a Plan for World Development', published on 9 June 1952. This document led to the founding of the international anti-poverty charity War on Want; its parent body, the AWP, waned after Gollancz stepped down from the chairmanship in 1952.\nWith Arthur Koestler and John Collins, Gollancz set up the National Campaign for the Prevention of Legal Cruelty in 1955. This organisation was renamed The National Campaign for the Abolition of Capital Punishment (NCACP) and campaigned against capital punishment in the United Kingdom. This drive against capital punishment would later lead Gollancz to campaign against the execution of the Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann. He addressed the issue in a controversial pamphlet, \"The Case of Adolf Eichmann\".\nGollancz was a member of Bertrand Russell's \"Who Killed Kennedy? Committee\", which challenged the official version of the assassination of John F. Kennedy.\nPersonal life and death.\nIn 1919, Victor married Ruth Lowy, an artist who had studied at the Slade School of Art under Henry Tonks. The couple had five daughters among them Vita Gollancz, an artist; Livia Ruth Gollancz, musician and later head of Victor Gollancz Ltd; and Diana Gollancz, a confidante of poet Philip Larkin.\nGollancz died in London on 8 February 1967.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66244", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66244", "title": "Electronic money", "text": ""}
{"id": "66245", "revid": "50034556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66245", "title": "DSC", "text": "DSC or Dsc may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "66246", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66246", "title": "Bomb calorimeter", "text": ""}
{"id": "66247", "revid": "97002", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66247", "title": "Differential scanning calorimeter", "text": ""}
{"id": "66248", "revid": "1155135012", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66248", "title": "Adamstown", "text": "Adamstown may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "66250", "revid": "46614790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66250", "title": "Assyrians", "text": ""}
{"id": "66251", "revid": "1303011713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66251", "title": "Ladder logic", "text": "Programming language for industrial controllers\nLadder logic was originally a written method to document the design and construction of relay racks as used in manufacturing and process control. Each device in the relay rack would be represented by a symbol on the ladder diagram with connections between those devices shown. In addition, other items external to the relay rack such as pumps, heaters, and so forth would also be shown on the ladder diagram.\nLadder logic has evolved into a programming language that represents a program by a graphical diagram based on the circuit diagrams of relay logic hardware. Ladder logic is used to develop software for programmable logic controllers (PLCs) used in industrial control applications. The name is based on the observation that programs in this language resemble ladders, with two vertical rails and a series of horizontal rungs between them. Ladder diagrams were once the only way to record programmable controller programs, but today, other forms are standardized in IEC 61131-3. For example, instead of the graphical ladder logic form, there is a language called Structured text, which is similar to C, within the IEC 61131-3 standard.\nOverview.\nLadder logic is widely used to program PLCs, where sequential control of a process or manufacturing operation is required. Ladder logic is useful for simple but critical control systems or for reworking old hardwired relay circuits. As programmable logic controllers became more sophisticated it has also been used in very complex automation systems. Often the ladder logic program is used in conjunction with a human\u2013machine interface (HMI) program operating on a computer workstation.\nThe motivation for representing sequential control logic in a ladder diagram was to allow factory engineers and technicians to develop software without additional training to learn a language such as FORTRAN or other general-purpose computer language. Development and maintenance were simplified because of the resemblance to familiar relay hardware systems. Implementations of ladder logic may have characteristics, such as sequential execution and support for control flow features, that make the analogy to hardware somewhat inaccurate.\nLadder logic can be thought of as a rule-based language rather than a procedural language. A \"rung\" in the ladder represents a rule. When implemented with relays and other electro-mechanical devices, the various rules execute simultaneously and immediately. When implemented in a programmable logic controller, the rules are typically executed sequentially by software in a continuous loop, or \"scan\". By executing the loop fast enough, typically many times per second, the effect of simultaneous and immediate execution is achieved. Proper use of programmable controllers requires an understanding of the limitations of the execution order of rungs.\nSyntax and examples.\nThe language itself can be seen as a set of connections between logical checkers (contacts) and actuators (coils). When a path exists from the left side of the rung to the output through asserted (true or \"closed\") contacts, the rung is considered true, and the output coil storage bit is set to 1 or (true). If no such path exists, the output is false (0), and the \"coil\" by analogy to electromechanical relays is considered \"de-energized\". This analogy between logical propositions and relay contact status was established by Claude Shannon.\nLadder logic has contacts that make or break circuits to control coils. Each coil or contact corresponds to the status of a single bit in the programmable controller's memory. Unlike electromechanical relays, a ladder program can refer any number of times to the status of a single bit, equivalent to a relay with an indefinitely large number of contacts.\nSo-called \"contacts\" may refer to physical (\"hard\") inputs to the programmable controller from physical devices such as pushbuttons and limit switches via an integrated or external input module, or may represent the status of internal storage bits which may be generated elsewhere in the program.\nEach rung of ladder language typically has one coil at the far right. Some manufacturers may allow more than one output coil on a rung.\nThe \"coil\" (output of a rung) may represent a physical output which operates some device connected to the programmable controller, or may represent an internal storage bit for use elsewhere in the program.\nA way to recall these is to imagine the checkers (contacts) as a push button input, and the actuators (coils) as a light bulb output. The presence of a slash within the checkers or actuators would indicate the default state of the device at rest.\nLogical AND.\nThe above realizes the function: Door motor = Key switch 1 AND Key switch 2\nThis circuit shows two key switches that security guards might use to activate an electric motor on a bank vault door. When the normally open contacts of both switches close, electricity is able to flow to the motor which opens the door.\nLogical AND with NOT.\nThe above realizes the function: Door motor = Close door AND NOT Obstruction.\nThis circuit shows a push button that closes a door and an obstruction detector that senses if something is in the way of the closing door. When the normally open push button contact closes and the normally closed (NC) obstruction detector is closed (no obstruction detected), electricity is able to flow to the motor which closes the door.\nLogical OR.\nThe above realizes the function: Unlock = Interior unlock OR Exterior unlock\nThis circuit shows the two things that can trigger a car's power door locks. The remote receiver is always powered. The unlock solenoid gets power when either set of contacts is closed.\nIndustrial STOP/START.\nIn common industrial latching start/stop logic, we have a \"Start\" button to turn on a motor contactor, and a \"Stop\" button to turn off the contactor.\nWhen the \"Start\" button is pushed the input goes true, via the \"Stop\" button NC contact. When the \"Run\" input becomes true the seal-in \"Run\" NO contact in parallel with the \"Start\" NO contact will close maintaining the input logic true (latched or sealed-in). After the circuit is latched the \"Stop\" button may be pushed causing its NC contact to open and consequently the input to go false. The \"Run\" NO contact then opens and the circuit logic returns to its inactive state.\nThe above realizes the function: Run = (Start OR Run) AND (NOT Stop)\nThis latch configuration is a common idiom in ladder logic. It may also be referred to as \"seal-in logic\". The key to understanding the latch is in recognizing that the \"Start\" switch is a momentary switch (once the user releases the button, the switch is open again). As soon as the \"Run\" solenoid engages, it closes the \"Run\" NO contact, which latches the solenoid on. The \"Start\" switch opening up then has no effect.\n Note: In this example, \"Run\" represents the status of a bit in the PLC, while \"Motor\" represents the actual output to the real-world relay that closes the motor's real-world circuit.\nFor safety reasons, an emergency stop (\"ES\") may be hardwired in series with the \"Start\" switch, and the relay logic should reflect this.\nComplex logic.\nHere is an example of what two rungs in a ladder logic program might look like. In real-world applications, there may be hundreds or thousands of rungs.\nTypically, complex ladder logic is \"read\" left to right and top to bottom. As each of the lines (or rungs) are evaluated the output coil of a rung may feed into the next stage of the ladder as an input. In a complex system there will be many \"rungs\" on a ladder, which are numbered in order of evaluation:\nThis represents a slightly more complex system for rung 2. After the first line has been evaluated, the output coil \"A/C\" is fed into rung 2, which is then evaluated and the output coil \"Cooling\" could be fed into an output device \"Compressor\" or into rung 3 on the ladder. This system allows very complex logic designs to be broken down and evaluated.\nAdditional functionality.\nAdditional functionality can be added to a ladder logic implementation by the PLC manufacturer as a special block. When the special block is powered, it executes code on predetermined arguments. These arguments may be displayed within the special block.\nIn this example, the system will count the number of times that the interior and remote unlock buttons are pressed. This information will be stored in memory locations A and B. Memory location C will hold the total number of times that the door has been unlocked electronically.\nPLCs have many types of special blocks. They include timers, arithmetic operators and comparisons, table lookups, text processing, PID control, and filtering functions. More powerful PLCs can operate on a group of internal memory locations and execute an operation on a range of addresses, for example, to simulate a physical sequential drum controller or a finite-state machine. In some cases, users can define their own special blocks, which effectively are subroutines or macros. The large library of special blocks along with high-speed execution has allowed use of PLCs to implement very complex automation systems.\nLimitations and successor languages.\nLadder notation is best suited to control problems where only binary variables are required and where interlocking and sequencing of binary is the primary control problem. Like all parallel programming languages, the sequential order of operations may be undefined or obscure; logic race conditions are possible which may produce unexpected results. Complex rungs are best broken into several simpler steps to avoid this problem. Some manufacturers avoid this problem by explicitly and completely defining the execution order of a rung, however, programmers may still have problems fully grasping the resulting complex semantics.\nAnalog quantities and arithmetical operations are clumsy to express in ladder logic and each manufacturer has different ways of extending the notation for these problems. There is usually limited support for arrays and loops, often resulting in duplication of code to express cases that in other languages would call for use of indexed variables.\nAs microprocessors have become more powerful, notations such as sequential function charts and function block diagrams can replace ladder logic for some limited applications. Some newer PLCs may have all or part of the programming carried out in a dialect that resembles BASIC, C, or other programming language with bindings appropriate for a real-time application environment.\nPopularity.\nIn 2019, \"IEEE Spectrum\" ranked ladder logic as number 50 out of 52 in a list of popular programming languages."}
{"id": "66252", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66252", "title": "Spin (propaganda)", "text": "Form of propaganda in public relations and politics\nIn public relations and politics, spin is a form of propaganda, achieved through knowingly \nproviding a biased interpretation of an event. While traditional public relations and advertising may manage their presentation of facts, \"spin\" often implies the use of , deceptive, and manipulative tactics.\nBecause of the frequent association between spin and press conferences (especially government press conferences), the room in which these conferences take place is sometimes described as a \"spin room\". Public relations advisors, pollsters and media consultants who develop deceptive or misleading messages may be referred to as \"spin doctors\" or \"spinmeisters\".\nA standard tactic used in \"spinning\" is to reframe or modify the perception of an issue or event to reduce any negative impact it might have on public opinion. For example, a company whose top-selling product is found to have a significant safety problem may \"reframe\" the issue by criticizing the safety of its main competitor's products or by highlighting the risk associated with the entire product category. This might be done using a \"catchy\" slogan or sound bite that can help to persuade the public of the company's biased point of view. This tactic could enable the company to refocus the public's attention away from the negative aspects of its product.\nSpinning is typically a service provided by paid media advisors and media consultants. The largest and most powerful companies may have in-house employees and sophisticated units with expertise in spinning issues. While spin is often considered to be a private-sector tactic, in the 1990s and 2000s some politicians and political staff were accused of using deceptive \"spin\" tactics to manipulate or deceive the public. Spin may include \"burying\" potentially negative new information by releasing it at the end of the workday on the last day before a long weekend; selectively cherry-picking quotes from previous speeches made by their employer or an opposing politician to give the impression that they advocate a certain position; or purposely leaking misinformation about an opposing politician or candidate that casts them in a negative light.\nHistory.\nRise of political spin.\nEdward Bernays has been called the \"Father of Public Relations\". Bernays helped tobacco and alcohol companies make consumption of their products more socially acceptable, and he was proud of his work as a propagandist. Throughout the 1990s, the use of spin by politicians and parties accelerated, especially in the United Kingdom; the emergence of 24-hour news increased pressures placed upon journalists to provide nonstop content, which was further intensified by the competitive nature of British broadcasters and newspapers, and content quality declined due to 24-hour news' and political parties' techniques for handling the increased demand. This led to journalists relying more heavily on the public relations industry as a source for stories, and advertising revenue as a profit source, making them more susceptible to spin.\nSpin in the United Kingdom began to break down with the high-profile resignations of the architects of spin within the New Labour government, with Charlie Whelan resigning as Gordon Brown's spokesman in 1999 and Alastair Campbell resigning as Tony Blair's Press Secretary in 2003. As information technology has increased since the end of the 20th century, commentators like Joe Trippi have advanced the theory that modern Internet activism spells the end for political spin, in that the Internet may reduce the effectiveness of spin by providing immediate counterpoints.\nExamples of spin doctors.\nSpin doctors can either command media attention or remain anonymous. Examples from the UK include Jamie Shea during his time as NATO's press secretary throughout the Kosovo War, Charlie Whelan, and Alastair Campbell.\nCampbell, previously a journalist before becoming Tony Blair's Press Secretary, was the driving force behind a government that was able to produce the message it wanted in the media. He played a key role in important decisions, with advisors viewing him as a 'Deputy Prime Minister' inseparable from Blair. Campbell identifies how he was able to spin Rupert Murdoch, during a meeting in July 1995, into positively reporting an upcoming Blair speech, gathering the support from \"The Sun\" and \"The Times\", popular British newspapers. Campbell later acknowledged that his and the government's spinning had contributed to the electorate's growing distrust of politicians, and he asserted that spin must cease.\n\"Spin doctors\" such as Shea praised and respected Campbell's work. In 1999, during the beginning of NATO's intervention in Kosovo, Shea's media strategy was non-existent before the arrival of Campbell and his team. Campbell taught Shea how to organise his team to deliver what he wanted to be in the media, which led to Shea being appreciated for his work by President Bill Clinton.\nTechniques.\nSome spin techniques include:\nFor years, businesses have used fake or misleading customer testimonials by editing/spinning customers to reflect a much more satisfied experience than was actually the case. In 2009, the Federal Trade Commission updated their laws to include measures to prohibit this type of \"spinning\" and have been enforcing these laws as of late.\nImpact on elections.\nThe extent of the impact of \"spin doctors\" is contested, though their presence is still recognized in the political environment. The 1997 General election in the United Kingdom saw a landslide victory for New Labour with a 10.3% swing from Conservative to Labour, with help from newspapers such as \"The Sun\" towards which Alastair Campbell focused his spinning tactics as he greatly valued their support. The famous newspaper headline 'The Sun Backs Blair' was a key turning point in the campaign which provided New Labour with a lot of confidence and hope of increased electoral support. The change in political alignment had an impact on the electorate, with the number of individuals voting for Labour that read switching newspapers rising by 19.4%, compared to only 10.8% by those that did not read switching newspapers; a study conducted by Ladd and Lenz.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66253", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66253", "title": "Senator Homer E. Capehart of Indiana", "text": ""}
{"id": "66254", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66254", "title": "Drinking", "text": "Ingestion of water or other liquids\nDrinking is the act of ingesting water or other liquids into the body through the mouth, proboscis, or elsewhere. Humans drink by swallowing, completed by peristalsis in the esophagus. The physiological processes of drinking vary widely among other animals.\nMost animals drink water to maintain bodily hydration, although many can survive on the water gained from their food. Water is required for many physiological processes. Both inadequate and (less commonly) excessive water intake are associated with health problems.\nMethods of drinking.\nIn humans.\nWhen a liquid enters a human mouth, the swallowing process is completed by peristalsis which delivers the liquid through the esophagus to the stomach; much of the activity is assisted by gravity. The liquid may be poured from the hands or drinkware may be used as vessels. Drinking can also be by sipping or sucking, typically when imbibing hot liquids or drinking from a spoon. Infants employ a method of suction wherein the lips are pressed tight around a source, as in breastfeeding: a combination of breath and tongue movement creates a vacuum which draws in liquid.\nIn other land mammals.\nBy necessity, terrestrial animals in captivity become accustomed to drinking water, but most free-roaming animals stay hydrated through the fluids and moisture in fresh food, and learn to actively seek foods with high fluid content. When conditions impel them to drink from bodies of water, the methods and motions differ greatly among species.\nCats, canines, and ruminants all lower the neck and lap in water with their powerful tongues. Cats and canines lap up water with the tongue in a spoon-like shape. Canines lap water by scooping it into their mouth with a tongue which has taken the shape of a ladle. However, with cats, only the tip of their tongue (which is smooth) touches the water, and then the cat quickly pulls its tongue back into its mouth which soon closes; this results in a column of liquid being pulled into the cat's mouth, which is then secured by its mouth closing. Ruminants and most other herbivores partially submerge the tip of the mouth in order to draw in water by means of a plunging action with the tongue held straight. Cats drink at a significantly slower pace than ruminants, who face greater natural predation hazards.\nMany desert animals do not drink even if water becomes available, but rely on eating succulent plants. In cold and frozen environments, some animals like hares, tree squirrels, and bighorn sheep resort to consuming snow and icicles. In savannas, the drinking method of giraffes has been a source of speculation for its apparent defiance of gravity; the most recent theory contemplates the animal's long neck functions like a plunger pump. Uniquely, elephants draw water into their trunks and squirt it into their mouths.\nIn birds.\nMost birds scoop or draw water into the buccal areas of their bills, raising and tilting their heads back to drink. An exception is the common pigeon, which can suck in water directly by inhalation.\nIn insects.\nMost insects obtain adequate water from their food: When dehydrated from a lack of moist food, however, many species will drink from standing water. Additionally, all terrestrial insects constantly absorb a certain amount of the air's humidity through their cuticles. Some desert insects, such as \"Onymacris unguicularis\", have evolved to drink substantially from nighttime fog.\nIn marine life.\nAmphibians and aquatic animals which live in freshwater do not need to drink: they absorb water steadily through the skin by osmosis. Saltwater fish, however, drink through the mouth as they swim, and purge the excess salt through the gills. Saltwater fishes do drink plenty of water and excrete a small volume of concentrated urine.\nHydration and dehydration.\nLike nearly all other life forms, humans require water for tissue hydration. Lack of hydration causes thirst, a desire to drink which is regulated by the hypothalamus in response to subtle changes in the body's electrolyte levels and blood volume. A decline in total body water is called dehydration and will eventually lead to death by hypernatremia. Methods used in the management of dehydration include assisted drinking or oral rehydration therapy.\nAn overconsumption of water can lead to water intoxication, which can dangerously dilute the concentration of salts in the body. Overhydration sometimes occurs among athletes and outdoor laborers, but it can also be a sign of disease or damage to the hypothalamus. A persistent desire to drink inordinate quantities of water is a psychological condition termed polydipsia. It is often accompanied by polyuria and may itself be a symptom of diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus.\nHuman water requirements.\nA daily intake of water is required for the normal physiological functioning of the human body. The USDA recommends a daily intake of \"total water\": not necessarily by drinking but by consumption of water contained in other beverages and foods. The recommended intake is 3.7 liters (appx. 1 gallon) per day for an adult male, and 2.7 liters (appx. 0.75 gallon) for an adult female.\nOther sources, however, claim that a high intake of fresh drinking water, separate and distinct from other sources of moisture, is necessary for good health \u2013 eight servings per day of eight fluid ounces (1.8 liters, or 0.5 gallon) is the amount recommended by many nutritionists, although there is no scientific evidence supporting this recommendation.\nEvidence-based hydration experts say that the amount of drinking water needed depends on ambient temperature, activity level, body size, and sweat rate. Research shows drinking when thirsty will maintain hydration to within about 2% of the needed level. Drinking beyond thirst might be beneficial for people who need to perform tasks that require intense concentration, and those with kidney disease, kidney stones, urinary tract infections, and people with a weak sense of thirst (which may include more older people).\nAlcoholic beverages.\nThe term \"drinking\" is often used metonymically for the consumption of alcoholic beverages. Most cultures throughout history have incorporated some number of the wide variety of \"strong drinks\" into their meals, celebrations, ceremonies, toasts and other occasions. Evidence of fermented drinks in human culture goes back as early as the Neolithic Period, and the first pictorial evidence can be found in Egypt around 4,000 BC.\nAlcohol consumption has developed into a variety of well-established drinking cultures around the world. Despite its popularity, alcohol consumption poses significant health risks. Alcohol abuse and the addiction of alcoholism are common maladies in developed countries worldwide. A high rate of consumption can also lead to cirrhosis, gastritis, gout, pancreatitis, hypertension, various forms of cancer, and numerous other illnesses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66255", "revid": "43901784", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66255", "title": "Bzip2", "text": "File compression software\nbzip2 is a free and open-source file compression program that uses the Burrows\u2013Wheeler algorithm. It only compresses single files and is not a file archiver. It relies on separate external utilities such as codice_1 for tasks such as handling multiple files, and other tools for encryption, and archive splitting.\nbzip2 was initially released in 1996 by Julian Seward. It compresses most files more effectively than older LZW and Deflate compression algorithms but is slower. bzip2 is particularly efficient for text data, and decompression is relatively fast. The algorithm uses several layers of compression techniques, such as run-length encoding (RLE), Burrows\u2013Wheeler transform (BWT), move-to-front transform (MTF), and Huffman coding. \nbzip2 compresses data in blocks between 100 and 900 kB and uses the Burrows\u2013Wheeler transform to convert frequently recurring character sequences into strings of identical letters. The move-to-front transform and Huffman coding are then applied. The compression performance is asymmetric, with decompression being faster than compression.\nThe algorithm has gone through multiple maintainers since its initial release, with Micah Snyder being the maintainer since June 2021. There have been some modifications to the algorithm, such as pbzip2 and lbzip2, which use multi-threading to improve compression speed on multi-CPU and multi-core computers.\nbzip2 is suitable for use in big data applications with cluster computing frameworks like Hadoop and Apache Spark, as a compressed block can be decompressed without having to process earlier blocks.\nThe bundled \"bzip2recover\" utility tries recovering readable parts of damaged bzip2 data. It works by searching for individual blocks and dumping them into separate files.\nHistory.\nSeward made the first public release of bzip2, version 0.15, in July 1996. The compressor's stability and popularity grew over the next several years, and Seward released version 1.0 in late 2000. Following a nine-year hiatus of updates for the project since 2010, on 4 June 2019 Federico Mena accepted maintainership of the bzip2 project. Bzip2 version 1.0.8 was released 13 July 2019. Since June 2021, the maintainer is Micah Snyder.\nImplementation.\nbzip2 uses several layers of compression techniques stacked on top of each other, which occur in the following order during compression and the reverse order during decompression:\nAny sequence of 4 to 255 consecutive duplicate symbols is replaced by the first 4 symbols and a repeat length between 0 and 251. Thus the sequence codice_2 is replaced with codice_3, where codice_4 and codice_5 represent byte values 3 and 0 respectively. Runs of symbols are always transformed after 4 consecutive symbols, even if the run-length is set to zero, to keep the transformation reversible.\nIn the worst case, it can cause an expansion of 1.25, and in the best case, a reduction to &lt;0.02. While the specification theoretically allows for runs of length 256\u2013259 to be encoded, the reference encoder will not produce such output.\nThe author of bzip2 has stated that the RLE step was a historical mistake and was only intended to protect the original BWT implementation from pathological cases.\nThe Burrows\u2013Wheeler transform is the reversible block-sort that is at the core of bzip2. The block is entirely self-contained, with input and output buffers remaining of the same size\u2014in bzip2, the operating limit for this stage is 900 kB. For the block-sort, a (notional) matrix is created, in which row \"i\" contains the whole of the buffer, rotated to start from the \"i\"-th symbol. Following rotation, the rows of the matrix are sorted into alphabetic (numerical) order. A 24-bit pointer is stored marking the \"starting position\" for when the block is untransformed. In practice, it is not necessary to construct the full matrix; rather, the sort is performed using pointers for each position in the buffer. The output buffer is the last column of the matrix; this contains the whole buffer, but reordered so that it is likely to contain large runs of identical symbols.\nThe move-to-front transform again does not alter the size of the processed block. Each of the symbols in use in the document is placed in an array. When a symbol is processed, it is replaced by its location (index) in the array and that symbol is shuffled to the front of the array. The effect is that immediately recurring symbols are replaced by zero symbols (long runs of \"any\" arbitrary symbol thus become runs of zero symbols), while other symbols are remapped according to their local frequency.\nMuch \"natural\" data contains identical symbols that recur within a limited range (text is a good example). As the MTF transform assigns low values to symbols that reappear frequently, this results in a data stream containing many symbols in the low integer range, many of them being identical (different recurring input symbols can actually map to the same output symbol). Such data can be very efficiently encoded by any legacy compression method.\nLong strings of zeros in the output of the move-to-front transform (which come from repeated symbols in the output of the BWT) are replaced by a sequence of two special codes, RUNA and RUNB, which represent the run-length as a binary number. Actual zeros are never encoded in the output; a lone zero becomes RUNA. (This step in fact is done at the same time as MTF is; whenever MTF would produce zero, it instead increases a counter to then encode with RUNA and RUNB.)\nThe sequence codice_6 would be represented as codice_7; codice_8 represents the value 5 as described below. The run-length code is terminated by reaching another normal symbol. This RLE process is more flexible than the initial RLE step, as it is able to encode arbitrarily long integers (in practice, this is usually limited by the block size, so that this step does not encode a run of more than ). The run-length is encoded in this fashion: assigning place values of 1 to the first bit, 2 to the second, 4 to the third, etc. in the sequence, multiply each place value in a RUNB spot by 2, and add all the resulting place values (for RUNA and RUNB values alike) together. This is similar to base-2 bijective numeration. Thus, the sequence codice_8 results in the value (1 + 2 \u00d7 2) = 5. As a more complicated example:\n RUNA RUNB RUNA RUNA RUNB (ABAAB)\n 1 2 4 8 16\n 1 4 4 8 32 = 49\nThis process replaces fixed-length symbols in the range 0\u2013258 with variable-length codes based on the frequency of use. More frequently used codes end up shorter (2\u20133 bits), whilst rare codes can be allocated up to 20 bits. The codes are selected carefully so that no sequence of bits can be confused for a different code.\nThe end-of-stream code is particularly interesting. If there are \"n\" different bytes (symbols) used in the uncompressed data, then the Huffman code will consist of two RLE codes (RUNA and RUNB), \"n\" \u2212 1 symbol codes and one end-of-stream code. Because of the combined result of the MTF and RLE encodings in the previous two steps, there is never any need to explicitly reference the first symbol in the MTF table (would be zero in the ordinary MTF), thus saving one symbol for the end-of-stream marker (and explaining why only \"n\" \u2212 1 symbols are coded in the Huffman tree). In the extreme case where only one symbol is used in the uncompressed data, there will be no symbol codes at all in the Huffman tree, and the entire block will consist of RUNA and RUNB (implicitly repeating the single byte) and an end-of-stream marker with value 2.\n 0: RUNA,\n 1: RUNB,\n 2\u2013257: byte values 0\u2013255,\n 258: end of stream, finish processing (could be as low as 2).\nSeveral identically sized Huffman tables can be used with a block if the gain from using them is greater than the cost of including the extra table. At least 2 and up to 6 tables can be present, with the most appropriate table being reselected before every 50 symbols processed. This has the advantage of having very responsive Huffman dynamics without having to continuously supply new tables, as would be required in DEFLATE. Run-length encoding in the previous step is designed to take care of codes that have an inverse probability of use higher than the shortest code Huffman code in use.\nIf multiple Huffman tables are in use, the selection of each table (numbered 0 to 5) is done from a list by a zero-terminated bit run between 1 and 6 bits in length. The selection is into a MTF list of the tables. Using this feature results in a maximal expansion of around 1.015, but generally less. This expansion is likely to be greatly over-shadowed by the advantage of selecting more appropriate Huffman tables, and the common-case of continuing to use the same Huffman table is represented as a single bit. Rather than unary encoding, effectively this is an extreme form of a Huffman tree, where each code has half the probability of the previous code.\nHuffman-code bit lengths are required to reconstruct each of the used canonical Huffman tables. Each bit length is stored as an encoded difference against the previous-code bit length. A zero bit (0) means that the previous bit length should be duplicated for the current code, whilst a one bit (1) means that a further bit should be read and the bit length incremented or decremented based on that value. In the common case a single bit is used per symbol per table and the worst case\u2014going from length 1 to length 20\u2014would require approximately 37 bits. As a result of the earlier MTF encoding, code lengths would start at 2\u20133 bits long (very frequently used codes) and gradually increase, meaning that the delta format is fairly efficient, requiring around 300 bits (38 bytes) per full Huffman table.\nA bitmap is used to show which symbols are used inside the block and should be included in the Huffman trees. Binary data is likely to use all 256 symbols representable by a byte, whereas textual data may only use a small subset of available values, perhaps covering the ASCII range between 32 and 126. Storing 256 zero bits would be inefficient if they were mostly unused. A \"sparse\" method is used: the 256 symbols are divided up into 16 ranges, and only if symbols are used within that block is a 16-bit array included. The presence of each of these 16 ranges is indicated by an additional 16-bit bit array at the front. The total bitmap uses between 32 and 272 bits of storage (4\u201334 bytes). For contrast, the DEFLATE algorithm would show the absence of symbols by encoding the symbols as having a zero bit length with run-length encoding and additional Huffman coding.\nFile format.\nNo formal specification for bzip2 exists, although an informal specification has been reverse engineered from the reference implementation.\nAs an overview, a codice_10 stream consists of a 4-byte header, followed by zero or more compressed blocks, immediately followed by an end-of-stream marker containing a 32-bit CRC for the plaintext whole stream processed. The compressed blocks are bit-aligned and no padding occurs.\nBecause of the first-stage RLE compression (see above), the maximum length of plaintext that a single 900\u00a0kB bzip2 block can contain is around 46\u00a0MB (45,899,236\u00a0bytes). This can occur if the whole plaintext consists entirely of repeated values (the resulting codice_10 file in this case is 46\u00a0bytes long). An even smaller file of 40\u00a0bytes can be achieved by using an input containing entirely values of 251, an apparent compression ratio of 1147480.9:1.\nA compressed block in bzip2 can be decompressed without having to process earlier blocks. This means that bzip2 files can be decompressed in parallel, making it a good format for use in big data applications with cluster computing frameworks like Hadoop and Apache Spark.\nEfficiency.\nbzip2 compresses most files more effectively than the older LZW (.Z) and Deflate (.zip and .gz) compression algorithms, but is considerably slower. LZMA is generally more space-efficient than bzip2 at the expense of even slower compression speed, while having faster decompression.\nbzip2 compresses data in blocks of size between 100 and 900 kB and uses the Burrows\u2013Wheeler transform to convert frequently-recurring character sequences into strings of identical letters. It then applies move-to-front transform and Huffman coding. bzip2's ancestor bzip used arithmetic coding instead of Huffman. The change was made because of a software patent restriction. bzip3, a modern compressor that shares common ancestry and set of algorithms with bzip2, switched back to arithmetic coding.\nbzip2 performance is asymmetric, as decompression is relatively fast. Motivated by the long time required for compression, a modified version was created in 2003 called pbzip2 that used multi-threading to encode the file in multiple chunks, giving almost linear speedup on multi-CPU and multi-core computers. As of \u00a02010[ [update]], this functionality has not been incorporated into the main project.\nLike gzip, bzip2 is only a data compressor. It is not an archiver like tar or ZIP; the bzip2 file format does not support storing the contents of multiple files in a single compressed file, and the program itself has no facilities for multiple files, encryption or archive-splitting. In the UNIX tradition, archiving could be done by a separate program producing an archive which is then compressed with bzip2, and un-archiving could be done by bzip2 uncompressing the compressed archive file and a separate program decompressing it. Some archivers have built-in support for compression and decompression, so that it is not necessary to use the bzip2 program to compress or decompress the archive. GnuPG also has built-in support for bzip2 compression and decompression.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66256", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66256", "title": "Proportional\u2013integral\u2013derivative controller", "text": "Control loop feedback mechanism\nA proportional\u2013integral\u2013derivative controller (PID controller or three-term controller) is a feedback-based control loop mechanism commonly used to manage machines and processes that require continuous control and automatic adjustment. It is typically used in industrial control systems and various other applications where constant control through modulation is necessary without human intervention. The PID controller automatically compares the desired target value (setpoint or SP) with the actual value of the system (process variable or PV). The difference between these two values is called the \"error value\", denoted as formula_1.\nIt then applies corrective actions automatically to bring the PV to the same value as the SP using three methods: The proportional (P) component responds to the current error value by producing an output that is directly proportional to the magnitude of the error. This provides immediate correction based on how far the system is from the desired setpoint. The integral (I) component, in turn, considers the cumulative sum of past errors to address any residual steady-state errors that persist over time, eliminating lingering discrepancies. Lastly, the derivative (D) component predicts future error by assessing the rate of change of the error, which helps to mitigate overshoot and enhance system stability, particularly when the system undergoes rapid changes. The PID output signal can directly control actuators through voltage, current, or other modulation methods, depending on the application. The PID controller reduces the likelihood of human error and improves automation.\nA common example is a vehicle\u2019s cruise control system. For instance, when a vehicle encounters a hill, its speed will decrease if the engine power output is kept constant. The PID controller adjusts the engine's power output to restore the vehicle to its desired speed, doing so efficiently with minimal delay and overshoot.\nThe theoretical foundation of PID controllers dates back to the early 1920s with the development of automatic steering systems for ships. This concept was later adopted for automatic process control in manufacturing, first appearing in pneumatic actuators and evolving into electronic controllers. PID controllers are widely used in numerous applications requiring accurate, stable, and optimized automatic control, such as temperature regulation, motor speed control, and industrial process management.\nFundamental operation.\nThe distinguishing feature of the PID controller is the ability to use the three \"control terms\" of proportional, integral and derivative influence on the controller output to apply accurate and optimal control. The block diagram on the right shows the principles of how these terms are generated and applied. It shows a PID controller, which continuously calculates an \"error value\" formula_1 as the difference between a desired setpoint formula_3 and a measured process variable formula_4: formula_5, and applies a correction based on proportional, integral, and derivative terms. The controller attempts to minimize the error over time by adjustment of a \"control variable\" formula_6, such as the opening of a control valve, to a new value determined by a weighted sum of the control terms.\nThe PID controller directly generates a continuous control signal based on error, without discrete modulation.\nIn this model:\nTuning \u2013 The balance of these effects is achieved by loop tuning to produce the optimal control function. The tuning constants are shown below as \"K\" and must be derived for each control application, as they depend on the response characteristics of the physical system, external to the controller. These are dependent on the behavior of the measuring sensor, the final control element (such as a control valve), any control signal delays, and the process itself. Approximate values of constants can usually be initially entered knowing the type of application, but they are normally refined, or tuned, by introducing a setpoint change and observing the system response.\nControl action \u2013 The mathematical model and practical loop above both use a \"direct\" control action for all the terms, which means an increasing positive error results in an increasing positive control output correction. This is because the \"error\" term is not the deviation from the setpoint (actual-desired) but is in fact the correction needed (desired-actual). The system is called \"reverse\" acting if it is necessary to apply negative corrective action. For instance, if the valve in the flow loop was 100\u20130% valve opening for 0\u2013100% control output, meaning that the controller action has to be reversed. Some process control schemes and final control elements require this reverse action. An example would be a valve for cooling water, where the fail-safe mode, in the case of signal loss, would be 100% opening of the valve; therefore 0% controller output needs to cause 100% valve opening.\nControl function.\nThe overall control function is\nformula_8\nwhere formula_9, formula_10, and formula_11, all non-negative, denote the coefficients for the proportional, integral, and derivative terms respectively (sometimes denoted \"P\", \"I\", and \"D\").\nStandard form.\nIn the \"standard form\" of the equation (see later in article), formula_10 and formula_11 are respectively replaced by formula_14 and formula_15; the advantage of this being that formula_16 and formula_17 have some understandable physical meaning, as they represent an integration time and a derivative time respectively. formula_15 is the time constant with which the controller will attempt to approach the set point. formula_14 determines how long the controller will tolerate the output being consistently above or below the set point.\nformula_20\nwhere\nformula_21 is the integration time constant, and\nformula_22 is the derivative time constant.\nSelective use of control terms.\nAlthough a PID controller has three control terms, some applications need only one or two terms to provide appropriate control. This is achieved by setting the unused parameters to zero and is called a PI, PD, P, or I controller in the absence of the other control actions. PI controllers are fairly common in applications where derivative action would be sensitive to measurement noise, but the integral term is often needed for the system to reach its target value.\nApplicability.\nThe use of the PID algorithm does not guarantee optimal control of the system or its control stability &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. Situations may occur where there are excessive delays: the measurement of the process value is delayed, or the control action does not apply quickly enough. In these cases, lead\u2013lag compensation is required to be effective. The response of the controller can be described in terms of its responsiveness to an error, the degree to which the system overshoots a setpoint, and the degree of any system oscillation. But the PID controller is broadly applicable since it relies only on the response of the measured process variable, not on knowledge or a model of the underlying process.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe centrifugal governor was invented by Christiaan Huygens in the 17th century to regulate the gap between millstones in windmills depending on the speed of rotation, and thereby compensate for the variable speed of grain feed.\nWith the invention of the low-pressure stationary steam engine, there was a need for automatic speed control, and James Watt's self-designed \"conical pendulum\" governor, a set of revolving steel balls attached to a vertical spindle by link arms, came to be an industry standard. This was based on the millstone-gap control concept.\nRotating-governor speed control, however, was still variable under conditions of varying load, where the shortcoming of what is now known as proportional control alone was evident. The error between the desired speed and the actual speed would increase with increasing load. In the 19th century, the theoretical basis for the operation of governors was first described by James Clerk Maxwell in 1868 in his now-famous paper \"On Governors\". He explored the mathematical basis for control stability and progressed a good way towards a solution, but made an appeal for mathematicians to examine the problem. The problem was examined further in 1874 by Edward Routh, Charles Sturm, and in 1895, Adolf Hurwitz, all of whom contributed to the establishment of control stability criteria.\nIn subsequent applications, speed governors were further refined, notably by American scientist Willard Gibbs, who in 1872 theoretically analyzed Watt's conical pendulum governor.\nAbout this time, the invention of the Whitehead torpedo posed a control problem that required accurate control of the running depth. Use of a depth pressure sensor alone proved inadequate, and a pendulum that measured the fore and aft pitch of the torpedo was combined with depth measurement to become the pendulum-and-hydrostat control. Pressure control provided only a proportional control that, if the control gain was too high, would become unstable and go into overshoot with considerable instability of depth-holding. The pendulum added what is now known as derivative control, which damped the oscillations by detecting the torpedo dive/climb angle and thereby the rate-of-change of depth. This development (named by Whitehead as \"The Secret\" to give no clue to its action) was around 1868.\nAnother early example of a PID-type controller was developed by Elmer Sperry in 1911 for ship steering, though his work was intuitive rather than mathematically-based.\nIt was not until 1922, however, that a formal control law for what we now call PID or three-term control was first developed using theoretical analysis, by Russian American engineer Nicolas Minorsky. Minorsky was researching and designing automatic ship steering for the US Navy and based his analysis on observations of a helmsman. He noted the helmsman steered the ship based not only on the current course error but also on past error, as well as the current rate of change; this was then given a mathematical treatment by Minorsky.\nHis goal was stability, not general control, which simplified the problem significantly. While proportional control provided stability against small disturbances, it was insufficient for dealing with a steady disturbance, notably a stiff gale (due to steady-state error), which required adding the integral term. Finally, the derivative term was added to improve stability and control.\nTrials were carried out on the USS \"New Mexico\", with the controllers controlling the \"angular velocity\" (not the angle) of the rudder. PI control yielded sustained yaw (angular error) of \u00b12\u00b0. Adding the D element yielded a yaw error of \u00b11/6\u00b0, better than most helmsmen could achieve.\nThe Navy ultimately did not adopt the system due to resistance by personnel. Similar work was carried out and published by several others in the 1930s.\nIndustrial control.\nThe wide use of feedback controllers did not become feasible until the development of wideband high-gain amplifiers to use the concept of negative feedback. This had been developed in telephone engineering electronics by Harold Black in the late 1920s, but not published until 1934. Independently, Clesson E Mason of the Foxboro Company in 1930 invented a wide-band pneumatic controller by combining the nozzle and flapper high-gain pneumatic amplifier, which had been invented in 1914, with negative feedback from the controller output. This dramatically increased the linear range of operation of the nozzle and flapper amplifier, and integral control could also be added by the use of a precision bleed valve and a bellows generating the integral term. The result was the \"Stabilog\" controller, which gave both proportional and integral functions using feedback bellows. The integral term was called \"Reset\". Later, the derivative term was added by a further bellows and adjustable orifice.\nFrom about 1932 onwards, the use of wideband pneumatic controllers increased rapidly in a variety of control applications. Air pressure was used for generating the controller output, and also for powering process modulating devices such as diaphragm-operated control valves. They were simple low maintenance devices that operated well in harsh industrial environments and did not present explosion risks in hazardous locations. They were the industry standard for many decades until the advent of discrete electronic controllers and distributed control systems (DCSs).\nWith these controllers, a pneumatic industry signaling standard of was established, which had an elevated zero to ensure devices were working within their linear characteristic and represented the control range of 0-100%.\nIn the 1950s, when high-gain electronic amplifiers became cheap and reliable, electronic PID controllers became popular, and the pneumatic standard was emulated by 10-50 mA and 4\u201320 mA current loop signals (the latter became the industry standard). Pneumatic field actuators are still widely used because of the advantages of pneumatic energy for control valves in process plant environments.\nMost modern PID controls in industry are implemented as computer software in DCSs, programmable logic controllers (PLCs), or discrete compact controllers.\nElectronic analog controllers.\nElectronic analog PID control loops were often found within more complex electronic systems, for example, the head positioning of a disk drive, the power conditioning of a power supply, or even the movement-detection circuit of a modern seismometer. Discrete electronic analog controllers have been largely replaced by digital controllers using microcontrollers or FPGAs to implement PID algorithms. However, discrete analog PID controllers are still used in niche applications requiring high-bandwidth and low-noise performance, such as laser-diode controllers.\nControl loop example.\nConsider a robotic arm that can be moved and positioned by a control loop. An electric motor may lift or lower the arm, depending on forward or reverse power applied, but power cannot be a simple function of position because of the inertial mass of the arm, forces due to gravity, external forces on the arm such as a load to lift or work to be done on an external object.\nThe PID controller continuously adjusts the input current to achieve smooth motion.\nBy measuring the position (PV) and subtracting it from the setpoint (SP), the error (e) is found, and from it, the controller calculates how much electric current to supply to the motor (MV).\nProportional.\nThe obvious method is proportional control: the motor current is set in proportion to the existing error. However, this method fails if, for instance, the arm has to lift different weights: a greater weight needs a greater force applied for the same error on the down side, but a smaller force if the error is low on the upside. That's where the integral and derivative terms play their part.\nIntegral.\nAn integral term increases action in relation not only to the error but also the time for which it has persisted. So, if the applied force is not enough to bring the error to zero, this force will be increased as time passes. A pure \"I\" controller could bring the error to zero, but it would be both weakly reacting at the start (because the action would be small at the beginning, depending on time to become significant) and more aggressive at the end (the action increases as long as the error is positive, even if the error is near zero).\nApplying too much integral when the error is small and decreasing will lead to overshoot. After overshooting, if the controller were to apply a large correction in the opposite direction and repeatedly overshoot the desired position, the output would oscillate around the setpoint in either a constant, growing, or decaying sinusoid. If the amplitude of the oscillations increases with time, the system is unstable. If it decreases, the system is stable. If the oscillations remain at a constant magnitude, the system is marginally stable.\nDerivative.\nA derivative term does not consider the magnitude of the error (meaning it cannot bring it to zero: a pure D controller cannot bring the system to its setpoint), but rather the rate of change of error, trying to bring this rate to zero. It aims at flattening the error trajectory into a horizontal line, damping the force applied, and so reduces overshoot (error on the other side because of too great applied force).\nControl damping.\nIn the interest of achieving a controlled arrival at the desired position (SP) in a timely and accurate way, the controlled system needs to be critically damped. A well-tuned position control system will also apply the necessary currents to the controlled motor so that the arm pushes and pulls as necessary to resist external forces trying to move it away from the required position. The setpoint itself may be generated by an external system, such as a PLC or other computer system, so that it continuously varies depending on the work that the robotic arm is expected to do. A well-tuned PID control system will enable the arm to meet these changing requirements to the best of its capabilities.\nResponse to disturbances.\nIf a controller starts from a stable state with zero error (PV = SP), then further changes by the controller will be in response to changes in other measured or unmeasured inputs to the process that affect the process, and hence the PV. Variables that affect the process other than the MV are known as disturbances. Generally, controllers are used to reject disturbances and to implement setpoint changes. A change in load on the arm constitutes a disturbance to the robot arm control process.\nApplications.\nIn theory, a controller can be used to control any process that has a measurable output (PV), a known ideal value for that output (SP), and an input to the process (MV) that will affect the relevant PV. Controllers are used in industry to regulate temperature, pressure, force, feed rate, flow rate, chemical composition (component concentrations), weight, position, speed, and practically every other variable for which a measurement exists.\n\"This section describes the parallel or non-interacting form of the PID controller. For other forms please see .\"\nController theory.\nThe PID control scheme is named after its three correcting terms, whose sum constitutes the manipulated variable (MV). The proportional, integral, and derivative terms are summed to calculate the output of the PID controller. Defining formula_6 as the controller output, the final form of the PID algorithm is\nformula_24\nwhere\n formula_9 is the proportional gain, a tuning parameter,\n formula_10 is the integral gain, a tuning parameter,\n formula_11 is the derivative gain, a tuning parameter,\n formula_28 is the error (SP is the setpoint, and PV(\"t\") is the process variable),\n formula_29 is the time or instantaneous time (the present),\n formula_30 is the variable of integration (takes on values from time 0 to the present formula_29).\nEquivalently, the transfer function in the Laplace domain of the PID controller is\nformula_32\nformula_33\nwhere formula_34 is the complex angular frequency.\nProportional term.\nThe proportional term produces an output value that is proportional to the current error value. The proportional response can be adjusted by multiplying the error by a constant \"K\"p, called the proportional gain constant.\nThe proportional term is given by\nformula_35\nA high proportional gain results in a large change in the output for a given change in the error. If the proportional gain is too high, the system can become unstable (see the section on loop tuning). In contrast, a small gain results in a small output response to a large input error, and a less responsive or less sensitive controller. If the proportional gain is too low, the control action may be too small when responding to system disturbances. Tuning theory and industrial practice indicate that the proportional term should contribute the bulk of the output change.\nSteady-state error.\nThe steady-state error is the difference between the desired final output and the actual one. Because a non-zero error is required to drive it, a proportional controller generally operates with a steady-state error. Steady-state error (SSE) is proportional to the process gain and inversely proportional to proportional gain. SSE may be mitigated by adding a compensating bias term to the setpoint AND output or corrected dynamically by adding an integral term.\nIntegral term.\nThe contribution from the integral term is proportional to both the magnitude of the error and the duration of the error. The integral in a PID controller is the sum of the instantaneous error over time and gives the accumulated offset that should have been corrected previously. The accumulated error is then multiplied by the integral gain (\"K\"i) and added to the controller output.\nThe integral term is given by\nformula_36\nThe integral term accelerates the movement of the process towards setpoint and eliminates the residual steady-state error that occurs with a pure proportional controller. However, since the integral term responds to accumulated errors from the past, it can cause the present value to overshoot the setpoint value (see the section on loop tuning).\nDerivative term.\nThe derivative of the process error is calculated by determining the slope of the error over time and multiplying this rate of change by the derivative gain \"K\"d. The magnitude of the contribution of the derivative term to the overall control action is termed the derivative gain, \"K\"d.\nThe derivative term is given by\nformula_37\nDerivative action predicts system behavior and thus improves settling time and stability of the system. An ideal derivative is not causal, so that implementations of PID controllers include an additional low-pass filtering for the derivative term to limit the high-frequency gain and noise. Derivative action is seldom used in practice, though \u2013 by one estimate in only 25% of deployed controllers \u2013 because of its variable impact on system stability in real-world applications.\nLoop tuning.\n\"Tuning\" a control loop is the adjustment of its control parameters (proportional band/gain, integral gain/reset, derivative gain/rate) to the optimum values for the desired control response. Stability (no unbounded oscillation) is a basic requirement, but beyond that, different systems have different behavior, different applications have different requirements, and requirements may conflict with one another.\nEven though there are only three parameters and it is simple to describe in principle, PID tuning is a difficult problem because it must satisfy complex criteria within the limitations of PID control. Accordingly, there are various methods for loop tuning, and more sophisticated techniques are the subject of patents; this section describes some traditional, manual methods for loop tuning.\nDesigning and tuning a PID controller appears to be conceptually intuitive, but can be hard in practice, if multiple (and often conflicting) objectives, such as short transient and high stability, are to be achieved. PID controllers often provide acceptable control using default tunings, but performance can generally be improved by careful tuning, and performance may be unacceptable with poor tuning. Usually, initial designs need to be adjusted repeatedly through computer simulations until the closed-loop system performs or compromises as desired.\nSome processes have a degree of nonlinearity, so parameters that work well at full-load conditions do not work when the process is starting up from no load. This can be corrected by gain scheduling (using different parameters in different operating regions).\nStability.\nIf the PID controller parameters (the gains of the proportional, integral and derivative terms) are chosen incorrectly, the controlled process input can be unstable; i.e., its output diverges, with or without oscillation, and is limited only by saturation or mechanical breakage. Instability is caused by \"excess\" gain, particularly in the presence of significant lag.\nGenerally, stabilization of response is required and the process must not oscillate for any combination of process conditions and setpoints, though sometimes marginal stability (bounded oscillation) is acceptable or desired.\nMathematically, the origins of instability can be seen in the Laplace domain.\nThe closed-loop transfer function is\n formula_38\nwhere formula_39 is the PID transfer function, and formula_40 is the plant transfer function. A system is \"unstable\" where the closed-loop transfer function diverges for some formula_34. This happens in situations where formula_42. In other words, this happens when formula_43 with a 180\u00b0 phase shift. Stability is guaranteed when formula_44 for frequencies that suffer high phase shifts. A more general formalism of this effect is known as the Nyquist stability criterion.\nOptimal behavior.\nThe optimal behavior on a process change or setpoint change varies depending on the application.\nTwo basic requirements are \"regulation\" (disturbance rejection\u00a0\u2013 staying at a given setpoint) and \"command tracking\" (implementing setpoint changes). These terms refer to how well the controlled variable tracks the desired value. Specific criteria for command tracking include rise time and settling time. Some processes must not allow an overshoot of the process variable beyond the setpoint if, for example, this would be unsafe. Other processes must minimize the energy expended in reaching a new setpoint.\nOverview of tuning methods.\nThere are several methods for tuning a PID loop. The most effective methods generally involve developing some form of process model and then choosing P, I, and D based on the dynamic model parameters. Manual tuning methods can be relatively time-consuming, particularly for systems with long loop times.\nThe choice of method depends largely on whether the loop can be taken offline for tuning, and on the response time of the system. If the system can be taken offline, the best tuning method often involves subjecting the system to a step change in input, measuring the output as a function of time, and using this response to determine the control parameters.\nManual tuning.\nIf the system must remain online, one tuning method is to first set formula_45 and formula_46 values to zero. Increase the formula_47 until the output of the loop oscillates; then set formula_47 to approximately half that value for a \"quarter amplitude decay\"-type response. Then increase formula_45 until any offset is corrected in sufficient time for the process, but not until too great a value causes instability. Finally, increase formula_46, if required, until the loop is acceptably quick to reach its reference after a load disturbance. Too much formula_47 causes excessive response and overshoot. A fast PID loop tuning usually overshoots slightly to reach the setpoint more quickly; however, some systems cannot accept overshoot, in which case an overdamped closed-loop system is required, which in turn requires a formula_47 setting significantly less than half that of the formula_47 setting that was causing oscillation.\nZiegler\u2013Nichols method.\nAnother heuristic tuning method is known as the Ziegler\u2013Nichols method, introduced by John G. Ziegler and Nathaniel B. Nichols in the 1940s. As in the method above, the formula_45 and formula_46 gains are first set to zero. The proportional gain is increased until it reaches the ultimate gain formula_56 at which the output of the loop starts to oscillate constantly. formula_56 and the oscillation period formula_58 are used to set the gains as follows:\nThe oscillation frequency is often measured instead, and the reciprocals of each multiplication yields the same result.\nThese gains apply to the ideal, parallel form of the PID controller. When applied to the standard PID form, only the integral and derivative gains formula_45 and formula_46 are dependent on the oscillation period formula_58.\nCohen\u2013Coon parameters.\nThis method was developed in 1953 and is based on a first-order + time delay model. Similar to the Ziegler\u2013Nichols method, a set of tuning parameters were developed to yield a closed-loop response with a decay ratio of formula_62. Arguably, the biggest problem with these parameters is that a small change in the process parameters could potentially cause a closed-loop system to become unstable.\nRelay (\u00c5str\u00f6m\u2013H\u00e4gglund) method.\nPublished in 1984 by Karl Johan \u00c5str\u00f6m and Tore H\u00e4gglund, the relay method temporarily operates the process using bang-bang control and measures the resultant oscillations. The output is switched (as if by a relay, hence the name) between two values of the control variable. The values must be chosen so the process will cross the setpoint, but they need not be 0% and 100%; by choosing suitable values, dangerous oscillations can be avoided.\nAs long as the process variable is below the setpoint, the control output is set to the higher value. As soon as it rises above the setpoint, the control output is set to the lower value. Ideally, the output waveform is nearly square, spending equal time above and below the setpoint. The period and amplitude of the resultant oscillations are measured and used to compute the ultimate gain and period, which are then fed into the Ziegler\u2013Nichols method.\nSpecifically, the ultimate period formula_58 is assumed to be equal to the observed period, and the ultimate gain is computed as formula_64 where a is the amplitude of the process variable oscillation, and b is the amplitude of the control output change which caused it.\nThere are numerous variants on the relay method.\nFirst-order model with dead time.\nThe transfer function for a first-order process with dead time is\n formula_65\nwhere \"k\"p is the process gain, \"\u03c4\"p is the time constant, \"\u03b8\" is the dead time, and \"u\"(\"s\") is a step change input. Converting this transfer function to the time domain results in\n formula_66\nusing the same parameters found above.\nIt is important when using this method to apply a large enough step-change input that the output can be measured; however, too large of a step change can affect the process stability. Additionally, a larger step change ensures that the output does not change due to a disturbance (for best results, try to minimize disturbances when performing the step test).\nOne way to determine the parameters for the first-order process is to use the 63.2% method. In this method, the process gain (\"k\"p) is equal to the change in output divided by the change in input. The dead time \"\u03b8\" is the amount of time between when the step change occurred and when the output first changed. The time constant (\"\u03c4\"p) is the amount of time it takes for the output to reach 63.2% of the new steady-state value after the step change. One downside to using this method is that it can take a while to reach a new steady-state value if the process has large time constants.\nTuning software.\nMost modern industrial facilities no longer tune loops using the manual calculation methods shown above. Instead, PID tuning and loop optimization software are used to ensure consistent results. These software packages gather data, develop process models, and suggest optimal tuning. Some software packages can even develop tuning by gathering data from reference changes.\nMathematical PID loop tuning induces an impulse in the system and then uses the controlled system's frequency response to design the PID loop values. In loops with response times of several minutes, mathematical loop tuning is recommended, because trial and error can take days just to find a stable set of loop values. Optimal values are harder to find. Some digital loop controllers offer a self-tuning feature in which very small setpoint changes are sent to the process, allowing the controller itself to calculate optimal tuning values.\nAnother approach calculates initial values via the Ziegler\u2013Nichols method, and uses a numerical optimization technique to find better PID coefficients.\nOther formulas are available to tune the loop according to different performance criteria. Many patented formulas are now embedded within PID tuning software and hardware modules.\nAdvances in automated PID loop tuning software also deliver algorithms for tuning PID Loops in a dynamic or non-steady state (NSS) scenario. The software models the dynamics of a process through a disturbance, and calculate PID control parameters in response.\nLimitations.\nWhile PID controllers are applicable to many control problems and often perform satisfactorily without any improvements or only coarse tuning, they can perform poorly in some applications and do not, in general, provide \"optimal\" control. The fundamental difficulty with PID control is that it is a feedback control system with \"constant\" parameters and no direct knowledge of the process, and thus, overall performance is reactive and a compromise. While PID control is the best controller for an observer that has no model of the process, better performance can be obtained by overtly modeling the actor of the process without resorting to an observer.\nPID controllers, when used alone, can give poor performance when the PID loop gains must be reduced so that the control system does not overshoot, oscillate or hunt about the control setpoint value. They also have difficulties in the presence of non-linearities, may trade-off regulation versus response time, do not react to changing process behavior (say, the process changes after it has warmed up), and have lag in responding to large disturbances.\nThe most significant improvement is to incorporate feed-forward control with knowledge about the system, and using the PID only to control error. Alternatively, PIDs can be modified in more minor ways, such as by changing the parameters (either gain scheduling in different use cases or adaptively modifying them based on performance), improving measurement (higher sampling rate, precision, and accuracy, and low-pass filtering if necessary), or cascading multiple PID controllers.\nLinearity and symmetry.\nPID controllers work best when the loop to be controlled is linear and symmetric. Thus, their performance in non-linear and asymmetric systems is degraded.\nA nonlinear valve in a flow control application, for instance, will result in variable loop sensitivity that requires damping to prevent instability. One solution is to include a model of the valve's nonlinearity in the control algorithm to compensate for this.\nAn asymmetric application, for example, is temperature control in HVAC systems that use only active heating (via a heating element), whereas only passive cooling is available. Overshoot of rising temperature can only be corrected slowly; active cooling is not available to force temperature downward as a function of the control output. In this case, the PID controller could be tuned to be over-damped, to prevent or reduce overshoot, but this reduces performance by increasing the settling time of a rising temperature to the set point. The inherent degradation of control quality in this application could be solved by application of active cooling.\nNoise in derivative term.\nA problem with the derivative term is that it amplifies higher frequency measurement or process noise that can cause large amounts of change in the output. It is often helpful to filter the measurements with a low-pass filter in order to remove higher-frequency noise components. As low-pass filtering and derivative control can cancel each other out, the amount of filtering is limited. Therefore, low-noise instrumentation can be important. A nonlinear median filter may be used, which improves the filtering efficiency and practical performance. In some cases, the differential band can be turned off with little loss of control. This is equivalent to using the PID controller as a PI controller.\nModifications to the algorithm.\nThe basic PID algorithm presents some challenges in control applications that have been addressed by minor modifications to the PID form.\nIntegral windup.\nOne common problem resulting from the ideal PID implementations is integral windup. Following a large change in setpoint, the integral term can accumulate an error larger than the maximal value for the regulation variable (windup), thus the system overshoots and continues to increase until this accumulated error is unwound. This problem can be addressed by:\nOvershooting from known disturbances.\nFor example, a PID loop is used to control the temperature of an electric resistance furnace where the system has stabilized. Now, when the door is opened and something cold is put into the furnace, the temperature drops below the setpoint. The integral function of the controller tends to compensate for error by introducing another error in the positive direction. This overshoot can be avoided by freezing of the integral function after the opening of the door for the time the control loop typically needs to reheat the furnace.\nPI controller.\nA PI controller (proportional-integral controller) is a special case of the PID controller in which the derivative (D) of the error is not used.\nThe controller output is given by\nformula_67\nwhere formula_68 is the error or deviation of actual measured value (PV) from the setpoint (SP).\nformula_69\nA PI controller can be modelled easily in software such as Simulink or Xcos using a \"flow chart\" box involving Laplace operators:\nformula_70\nwhere\nformula_71 = proportional gain\nformula_72 = integral gain\nSetting a value for formula_73 is often a trade off between decreasing overshoot and increasing settling time.\nThe lack of derivative action may make the system more steady in the steady state in the case of noisy data. This is because derivative action is more sensitive to higher-frequency terms in the inputs.\nWithout derivative action, a PI-controlled system is less responsive to real (non-noise) and relatively fast alterations in state, and so the system will be slower to reach setpoint and slower to respond to perturbations than a well-tuned PID system may be.\nDeadband.\nMany PID loops control a mechanical device (for example, a valve). Mechanical maintenance can be a major cost and wear leads to control degradation in the form of either stiction or backlash in the mechanical response to an input signal. The rate of mechanical wear is mainly a function of how often a device is activated to make a change. Where wear is a significant concern, the PID loop may have an output deadband to reduce the frequency of activation of the output (valve). This is accomplished by modifying the controller to hold its output steady if the change would be small (within the defined deadband range). The calculated output must leave the deadband before the actual output will change.\nSetpoint step change.\nThe proportional and derivative terms can produce excessive movement in the output when a system is subjected to an instantaneous step increase in the error, such as a large setpoint change. In the case of the derivative term, this is due to taking the derivative of the error, which is very large in the case of an instantaneous step change. As a result, some PID algorithms incorporate some of the following modifications:\nIn this modification, the setpoint is gradually moved from its old value to a newly specified value using a linear or first-order differential ramp function. This avoids the discontinuity present in a simple step change.\nIn this case, the PID controller measures the derivative of the measured PV, rather than the derivative of the error. This quantity is always continuous (i.e., never has a step change as a result of changed setpoint). This modification is a simple case of setpoint weighting.\nSetpoint weighting adds adjustable factors (usually between 0 and 1) to the setpoint in the error in the proportional and derivative element of the controller. The error in the integral term must be the true control error to avoid steady-state control errors. These two extra parameters do not affect the response to load disturbances and measurement noise and can be tuned to improve the controller's setpoint response.\nFeed-forward.\nThe control system performance can be improved by combining the feedback (or closed-loop) control of a PID controller with feed-forward (or open-loop) control. Knowledge about the system (such as the desired acceleration and inertia) can be fed forward and combined with the PID output to improve the overall system performance. The feed-forward value alone can often provide the major portion of the controller output. The PID controller primarily has to compensate for whatever difference or \"error\" remains between the setpoint (SP) and the system response to the open-loop control. Since the feed-forward output is not affected by the process feedback, it can never cause the control system to oscillate, thus improving the system response without affecting stability. Feed forward can be based on the setpoint and on extra measured disturbances. Setpoint weighting is a simple form of feed forward.\nFor example, in most motion control systems, in order to accelerate a mechanical load under control, more force is required from the actuator. If a velocity loop PID controller is being used to control the speed of the load and command the force being applied by the actuator, then it is beneficial to take the desired instantaneous acceleration, scale that value appropriately and add it to the output of the PID velocity loop controller. This means that whenever the load is being accelerated or decelerated, a proportional amount of force is commanded from the actuator regardless of the feedback value. The PID loop in this situation uses the feedback information to change the combined output to reduce the remaining difference between the process setpoint and the feedback value. Working together, the combined open-loop feed-forward controller and closed-loop PID controller can provide a more responsive control system.\nBumpless operation.\nPID controllers are often implemented with a \"bumpless\" initialization feature that recalculates the integral accumulator term to maintain a consistent process output through parameter changes. A partial implementation is to store the integral gain times the error rather than storing the error and postmultiplying by the integral gain, which prevents discontinuous output when the I gain is changed, but not the P or D gains.\nOther improvements.\nIn addition to feed-forward, PID controllers are often enhanced through methods such as PID gain scheduling (changing parameters in different operating conditions), fuzzy logic, or computational verb logic. Further practical application issues can arise from instrumentation connected to the controller. A high enough sampling rate, measurement precision, and measurement accuracy are required to achieve adequate control performance. Another new method for improvement of PID controller is to increase the degree of freedom by using fractional order. The order of the integrator and differentiator add increased flexibility to the controller.\nCascade control.\nOne distinctive advantage of PID controllers is that two PID controllers can be used together to yield better dynamic performance. This is called cascaded PID control. Two controllers are in cascade when they are arranged so that one regulates the set point of the other. A PID controller acts as outer loop controller, which controls the primary physical parameter, such as fluid level or velocity. The other controller acts as inner loop controller, which reads the output of outer loop controller as setpoint, usually controlling a more rapid changing parameter, flowrate or acceleration. It can be mathematically proven that the working frequency of the controller is increased and the time constant of the object is reduced by using cascaded PID controllers..\nFor example, a temperature-controlled circulating bath has two PID controllers in cascade, each with its own thermocouple temperature sensor. The outer controller controls the temperature of the water using a thermocouple located far from the heater, where it accurately reads the temperature of the bulk of the water. The error term of this PID controller is the difference between the desired bath temperature and measured temperature. Instead of controlling the heater directly, the outer PID controller sets a heater temperature goal for the inner PID controller. The inner PID controller controls the temperature of the heater using a thermocouple attached to the heater. The inner controller's error term is the difference between this heater temperature setpoint and the measured temperature of the heater. Its output controls the actual heater to stay near this setpoint.\nThe proportional, integral, and differential terms of the two controllers will be very different. The outer PID controller has a long time constant \u2013 all the water in the tank needs to heat up or cool down. The inner loop responds much more quickly. Each controller can be tuned to match the physics of the system \"it\" controls \u2013 heat transfer and thermal mass of the whole tank or of just the heater \u2013 giving better total response.\nAlternative nomenclature and forms.\nStandard versus parallel (ideal) form.\nThe form of the PID controller most often encountered in industry, and the one most relevant to tuning algorithms, is the \"standard form\". In this form the formula_47 gain is applied to the formula_75, and formula_76 terms, yielding:\nformula_77\nwhere\nformula_78 is the \"integral time\"\nformula_79 is the \"derivative time\"\nIn this standard form, the parameters have a clear physical meaning. In particular, the inner summation produces a new single error value, which is compensated for future and past errors. The proportional error term is the current error. The derivative components term attempts to predict the error value at formula_79 seconds (or samples) in the future, assuming that the loop control remains unchanged. The integral component adjusts the error value to compensate for the sum of all past errors, with the intention of completely eliminating them in formula_78 seconds (or samples). The resulting compensated single error value is then scaled by the single gain formula_47 to compute the control variable.\nIn the parallel form, shown in the controller theory section\nformula_83\nthe gain parameters are related to the parameters of the standard form through formula_84 and formula_85. This parallel form, where the parameters are treated as simple gains, is the most general and flexible form. However, it is also the form where the parameters have the weakest relationship to physical behaviors and is generally reserved for theoretical treatment of the PID controller. The standard form, despite being slightly more complex mathematically, is more common in industry.\nReciprocal gain, a.k.a. proportional band.\nIn many cases, the manipulated variable output by the PID controller is a dimensionless fraction between 0 and 100% of some maximum possible value, and the translation into real units (such as pumping rate or watts of heater power) is outside the PID controller. The process variable, however, is in dimensioned units such as temperature. It is common in this case to express the gain formula_47 not as \"output per degree\", but rather in the reciprocal form of a \"proportional band\" formula_87, which is \"degrees per full output\": the range over which the output changes from 0 to 1 (0% to 100%). Beyond this range, the output is saturated, full-off or full-on. The narrower this band, the higher the proportional gain.\nBasing derivative action on PV.\nIn most commercial control systems, derivative action is based on process variable rather than error. That is, a change in the setpoint does not affect the derivative action. This is because the digitized version of the algorithm produces a large unwanted spike when the setpoint is changed. If the setpoint is constant, then changes in the PV will be the same as changes in error. Therefore, this modification makes no difference to the way the controller responds to process disturbances.\nBasing proportional action on PV.\nMost commercial control systems offer the \"option\" of also basing the proportional action solely on the process variable. This means that only the integral action responds to changes in the setpoint. The modification to the algorithm does not affect the way the controller responds to process disturbances.\nBasing proportional action on PV eliminates the instant and possibly very large change in output caused by a sudden change to the setpoint. Depending on the process and tuning, this may be beneficial to the response to a setpoint step.\nformula_88\nKing describes an effective chart-based method.\nLaplace form.\nSometimes it is useful to write the PID regulator in Laplace transform form:\nformula_89\nHaving the PID controller written in Laplace form and having the transfer function of the controlled system makes it easy to determine the closed-loop transfer function of the system.\nSeries/interacting form.\nAnother representation of the PID controller is the series, or \"interacting\" form\nformula_90\nwhere the parameters are related to the parameters of the standard form through\nformula_91, formula_92, and\nformula_93\nwith\nformula_94.\nThis form essentially consists of a PD and PI controller in series. As the integral is required to calculate the controller's bias, this form provides the ability to track an external bias value, which is required to be used for proper implementation of multi-controller advanced control schemes.\nDiscrete implementation.\nThe analysis for designing a digital implementation of a PID controller in a microcontroller (MCU) or FPGA device requires the standard form of the PID controller to be \"discretized\". Approximations for first-order derivatives are made by backward finite differences. formula_6 and formula_1 are discretized with a sampling period formula_97, k is the sample index.\nDifferentiating both sides of PID equation using Newton's notation gives:\nformula_98\nDerivative terms are approximated as,\nformula_99\nSo,\nformula_100\nApplying backward difference again gives,\nformula_101\nBy simplifying and regrouping terms of the above equation, an algorithm for an implementation of the discretized PID controller in an MCU is finally obtained:\nformula_102\nor:\nformula_103\ns.t. formula_104\nNote: This method solves in fact formula_105 where formula_106 is a constant independent of t. This constant is useful when you want to have a start and stop control on the regulation loop. For instance, setting Kp,Ki and Kd to 0 will keep u(t) constant. Likewise, when you want to start a regulation on a system where the error is already close to 0 with u(t) non null, it prevents from sending the output to 0.\nPseudocode.\nHere is a very simple and explicit group of pseudocode that can be easily understood by the layman:\n previous_error := 0\n integral := 0\n loop:\n error := setpoint \u2212 measured_value\n proportional := error;\n integral := integral + error \u00d7 dt\n derivative := (error - previous_error) / dt\n output := Kp \u00d7 proportional + Ki \u00d7 integral + Kd \u00d7 derivative\n previous_error := error\n wait(dt)\n goto loop\nBelow a pseudocode illustrates how to implement a PID considering the PID as an IIR filter:\nThe Z-transform of a PID can be written as (formula_107 is the sampling time):\nformula_108\nand expressed in a IIR form (in agreement with the discrete implementation shown above):\nformula_109\nWe can then deduce the recursive iteration often found in FPGA implementation\nformula_110\n A0 := Kp + Ki*dt + Kd/dt\n A1 := -Kp - 2*Kd/dt\n A2 := Kd/dt\n error[2] := 0 // e(t-2)\n error[1] := 0 // e(t-1)\n error[0] := 0 // e(t)\n output := u0 // Usually the current value of the actuator\n loop:\n error[2] := error[1]\n error[1] := error[0]\n error[0] := setpoint \u2212 measured_value\n output := output + A0 * error[0] + A1 * error[1] + A2 * error[2]\n wait(dt)\n goto loop\nHere, Kp is a dimensionless number, Ki is expressed in formula_111 and Kd is expressed in s. When doing a regulation where the actuator and the measured value are not in the same unit (e.g., temperature regulation using a motor controlling a valve), Kp, Ki and Kd may be corrected by a unit conversion factor. It may also be interesting to use Ki in its reciprocal form (integration time). The above implementation allows to perform an I-only controller which may be useful in some cases.\nIn the real world, this is D-to-A converted and passed into the process under control as the manipulated variable (MV). The current error is stored elsewhere for re-use in the next differentiation, the program then waits until dt seconds have passed since start, and the loop begins again, reading in new values for the PV and the setpoint and calculating a new value for the error.\nNote that for real code, the use of \"wait(dt)\" might be inappropriate because it doesn't account for time taken by the algorithm itself during the loop, or more importantly, any pre-emption delaying the algorithm.\nA common issue when using formula_46 is the response to the derivative of a rising or falling edge of the setpoint, as shown below:\nA typical workaround is to filter the derivative action using a low pass filter of time constant formula_113 where formula_114:\nA variant of the above algorithm using an infinite impulse response (IIR) filter for the derivative:\n A0 := Kp + Ki*dt\n A1 := -Kp\n error[2] := 0 // e(t-2)\n error[1] := 0 // e(t-1)\n error[0] := 0 // e(t)\n output := u0 // Usually the current value of the actuator\n A0d := Kd/dt\n A1d := - 2.0*Kd/dt\n A2d := Kd/dt\n N := 5\n tau := Kd / (Kp*N) // IIR filter time constant\n alpha := dt / (2*tau)\n d0 := 0\n d1 := 0\n fd0 := 0\n fd1 := 0\n loop:\n error[2] := error[1]\n error[1] := error[0]\n error[0] := setpoint \u2212 measured_value\n // PI\n output := output + A0 * error[0] + A1 * error[1]\n // Filtered D\n d1 := d0\n d0 := A0d * error[0] + A1d * error[1] + A2d * error[2]\n fd1 := fd0\n fd0 := ((alpha) / (alpha + 1)) * (d0 + d1) - ((alpha - 1) / (alpha + 1)) * fd1\n output := output + fd0 \n wait(dt)\n goto loop\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66258", "revid": "24891730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66258", "title": "Almdudler", "text": "Austrian brand of carbonated soft drinks\n Almdudler () is the brand name of a popular herbal carbonated soft drink from Austria.\nProduct.\nThe original Almdudler is a sweetened carbonated beverage made of herbal extracts. Almdudler has been called the \"national drink of Austria\". Its popularity in Austria is second only to Coca-Cola. About 80 million litres of the beverage are produced per year.\nAlmdudler is currently sold in original, light (sugar-free), \"still\" (uncarbonated), and \"g'spritzt\" (mixed with carbonated mineral water) versions. In Austria, a \"Radler\" variety (mixed with beer), is available as \"Almradler\". In the wine-growing regions of Lower Austria and Burgenland, it is a popular mixer with locally produced red and white wines.\nHistory.\nAfter three years of development, Almdudler was produced from 1957 by the Viennese entrepreneur Erwin Klein (1924\u20131983). According to the company's website, he derived the name from the then-common phrase \"auf der Alm dudeln\", which means \"yodeling in the (alpine) pasture\". The drink was originally created and marketed as an alternative to alcoholic beverages or as a mixer for alcoholic drinks.\nKlein promoted the popularity of Almdudler through advertising and sponsoring at major sporting events, such as the 1964 Winter Olympics held in Innsbruck. Since 1973, the Almdudler company only functions as a license supplier.\nThe Austrian family business Pfanner and the mineral water company Franken Brunnen have been distribution partners in Germany since 2016, and Stardrinks AG (a subsidiary of Heineken Switzerland AG) in Switzerland. For the 60th anniversary of the brand in 2017, the American artist Mel Ramos created a painting with the name \"Almdudler\u2019s Fabulous Blonde\".\nAlmdudler remains wholly owned by the Klein family. Erwin Klein\u2019s son Thomas serves as chairman of the parent company supervisory board, while Gerhard Schilling has been managing director since 2004.\nMarketing and distribution.\nAlmdudler is currently bottled in Austria, Germany, Croatia, Belgium, and Switzerland. It is further exported to the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, the Netherlands, Romania, Australia, and the United States.\nIn 2017, American figurative painter Mel Ramos created a painting for the brand's 60th anniversary entitled \"Almdudler's Fabulous Blonde\", which was exhibited in the Vienna Museum of Art History. The famous award winning advertising slogan for Almdudler \"Wenn die kan\u00a0Almdudler\u00a0hab'n,\u00a0geh\u00a0i\u00a0wieder\u00a0ham.\" \"If they don't have any Almdudler I'm going home\".\nPopularity.\nNearly 99 percent of all Austrians know the herbal soft drink. Almdudler was ranked 7th in Austria's largest brand study. The so-called Brand Asset Valuator by the Young &amp; Rubicam agency measures brand value from the consumer's point of view, and the 2000 respondents chose Almdudler as the only Austrian beverage brand among the top 10. Over 80 million liters of Almdudler are produced every year; 14 percent (as of 2010) and 20 percent (as of 2014) of total sales are bottled and sold in foreign markets.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66260", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66260", "title": "PID loop", "text": ""}
{"id": "66262", "revid": "2030868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66262", "title": "Timeline of Linux development", "text": ""}
{"id": "66263", "revid": "2", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66263", "title": "Aerobe", "text": ""}
{"id": "66264", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66264", "title": "Hexose", "text": "6-carbon simple sugar\nIn chemistry, a hexose is a monosaccharide (simple sugar) with six carbon atoms. The chemical formula for all hexoses is , and their molecular weight is 180.156 g/mol.\nHexoses exist in two forms, open-chain or cyclic, that easily convert into each other in aqueous solutions. The open-chain form of a hexose, which usually is favored in solutions, has the general structure , where \"n\" is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Namely, five of the carbons have one hydroxyl functional group () each, connected by a single bond, and one has an oxo group (), forming a carbonyl group (). The remaining bonds of the carbon atoms are satisfied by seven hydrogen atoms. The carbons are commonly numbered 1 to 6 starting at the end closest to the carbonyl.\nHexoses are extremely important in biochemistry, both as isolated molecules (such as glucose and fructose) and as building blocks of other compounds such as starch, cellulose, and glycosides. Hexoses can form dihexose (like sucrose) by a condensation reaction that makes 1,6-glycosidic bond.\nWhen the carbonyl is in position 1, forming a formyl group (), the sugar is called an aldohexose, a special case of aldose. Otherwise, if the carbonyl position is 2 or 3, the sugar is a derivative of a ketone, and is called a ketohexose, a special case of ketose; specifically, an \"n\"-ketohexose. However, the 3-ketohexoses have not been observed in nature, and are difficult to synthesize; so the term \"ketohexose\" usually means 2-ketohexose.\nIn the linear form, there are 16 aldohexoses and eight 2-ketohexoses, stereoisomers that differ in the spatial position of the hydroxyl groups. These species occur in pairs of optical isomers. Each pair has a conventional name (like \"glucose\" or \"fructose\"), and the two members are labeled \"D-\" or \"L-\", depending on whether the hydroxyl in position 5, in the Fischer projection of the molecule, is to the right or to the left of the axis, respectively. These labels are independent of the optical activity of the isomers. In general, only one of the two enantiomers occurs naturally (for example, D-glucose) and can be metabolized by animals or fermented by yeasts.\nThe term \"hexose\" sometimes is assumed to include deoxyhexoses, such as fucose and rhamnose: compounds with general formula that can be described as derived from hexoses by replacement of one or more hydroxyl groups with hydrogen atoms.\nClassification.\nAldohexoses.\nThe aldohexoses are a subclass of the hexoses which, in the linear form, have the carbonyl at carbon 1, forming an aldehyde derivative with structure . The most important example is glucose.\nIn linear form, an aldohexose has four chiral centres, which give 16 possible aldohexose stereoisomers (24), comprising 8 pairs of enantiomers. The linear forms of the eight D-aldohexoses, in the Fischer projection, are\nOf these D-isomers, all except D-altrose occur in living organisms, but only three are common: D-glucose, D-galactose, and D-mannose. The L-isomers are generally absent in living organisms; however, L-altrose has been isolated from strains of the bacterium \"Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens\".\nWhen drawn in this order, the Fischer projections of the D-aldohexoses can be identified with the 3-digit binary numbers from 0 to 7, namely 000, 001, 010, 011, 100, 101, 110, 111. The three bits, from left to right, indicate the position of the hydroxyls on carbons 4, 3, and 2, respectively: to the right if the bit value is 0, and to the left if the value is 1.\nThe chemist Emil Fischer is said to have devised the following mnemonic device for remembering the order given above, which corresponds to the configurations about the chiral centers when ordered as 3-bit binary strings:\nAll altruists gladly make gum in gallon tanks.\nreferring to allose, altrose, glucose, mannose, gulose, idose, galactose, talose.\nThe Fischer diagrams of the eight L-aldohexoses are the mirror images of the corresponding D-isomers; with all hydroxyls reversed, including the one on carbon 5.\nKetohexoses.\nA ketohexose is a ketone-containing hexose. \nThe important ketohexoses are the 2-ketohexoses, and the most important 2-ketose is fructose.\nBesides the 2-ketoses, there are only the 3-Ketoses, and they do not exist in nature, although at least one 3-ketohexose has been synthesized, with great difficulty.\nIn the linear form, the 2-ketohexoses have three chiral centers and therefore eight possible stereoisomers (23), comprising four pairs of enantiomers. The four D-isomers are:\nThe corresponding L forms have the hydroxyls on carbons 3, 4, and 5 reversed. Below are\ndepiction of the eight isomers in an alternative style:\n3-Ketohexoses.\nIn theory, the ketohexoses include also the 3-ketohexoses, which have the carbonyl in position 3; namely . However, these compounds are not known to occur in nature, and are difficult to synthesize.\nIn 1897, an unfermentable product obtained by treatment of fructose with bases, in particular lead(II) hydroxide, was given the name \"glutose\", a portmanteau of \"glucose\" and \"fructose\", and was claimed to be a 3-ketohexose. However, subsequent studies showed that the substance was a mixture of various other compounds.\nThe unequivocal synthesis and isolation of a 3-ketohexose, \"xylo\"-3-hexulose, through a rather complex route, was first reported in 1961 by George U. Yuen and James M. Sugihara.\nCyclic forms.\nLike most monosaccharides with five or more carbons, each aldohexose or 2-ketohexose also exists in one or more cyclic (closed-chain) forms, derived from the open-chain form by an internal rearrangement between the carbonyl group and one of the hydroxyl groups.\nThe reaction turns the group into a hydroxyl, and the hydroxyl into an ether bridge () between the two carbon atoms, thus creating a ring with one oxygen atom and four or five carbons.\nIf the cycle has five carbon atoms (six atoms in total), the closed form is called a pyranose, after the cyclic ether tetrahydropyran, that has the same ring. If the cycle has four carbon atoms (five in total), the form is called furanose after the compound tetrahydrofuran. The conventional numbering of the carbons in the closed form is the same as in the open-chain form.\nIf the sugar is an aldohexose, with the carbonyl in position 1, the reaction may involve the hydroxyl on carbon 4 or carbon 5, creating a hemiacetal with five- or six-membered ring, respectively. If the sugar is a 2-ketohexose, it can only involve the hydroxyl in carbon 5, and will create a hemiketal with a five-membered ring.\nThe closure turns the carboxyl carbon into a chiral center, which may have either of two configurations, depending on the position of the new hydroxyl. Therefore, each hexose in linear form can produce two distinct closed forms, identified by prefixes \"\u03b1\" and \"\u03b2\".\nIt has been known since 1926 that hexoses in the crystalline solid state assume the cyclic form. The \"\u03b1\" and \"\u03b2\" forms, which are not enantiomers, will usually crystallize separately as distinct species. For example, D-glucose forms an \u03b1 crystal that has specific rotation of +112\u00b0 and melting point of 146\u00a0\u00b0C, as well as a \u03b2 crystal that has specific rotation of +19\u00b0 and melting point of 150\u00a0\u00b0C.\nThe linear form does not crystallize, and exists only in small amounts in water solutions, where it is in equilibrium with the closed forms. Nevertheless, it plays an essential role as the intermediate stage between those closed forms.\nIn particular, the \"\u03b1\" and \"\u03b2\" forms can convert to into each other by returning to the open-chain form and then closing in the opposite configuration. This process is called mutarotation.\nChemical properties.\nAlthough all hexoses have similar structures and share some general properties, each enantiomer pair has its own chemistry. Fructose is soluble in water, alcohol, and ether. The two enantiomers of each pair generally have vastly different biological properties.\n2-Ketohexoses are stable over a wide pH range, and with a primary p\"K\"a of 10.28, will only deprotonate at high pH, so are marginally less stable than aldohexoses in solution.\nNatural occurrence and uses.\nThe aldohexose that is most important in biochemistry is D-glucose, which is the main \"fuel\" for metabolism in many living organisms.\nThe 2-ketohexoses psicose, fructose and tagatose occur naturally as the D-isomers, whereas sorbose occurs naturally as the L-isomer.\nD-Sorbose is commonly used in the commercial synthesis of ascorbic acid. D-Tagatose is a rare natural ketohexose that is found in small quantities in food. D-Fructose is responsible for the sweet taste of many fruits, and is a building block of sucrose, the common sugar.\nDeoxyhexoses.\nThe term \"hexose\" may sometimes be used to include the deoxyhexoses, which have one or more hydroxyls () replaced by hydrogen atoms (). It is named as the parent hexose, with the prefix \"\"x\"-deoxy-\", the \"x\" indicating the carbon with the affected hydroxyl. Some examples of biological interest are\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66265", "revid": "50772701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66265", "title": "Mark Spitz", "text": "American Olympic swimmer (born 1950)\nMark Andrew Spitz (born February 10, 1950) is an American former competitive swimmer and nine-time Olympic champion. He was the most successful athlete at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, winning seven gold medals, each in world-record time. This achievement set a record that lasted for 36 years, until it was surpassed by fellow American Michael Phelps, who won eight golds at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing. Phelps, like Spitz, set seven world records.\nBetween 1968 and 1972, Spitz won nine Olympic golds, a silver, and a bronze, in addition to five Pan American golds, 31 Amateur Athletic Union (AAU) titles, and eight National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) titles. During those years he set 35 world records, two of which were in trials and unofficial. \"Swimming World Magazine\" named him World Swimmer of the Year in 1969, 1971, and 1972. He was the third athlete to win nine Olympic gold medals.\nEarly life.\nSpitz was born on February 10, 1950, in Modesto, California, the eldest of three children of Lenore Sylvia (n\u00e9e Smith) and Arnold Spitz. His family is Jewish; his mother's family, originally surnamed Sklotkovick, was from Russia. When he was two years old, his family moved to Honolulu, Hawaii, where he swam at Waikiki beach every day. \"You should have seen that little boy dash into the ocean. He'd run like he was trying to commit suicide,\" Lenore Spitz told a reporter for \"Time\" in 1968. When he was six, the family returned to Sacramento, California, and he began to compete at his local swim club. At age nine, he was training at Arden Hills Swim Club in Sacramento with swimming coach Sherm Chavoor, who mentored six other Olympic medal winners.\nAt 10, Spitz held one world age-group record and 17 national records. When Spitz was 14, his family moved to Santa Clara, where he joined the Santa Clara Swim Club and was trained by coach George F. Haines. From 1964 to 1968, Spitz trained with Haines at SCSC and Santa Clara High School. During his four years there, Spitz held national high school records in every stroke and in every distance. In 1966 at age 16, he won the 100-meter butterfly at the AAU national championships, the first of his 24 total AAU titles. The following year, Spitz emerged on the world swimming stage when he set his first world record at a small California meet with a time of 4:10.60 in the 400-meter freestyle.\nSwimming career.\nMaccabiah Games.\nSpitz swam in his first international competition at the 1965 Maccabiah Games in Israel. At age 15 and weighing 130 pounds, he won four gold medals in Tel Aviv\u2014the 400 m freestyle, the 1500 m freestyle, the 400 m individual medley, and the 800 m freestyle relay\u2014and was named the most outstanding athlete of the Games.\nHe returned to Israel in 1969 following the Mexico Olympics to again compete, at the 1969 Maccabiah Games, where he won six gold medals and was again named outstanding athlete of the Games.\nIn 1985, Spitz lit the torch to open the 1985 Maccabiah Games.\nIn 2005, he was a member of the U.S. delegation at the 2005 Maccabiah Games. He spoke at the JCC Maccabiah Games Opening Ceremonies, which was held in Richmond, Virginia. The Weinstein JCC in Richmond was one of the Host JCC's for the 2005 games, with over 1,000 teenagers participating in various sports, including swimming.\nPan American Games.\nHe won five gold medals at the 1967 Pan American Games, setting a record that lasted until 2007 when Brazilian swimmer Thiago Pereira won six golds at the XV Pan American Games in Rio de Janeiro.\n1968 Olympics.\nSpitz was already the holder of ten world records, and he brashly predicted that he would win six gold medals at the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City. However, he won only two team golds: the 4\u00d7100-meter freestyle relay in 3:31.70, and the 4\u00d7200-meter freestyle relay in 7:52.33. In addition, Spitz finished second to fellow American Doug Russell in the 100-meter butterfly. He lost to Russell by a half second, despite holding the world record and having beaten Russell the previous ten times they had swum against each other that year. Russell did briefly match Spitz's world record in late August 1967, holding the record equally with Spitz for five days before Spitz regained it solely on October 2, 1967. As a result of being beaten by Russell, Spitz did not get to swim in the 4\u00d7100-meter medley relay, which gave Russell his second gold medal and the USA team another world record performance.\nCollege training.\nSpitz was disappointed in his 1968 Olympic performance. In January 1969, he decided to attend Indiana University to train with Indiana Hoosiers swimming coach Doc Counsilman, who was also his Olympic coach in Mexico City. He called choosing Indiana and Counsilman \"the biggest decision of my life (and) the best.\" While at Indiana, Spitz won eight individual NCAA titles. In 1971, he won the James E. Sullivan Award as the top amateur athlete in the United States. Spitz also set a number of world records during the U.S. Olympic Swim Trials held in Chicago's Portage Park in 1972.\nHe was nicknamed \"Mark the Shark\" by his teammates.\n1972 Olympics.\nAt the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, Spitz was back to repeat his quest for the six gold medals. He did even better, winning seven Olympic gold medals. Furthermore, Spitz set a new world record in each of the seven events \u2013 100-meter freestyle (51.22), 200-meter freestyle (1:52.78), 100-meter butterfly (54.27), 200-meter butterfly (2:00.70), 4\u00d7100-meter freestyle relay (3:26.42), 4\u00d7200-meter freestyle relay (7:35.78), and 4\u00d7100-meter medley relay (3:48.16). Spitz was originally reluctant to swim the 100-meter freestyle, fearing that he would not win the gold medal. Minutes before the race, he confessed on the pool deck to ABC's Donna de Varona, \"I know I say I don't want to swim before every event, but this time I'm serious. If I swim six and win six, I'll be a hero. If I swim seven and win six, I'll be a failure.\" Spitz won by half a stroke in a world-record time of 51.22 seconds.\nSpitz is one of seven Olympians (four of them swimmers) to win nine or more career gold medals: Larisa Latynina, Paavo Nurmi, Carl Lewis, Katie Ledecky, and Caeleb Dressel also have nine; only Michael Phelps has won more, with 23. Spitz's record of seven gold medals in a single Olympics was not surpassed until Phelps broke the record at the 2008 Summer Olympics.\nAfter he had completed his events, Spitz left Munich early as a result of the Munich Massacre, where eleven Israeli athletes were taken hostage and later murdered by Palestinian terrorists. Being Jewish himself, there was concern among the Olympic authorities that Spitz would become a likely target for the Palestinians and he was escorted to London for his own safety, briefly with an escort of U.S. Marines.\nRetirement.\nFollowing the Munich Olympics, Spitz retired from competition even though he was only 22 years old.\nAt age 41, Spitz attempted a comeback for the 1992 Summer Olympics after filmmaker Bud Greenspan offered him a million dollars if he succeeded in qualifying. Spitz's comeback attempt made the cover of \"Parade\" and was also reported on in \"Sports Illustrated\" and \"Esquire\". Filmed by Greenspan's cameras, Spitz was two seconds slower than the Olympic standard and failed to qualify.\nIn 1999, Spitz ranked No. 33 on \"ESPN SportsCentury 50 Greatest Athletes\", the only aquatic athlete to make the list.\nFilm and television career.\nAfter Spitz retired from competitive swimming at age 22, he was managed by the William Morris Agency, which tried to get him into show business while he was still a household name due to his athletic success.\nA poster featuring Spitz wearing his swimsuit and gold medals led ESPN to retroactively label him \"the hottest pin-up since Betty Grable\".\nIn Spitz's TV debut, he appeared as himself in a skit as a dentist on a Bob Hope special that aired October 5, 1972. In 1973\u201374, Spitz appeared on TV's \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\" and \"The Sonny &amp; Cher Comedy Hour\". On the TV drama \"Emergency!\", he portrayed Pete Barlow, whose wife (played by Spitz's wife, Suzy) is accidentally shot by a handgun in an overfull drawer. He also appeared briefly on \"The Dean Martin Celebrity Roast\" of California Governor Ronald Reagan in September 1973.\nSpitz went to work for ABC Sports in 1976 and worked on many sports presentations, including coverage of the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal and the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. In 1985 he appeared as a TV announcer in \"Challenge of a Lifetime\". He continued as a broadcaster for some time, but within a few years, he was hardly seen as a public figure except perhaps as a commentator for swimming events like the 2004 Summer Olympics. Instead Spitz focused on his real estate company in Beverly Hills and hobbies such as sailing.\nNarration.\nSpitz narrated \"Freedom's Fury\", a 2006 Hungarian documentary about the Olympic water polo team's Blood in the Water match against the Soviet Union during the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 which was repressed by the Soviet Union\u2014considered among the most famous water polo matches. The film was executive produced by Quentin Tarantino and Lucy Liu, and made its debut at the Tribeca Film Festival.\nCommercials.\nHe appeared in an advertisement for the California Milk Advisory Board. One of his print advertisements featured the caption \"I always drink it--is something I like to do. I want to be loved by the mothers.\"\nIn 1974, he was in a number of Schick razors commercials. In 1998 he appeared with Evel Knievel in a TV commercial for PlayStation.\nIn 1982, bestselling author Clive Cussler, mentioned Mark Spitz in the novel \"Pacific Vortex!\", the origin-story of Dirk Pitt.\nIn 2004, he appeared in a TV commercial for Sprint PCS. Then in November 2007, Spitz made a cameo appearance on Amanda Beard's first television commercial (for GoDaddy) featuring her own seven Olympic medals (won between 1996 and 2004). The ad was entitled \"Shock\". Also, in 2007 he appeared in the infomercial for the \"Orbitrek Elite\" fitness workout.\nIn 2012, Spitz appeared in a commercial for Ageless Male, a testosterone supplement.\nIn a 2019 commercial, Spitz pitched a personal EKG device by KardiaMobile.\nIn 2022, Spitz endorsed the health supplement Relief Factor.\nPersonal life.\nFamily life.\nWhen Spitz returned from the Olympics, he began dating Suzy Weiner, a UCLA theater student and part-time model, who also was the daughter of one of his father's business acquaintances. Less than a year after the Munich Olympics, they were married on May 6, 1973, in a traditional Jewish service at the Beverly Hills Hotel. They have two sons, Matthew (born October 1981) and Justin (born September 1991). Justin was a member of the Stanford swim team. Spitz and his wife reside in Los Angeles, California.\nEducation.\nAt Indiana University from 1968 to 1972, Spitz was a pre-dental student and member of Phi Kappa Psi fraternity. \"Time\" magazine asked him if he wanted to return to dental school after the Olympics. \"I always wanted to be a dentist from the time I was in high school, and I was accepted to dental school in the spring of 1972. I was planning to go, but after the Olympics there were other opportunities. I did some television and speaking engagements, and things just went from there.\" Spitz graduated from Indiana University in 1972.\nPost-swimming career.\nAfter Spitz's return to the United States following the 1972 Olympics, he landed several lucrative corporate endorsement contracts. He earned about $7 million in a two-year period. \"A million dollars in 1972 would be equivalent to more than $10 million today,\" Spitz said in 2007. \"I did very well, thank you very much.\" Spitz added, \"I would say I was a pioneer. There wasn't anyone who'd gone to the Olympics before me who capitalized the same way on opportunity. It depends on timing, it depends on hype, it depends on the economy, and most importantly, it depends on looks. I mean, I've never seen a magazine of uglies. That's our society. I'm not saying it's right. That's just the facts.\" Spitz went on to start a real estate company.\nPer his official website, Spitz is self-employed as a corporate spokesperson and motivational speaker. However, Sports Yahoo! lists his occupation as a stock broker and motivational speaker. According to one interview, \"Spitz became a stockbroker in 2002 and has since moved into private equity. He is now also dabbling in the 'water business', as he calls it, and is in negotiations to build a water-bottling facility on aquifer-rich land that he and a business partner own.\"\nSpitz has pursued various entrepreneurial projects with former NBA player Rick Barry. He travels the world, delivering about 25 lectures a year. His biography, \"The Extraordinary Life of An Olympic Champion\" by Richard J. Foster, was released in July 2008.\nIn July 2012, he endorsed Istanbul's bid to host the 2020 Summer Olympics, but the award went to Tokyo.\nHobbies.\nHis hobbies include sailing, skiing and collecting art.\nFamous moustache during Olympics.\nIn an era when other swimmers, male and female, were shaving body hair, he swam with a moustache. When asked why he initially grew one, he stated: \"I grew the moustache because a coach in college said I couldn't grow one.\" Spitz said he originally grew the moustache as a form of rebellion against the clean-cut look imposed on him in college. \"It took a long time to grow,\" he said. It took four months to grow, but Spitz was proud of it, and decided the moustache was a \"good-luck piece\". \nSpitz is quoted as saying, \"When I went to the Olympics, I had every intention of shaving the moustache off, but I realized I was getting so many comments about it\u2014and everybody was talking about it\u2014that I decided to keep it. I had some fun with a Russian coach who asked me if my moustache slowed me down. I said, 'No, as a matter of fact, it deflects water away from my mouth, allows my rear end to rise and make me bullet-shaped in the water, and that's what had allowed me to swim so great.'\nAccording to a \"Sports Illustrated\" article, on February 14, 1988, after talking about shaving off his moustache for a year, he finally did. \"He looked great with it, don't get me wrong,\" explained his wife Suzy, \"but he looks so handsome without it.\"\nWhen he was asked why he shaved it off, he responded: \"Well, one, I'm not swimming anymore; two, it started to turn gray; and three, my wife had never seen me, nor my family, without the moustache ... I'm happy [without it].\" He also commented on his moustache in a live, in-studio interview with KCRA host Mike TeSelle on June 14, 2008, with Spitz stating that he no longer maintains his iconic moustache because it had become \"too gray\".\nHealth issues.\nAfter retirement, Spitz was diagnosed with acid reflux disease, a condition from which his physician thinks he suffered throughout his career. \"During my Olympic training, I attributed the symptoms [of acid reflux] to an overexposure to chlorine and eating too soon before and after swimming,\" says Spitz. \"It wasn't until the symptoms began to get in the way of my 1976 Olympic broadcasting career in Montreal, which was four years after retirement that I suspected something more serious must be happening.\"\nHe has also reported having high cholesterol and other chronic health issues. \"People don't believe that I have high cholesterol, but it's a fact,\" said Spitz. \"I take medication every day because my doctor told me that diet and exercise are not enough to keep my cholesterol down.\" He is a paid spokesperson for Medco, a pharmacy benefit management company.\nOlympic controversies.\n1972 medal podium incident.\nIn 1972, Spitz was accused of product placement during the medal ceremony. Following his victory in the 200-meter freestyle, Spitz carried his shoes and arrived barefoot to obtain his gold medal. He put them down as the American national anthem, \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" was played. After the anthem, he picked up his shoes and waved to the crowd. The Soviet officials viewed this as product placement and complained to the IOC. When questioned by the IOC, Spitz explained that the gesture was innocent, the shoes were old and he was not paid. The IOC cleared him of any wrongdoing.\nIssues with 2008 Summer Olympics.\nSpitz has said that he felt snubbed by not being asked to attend the 2008 Summer Olympics to watch Michael Phelps attempt to break his seven-gold-medal record: \"I never got invited. You don't go to the Olympics just to say, I am going to go. Especially because of who I am. ... I am going to sit there and watch Michael Phelps break my record anonymously? That's almost demeaning to me. It is not almost\u2014it is.\" Spitz added, \"They voted me one of the top five Olympians of all time. Some of them are dead. But they invited the other ones to go to the Olympics, but not me,\" he said. \"Yes, I am a bit upset about it.\" Spitz has stated that he has no hard feelings towards Phelps.\nHowever, on August 14, 2008, Spitz appeared on NBC's \"Today Show\" where he clarified his statement and his pride in Michael Phelps:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It's about time that somebody else takes the throne. And I'm very happy for him. I really, truly am\u00a0... I was working with a corporate sponsor who elected not to bring their US contingent over to China, and they piled on more work for me here in the United States, which was great. So I wasn't able to get to the Olympics and watch Michael in the first couple of days. And they thought, some of these reporters, that I was supposed to be invited by some entity, and I told them that that wasn't really the case, that doesn't happen that way. And so, I'm sort of disappointed that I wasn't there, but, you know, that interview somehow took a different turn, and I've done hundreds and hundreds of them and I've been true to form about the way I feel about Michael, and he's doing a great job for the United States and inspiring a lot of great performances by the other team members.\nAlso on August 14, 2008, in an interview aired on Los Angeles KNBC-4's morning news show, \"Today in L.A.\", Spitz was quoted saying he does believe that \"Michael Phelps is the greatest Olympic athlete ever.\"\nOn August 15, 2008, as part of an interview on NBC, Spitz said that he felt Phelps's performance in the 100 fly in Beijing was \"epic\". Spitz paid this compliment to Phelps just two hours after his record-tying seventh gold medal during a live joint interview with Bob Costas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You know, Bob and Michael, I wondered what I was going to say at this monumental time, when it would happen and who I would say it to, and of course I thought I was going to say it to you for some time now. But, it's the word that comes to mind, \"epic\". What you did tonight was epic, and it was epic for the whole world to see how great you really are. I never thought for one moment that you were out of that race and contention, because I watched you at Athens win the race by similar margins, and 18 months ago at the World's by similar margins. And, you know, that is a tribute to your greatness. And now the whole world knows. We are so proud of you Michael here in America, and we are so proud of you and the way that you handle yourself, and you represent such an inspiration to all the youngsters around the world. You know, you weren't born when I did what I did, and I'm sure that I was a part of your inspiration, and I take that as a full compliment. And they say that you judge one's character by the company you keep, and I'm happy to keep company with you. And you have a tremendous responsibility for all those people that you are going to inspire over the next number of years, and I know that you will wear the crown well. Congratulations, Mike.\nIn 2015, Spitz allegedly claimed that he had seen an email from Omega, the official timekeeper, that Phelps had lost the closely contested 100m butterfly final in 2008. He later claimed that his quote had been \"misconstrued\".\nViews on drug testing.\nSpitz has been consistent in his criticism of the two swimming world bodies, FINA (now named World Aquatics) and the IOC, in their incomplete attempts to keep drugs out of the sport. He has felt that not enough has been done to monitor and encourage drug-free participation. In 1998 he criticized FINA for its \"embarrassing\" attempts to stamp out drug abuse, urging them to test for all known drugs. In September 1999 Spitz said the IOC had the technology to test for a plethora of drugs but was refusing to do so because of some IOC member protests.\nDuring a radio interview in Australia, Spitz was quoted as saying \"They don't want to test for everything because there's tremendous pressure from the television networks because they want the television to have athletic competitions with the world record holders there for the finals. They want the medals not to be tainted in their value of accomplishment by winning them, and it's all about ratings and commercial selling of time and about money. And an International Olympic Committee has got their hand in the pockets of the network television people, so there's a tremendous conflict of interest in what they should do and what they're doing.\"\nIn August 2008, the \"Los Angeles Times\" reported that Spitz continued to discuss drug testing and was saying \"the IOC has sponsors who demand a good show. Television pays the IOC for the rights to that good show, and its sponsors want that too. Drug news and drug distractions are not a good show. People are not going to tune in to see athletes have their medals taken away from them.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66267", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66267", "title": "Homesteading the Noosphere", "text": "1999 essay by Eric S. Raymond\n\"Homesteading the Noosphere\" (abbreviated HtN) is an essay written by Eric S. Raymond about the social workings of open-source software development. It follows his previous piece \"The Cathedral and the Bazaar\" (1997).\nThe essay examines issues of project ownership and transfer, as well as investigating possible anthropological roots of the gift culture in open source as contrasted with the exchange culture of closed source software. Raymond also investigates the nature of the spread of open source into the untamed frontier of ideas he terms the noosphere, postulating that projects that range too far ahead of their time fail because they are too far out in the wilderness, and that successful projects tend to relate to existing projects.\nRaymond delves into the contrast between the stated aims of open source and observed behaviors, and also explores the underlying motivations of people involved in the open-source movement. He notes that a key motivation for open-source practitioners is their membership of and reputation within each project's \"tribe\". In contrast, Microsoft's \"embrace and extend\" policy complexified and closed up Internet protocols with \"protocol pollution.\"\nCitations.\n\"Homesteading the Noosphere\" has been referenced in various papers, including:"}
{"id": "66269", "revid": "34439343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66269", "title": "Chloride", "text": "Main anion present in sea water\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nThe term chloride refers to a compound or molecule that contains either a chlorine anion (), which is a negatively charged chlorine atom, or a non-charged chlorine atom covalently bonded to the rest of the molecule by a single bond (). The pronunciation of the word \"chloride\" is .\nChloride salts such as sodium chloride are often soluble in water. It is an essential electrolyte located in all body fluids responsible for maintaining acid/base balance, transmitting nerve impulses and regulating liquid flow in and out of cells. Other examples of ionic chlorides include potassium chloride (), calcium chloride (), and ammonium chloride (). Examples of covalent chlorides include methyl chloride (), carbon tetrachloride (), sulfuryl chloride (), and monochloramine ().\nElectronic properties.\nA chloride ion (diameter 181\u00a0pm) is much larger than a chlorine atom (diameter 99\u00a0pm). The chlorine atom's hold on the valence shell is weaker because the chloride anion has one more electron than it does. The ion is colorless and diamagnetic. In aqueous solution, it is highly soluble in most cases; however, for some chloride salts, such as silver chloride, lead(II) chloride, and mercury(I) chloride, they are only slightly soluble in water. In aqueous solution, chloride is bonded by the protic end of the water molecules.\nReactions of chloride.\nChloride can be oxidized but not reduced. The first oxidation, as employed in the chlor-alkali process, is conversion to chlorine gas. Chlorine can be further oxidized to other oxides and oxyanions including hypochlorite (ClO\u2212, the active ingredient in chlorine bleach), chlorine dioxide (ClO2), chlorate (ClO3\u2212), and perchlorate (ClO4\u2212).\nIn terms of its acid\u2013base properties, chloride is a weak base as indicated by the negative value of the p\"K\"a of hydrochloric acid. Chloride can be protonated by strong acids, such as sulfuric acid:\nNaCl + H2SO4 \u2192 NaHSO4 + HCl\nIonic chloride salts react with other salts to exchange anions. The presence of halide ions like chloride can be detected using silver nitrate. A solution containing chloride ions will produce a white silver chloride precipitate:\nCl\u2212 + Ag+ \u2192 AgCl\nThe concentration of chloride in an assay can be determined using a chloridometer, which detects silver ions once all chloride in the assay has precipitated via this reaction.\nChlorided silver electrodes are commonly used in electrophysiology.\nOther oxyanions.\nChlorine can assume oxidation states of \u22121, +1, +3, +5, or +7. Several neutral chlorine oxides are also known.\nOccurrence in nature.\nIn nature, chloride is found primarily in seawater, which has a chloride ion concentration of 19400\u00a0mg/liter. Smaller quantities, though at higher concentrations, occur in certain inland seas and in subterranean brine wells, such as the Great Salt Lake in Utah and the Dead Sea in Israel. \nMost chloride salts are soluble in water, thus, chloride-containing minerals are usually only found in abundance in dry climates or deep underground. Some chloride-containing minerals include halite (sodium chloride NaCl), sylvite (potassium chloride KCl), bischofite (MgCl2\u22196H2O), carnallite (KCl\u2219MgCl2\u22196H2O), and kainite (KCl\u2219MgSO4\u22193H2O). It is also found in evaporite minerals such as chlorapatite and sodalite.\nRole in biology.\nChloride has a major physiological significance, which includes regulation of osmotic pressure, electrolyte balance and acid-base homeostasis. Chloride is present in all body fluids, and is the most abundant extracellular anion which accounts for around one third of extracellular fluid's tonicity.\nChloride is an essential electrolyte, playing a key role in maintaining cell homeostasis and transmitting action potentials in neurons. It can flow through chloride channels (including the GABAA receptor) and is transported by KCC2 and NKCC2 transporters.\nChloride is usually (though not always) at a higher extracellular concentration, causing it to have a negative reversal potential (around \u221261\u00a0mV at 37\u00a0\u00b0C in a mammalian cell). Characteristic concentrations of chloride in model organisms are: in both \"E. coli\" and budding yeast are 10\u2013200\u00a0mM (dependent on medium), in mammalian cells 5\u2013100\u00a0mM and in blood plasma 100\u00a0mM.\nChloride is also needed for the production of hydrochloric acid in the stomach.\nThe concentration of chloride in the blood is called serum chloride, and this concentration is regulated by the kidneys. A chloride ion is a structural component of some proteins; for example, it is present in the amylase enzyme. For these roles, chloride is one of the essential dietary minerals (listed by its element name \"chlorine\"). Serum chloride levels are mainly regulated by the kidneys through a variety of transporters that are present along the nephron. Most of the chloride, which is filtered by the glomerulus, is reabsorbed by both proximal and distal tubules (majorly by proximal tubule) by both active and passive transport.\nCorrosion.\nThe presence of chlorides, such as in seawater, significantly worsens the conditions for pitting corrosion of most metals (including stainless steels, aluminum and high-alloyed materials). Chloride-induced corrosion of steel in concrete leads to a local breakdown of the protective oxide form in alkaline concrete, so that a subsequent localized corrosion attack takes place.\nEnvironmental threats.\nIncreased concentrations of chloride can cause a number of ecological effects in both aquatic and terrestrial environments. It may contribute to the acidification of streams, mobilize radioactive soil metals by ion exchange, affect the mortality and reproduction of aquatic plants and animals, promote the invasion of saltwater organisms into previously freshwater environments, and interfere with the natural mixing of lakes. Sodium chloride has been shown to change the composition of microbial species at relatively low concentrations, hinder the denitrification process, a microbial process essential to nitrate removal and the conservation of water quality, and inhibit the nitrification and respiration of organic matter.\nProduction.\nThe chlor-alkali industry is a major consumer of the world's energy budget. This process converts concentrated sodium chloride solutions into chlorine and sodium hydroxide, which are used to make many other materials and chemicals. The process involves two parallel reactions:\n2\u00a0Cl\u2212 \u2192 Cl2 + 2\u00a0e\u2212\n2\u00a0H2O + 2\u00a0e\u2212 \u2192 H2 + 2\u00a0OH\u2212\nExamples and uses.\nAn example is table salt, which is sodium chloride with the chemical formula NaCl. In water, it dissociates into Na+ and Cl\u2212 ions. Salts such as calcium chloride, magnesium chloride, potassium chloride have varied uses ranging from medical treatments to cement formation.\nCalcium chloride (CaCl2) is a salt that is marketed in pellet form for removing dampness from rooms and lawn care. Calcium chloride is also used for maintaining unpaved roads and for fortifying roadbases for new construction. In addition, calcium chloride is widely used as a de-icer, since it is effective in lowering the melting point when applied to ice.\nExamples of covalently-bonded chlorides are phosphorus trichloride, phosphorus pentachloride, and thionyl chloride, all three of which are reactive chlorinating reagents.\nWater quality and processing.\nA major application involving chloride is desalination, which involves the energy intensive removal of chloride salts to give potable water. In the petroleum industry, the chlorides are a closely monitored constituent of the mud system. An increase of the chlorides in the mud system may be an indication of drilling into a high-pressure saltwater formation. Its increase can also indicate the poor quality of a target sand.\nChloride is also a useful and reliable chemical indicator of river and groundwater fecal contamination, as chloride is a non-reactive solute and ubiquitous to sewage and potable water. Many water regulating companies around the world utilize chloride to check the contamination levels of the rivers and potable water sources.\nFood.\nChloride salts such as sodium chloride are used to preserve food and as nutrients or condiments.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66270", "revid": "48691900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66270", "title": "Greg Louganis", "text": "American Olympic springboard and platform diver\nGregory Efthimios Louganis (; born January 29, 1960) is an American Olympic diver who won gold medals at the 1984 and 1988 Summer Olympics on the springboard and platform. He is the only man and the second diver in Olympic history to sweep the diving events in consecutive Olympic Games. He has been called both \"the greatest American diver\" and \"probably the greatest diver in history\".\nEarly life and education.\nLouganis was born in El Cajon, California, and is of Samoan and Swedish descent. His teenage biological parents placed him for adoption when he was eight months old and he was raised in California by his adoptive parents, Frances and Peter Louganis. His adoptive father was of Greek descent. Louganis reconnected with his biological father, Fouvale Lutu, in 1984. Through the help of DNA tests and his half-siblings, he found his biological mother in 2017.\nHe started taking dance, acrobatics, and gymnastics classes at 18 months, after witnessing his sister's classes and attempting to join in. By the age of three, he was practicing daily and was competing and giving public performances. For the next few years, he regularly competed and performed at various places including nursing homes and the local naval base. As a child, he was diagnosed with asthma and allergies, so to help with the conditions, he was encouraged to continue the dance and gymnastics classes. He also took up trampolining, and at the age of nine began diving lessons after the family got a swimming pool. He attended Santa Ana High School in Santa Ana, Valhalla High School in El Cajon, and Mission Viejo High School in Mission Viejo.\nIn 1978, he subsequently attended the University of Miami, where he majored in drama and continued diving. In 1981, he transferred to the University of California, Irvine, where he graduated with a major in theater and a minor in dance in 1983.\nDiving career.\nAs a Junior Olympic competitor, Louganis caught the eye of Sammy Lee, two-time Olympic champion, who began coaching him. At 16, Louganis took part in the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal, where he placed second in the tower event, behind Italian sport legend Klaus Dibiasi. Two years later, with Dibiasi retired, Louganis won his first world title in the same event with the help of coach Ron O'Brien of the Mission Viejo Nadadores.\nLouganis was a favorite for two golds in the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow, but an American boycott of the games prevented him from participating. He was one of 461 athletes to receive a Congressional Gold Medal years later. Louganis won two titles at the world championships in 1982, where he became the first diver in a major international meeting to get a perfect score of 10 from all seven judges. At the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics, with record scores and leads over his opponents, Louganis won gold medals in both the springboard and tower diving events.\nHe won two more world championship titles in 1986.\nAt the 1988 Seoul Olympics, he struck his head on the springboard during the preliminary rounds, leading to a concussion. He completed the preliminaries despite his injury. He then earned the highest single score of the qualifying round for his next dive and repeated the dive during the finals, earning the gold medal by a margin of 25 points. In the 10 m finals, he won the gold medal, performing a 3.4 difficulty dive in his last attempt, earning 86.70 points for a total of 638.61, surpassing silver medalist Xiong Ni by only 1.14 points. His comeback earned him the title of ABC's \"Wide World of Sports\" \"Athlete of the Year\" for 1988.\nHIV status and head injury.\nSix months before the 1988 Seoul Olympics, Louganis was diagnosed with HIV and started antiretrovirals. After Louganis came out publicly as HIV-positive in 1995, people in and out of the international diving community began to question Louganis's decision not to disclose his HIV status at the time of his head injury during the 1988 Olympics, given that he had bled into a pool that others then dove into. Louganis has stated that, during the ordeal, he was \"paralyzed with fear\" that he would infect another competitor or the doctor who treated him. Ultimately, no one else was infected. John Ward, chief of HIV-AIDS surveillance at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, noted that the incident posed no risk to others because any blood was highly diluted by the pool water and \"chlorine kills HIV\". Since skin is an effective barrier to HIV, the only way the virus could enter would be through an open wound; \"If the virus just touches the skin, it is unheard of for it to cause infection: the skin has no receptors to bind HIV,\" explained the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases' Anthony Fauci at the time.\nEndorsement deals.\nLouganis got few endorsement deals following his 1984 and 1988 Olympic victories, his one major deal being Speedo, a partnership which lasted until 2007. Some of his fellow athletes blamed homophobia for his lack of deals, since he had been rumored to be gay even before he came out. Louganis has stated that he suspects that his sexuality played a part, although he feels that in part he was simply overshadowed in the public imagination by other American Olympians, most notably Mary Lou Retton.\nIn 2016, Louganis was pictured on boxes of Wheaties cereal, where prominent American athletes are famously featured, as part of a special \"Legends\" series that also included 1980s Olympians Janet Evans and Edwin Moses. This occurred approximately a year after a Change.org petition was launched that requested that he be featured, although General Mills denied any influence from the petition.\nCoaching.\nIn November 2010, Louganis began coaching divers of a wide range of ages and abilities in the SoCal Divers Club in Fullerton, California.\nHe was a mentor to the U.S. diving team at the London 2012 Olympics and the Rio de Janeiro 2016 Olympics.\nMedia career.\nActing.\nLouganis had been a theater major in college, and in the late 1980s and 1990s, he appeared in a number of movies, including \"Touch Me\" in 1997.\nIn 1993, he played the role of Darius in an Off-Broadway production of the play \"Jeffrey\". In 1995, he starred for six weeks in the Off-Broadway production of Dan Butler's one man-show about gay life, \"The Only Thing Worse You Could Have Told Me\", taking over from Butler himself. In the play he portrayed 14 different characters.\nIn 2008, he appeared in the film \"Watercolors,\" in the role of Coach Brown, a swimming instructor in a high school.\nIn 2012, he appeared in the ninth episode of the second season of IFC's comedy series \"Portlandia\", playing himself.\nTelevision.\nIn September 2000, Louganis appeared on \"Hollywood Squares\" as a member of famous Olympic gold medalists \"Dream Team.\"\nIn 2013, Louganis was Dive Master in the celebrity diving show \"Splash\" on ABC, and a diving judge on \"Celebrity Splash!\" on Channel 7 in Australia.\nIn 2020, he was a diving judge on the second season of the ABC show \"Holey Moley\".\nBooks and video diary.\nIn 1996, Louganis recounted his story in a bestselling autobiography, \"Breaking the Surface\", co-written with Eric Marcus. In the book, Louganis detailed a relationship of domestic abuse and rape as well as teenage depression, and how he began smoking and drinking at a young age. The book spent five weeks at number one on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list.\nIn 1998, Louganis released a video diary called \"Looking to the Light\", which picked up where \"Breaking the Surface\" left off.\nIn 1999, Louganis co-wrote the book \"For the Life of Your Dog: A Complete Guide to Having a Dog From Adoption and Birth Through Sickness and Health\" with Betty Sicora Siino.\nDog agility competitions.\nAfter retiring from diving, Louganis began to compete in dog agility competitions; he has said that being around the dogs gave him \"a sense of security, company and unconditional love\". His dogs have included Dr. Schivago; Captain Woof Blitzer; Nipper and son, Dobby, both champion Jack Russell terriers; Gryff (Gryffindor), a border collie; and Hedwig, a Hungarian Pumi. Nipper was named for the RCA dog, while Gryff, Dobby and Hedwig were named for Harry Potter characters, as Louganis is a self-described \"huge Harry Potter fan.\"\nActivism.\nLouganis is a gay rights activist, as well as an HIV awareness advocate. He has worked frequently with the Human Rights Campaign to defend the civil liberties of the LGBT community and people diagnosed with HIV/AIDS.\nIn the October/November 2010 issue of \"ABILITY\" Magazine, Louganis stated that the \"Don't Ask, Don't Tell\" policy was \"absurd,\" \"unconstitutional,\" and a \"witch-hunt.\" He added that \"gay men and women have been serving this country for years ... [it's] basically encouraging people who are serving our country to lie to each other.\"\nLouganis is on the board of directors to the USA-based chapter of the charitable foundation of Princess Charlene of Monaco.\nIn 2023, it was reported that Louganis was auctioning three of his five Olympic medals in an effort to fund the Damien Center, Indiana's oldest and largest AIDS services center. \"The medals, they're in the history books,\" he said. \"Instead of holding on to them, I'm aiming to share my piece of Olympic history with collectors; together, we can help the Damien Center and its community to grow and thrive.\" Instead, Louganis auctioned the medals to fund his retirement to Panama.\nPersonal life.\nFrom 1983 to 1989, Louganis was involved romantically with his manager, R. James \"Jim\" Babbitt. Louganis has described the relationship as abusive, saying that, at one point in 1983, Babbitt raped him at knife point. Louganis also accused Babbitt of taking 80 percent of his earnings. Six months before the 1988 Olympics, Louganis was diagnosed with HIV; he had contracted the virus from Babbitt. His doctor placed him on the antiretroviral drug AZT, which he took every four hours round the clock. In 1989, Louganis obtained a restraining order against Babbitt. Babbitt died of AIDS in 1990.\nWhen Louganis turned 33, in 1993, he agreed to gather friends and family for a birthday party, but one that he envisioned as a final goodbye, as he was in failing health and thought he would soon die of AIDS. But, with treatment, he kept going and, in 1994, at the opening ceremony at that year's Gay Games, Louganis came out publicly as gay in a pre-taped announcement, at the encouragement of the event's organizers. Even before then, however, he led a life that has been described as \"openly gay.\" In 1995, around the time of the release of his memoir, \"Breaking the Surface\", Louganis revealed his HIV status in an interview with Barbara Walters, speaking openly, for the first time, about being both gay and HIV-positive.\nIn June 2013, Louganis announced, in \"People\" magazine, his engagement to his partner, paralegal Johnny Chaillot. The two were married on October 12, 2013, but on June 18, 2021, Louganis revealed on Instagram that he and Chaillot were ending their marriage.\nIn popular culture.\nAs a follow-up to the success of the book, Canadian television and film director Steven Hilliard Stern directed \"\" in 1997, starring Mario Lopez as Louganis, with Louganis also appearing in certain scenes of the television film and as narrator. Louganis also produced a video diary called \"Looking To the Light\", which picked up where \"Breaking the Surface\" left off.\nActor Michael Fassbender took Louganis's gait and mannerisms as inspiration for his portrayal of an advanced humanoid robot in the 2012 film \"Prometheus\", stating that \"Louganis was my first inspiration. I figured that I'd sort of base my physicality roughly around him, and then it kind of went from there.\"\nLouganis was the subject of the documentary \"Back on Board\" which aired on HBO on August 4, 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66273", "revid": "1292794888", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66273", "title": "Olaf II of Denmark", "text": "King of Denmark, Norway (1370\u20131387)\nOlaf II of Denmark (December 1370 \u2013 3 August 1387) was King of Denmark as Olaf II (though occasionally referred to as Olaf III) from 1376 and King of Norway as Olav IV from 1380 until his death. Olaf was the son of Queen Margaret I of Denmark and King Haakon VI of Norway, and grandson of kings Magnus IV of Sweden and Valdemar IV of Denmark.\nReign.\nWhen his grandfather Valdemar IV of Denmark died, Olaf was just five years old. He was proclaimed king of Denmark by a Danehof in Slagelse the following year. His mother, Queen Margaret, was to serve as regent due to his young age. His proclamation included the title \"true heir of Sweden\" added at his mother's insistence since both his father and his paternal grandfather, Magnus IV, had been kings of Sweden until they were forced to abdicate. Olaf was hailed as king in Scania, including the towns controlled by the Hanseatic league since the Treaty of Stralsund in 1370. Queen Margaret signed a coronation charter on behalf of Olaf, who was too young to rule until he came of age at fifteen. In the charter Olaf agreed to meet with the Danehof at least once a year and return properties his grandfather Valdemar IV had confiscated during his reign.\nOlaf became king of Norway on his father's death in 1380. Even when Olaf reached his majority in 1385, his mother ruled through him. With his ascent to the Norwegian throne, Denmark and Norway were thus united in a personal union ruled from Denmark. Denmark and Norway would have the same king, with the exception of short interregna, until Norway's independence from Denmark in 1814, as a result of the Treaty of Kiel.\nDeath and aftermath.\nOlaf died unexpectedly at Falsterbohus in August 1387 at age 16. He was buried at Sor\u00f8 Abbey on the Danish island of Zealand where his grandfather and, later, his mother, were also buried. Rumors immediately arose that Olaf had been poisoned. Following her son's death, Margaret united all three Scandinavian kingdoms in a personal union. After Olaf, no Norwegian king was to be born on Norwegian soil for more than 550 years, until Harald V, born in 1937, became king in 1991. Olaf's death was also the end of the male line of the House of Bj\u00e4lbo. In 2015 J\u00f8rgen Lange Thomsen, a forensic scientist, proposed a theory Olaf II died from Brugada syndrome.\nIn 1402, he was impersonated by the False Olaf.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66274", "revid": "589657", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66274", "title": "Areas of Edinburgh", "text": "This page lists residential areas in the urban area (settlement) which covers Edinburgh \u2013 the capital city of Scotland \u2013 and is located mainly in the City of Edinburgh council area and partly in East Lothian.\nLocalities and Neighbourhood Partnerships.\nThe City of Edinburgh council area is divided into 17 wards, which have been combined into four operational management areas termed \"localities\":\nThe localities are further divided into Neighbourhood Partnership (NP) Areas:\nTwo of the Neighbourhood Partnership areas, Almond NP and Pentlands NP, extend into the rural hinterland in the west of the City of Edinburgh council area, taking in villages such as Kirkliston and Ratho which are not part of the settlement of Edinburgh (however, Juniper Green, Baberton, Currie and Balerno are considered to be contiguous and are included). For the same reason, less than 50% of the North West and the South West localities' territory is with the urban area. to the east of the city, Musselburgh and Wallyford in East Lothian are considered to be contiguous with the main Edinburgh settlement and are also included in the urban area; however, other nearby localities such as Loanhead and Danderhall are not included (this may be adjusted in the future, particularly for Danderhall where 2020s housing developments at the former Edmonstone estate on the local authority boundary with Edinburgh will almost close the gap between the localities).\nOther definitions.\nMain areas.\nResidential areas can be situated inside or located across borders of the larger Neighbourhood Partnership areas or locality areas. The edges of the residential areas are generally defined by main roads, though actual lines on the ground are not defined precisely. The names of areas are often given to roads and streets in those areas, although this is not always the case.\nMain residential areas of the Edinburgh urban area:\nSmaller areas.\nSmaller residential areas of the Edinburgh urban area:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66275", "revid": "50654738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66275", "title": "Coati", "text": "Variety of mammal\nCoatis (from Tup\u00ed), also known as coatimundis (), are members of the family Procyonidae in the genera \"Nasua\" and \"Nasuella\" (comprising the subtribe Nasuina). They are diurnal mammals native to South America, Central America, Mexico, and the Southwestern United States. The name \"coatimundi\" comes from the Tupian languages of Brazil, where it means \"lone coati\". Locally in Belize, the coati is known as \"quash\".\nPhysical characteristics.\nAdult coatis measure from head to the base of the tail, which can be as long as their bodies. Coatis are about tall at the shoulder and weigh between , about the size of a large house cat. Males can become almost twice as large as females and have large, sharp canine teeth. The measurements above relate to the white-nosed and South America coatis. The two species of mountain coati are smaller.\nAll coatis share a slender head with an elongated, flexible, slightly upturned nose, small ears, dark feet, and a long non-prehensile tail used for balance and signaling.\nRing-tailed coatis have either a light brown or black coat, with a lighter underpart and a white-ringed tail in most cases. Coatis have a long brown tail with rings on it which are anywhere from starkly defined like a raccoon's to very faint. As in raccoons but not ring-tailed cats and cacomistles, the rings go completely around the tail. Coatis often hold the tail erect; it is used as such to keep troops of coatis together in tall vegetation. The tip of the tail can be moved slightly on its own, as is the case with cats, but it is not prehensile as is that of the kinkajou, another procyonid.\nCoatis have bear- and raccoon-like paws and walk plantigrade like raccoons and bears (on the soles of the feet, as do humans). Coatis have nonretractable claws. Coatis also are able to rotate their ankles beyond 180\u00b0, in common with raccoons and other procyonids (and others in the order Carnivora and rare cases among other mammals); they are therefore able to descend trees head first. (Other animals living in forests have acquired some or all of these properties through convergent evolution, including members of the mongoose, civet, weasel, cat, and bear families.)\nThe coati snout is long and somewhat pig-like\u2014part of the reason for its nickname, the \"hog-nosed raccoon\". It is also extremely flexible and can rotate up to 60\u00b0 in any direction. They use their noses to push objects and rub parts of their body. The facial markings include white markings around the eyes and on the ears and snout.\nCoatis have strong limbs to climb and dig and have a reputation for intelligence, like their fellow procyonid, the raccoon. Unlike the nocturnal raccoons, however, most coatis are diurnal, although some may exhibit cathemeral behavior. They prefer to sleep or rest in elevated places and niches, like the rainforest canopy, in crudely built sleeping nests.\nHabitat and range.\nOverall, coatis are widespread, occupying habitats ranging from hot and arid areas to humid Amazonian rainforests or even cold Andean mountain slopes, including grasslands and bushy areas. Their geographical range extends from the southwestern U.S. (southern Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas) through northern Uruguay. Around 10 coatis are thought to have formed a breeding population in Cumbria, UK.\nTaxonomy.\nThe following species are recognised:\nThe Cozumel Island coati was formerly recognised as a species, but the vast majority of recent authorities treat it as a subspecies, \"N. narica nelsoni\", of the white-nosed coati.\nGenetic evidence (cytochrome b sequences) has suggested that the genus \"Nasuella\" should be merged into \"Nasua\", as the latter is otherwise paraphyletic. Other genetic studies have shown that the closest relatives of the coatis are the olingos (genus \"Bassaricyon\"); the two lineages are thought to have diverged about 10.2\u00a0million years ago.\nLifespan.\nCoatis can live up to seven years in the wild. In captivity, their average lifespan is about 14 years, and some coatis can live into their late teens.\nFeeding habits.\nCoatis are omnivores; their diet consists mainly of ground litter, invertebrates, such as tarantula, and fruit (Alves-Costa et al., 2004, 2007; Hirsch 2007). They also eat small vertebrate prey, such as lizards, rodents, small birds, birds' eggs, and crocodile eggs. The snout, with an acute sense of smell, assists the paws in a hog-like manner to unearth invertebrates.\nBehaviour.\nLittle is known about the behaviour of the mountain coatis, and the following is almost entirely about the coatis of the genus \"Nasua\". Unlike most members of the raccoon family (Procyonidae), coatis are primarily diurnal. Nasua coati females and young males up to two years of age are gregarious and travel through their territories in noisy, loosely organised bands made up of four to 25 individuals, foraging with their offspring on the ground or in the forest canopy. Males over two years become solitary due to behavioural disposition and collective aggression from the females and will join the female groups only during the breeding season.\nWhen provoked, or for defence, coatis can be fierce fighters; their strong jaws, sharp canine teeth, and fast scratching paws, along with a tough hide sturdily attached to the underlying muscles, make it very difficult for potential predators (e.g., dogs or jaguars) to seize the smaller mammal.\nCoatis communicate their intentions or moods with chirping, snorting, or grunting sounds. Different chirping sounds are used to express joy during social grooming, appeasement after fights, or to convey irritation or anger. Snorting while digging, along with an erect tail, states territorial or food claims during foraging. Coatis additionally use special postures or moves to convey simple messages; for example, hiding the nose between the front paws as a sign for submission; lowering the head, baring teeth, and jumping at an enemy signal an aggressive disposition. Individuals recognise other coatis by their looks, voices, and smells, the individual smell is intensified by special musk-glands on their necks and bellies.\nCoatis from Panama are known to rub their own fur and that of other troop members with resin from \"Trattinnickia aspera\" (Burseraceae) trees, but its purpose is unclear. Some proposed possibilities are it serves as an insect repellent, a fungicide, or as a form of scent-marking. Coatis rub preputial gland secretions on objects in their home ranges, but do not have anal glands.\nReproduction.\n Coati breeding season mainly corresponds with the start of the rainy season to coincide with maximum availability of food, especially fruits: between January and March in some areas, and between October and February in others. Female and young coatis commonly live in bands of 5 to 40 and travel together. The males are solitary and join the bands only during the short mating season.\nFor this period, an adult male is accepted into the band of females and juveniles near the beginning of the breeding season, leading to a polygynous mating system.\nThe pregnant females separate from the group, build a nest on a tree or in a rocky niche and, after a gestation period of about 11 weeks, give birth to litters of three to seven kits. About six weeks after birth, the females and their young will rejoin the band. Females become sexually mature at two years of age, while males will acquire sexual maturity at three years of age.\nNatural predators.\nCoati predators include jaguarundis, anacondas, pumas, maned wolves, boa constrictors, foxes, dogs, tayras, ocelots, and jaguars. Large raptors, such as ornate hawk-eagles, black-and-chestnut eagles, and harpy eagles, also are known to hunt them. White-headed capuchin monkeys hunt their pups.\nStatus.\nIn Central and South America, coatis are threatened by environmental destruction and unregulated hunting. A lack of scientifically sound population studies could be leading to an underestimation of the coati population and other ecological problems affecting the species.\nIn captivity.\nCoatis are one of five groups of procyonids commonly kept as pets in various parts of North, Central and South America, the others being the raccoons (common and crab-eating), the kinkajou, the ring-tailed cat and cacomistle. However, while both the white-nosed and South America coatis are common in captivity, mountain coatis are extremely rare in captivity.\nCoatis are small creatures that can be wild, somewhat difficult to control or train in some cases, and generally behave in a manner radically different from that of a pet dog. Optimally, they should have a spacious outdoor enclosure and a coati-proofed room in the house and/or other climate-controlled place, as well. They can be given the run of the house but need careful watching, more careful in some cases than others.\nIt is possible to litter or toilet train coatis; if one cannot be trained as such, it is still possible to lessen problems in that they tend to designate a latrine area, which can have a litter pan placed in it as is done with many ferrets, pet skunks, rabbits, and rodents. Coatis generally need both dog and cat vaccines for distemper and many other diseases and an inactivated rabies vaccine. They can be spayed or neutered for the same reason as cats and dogs and other pets.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66278", "revid": "41906662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66278", "title": "Olaf Tryggvason", "text": "King of Norway from 995 to 1000\nOlaf Tryggvason (960s \u2013 9 September 1000) was King of Norway from 995 to 1000. He was the son of Tryggvi Olafsson, king of Viken (Vingulmark, and R\u00e5nrike), and, according to later sagas, the great-grandson of Harald Fairhair, first King of Norway. He is numbered as Olaf I.\nOlaf was important in the conversion of the Norse to Christianity, but he did so forcibly within his own kingdom. He is said to have built the first Christian church in Norway in 995, and to have founded the city of Trondheim in 997. A statue dedicated to him is located in the city's central plaza.\nHistorical information on Olaf is sparse. He is mentioned in some contemporary English sources, and some skaldic poems. The oldest narrative source mentioning him briefly is Adam of Bremen's \"Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum\" of \"circa\" 1070.\nIn the 1190s, two Latin versions of \"\u00d3l\u00e1fs saga Tryggvasonar\" were written in Iceland, by Oddr Snorrason and Gunnlaugr Leifsson \u2013 these are now lost, but are thought to form the basis of later Norse versions. Snorri Sturluson gives an extensive account of Olaf in the \"Heimskringla\" saga of \"circa\" 1230, using Oddr Snorrason's saga as his primary source. Modern historians do not assume that these late sources are accurate, and their credibility is debated. The most detailed account is named \"\u00d3l\u00e1fs saga Tryggvasonar en mesta\" (\"Greatest Saga of \u00d3l\u00e1fr Tryggvason\") and is recorded in the \"Flateyjarb\u00f3k\", and in the early 15th-century \"Bergsb\u00f3k\".\nBiography.\nThe account in this article is primarily based on the late sagas.\nBirth and early life.\nThere is uncertainty about both the date and the place of Olaf's birth. The earliest Norwegian written source, the \"Historia Norwegi\u00e6\" of the late twelfth century, states that Olaf was born in the Orkney Islands after his mother fled there to escape the killers of Olaf's father. Another late 12th-century source, \"\u00c1grip af N\u00f3regskonungas\u00f6gum\", states that Olaf's mother fled to Orkney with Olaf when he was three years old for the same reason. All the sagas agree that Olaf eventually came to Kievan Rus', specifically the court of Vladimir the Great of Kiev.\nThe version in \"Heimskringla\" is the most elaborate, but also the latest, and introduces elements to the story that are not found in earlier sources. It states that Olaf was born shortly after the murder of his father in 963, while other sources suggest a date between 964 and 969. The later dates cast doubt over Olaf's claim to be of Harald Fairhair's kin, and the legitimacy of his claim to the throne. Snorri Sturluson claims in \"Olaf Tryggvson's saga\" that Olaf was born on an islet in Fj\u00e6rlandsvatnet, where his mother Astrid Eiriksdottir, daughter of Eirik Bjodaskalle, was hiding from her husband's killers, led by Harald Greycloak, the son of Eirik Bloodaxe. Greycloak and his brothers had seized the throne from Haakon the Good. Astrid fled to her father's home in Oppland, then went on to Sweden where she thought she and Olaf would be safe. Greycloak sent emissaries to the king of Sweden, and asked for permission to take the boy back to Norway, where he would be raised by Greycloak's mother Gunhild. The Swedish king gave them men to help them claim the young boy, but to no avail. After a short scuffle Astrid (with her son) fled again. This time their destination was Gardarike (Kiev), where Astrid's brother Sigurd was in the service of Vladimir the Great. Olaf was three years old when they set sail on a merchant ship for Novgorod. The journey was not successful: in the Baltic Sea they were captured by Estonian vikings, and the people aboard were either killed or taken as slaves. Olaf became the possession of a man named Klerkon, together with his foster father Thorolf and his son Thorgils. Klerkon considered Thorolf too old to be useful as a slave and killed him, and then sold the two boys to a man named Klerk for a ram. Olaf was then sold to a man called Reas for a fine cloak. Six years later, Sigurd Eirikson traveled to Estonia to collect taxes for King Vladimir. He saw a boy who did not appear to be a native. He asked the boy about his family, and the boy told him he was Olaf, son of Tryggve Olafson and Astrid Eiriksdattir. Sigurd then went to Reas and bought Olaf and Thorgils out from slavery, and took the boys with him to Novgorod to live under the protection of Vladimir.\nStill according to \"Heimskringla\", one day in the Novgorod marketplace Olaf encountered Klerkon, his enslaver and the murderer of his foster father. Olaf killed Klerkon with an axe blow to the head. A mob followed the young boy as he fled to his protector Queen Allogia, with the intent of killing him for his misdeed. Only after Allogia had paid blood money for Olaf did the mob calm down. As Olaf grew older, Vladimir made him chief over his men-at-arms, but after a couple years the king became wary of Olaf and his popularity with his soldiers. Fearing he might be a threat to the safety of his reign, Vladimir stopped treating Olaf as a friend. Olaf decided that it was better for him to seek his fortune elsewhere, and set out for the Baltic.\nRaiding.\n\"Heimskringla\" states that after leaving Novgorod, Olaf raided settlements and ports with success. In 982 he was caught in a storm and made port in Wendland, where he met Queen Geira, a daughter of King Burizleif. She ruled the part of Wendland in which Olaf had landed, and Olaf and his men were given an offer to stay for the winter. Olaf accepted and after courting the Queen, they were married. Olaf began to reclaim the baronies which while under Geira's rule had refused to pay taxes. After these successful campaigns, he began raiding again both in Sk\u00e5ne and Gotland.\nRelationship and marriage to Geira.\nOlaf Tryggvason's relationship with Geira began when Geira was warned that there were a large number of ships sitting in the harbor outside of her kingdom. Queen Geira told the man who informed her to invite them to her kingdom, telling him that she would have them over for a feast. Once Olaf and his men arrived, Queen Geira welcomed them in, held a feast for them, and engaged in very meaningful conversation with Olaf. This conversation led to Olaf and his men staying for a few days, and a relationship starting between the two leaders. Eventually these two would agree to a marriage while Olaf and his troops were still there. Later, during one of their conversations, Olaf asked Geira if there were any towns that she had lost control over. She replied, \"Lord, I can name for you the towns that have escaped from our control; we have suffered their arrogance for a long time.\" Following this conversation, Olaf went out and recaptured these towns for Geira. Following this, and their marriage, Olaf would stay in the country until the untimely death of Geira.\nAlliance with Emperor Otto II.\nHoly Roman Emperor Otto II assembled a great army of Saxons, Franks, Frisians, and Wends to fight the Norse pagan Danes. Olaf was part of this army because his father-in-law was king of Wendland. Otto's army met the armies of King Harald Bluetooth and Haakon Jarl, the ruler of Norway under the Danish king, at Danevirke, a great wall near Schleswig. Otto's army was unable to break the fortification, so he changed tactics and sailed around it to Jutland with a large fleet. Otto won a large battle there, and forced Harald and Haakon with their armies to convert to Christianity. The constituents of Otto's army then returned to their homelands. Harald held to his new religion, but Haakon returned to worshipping the pagan gods when he came home.\nDeath of Geira and conversion.\nAfter Olaf had spent three years in Wendland, his wife Geira died. He felt so much sorrow from her death that he could no longer bear to stay in Wendland, and set out to plunder in 984. He raided from Friesland to the Hebrides. After four years he landed on one of the Scilly Isles. He heard of a seer who lived there. Desiring to test the seer, he sent one of his men to pose as Olaf. But the seer was not fooled. So Olaf went to see the hermit, now convinced he was a real fortune teller. And the seer told him:\nThou wilt become a renowned king, and do celebrated deeds. Many men wilt thou bring to faith and baptism, and both to thy own and others' good; and that thou mayst have no doubt of the truth of this answer, listen to these tokens. When thou comest to thy ships many of thy people will conspire against thee, and then a battle will follow in which many of thy men will fall, and thou wilt be wounded almost to death, and carried upon a shield to thy ship; yet after seven days thou shalt be well of thy wounds, and immediately thou shalt let thyself be baptized.\nAfter the meeting mutineers attacked Olaf, and he was wounded but survived, and as a result he converted to Christianity.\nDavid Hugh Farmer, in the Oxford Dictionary of Saints, writes 'it is tempting' to identify the seer with Saint Lide who lived on the island of St Helen's in the Isles of Scilly.\nBy another account, Saint \u00c6lfheah of Canterbury baptized him near Andover, Hampshire, England in 994. However, Henrietta Leyser, the author of \u00c6lfheah's entry in the \"Oxford National Dictionary of Biography\", states that Olaf was already baptized and that the 994 event at Andover was a confirmation of his faith, part of a Danegeld treaty in which he agreed to no longer raid in England.\nFollowing the death of Geira, it states in \"The Saga of Olaf\" that he travelled to Russia. During his stay here, he had a dream in which God spoke to him. The voice he heard said, \"Hear me, you who promise to be a good man, for you never worshipped gods or paid them any reverence. But rather you disgraced them, and for that reason your works will be multiplied for good and profitable ends. Still you are very deficient in those qualities that would allow you to be in these regions and make you deserving to live here in eternity, because you do not know your Creator and you do not know who the true God is.\"\nBattle of Maldon.\nIn 991 Olaf was one of the commanders of the first large-scale Viking attack on England for a generation. A large force harried Ipswich and inflicted a major defeat on the English at the Battle of Maldon, which was the subject of a famous Old English poem. Sweyn Forkbeard was probably also one of the Viking commanders.\nAscent to the throne.\nIn 995, rumours began to surface in Norway of a king in Ireland of Norwegian blood. This caught the ear of Jarl Haakon, who sent Thorer Klakka to Ireland, posing as a merchant, to see if he was the son of Tryggve Olafson. Haakon told Thorer that if it were him, to lure him to Norway, so Haakon could have him under his power. Thorer befriended Olaf and told him of the situation in Norway, that Jarl Haakon had become unpopular with the populace, because he often took daughters of the elite as concubines, which was his right as ruler. He quickly grew tired of them and sent them home after a week or two. He had also been weakened by his fighting with the Danish king, due to his rejection of the Christian faith.\nOlaf seized this opportunity, and sailed for Norway. When he arrived many men had already revolted against Haakon, who was forced to hide in a hole dug in a pigsty, together with his slave, Kark. When Olaf met the rebels they accepted him as their king, and together they started to search for Haakon. They eventually came to the farm where Haakon and Kark were hiding, but did not find them. Olaf held a meeting just outside the swine-sty and promised a great reward for the man who killed Haakon. The two men in the hole heard this speech, and Haakon became distrustful of Kark, fearing he would kill him for the reward. He could not leave the pigsty, nor could he stay awake indefinitely, and when he fell asleep Kark decapitated Haakon with a knife. The next day Kark went to Olaf and presented him the head of Haakon. King Olaf did not reward him, and instead decapitated him.\nAfter his confirmation as King of Norway, Olaf traveled to the parts of Norway that had not been under the rule of Haakon, but that of the King of Denmark; they also swore allegiance to him. He then demanded that they all be baptized, and most reluctantly they agreed.\nReign.\nIn 997, Olaf founded his seat of government in Trondheim, where he had first held a \"thing\" with the revolters against Haakon. It was a suitable site because the River Nid twisted itself before going into the fjord, creating a peninsula that could be easily defended against terrestrial attacks by only one short wall.\nBoth his Wendish and his Irish wife had brought Olaf wealth and good fortune, but, according to the Sagas, his last wife, Tyra, was his undoing, for it was on an expedition undertaken in 1000 to wrest her lands from Burislav that he was waylaid off the island Svolder by the combined Swedish, Danish, and Wendish fleets, together with the ships of Earl Haakon's sons.\nAttempted conversion of Norway to Christianity.\nIt has been suggested that Olaf's ambition was to rule a united Christian Scandinavia, and it is known that he made overtures of marriage to Sigrid the Haughty, queen of Sweden, but negotiations failed because of her steadfast pagan faith. Instead, he made an enemy of her, and did not hesitate to involve himself in a quarrel with King Sweyn Forkbeard by marrying Sweyn's sister Tyra, who had fled from her heathen husband Burislav, the semi-legendary \"King of Wends\", in defiance of her brother's authority.\nOlaf continued to promote Christianity throughout his reign. He baptized the explorer Leif Ericson, who took a priest with him back to Greenland to convert the rest of his kin. Olaf also converted the people and Earl of the Orkney Islands to Christianity. At that time, the Orkney Islands were part of Norway. While Olaf sent missionaries to other lands and baptized dignitaries who visited Norway to spread Christianity, within his own kingdom he used forced conversion through means such as exile, hostage taking, mutilation, torture, and death for those who refused as well as destroying pagan temples. Noted victims include Thorlief the Wise who had one eye torn out\u2014his torturers were supposed to blind him but his stoic bearing during the torture led them to run away after doing only half the job\u2014and Raud the Strong who had a venomous snake forced into body through his mouth by a red hot iron. Ultimately, Olaf's efforts at widespread conversion failed.\nDeath.\nHe died at the sea Battle of Svolder when his forces were defeated by a combined armada from Denmark, Sweden and the Jarls of Lade. Finally surrounded on his flagship the \"Ormrinn Langi\" (Long Serpent), Danish sources report that when all was lost he committed suicide by throwing himself into the sea, \"the end befitting his life\", according to Adam of Bremen. Saxo Grammaticus says that Olaf preferred suicide to death at the hands of the enemy and jumped overboard in full armour rather than see his foes victorious. The Norwegian and Icelandic accounts are more complex and more favourable to Olaf. Hallfre\u00f0r's memorial poem for his lord had already alluded to rumours that Olaf escaped death at Svolder. The sagas offer a variety of possibilities. \"\u00c1grip\" reports:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"But of the fall of King \u00d3l\u00e1fr nothing was known. It was seen that as the fighting lessened he stood, still alive, on the high-deck astern on the \"Long Serpent\", which had thirty-two rowing places. But when Eir\u00edkr went to the stern of the ship in search of the king, a light flashed before him as though it were lightning, and when the light disappeared, the king himself was gone.\"\nOther sagas suggest that one way or another Olaf made his way to the shore; perhaps by swimming, perhaps with the help of angels, most likely rescued by one of the Wendish ships present. After his escape, Olaf supposedly sought salvation for his soul abroad, perhaps joining a monastery. \"Mesta\" describes a series of \"sightings\" of him in the Holy Land, the last in the 1040s.\nLegacy.\nIn the early 11th century, a Viking chieftain named Tryggvi invaded Norway, claiming to be the son of Olaf and Gyda. His invasion was defeated by forces loyal to Cnut the Great's son Svein Knutsson. An account preserved in \"Morkinskinna\" relates that Tryggvi was killed by a farmer after the battle. Many years later, when Harald Hardrada was king of Norway, he passed by the site of the battle. The king met an old friend of his who pointed out the alleged assassin. After questioning the purported killer and hearing him confess, King Harald had the man hanged, citing the familial bond between him and Tryggvi and his duty to avenge the latter's death.\nFor some time after the Battle of Svolder, there were rumors that Olaf had survived his leap into the sea and had made his way to safety. Accounts reported by Oddr Snorrason included sightings of Olaf in Rome, Jerusalem, and elsewhere in Europe and the Mediterranean. Both King Ethelred the Unready and Olaf's sister Astrid allegedly received gifts from Olaf long after he was presumed dead. The latest sighting reported by Oddr took place in 1046.\nOlaf routinely used force to compel conversion to Christianity, including execution and torture of those who refused. Raud the Strong refused to convert and, after a failed attempt using a wooden pin to pry open his mouth to insert a snake, was killed by a snake goaded by a hot poker through a drinking horn into Raud's mouth and down his throat. Eyvind Kinnrifi likewise refused and was killed by a brazier of hot coals resting on his belly. The possibly apocryphal figure, Sigrid the Haughty was said to have refused to marry Olaf if it meant forgoing her forefathers' religion, upon which Olaf slapped her with his glove, an act that prompted her to unite his enemies against him years later.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
