{"id": "59801", "revid": "44427707", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59801", "title": "University of Virginia", "text": "Public university in Charlottesville, Virginia, US\nThe University of Virginia (UVA or Virginia) is a public research university in Charlottesville, Virginia, United States. It was founded in 1819 by Thomas Jefferson and contains his Academical Village, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The original governing Board of Visitors included three U.S. presidents: Jefferson, James Madison, and James Monroe, the latter as sitting president of the United States at the time of its foundation. As its first two rectors, Presidents Jefferson and Madison played key roles in the university's foundation, with Jefferson designing both the original courses of study and the university's architecture.\nLocated within its 1,135-acre central campus, the university is composed of eight undergraduate and three professional schools: the School of Law, the Darden School of Business, and the School of Medicine. The university has been a member of the Association of American Universities since 1904.\nThe university's leadership, faculty, research staff, and alumni have included several United States presidents, foreign heads of state, , Pulitzer Prize winners, Marshall Scholars, Fulbright Scholars, and 57 Rhodes Scholars\u2014the most of any state university. Its alumni include 30 state governors (including thirteen Governors of Virginia) and 33 United States senators. UVA students and alumni have founded companies such as Reddit, Skillshare, VMware, and Space Adventures. Its athletic teams are called the Cavaliers and they compete in NCAA Division I as members of the Atlantic Coast Conference.\nHistory.\n1800s.\nIn 1802, while serving as president of the United States, Thomas Jefferson wrote to artist Charles Willson Peale that his concept of the new university would be \"on the most extensive and liberal scale that our circumstances would call for and our faculties meet,\" and it might even attract talented students from \"other states to come, and drink of the cup of knowledge.\" Virginia was already home to the College of William &amp; Mary in Williamsburg, but Jefferson lost all confidence in his \"alma mater,\" partly because of its religious nature\u2014it required all its students to recite a catechism\u2014and its stifling of the sciences. Jefferson had flourished under William &amp; Mary professors William Small and George Wythe decades earlier, but the college was in a period of great decline and his concern became so dire by 1800 that he expressed to British chemist Joseph Priestley, \"we have in that State, a college just well enough endowed to draw out the miserable existence to which a miserable constitution has doomed it.\" These words would ring true some seventy years later when William &amp; Mary fell bankrupt after the Civil War and the Williamsburg college was shuttered completely in 1881, later being revived as primarily a small college for teachers until it regained university status later in the twentieth century. Jefferson envisioned his new university would \"be based on the illimitable freedom of the human mind. For here we are not afraid to follow truth wherever it may lead, nor to tolerate any error so long as reason is left free to combat it.\"\nIn 1817, three presidents (Jefferson, James Monroe, and James Madison) and Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court John Marshall joined 24 other dignitaries at a meeting held in the Mountain Top Tavern at Rockfish Gap. After some deliberation, they selected nearby Charlottesville as the site of the new University of Virginia. The UVA Board of Visitors purchased just outside Charlottesville a farm that had once been owned by James Monroe. The Commonwealth of Virginia chartered a new flagship university to be based on the site in Charlottesville on January 25, 1819. \nJohn Hartwell Cocke collaborated with James Madison, Monroe, and Joseph Carrington Cabell to fulfill Jefferson's dream to establish the university. Cocke and Jefferson were appointed to the building committee to supervise the construction. The UVA Office of Equal Opportunity and Civil Rights is continuing to \"seek opportunities to engage and acknowledge with respect that we live, learn, and work on [what once was] the territory of the Monacan Indian Nation.\" Like many of its peers, the university owned slaves who helped build the campus. They also served students and professors. The Memorial to Enslaved Laborers on Central Grounds was built to memorialize their lives and legacies. The university's first classes met on March 7, 1825.\nIn contrast to other universities of the day, at which one could study in either medicine, law, or divinity, the first students at the University of Virginia could study in one or several of eight independent schools \u2013 medicine, law, mathematics, chemistry, ancient languages, modern languages, natural philosophy, and moral philosophy. Another innovation of the new university was that higher education would be separated from religious doctrine. UVA had no divinity school, was established independently of any religious sect, and the Grounds were planned and centered upon a library, the Rotunda, rather than a church, distinguishing it from peer universities still primarily functioning as seminaries for one particular strain of Protestantism or another. Jefferson opined to philosopher Thomas Cooper that \"a professorship of theology should have no place in our institution\", and never has there been one. There were initially two degrees awarded by the university: \"Graduate,\" to a student who had completed the courses of one school; and \"Doctor\" to a graduate in more than one school who had shown research prowess.\nJefferson was intimately involved in the university to the end, hosting Sunday dinners at his Monticello home for faculty and students. Jefferson viewed the university's foundation as having such great importance and potential that he counted it among his greatest accomplishments and insisted his grave mention only his status as author of the Declaration of Independence and Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, and father of the University of Virginia. Thus, he eschewed mention of his national accomplishments, such as the Louisiana Purchase and any other aspects of his presidency, in favor of his role with the young university.\nInitially, some of the students arriving at the university matched the then-common picture of college students: wealthy, spoiled aristocrats with a sense of privilege which often led to brawling, or worse. This was a source of frustration for Jefferson, who assembled the students during the school's first year, on October 3, 1825, to criticize such behavior; but was too overcome to speak. He later spoke of this moment as \"the most painful event\" of his life.\nAlthough the frequency of such irresponsible behavior dropped after Jefferson's expression of concern, it did not die away completely. Like many universities and colleges, it experienced periodic student riots, culminating in the shooting death of Professor John A. G. Davis, Chairman of the Faculty, in 1840. This event, in conjunction with the new UVA Honor System and the growing popularity of temperance and a rise in religious affiliation in society in general, seems to have resulted in a permanent change in student attitudes toward reporting the bad behavior, and thus such behavior among students that had so greatly bothered Jefferson finally vanished.\nIn the year of Jefferson's death in 1826, poet Edgar Allan Poe enrolled at the university, where he excelled in Latin. The Raven Society, an organization named after Poe's most famous poem, continues to maintain 13 West Range, the room Poe inhabited during the single semester he attended the university. He left because of financial difficulties. The School of Engineering and Applied Science opened in 1836, making UVA the first comprehensive university to open an engineering school.\nUnlike the majority of Southern colleges, the university was kept open throughout the Civil War, despite its state seeing more bloodshed than any other and the near 100% conscription of the American South. After Jubal Early's total loss at the Battle of Waynesboro, Charlottesville was willingly surrendered to Union forces to avoid mass bloodshed, and UVA faculty convinced George Armstrong Custer to preserve Jefferson's university. Although Union troops camped on the Lawn and damaged many of the Pavilions, Custer's men left four days later without bloodshed and the university was able to return to its educational mission. However, an extremely high number of officers of both Confederacy and Union were alumni. UVA produced 1,481 officers in the Confederate Army alone, including four major-generals, twenty-one brigadier-generals, and sixty-seven colonels from ten different states. John S. Mosby, the infamous \"Gray Ghost\" and commander of the lightning-fast 43rd Battalion Virginia Cavalry ranger unit, had also been a UVA student.\nThanks to a grant from the Commonwealth of Virginia, tuition became free for all Virginians in the year 1875. During this period, the University of Virginia remained unique in that it had no president and mandated no core curriculum from its students, who often studied in and took degrees from more than one school. However, the university was also experiencing growing pains. As the original Rotunda caught fire and was gutted in 1895, there would soon be sweeping changes, much greater than merely reconstructing the Rotunda in 1899.\n1900s.\nJefferson had originally decided the University of Virginia would have no serving president. Rather, this power was to be shared by a rector and the Board of Visitors. But as the 19th century waned, it became obvious this cumbersome arrangement was incapable of adequately handling the many administrative and fundraising tasks of the growing university. Edwin Alderman, who had only recently moved from his post as president of UNC-Chapel Hill since 1896 to become president of Tulane University in 1900, accepted an offer as president of the University of Virginia in 1904. His appointment was not without controversy, and national media such as \"Popular Science\" lamented the end of one of the things that made UVA unique among universities.\nAlderman stayed 27 years, and became known as a prolific fund-raiser, a well-known orator, and a close adviser to U.S. president and UVA alumnus Woodrow Wilson. He added significantly to the University Hospital to support new sickbeds and public health research, and helped create departments of geology and forestry, the School of Education and Human Development (originally the Curry School of Education), the McIntire School of Commerce, and the summer school programs in which young Georgia O'Keeffe took part. Perhaps his greatest ambition was the funding and construction of a library on a scale of millions of books, much larger than the Rotunda could bear. Delayed by the Great Depression, Alderman Library was named in his honor in 1938. Alderman, who seven years earlier had died in office en route to giving a public speech at the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign, is still the longest-tenured president of the university.\nIn 1904, UVA became the first university south of Washington, D.C. to be elected to the Association of American Universities. After a gift by Andrew Carnegie in 1909 the University of Virginia was organized into twenty-six departments across six schools including the Andrew Carnegie School of Engineering, the James Madison School of Law, the James Monroe School of International Law, the James Wilson School of Political Economy, the Edgar Allan Poe School of English and the Walter Reed School of Pathology. The honorific historical names for these schools \u2013 several of which have remained as modern schools of the university \u2013 are no longer used.\nIn December 1953, the University of Virginia joined the Atlantic Coast Conference for athletics. At the time, UVA had a football program that had just broken through to be nationally ranked in 1950, 1951, and 1952, and consistently beat its rivals North Carolina and Virginia Tech by scores such as 34\u20137 and 44\u20130. Other sports were very competitive as well. However, the administration of Colgate Darden de-emphasized athletics, defunding the department and declining to join the ACC before being overruled by the Board of Visitors on that decision. It would take until the 1980s for the bulk of athletics programs to fully recover but approaching the year 2000 UVA was again one of the most successful all-around sports programs with NCAA national titles achieved in an array of different sports; by 2020, it had twice won the Capital One Cup for overall athletics excellence in men's sports programs.\nUVA established a junior college in 1954, known today as the University of Virginia's College at Wise. George Mason University and Mary Washington University used to similarly exist as UVA's satellite campuses, but those are now wholly independent universities no longer administered by the University of Virginia.\nThe Academical Village and nearby Monticello became a joint World Heritage Site in 1987. Simultaneously with Hawai\u02bbi Volcanoes National Park and Chaco Culture National Historical Park, they were the fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth U.S. sites designated as culturally significant to the collective interests of global humanity, coming after the Statue of Liberty and Yosemite National Park three years earlier. As such, UVA possesses the only U.S. collegiate grounds to be internationally protected by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).\nIntegration, coeducation, and student dissent.\nThe University of Virginia first admitted a few selected women to graduate studies in the late 1890s and to certain programs such as nursing and education in the 1920s and 1930s. In 1944, Mary Washington College in Fredericksburg, Virginia, became the Women's Undergraduate Arts and Sciences Division of the University of Virginia. With this branch campus in Fredericksburg exclusively for women, UVA maintained its main campus in Charlottesville as near-exclusively for men, until a civil rights lawsuit in the 1960s forced it to commingle the sexes. In 1970, the Charlottesville campus became fully co-educational, and in 1972 Mary Washington became an independent state university. When the first female class arrived, 450 undergraduate women entered UVA, comprising 39 percent of undergraduates, while the number of men admitted remained constant. By 1999, women made up a 52 percent majority of the total student body.\nThe university admitted its first black student when Gregory Swanson sued to gain entrance into the university's law school in 1950. Following his successful lawsuit, a handful of black graduate and professional students were admitted during the 1950s, though no black undergraduates were admitted until 1955, and UVA did not fully integrate until the 1960s. When Walter Ridley graduated with a doctorate in education, he was the first black person to graduate from UVA. UVA's Ridley Scholarship Fund is named in his honor.\nThe fight for integration and coeducation came to the foreground particularly in the late 1960s, leading up to the May Strike of 1970, in which students protested for higher black enrollment, equal access to UVA admission by undergraduate women, unionization of employees, and against the presence of armed university police and recruiters of government agencies such as the CIA and FBI on Grounds.\n21st century.\nDue to a continual decline in state funding for the university, today only 6 percent of its budget comes from the Commonwealth of Virginia. A Charter initiative was signed into law by then-Governor Mark Warner in 2005, negotiated with the university to have greater autonomy over its own affairs in exchange for accepting this decline in financial support.\nThe university welcomed Teresa A. Sullivan as its first female president in 2010. Just two years later its first woman rector, Helen Dragas, engineered a forced-resignation to remove President Sullivan from office. The attempted ouster elicited a faculty Senate vote of no confidence in Rector Dragas, and demands from student government for an explanation. In the face of mounting pressure including alumni threats to cease contributions, and a mandate from then-Governor Robert McDonnell to resolve the issue or face removal of the entire Board of Visitors, the board unanimously reinstated President Sullivan. In 2013 and 2014, the board passed new bylaws that made it harder to remove a president and possible to remove a rector.\nIn November 2014, the university suspended fraternity and sorority functions pending investigation of an article by \"Rolling Stone\" concerning an alleged rape story, which was later determined to be a hoax after the story was confirmed to be false through investigation by \"The Washington Post\". The university nonetheless instituted new rules banning \"pre-mixed drinks, punches or any other common source of alcohol\" such as beer kegs and requiring \"sober and lucid\" fraternity members to monitor all parties. In April 2015, \"Rolling Stone\" fully retracted the article after the Columbia School of Journalism released a scathing and discrediting report on the \"anatomy of a journalistic failure\" by its author. Even before release of the Columbia University report, the \"Rolling Stone\" story was named the \"Error of the Year\" by the Poynter Institute. The UVA chapter of Phi Kappa Psi settled a defamation suit against \"Rolling Stone\" and received $1.65\u00a0million.\nIn August 2017, the night before the infamous Unite the Right rally, a group of non-student and mostly non-Virginian white nationalists marched on the university's Lawn bearing torches and chanting antisemitic and Nazi slogans after the city of Charlottesville decided to remove all remaining Confederate statues from the city including one depicting Robert E. Lee. They were met by student counter-protesters near the statue of Thomas Jefferson in front of the Rotunda, where a fight broke out.\nJames E. Ryan, a graduate of the University of Virginia School of Law, became the university's ninth president in August 2018. His first act upon his inauguration was to announce that in-state undergraduates from families making less than $80,000 per year would receive full scholarships covering tuition, and those from families making under $30,000 would also receive free room and board. Ryan was previously dean of the Harvard School of Education. \nOn the night of November 13, 2022, three students were killed and two others injured in a shooting on a charter bus that was returning to the campus from a play for a class trip in Washington, D.C. All three fatalities were current members of the Virginia Cavaliers football team and the alleged shooter was briefly a member of the team during the 2018 season.\nIn 2025, the United States Department of Justice called for President Ryan to resign, citing university-wide efforts to stall and misrepresent the dismantling of the University's diversity, equity and inclusion policies. Ryan announced his resignation on June 27, 2025. In October 2025, the university made a deal with the Trump administration, agreeing to \"not engage in unlawful racial discrimination in its university programming, admissions, hiring or other activities\".\nOn November 12, 2025, Virginia governor-elect Abigail Spanberger asked the University\u2019s board of visitors to pause its search for a new president until she takes office, and could appoint members to the board. Governor Glenn Youngkin and conservative alumni criticized the move as political interference.\nOrganization and administration.\nThe university has several affiliated centers including the Rare Book School, headquarters of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, University of Virginia Center for Politics, Weldon Cooper Center for Public Service, Sorensen Institute for Political Leadership, Institute for Advanced Studies in Culture, and Miller Center of Public Affairs. The Fralin Museum of Art is dedicated to creating an environment where both the university community and the general public can study and learn from directly experiencing works of different art. The university has its own internal recruiting firm, the Executive Search Group and Strategic Resourcing. Since 2013, this department has been housed under the Office of the President.\nIn 2006, President Casteen announced an ambitious $3\u00a0billion capital campaign to be completed by December 2011. During the Great Recession, President Sullivan missed the 2011 deadline, and extended it indefinitely. The $3\u00a0billion goal would be met a year and a half later, which President Sullivan announced at graduation ceremonies in May 2013.\nAs of 2013[ [update]], UVA's $1.4\u00a0billion academic budget is paid for primarily by tuition and fees (32%), research grants (23%), endowment and gifts (19%), and sales and services (12%). The university receives 10% of its academic funds through state appropriation from the Commonwealth of Virginia. For the overall (including non-academic) university budget of $2.6\u00a0billion, 45% comes from medical patient revenue. The Commonwealth contributes less than 6%.\nUVA's endowment is among the highest among universities in the United States. As of 2013, the University of Virginia was one of only two public universities in the United States that had a Triple-A credit rating from all three major credit rating agencies.\nAlthough UVA is the flagship university of Virginia, state funding has decreased for several consecutive decades. Financial support from the state dropped by half from 12 percent of total revenue in 2001\u201302 to six percent in 2013\u201314. The portion of academic revenue coming from the state fell by even more in the same period, from 22 percent to just nine percent. This nominal support from the state, contributing just $154\u00a0million of UVA's $2.6\u00a0billion budget in 2012\u201313, has led President Sullivan and others to contemplate the partial privatization of the University of Virginia. UVA's Darden School and Law School are already self-sufficient. Hunter R. Rawlings III, President of the prominent Association of American Universities research group of universities, came to Charlottesville to make a speech to university faculty which included a statement about the proposal: \"there's no possibility, as far as I can see, that any state will ever relinquish its ownership and governance of its public universities, much less of its flagship research university\". He encouraged university leaders to stop talking about privatization and instead push their state lawmakers to increase funding for higher education and research as a public good.\nAcademics.\nThe University of Virginia offers 48 bachelor's degree programs, 94 master's degree programs, 55 doctoral degree programs, 6 educational specialist degree programs, and 2 first-professional degrees (Medicine and Law). UVA does not bestow honorary degrees.\nScholarships.\nThe Jefferson Scholarship is a competitive merit scholarship. Around 30 scholars are selected annually from a direct application pool of 4,500 nominating schools, each able to nominate only one student. Covering all tuition, books, room and board, the scholarship also provides scholars finances for summer enrichment, independent research and study abroad.\nEchols Scholars (College of Arts and Sciences) and Rodman Scholars (School of Engineering and Applied Science), which include 5% of undergraduate students, receive no financial benefits, but are entitled to special advisors, priority course registration, residence in designated dorms and fewer curricular constraints than other students have.\nFull tuition scholarships are given to each in-state student from families earning under $100,000 per year. Each in-state student from families earning under $50,000 per year also receives free room and board. These scholarships are initiatives of President Ryan, who announced them upon his inauguration in 2018.\nResearch.\nThe University of Virginia is the first and longest serving public member of the Association of American Universities in the American South, attaining membership in 1904. It is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\".\nAccording to the National Science Foundation, UVA spent $614\u00a0million on research and development in 2019, ranking it 44th in the nation and first in Virginia. Built in 1996, North Fork (formerly the UVA Research Park) is an extensive 3.7-million square foot, 562 acre research park nine miles north of UVA's North Grounds. It houses the UVA Applied Research Institute as well as many private R&amp;D efforts by such firms as Battelle, The MITRE Corporation, Signature Science, and CACI.\nUVA is also home to globally recognized research on hypersonic flight for NASA and other organizations. The United States Air Force, National Science Foundation, and National Center for Hypersonic Combined Cycle Propulsion have each also granted UVA researchers millions in funding for the university's ongoing broad and deep research into ultra-high velocity flight. Starting in 2015, a UVA team led by mechanical engineering professor Eric Loth began Department of Energy-funded research into an original design of offshore wind turbines that would potentially dwarf the size and scope of any being produced or researched anywhere else. The innovative design inspired by palm trees led to Loth being named to a \"Popular Science\" list of \"The Brilliant Minds Behind The New Energy Revolution\".\nUVA was recognized by \"Science\" as leading two of the top 10 scientific discoveries in the world in 2015. The first breakthrough was when UVA School of Medicine researchers Jonathan Kipnis and Antoine Louveau discovered previously unknown vessels connecting the human brain directly to the lymphatic system. The second breakthrough was when UVA psychology professor Brian Nosek examined the reproducibility of 100 psychology studies and found fewer than half could be reproduced. More than 270 researchers on five continents were involved, and twenty-two students and faculty from UVA were listed as co-authors on the scientific paper.\nIn the field of astrophysics, the university is a member of a consortium engaged in the construction and operation of the Large Binocular Telescope in the Mount Graham International Observatory of the Pinaleno Mountains of southeastern Arizona. It is also a member of both the Astrophysical Research Consortium, which operates telescopes at Apache Point Observatory in New Mexico, and the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy which operates the National Optical Astronomy Observatory, the Gemini Observatory and the Space Telescope Science Institute. The University of Virginia hosts the headquarters of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, which operates the Green Bank Telescope in West Virginia and the Very Large Array radio telescope made famous in the Carl Sagan television documentary \"\" and film \"Contact\". The North American Atacama Large Millimeter Array Science Center is also at the Charlottesville NRAO site. In 2019, researchers at NRAO co-authored a study documenting the discovery of a pair of giant hourglass shaped balloons emanating radio waves from the center of our Milky Way galaxy.\nRankings.\nAs of the 2023 rankings, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranks UVA's undergraduate programs 24th among national universities overall. Its undergraduate business school, McIntire, is ranked 4th (and 1st among public universities) in the United States by the UK-based business school website \"Poets &amp; Quants\" as of 2023. In its (most recent as of 2024) undergraduate business school rankings of 2016, \"Bloomberg BusinessWeek\" ranked the McIntire School of Commerce, UVA's undergraduate business program, 5th overall and 2nd among public universities. In its 2024 ranking, \"Bloomberg.com\" ranks UVA as the #3 business school in the nation and 1st among public universities.\n\"U.S. News &amp; World Report\"'s 2024 rankings placed its law school fourth-best overall and 1st among public universities, its graduate Darden School of Business 10th nationally, the medical school 30th overall in the \"Research\" category, and the engineering school tied for 37th overall. The School of Education was ranked 8th in the nation. The specialization in special education, as well as in curriculum and instruction, were both ranked 4th in the nation. In the 2022 Academic Ranking of World Universities, the School of Education was ranked 8th in the world.\n\"Washington Monthly\" ranked UVA 37th in its 2024 ranking of national universities based on its contribution to the public good, as measured by social mobility, research, and promoting good public service.\nOther recognition.\nUVA was ranked 1st by the Foundation for Individual Rights and Expression in the 2025 Free Speech College Rankings, improving from a #6 ranking in 2024.\nThe University of Virginia has also been recognized for consistently having the highest African American graduation rate among national public universities. According to the Fall 2005 issue of \"Journal of Blacks in Higher Education\", UVA \"has the highest black student graduation rate of the Public Ivies\" and \"by far the most impressive is the University of Virginia with its high black student graduation rate and its small racial difference in graduation rates.\"\nUndergraduate admissions and financial aid.\nFor the undergraduate Class of 2027, the University of Virginia received a record 56,439 applications, admitting 16.2 percent. The early action acceptance rate was 27 percent for in-state Virginians and 12 percent for out-of-state applicants. The regular decision acceptance rate was 13 percent for in-state Virginians and 8 percent for out-of-state applicants. UVA is required, by Virginia state law, to matriculate two-thirds of its undergraduate student body from its pool of in-state applicants; it is barred, by Virginia state law, from giving admissions preference to the children of its alumni. Approximately 40 percent of those admitted to UVA are non-white. Matriculated students come from all 50 states and 147 foreign countries. The university has seen steady increases to its applicant pool in recent decades, and the number of applications has more than tripled since the Class of 2008 received 15,094 applications. Admission to the university is among the most selective in the United States among public universities. As of 2014, 93 percent of admitted applicants ranked in the top 10 percent of their high school classes. For the Class of 2027, some 1,167 students were accepted after having had their application fees waived as either low-income or first-generation college students.\nAdmission is need-blind for domestic applicants. President James Ryan announced at his inauguration in fall 2018 that in-state students from families earning less than $80,000 a year will receive full tuition scholarships. Those from families earning less than $30,000 will also receive free room and board. The university already met 100 percent of demonstrated need for all admitted undergraduate students, making it one of only two public universities in the U.S. to reach this level of financial aid for its students. For 2014, the university ranked fourth overall by the \"Princeton Review\" for \"Great Financial Aid\". In 2008 the Center for College Affordability and Productivity named UVA the top value among all national public colleges and universities; and in 2009, UVA was again named the \"No. 1 Best Value\" among public universities in the United States in a separate ranking by \"USA TODAY\" and the \"Princeton Review.\" \"Kiplinger\" in 2014 ranked UVA second out of the top 100 best-value public colleges and universities in the nation.\nGraduate and professional school admissions are also highly selective. As of 2024, the average LSAT score was 172 at the School of Law, while at the Darden School of Business the average GMAT score was 718.\nStudent life.\nStudent life at the University of Virginia is marked by a number of unique traditions. The campus of the university is referred to as the \"Grounds\". Freshmen, sophomores, juniors, and seniors are instead called first-, second-, third-, and fourth-years to reflect Jefferson's belief that learning is a lifelong process, rather than one to be completed within four years.\nStudent-faculty interaction and connections.\nProfessors are traditionally addressed as \"Mr.\" or \"Ms.\" at UVA instead of \"Doctor\" (although medical doctors are the one exception) in deference to Jefferson's desire to have an equality of ideas.\nFirst-year students in the College of Arts &amp; Sciences have the opportunity to take four Engagements, two per semester, with the goal of students expanding their thinking. \nSelect faculty live at Brown College at Monroe Hill, Hereford College, International Residential College, and in Pavilions on the Lawn. This living arrangement gives more opportunities for professors to invite students to lunches and dinners, which regularly happens, and creates chances for impromptu meetings and interactions between faculty and students around Grounds.\nReflecting this close student-faculty interaction at UVA, it welcomed Nobel Laureate William Faulkner to a position as \"Writer-in-Residence\" in 1957. He had no teaching responsibilities, and was paid merely to live among the students and write. He was badly injured in a horse riding accident in 1959, and did not return to the state before his death in 1962. Faulkner then bequeathed the majority of his papers to Shannon Library, giving UVA the largest Faulkner archives in the world.\nGlobal citizenship initiatives.\nUVA was previously the academic sponsor for Semester at Sea, a multi-country study abroad program conducted on a cruise ship.\nThe University of Virginia received the 2015 Paul Simon Award for Comprehensive Internationalization, by the Association of International Educators. This award confirms the university's success and commitment in educating its students on a global scale as well as nationally.\nStudent leadership opportunities.\nThere are a number of UVA undergraduate leadership opportunities that are offered in addition to the standard student government or fraternity and sorority positions found at many other universities. They include UVA's secret societies and debating societies, the student-run honor committees, and the chance to be recognized as a fourth-year student at the pinnacle of student leadership by being asked to live on the Lawn.\nThe Frank Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy, established in 2007, expands on these unique student leadership opportunities to study Leadership itself as a cross-disciplinary subject of focus and is closely aligned with many of the university's schools, including the Architecture, Education, Engineering, Law, Medical, and Darden schools, as well as with programs in politics, economics, and applied ethics.\nThe University of Virginia has a long history of student activists who formed radical environmental, religious, and political groups to champion various social changes. An especially intense period of student activism occurred in the 1970s during the May Days strikes against the Vietnam War. More recently, the School of Education and Human Development and its Youth-Nex Center held a national conference in 2019 to promote student activism at UVA and beyond.\nSecret societies.\nStudent societies have existed on Grounds since the early twentieth century. Secret societies have been a part of University of Virginia student life since the first class of students in 1825. While the number of societies peaked during the 75-year period between 1875 and 1950, there are still six societies active that are over 100 years old, and several newer secret societies.\nHonor system.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHonor Pledge\nOn my honor, I have neither given nor received aid on this assignment.\nThe nation's first codified honor system was instituted by UVA law professor Henry St. George Tucker, Sr. in 1842, after a fellow professor was shot to death on the Lawn. There are three tenets to the system: students simply must not lie, cheat, or steal. For its first 180 years it was a \"single sanction system\", meaning that committing any of these three offenses would result in immediate expulsion from the university. In the spring of 2022, following decades of criticism and waning support, a proposal to replace the penalty of expulsion with a two-semester suspension passed a student referendum with over 80% of the vote and took effect immediately.\nThe honor system is intended to be student-run and student-administered. If accused, students are tried before their peers\u2014fellow students, never faculty, serve as counsel and jury. Although Honor Committee resources have been strained by mass cheating scandals such as a case in 2001 of 122 suspected cheaters over several years in a single large Physics survey course, and federal lawsuits have challenged the system, its verdicts are rarely overturned. There is only one documented case of direct UVA administration interference in an honor system proceeding: the trial and subsequent retrial of student Christopher Leggett.\nStudent activities.\nMany events take place at the University of Virginia, on the Lawn and across Grounds. One of the largest events at UVA is Springfest, hosted by the University Programs Council. It takes place every year in the spring, and features a large free concert, various inflatables, games. Another popular event and tradition is Lighting of the Lawn in the winter. Established in 2001 as a tribute to the September 11 attacks, Lighting of the Lawn consists of a light and music show on the Lawn. Another popular event is Foxfield, a steeplechase and social gathering that takes place nearby in Albemarle County in April, and which is annually attended by thousands of students from the University of Virginia, neighboring colleges, and local residents.\nThe student life building is called Newcomb Hall. It is home to the Student Activities Center (SAC) and the Media Activities Center (MAC), where student groups can get leadership consulting and use computing and copying resources. It also features several meeting rooms for student groups. Student Council, the student self-governing body, holds meetings Tuesdays at 6:30\u00a0p.m. in the Newcomb South Meeting Room. Student Council, or \"StudCo\", also holds office hours and regular committee meetings in the newly renovated Newcomb Programs and Council (PAC) Room. The PAC also houses the University Programs Council and Class Councils. Newcomb basement is home to both the office of the independent student newspaper \"The Declaration\", \"The Cavalier Daily\", and the Consortium of University Publications.\nIn 2005, the university was named \"Hottest for Fitness\" by \"Newsweek\" magazine, due in part to 94% of its students using one of the four indoor athletics facilities. Particularly popular is the Aquatics and Fitness Center, across the street from the Alderman Dorms. The University of Virginia sent more workers to the Peace Corps in 2006 and 2008 than any other \"medium-sized\" university in the United States. Volunteerism at the university is centered around Madison House which offers numerous opportunities to serve others. Among the numerous programs offered are tutoring, housing improvement, an organization called Hoos Against Hunger, which gives leftover food from restaurants to the homeless of Charlottesville rather than allowing it to be discarded, among numerous other volunteer programs. Many students also choose to volunteer as emergency responders, the most common stations being Charlottesville Albemarle Rescue Squad (CARS) in the city of Charlottesville and Seminole Trail Volunteer Fire Department (STVFD) in Albemarle County.\nAs at many universities, alcohol use is a part of the social life of many undergraduate students. In 2005, concerns particularly arose about fourth-years consuming excessive alcohol during the day of the last home football game. President Casteen then announced a $2.5\u00a0million donation from Anheuser-Busch to fund a new UVA-based Social Norms Institute in September 2006. A spokesman said: \"the goal is to get students to emulate the positive behavior of the vast majority of students\". On the other hand, the university was ranked first in \"Playboy\"'s 2012 list of Top 10 Party Schools based on ratings of sex, sports, and nightlife.\nFraternities and sororities.\nThe University of Virginia has a number of fraternities and sororities on campus, encompassing the traditional social fraternities and sororities as well as coeducational professional, service, and honor fraternities. Social life at the university was originally dominated by debating societies. The first fraternity chapter founded at UVA was Delta Kappa Epsilon in 1852, and it was quickly followed by many more; the University of Virginia was the birthplace of two national fraternities, Kappa Sigma and Pi Kappa Alpha, which exist at the university as of 2023.\nThrough the twentieth century, the roles of these organizations on campus expanded to encompass social sororities, professional fraternities and sororities, service fraternities, honor societies, black fraternities and sororities, and multicultural fraternities and sororities. Roughly 30% of the student body are members of social fraternities and sororities, while additional students are involved with service, professional, and honor fraternities. \"Rush and pledging\" occur in the spring semester for most Greek organizations. Kappa Sigma and the Trigon Engineering Society hold reserved rooms on the Lawn, while Pi Kappa Alpha holds the only undergraduate room on the Range.\nTransportation.\nA set of bus lines operated by the university's University Transit Service connect different parts of the UVA Grounds with adjacent parking facilities. This is complemented by a set of bus lines operated by Charlottesville Area Transit that connect the University of Virginia with other parts of Charlottesville. The Virginia Department of Transportation maintains the roads through the university grounds as State Route 302.\nCharlottesville Union Station is just from UVA, and from there Amtrak passenger trains serve Charlottesville on three routes: the \"Cardinal\" (Chicago to New York City), \"Crescent\" (New Orleans to New York City), and \"Northeast Regional\" (Roanoke to Boston). The long-haul \"Cardinal\" operates three times a week, while the \"Crescent\" and \"Northeast Regional\" both run daily. Charlottesville\u2013Albemarle Airport, away, has nonstop flights to Chicago, New York, Atlanta, Charlotte, and Philadelphia. The larger Richmond International Airport is to the southeast, and the still larger Dulles International Airport is to the northeast. They are accessible via Interstate 64 and U.S. 29, respectively, both of which are major highways and frequently trafficked.\nMegabus began serving Charlottesville with inexpensive direct express routes to and from Washington, D.C. in 2018. Megabus also runs up to four trips per day from Charlottesville to New York City with several stops between. Like the trains, the Megabus stop is at the nearby Amtrak station.\nAthletics.\nVirginia has ranked near the top of collegiate athletics programs in recent years. In 2015 and 2019, UVA won the nationwide Capital One Cup for overall men's sports excellence. The teams and athletes representing Virginia in college athletics have been dubbed the \"Cavaliers\" since 1923, predating the NBA's Cleveland Cavaliers by nearly half a century.\nIn 2019, Virginia men's basketball won the NCAA Championship in March Madness, the single-elimination national college basketball tournament considered by \"YouGov\" polled American viewers (as of the same year) to be the most exciting collegiate sporting event. In 2015, when Virginia first won its first Capital One Cup its teams won the 2014 College Cup, the 2015 College World Series, and the 2015 NCAA Tennis Championships. When it repeated the feat in 2019, the program won both the March Madness tournament and the 2019 Men's Lacrosse Championship.\nVirginia's athletics director is Carla Williams, the first African American woman to hold the position at any power conference university. The previous athletics director was Craig Littlepage, the first African American to have that title in the ACC. He held the position for sixteen years and, under his leadership, UVA added many significant hires who have demonstrated success near the top of their respective sports, including recent NCAA Champions Tony Bennett, Lars Tiffany, Brian O'Connor, and Todd DeSorbo, as well as former football coach Bronco Mendenhall. Among coaches who have longer tenures, George Gelnovatch has won two NCAA men's soccer national titles since 2009. Steve Swanson has led women's soccer teams to six ACC titles and 24 consecutive winning seasons. Kevin Sauer has led UVA women's rowing to two NCAA titles since 2010.\nChampionships.\nIn the 21st century alone, UVA teams have won 22 NCAA championships. The men's teams have won NCAA titles in basketball (2019); lacrosse (2003, 2006, 2011, 2019, and 2021); baseball (2015); soccer (2009 and 2014); and tennis (2013, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2022, and 2023). UVA women have won recent NCAA titles in rowing (2010 and 2012) and swimming &amp; diving (2021, 2022, 2023, 2024, and 2025). The Cavaliers rank first in the ACC (a power conference) with 23 men's NCAA Championships, and rank second in the conference with 11 women's NCAA Championships.\nUnder Tony Bennett the Cavaliers have experienced a basketball renaissance, winning the 2019 NCAA Championship, winning the ACC tournaments of 2014 (over Duke) and 2018 (over North Carolina), and winning regular-season championships in 2014, 2015, 2018, and 2019. UVA became the third program in ACC history to win 30 or more games in consecutive seasons and John Paul Jones Arena is considered one of the more intimidating trips for opposing teams to make. The women's basketball program fell just short of its own NCAA Championship in 1990, losing the Championship Game in overtime.\nThe Virginia men's and women's lacrosse programs are two of the most dominant in the history of the sport, winning ten of UVA's twenty-nine NCAA Championships between them and two more (for a total of 11 recognized national championships) before NCAA oversight began. 2019 and 2021 NCAA champion men's head coach Lars Tiffany has brought UVA back to prominence after Dom Starsia retired as the all-time ACC leader in men's lacrosse wins. All three UVA head coaches in the position prior to Tiffany still rank (as of 2019) in the top 20 of career wins. Three-time NCAA champion head coach Julie Myers leads women's lacrosse and under her guidance, Virginia is the only program to qualify for 24 straight NCAA tournament berths as of 2019.\nThe Cavalier baseball team under Brian O'Connor has also experienced tremendous success. UVA finished as national runners-up in the 2014 College World Series and came back to win the 2015 College World Series. Virginia has hosted five NCAA Super Regional tournament events at Davenport Field.\nThe UVA men's tennis program won \"three-peat\" NCAA Championships in 2015\u20132017 after winning the Cavaliers' first in 2013. The team won back-to-back championships in 2022 and 2023. The program has regularly featured international talent combined with locally grown high school tennis talent from Virginia (often Northern Virginia).\nThe University of Virginia women's cross country team won the 1981 and 1982 NCAA Women's Division I Cross Country Championship as well as the DI Indoor Championships.\nThe women's swimming and diving team won its first NCAA Championship in 2021. The women repeated the feat in both 2022 and 2023.\nRivalries.\nOfficial ACC designated rivalry games include the Virginia\u2013Virginia Tech rivalry and the Virginia\u2013Louisville series. These two rivalries are guaranteed an annual game in all sports, and a home-and-away series in men's and women's basketball. The Cavaliers competed against the Hokies in the \"Commonwealth Challenge\" and more recently competed in the \"Commonwealth Clash\", under new rules, for many sports in which they compete head-to-head. The Cavaliers went 2\u20130 against the Hokies in the \"Challenge\" and 3\u20132 in the \"Clash\" (5\u20132 overall). Perhaps the two most significant rivalry games played between the Cavaliers and Hokies were both in men's basketball, in March 2007 and January 2019. In the former, the two teams met with identical 10\u20134 ACC records and the winner would clinch a share of the regular-season conference championship. UVA won the game 69\u201356 and took their fifth of 11 ACC titles. In the latter, No. 4 UVA beat No. 9 Virginia Tech 81\u201359 in the only game between two AP Top 10 teams in the rivalry's history.\nThe ACC is often regarded as the best college basketball conference, and UVA leads the series in its official yearly home-and-away ACC basketball rivalries: against Virginia Tech 99\u201361, and against Louisville 23\u20137, as of 2025[ [update]]. Other basketball rivalries include those against North Carolina and Maryland. Notably the 1982 ACC tournament championship game where Dean Smith had his team of future NBA stars (such as Michael Jordan and James Worthy) hold the ball for seven minutes, against a Virginia team featuring Ralph Sampson, led to the advent of the shot clock and the three-point line. The Maryland rivalry is now mostly dormant, but was reignited for the 2014 and 2018 editions of the ACC\u2013Big Ten Challenge, with both Challenges won by the Cavaliers on the road in College Park.\nVirginia men's lacrosse, as one of the all-time great NCAA programs, has a championship rivalry with fellow ACC program Syracuse (the Cavaliers and Orange holding 18 NCAA Championships between them) as well as rivalries against Big Ten programs Johns Hopkins and Maryland. The Syracuse and Johns Hopkins rivalries are played out at least once each season (Syracuse played \"twice\" in 2021) with the teams often finding themselves facing off a second or third time in the ACC and NCAA tournaments. Virginia women's lacrosse, also a multi-NCAA Championship program, maintains several of those same rivalries.\nThe Virginia football team competes against North Carolina in the South's Oldest Rivalry, a historic football rivalry game which a sitting President of the United States, Calvin Coolidge, made time to attend in Charlottesville in 1924. The 1960s and 1970s were particularly dark decades for the football program, which later experienced a resurgence in the 1980s and 1990s under George Welsh. Coach Welsh led the program to its first bowl bids starting with the 1984 Peach Bowl. Welsh, who even reached AP No. 1 rankings for Virginia in October 1990, is a member of the College Football Hall of Fame after compiling the second-most wins in ACC history after Bobby Bowden. In a historic rivalry between two legendary coaches, Welsh finished two games up in the head-to-head series against Virginia Tech coach Frank Beamer, 8\u20136. He was also dominant against UNC in the South's Oldest Rivalry, finishing 13\u20135\u20131, including a perfect 10\u20130 record against North Carolina at Scott Stadium.\nSponsorship.\nIn 2015, The Cavaliers negotiated a 10-year sponsorship deal with Nike, from which the program receives $3.5\u00a0million per year.\nPeople.\nFaculty.\nFaculty were originally housed in the Academical Village among the students, serving as both instructors and advisors, continuing on to include the McCormick Road Old Dorms, though this has been phased out in favor of undergraduate student resident advisors (RAs). Several of the faculty, however, continue the university tradition of living on Grounds, either on the Lawn in the various Pavilions, or as fellows at one of three residential colleges (Brown College at Monroe Hill, Hereford College, and the International Residential College).\nThe university's faculty includes a National Humanities Medal and National Medal of Arts winner and former United States Poet Laureate, an awardee of the Order of Isabella the Catholic, 25 Guggenheim fellows, 26 Fulbright fellows, six National Endowment for the Humanities fellows, two Presidential Young Investigator Award winners, three Sloan award winners, three Packard Foundation Award winners, and a winner of the 2005 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Physics professor James McCarthy was the lead academic liaison to the government in the establishment of Suranet, and the university has also participated in ARPANET, Abilene, Internet2, and Lambda Rail. On March 19, 1986, the university's domain name, codice_1, became the first registration under the codice_2 top-level domain originating from the Commonwealth of Virginia on what would become the World Wide Web.\nLarry Sabato has, according to \"The Wall Street Journal\" and \"The Washington Post\", become the most-cited professor in the country by national and regional news organizations, both on the Internet and in print. Civil rights activist Julian Bond, a professor in the Corcoran Department of History from 1990 to 2012, was the chairman of the NAACP from 1998 to 2009 and was chosen to host the Nobel Laureates conference in 1998.\nAlumni.\nAs of December 2014[ [update]], the University of Virginia has 221,000 living graduates. According to a study by researchers at the Darden School and Stanford University, UVA alumni have founded over 65,000 companies which have employed 2.3\u00a0million people worldwide with annual global revenues of $1.6\u00a0trillion. Extrapolated numbers show companies founded by UVA alumni have created 371,000 jobs in the state of Virginia alone. The relatively small amount that the Commonwealth gives UVA for support was determined by the study to have a tremendous return on investment for the state.\nRhodes Scholarships are international postgraduate awards given to students to study at the University of Oxford. Since the scholarship program began in 1904, UVA has had fifty-seven Rhodes Scholars. \nEight NASA astronauts and launch directors are UVA alumni: Karl Gordon Henize, Bill Nelson, Thomas Marshburn, Leland Melvin, Jeff Wisoff, Kathryn Thornton, Patrick Forrester; and Michael Leinbach.\nThe Pulitzer Prize has been awarded to eight UVA alumni: Edward P. Jones, Ron Suskind, Virginius Dabney, Claudia Emerson, Henry Taylor, Lane DeGregory, George Rodrigue, and Michael Vitez.\nGovernment leaders include 28th President of the United States Woodrow Wilson (who attended before transferring), former Special Counsel and FBI Director Robert Mueller; NATO Secretary General Javier Solana; U.S. Speaker of the House Robert M. T. Hunter; widely known United States Senators Harry Byrd, Robert F. Kennedy, and Ted Kennedy; first African American Chief Justice of the Virginia Supreme Court Leroy Hassell; Delaware Court of Chancery Vice Chancellor J. Travis Laster; United States Supreme Court Justices Howell Edmunds Jackson, James Clark McReynolds, and Stanley Forman Reed; President of the Supreme Court of Israel, Asher Grunis; and Premier and President of the First Republic of China, Yan Huiqing.\nThirty U.S. state or U.S. territorial Governors have graduated from UVA, including fifteen Governors of Virginia, and fifteen Governors of other U.S. states and territories as well. \nUVA's alumni ranks also include others who have achieved widespread fame: computer science pioneer John Backus; polar explorer Richard Byrd; physicians Walter Reed, Charles T. Pepper, J. Hartwell Harrison, Hugh S. Cumming, Rupert Blue, Wade Hampton Frost, Vivian Pinn, and Francis Collins; scientists Stuart Schreiber, Daniel Barringer, and Richard Lutz; artists Edgar Allan Poe and Georgia O'Keeffe; musicians Stephen Malkmus and Boyd Tinsley; self-made billionaire Paul Tudor Jones; national news anchors Katie Couric and Brit Hume; actors Tina Fey, Ben McKenzie, and Sarah Drew; Team USA Olympic team captains John Harkes, Dawn Staley, and Claudio Reyna; NBA All-Star MVP Ralph Sampson and the NBA's eighth ever 50\u201340\u201390 shooter Malcolm Brogdon; two-time FIFA Women's World Cup champions Becky Sauerbrunn, Emily Sonnett and Morgan Brian; voice actor Sam Riegel; and social psychologist Jon Maner.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59804", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59804", "title": "Have Space Suit\u2014Will Travel", "text": "1958 SF novel by Robert A. Heinlein\nHave Space Suit\u2014Will Travel is a science fiction novel for young readers by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, originally serialized in \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\" (August, September, and October 1958) and published by Scribner's in hardcover in 1958. The last Heinlein novel to be published by Scribner's, it was nominated for a Hugo Award in 1959 and won the Sequoyah Children's Book Award for 1961. Heinlein's engineering expertise enabled him to add realistic detail; during World War II, he had been a civilian aeronautics engineer at a laboratory which developed pressure suits for use at high altitudes.\nPlot summary.\nIn the near future, Earth has established some lunar bases. High school senior Clifford \"Kip\" Russell is determined to get to the Moon, but the price of a ticket is far beyond his reach. His unorthodox father suggests he enter an advertising jingle-writing contest; first prize is an all-expenses-paid trip there. Instead, he wins a used space suit. Kip puts the suit (which he names \"Oscar\") back into working condition.\nKip reluctantly decides to return his space suit for a cash prize to help pay for college, but puts it on for one last walk. As he idly broadcasts on his shortwave radio, someone identifying herself as \"Peewee\" answers and requests a homing signal. He is shocked when a flying saucer lands practically on top of him. An 11-year-old girl (Peewee) and an alien being (the \"Mother Thing\") flee from it, but all three are quickly captured and taken to the Moon.\nTheir kidnapper (\"Wormface\") is a horrible-looking creature who contemptuously refers to all others as \"animals\". Wormface has two human flunkies (\"Fats\" and \"Skinny\") who assisted him in initially capturing the Mother Thing and Peewee, the latter a genius and the daughter of an eminent scientist. The Mother Thing speaks in what sounds like birdsong (illustrated by a few musical notations), but Kip and Peewee have no trouble understanding her.\nKip, Peewee, and the Mother Thing escape and try to reach the nearest human lunar base on foot, but they are recaptured and taken to a base on Pluto. Kip is thrown into a cell, later to be joined by Fats and Skinny, who have apparently outlived their usefulness. After Skinny is taken away, Fats tells Kip that his former employers eat humans, before he too disappears.\nThe Mother Thing, meanwhile, makes herself useful to their captors by constructing advanced devices for them. She manages to steal enough parts to assemble a bomb and a transmitter. The bomb takes care of all but one of the Wormfaces, and between them, Kip and Peewee deal with the last one. The Mother Thing freezes solid when she tries to set up the transmitter outside without a spacesuit. Kip puts Oscar on and activates the beacon, but becomes severely frostbitten in the extreme cold. Help arrives quickly. Kip, Peewee and the Mother Thing are transported to Vega V, the Mother Thing's home planet.\nKip is kept in a state of cryopreservation while the Mother Thing's people figure out how to heal him. It turns out that the Mother Thing is far hardier than Kip had suspected and freezing did not hurt her. While Kip recuperates, a Vegan anthropologist whom Kip nicknames \"Joe\" learns about Earth from Peewee and Kip. Once Kip is well, he, Peewee, and the Mother Thing travel to a planet in the Lesser Magellanic Cloud, to face an intergalactic tribunal, composed of many advanced species that have banded together for self-protection.\nThe Wormfaces are put on trial first. Their representatives are so arrogantly xenophobic that they promise to destroy the \"animals\" who dared to try the \"Only People\", and are judged to be dangerous. Their species is sentenced to have their planet \"rotated\" 90\u00b0 out of the present space-time\u00a0... without their star, most likely dooming them to freezing to death.\nThen it is humanity's turn to be judged, as represented by Peewee, Kip, and two additional humans retrieved from different historical eras: Iunio (an ancient Roman centurion), and a Neanderthal man. The Neanderthal is rejected as being of another species. Iunio proves belligerent, but brave. Peewee's and Kip's recorded remarks are then admitted into evidence. In humanity's defense, Kip makes an impassioned speech. The Mother Thing and a representative of another race argue that the short-lived species are essentially children who should be granted more time to learn and grow. It is decided to re-evaluate humanity after \"a dozen half-deaths of radium\" (19,200 years).\nKip and Peewee are returned to Earth with advanced alien devices and scientific equations provided by the Vegans to help the human race advance. Kip passes the information along to Professor Reisfeld, Peewee's father. Reisfeld arranges a full scholarship for Kip at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where Kip wants to study engineering and spacesuit design.\nReception.\nFloyd C. Gale wrote that the book \"is possibly the most unabashedly juvenile of Heinlein's long list ... Great for kids, chancy for grownups who don't identify readily with adolescent heroes\".\nFilm adaptation.\nIn 2010, it was announced that \"Star Trek\" writer Harry Kloor had written a script for a film version and optioned the film rights. The film was expected to have come out in 2013, but as of the end of 2013 was still listed as \"in development\".\nEditions.\nThe cover for one of the French editions (Presses Pocket, 1978) is by notable science fiction illustrator Jean-Claude M\u00e9zi\u00e8res.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59805", "revid": "13051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59805", "title": "Job, A Parody of Justice", "text": ""}
{"id": "59806", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59806", "title": "'\u2014All You Zombies\u2014'", "text": "1958 SF short story by Robert A. Heinlein\n\"\u2009'\u2014All You Zombies\u2014'\u2009\" is a science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. It was written in one day, July 11, 1958, and first published in the March 1959 issue of \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\" after being rejected by \"Playboy\".\nThe story involves a number of paradoxes caused by time travel. In 1980, it was nominated for the Balrog Award for short fiction.\n\"'\u2014All You Zombies\u2014'\" further develops themes explored by the author in a previous work: \"By His Bootstraps\", published some 18 years earlier. Some of the same elements also appear later in \"The Cat Who Walks Through Walls\" (1985), including the Circle of Ouroboros and the Temporal Corps.\nThe unusual title of the story, which includes both the quotation marks and dashes shown above, is a quotation from a sentence near the end of the story; the quotation is taken from the middle of the sentence, hence the dashes indicating elided text before and after the title.\nPlot.\n\"'\u2014All You Zombies\u2014'\" chronicles a young man (later revealed to be intersex) taken back in time and tricked into impregnating his younger, female self (before he was forced to undergo sexual reassignment surgery); he turns out to be the offspring of that union, with the paradoxical result that he is his own mother and father. As the story unfolds, all the major characters are revealed to be the same person, at different stages of their life.\nNarrative order of events.\nThe story involves an intricate series of time-travel journeys (see diagram). It begins with a young man speaking to the narrator, the Bartender, in 1970. The two of them relate in that both of them are from unmarried parents. The Bartender remarks that no one in his family ever gets married, including him. He wears an Ouroboros ring. The young man is called the Unmarried Mother, because he writes stories for confession magazines, many of them presumably from the point of view of an unmarried mother.\nCajoled by the Bartender, the Unmarried Mother explains why he understands the female viewpoint so well: he was born a girl, in 1945, and raised in an orphanage. While a fairly ugly teenager in 1963, she was seduced, impregnated, and abandoned by an older man. During the delivery of her child, doctors discovered she was intersex, with internalized male sex organs as well as female sex organs. Complications during delivery, by Caesarean section, rendered the female organs unviable and the physicians gave her a gender reassignment. The baby was kidnapped by a mysterious older gentleman, and not seen again. The Unmarried Mother then had to adjust to life as a man, despite an upbringing that left him unqualified for \"men's\" jobs; he had planned to get into space as a sex worker for male workers and colonists. Instead, he used his secretarial skills to type manuscripts and eventually began writing.\nProfessing sympathy, the Bartender offers to take him to the abandoning seducer, whom the Unmarried Mother wishes revenge on. The Bartender guides him into a back room, where he (Bartender) uses a time machine to take them to 1963, and sets the young man loose. The Bartender goes forward eleven months, kidnaps a one-month-old baby, and takes her to 1945, leaving her at an orphanage. He returns to 1963 one month later and picks up the Unmarried Mother, who was instinctively attracted to his younger female self and has seduced and impregnated her. The Bartender nudges him to connect the dots and realize that the seducer, the young woman, the baby, and the time traveler are all \"him\".\nThe Bartender then drops the Unmarried Mother in 1985 at an outpost of the Temporal Bureau, a time-traveling secret police force that manipulates events in history, to protect the human race. He has just created and recruited himself.\nFinally, the Bartender returns to 1970, arriving a short time after he left the bar. He allows a customer to play \"I'm My Own Grandpa\" on the jukebox, having yelled at the customer for playing the song before he left. Closing the bar, he time travels again to his home base in 1993. As he beds down for a much-deserved rest, he contemplates the scar left over from the Caesarean section performed when he gave birth to his daughter, father, mother, and entire history. He thinks, \"I \"know\" where \"I\" came from\u2014but \"where did all you zombies come from?\"\"\nChronological order of events.\nAs the story is told as a disjointed point of view reference by several other points thereafter, this is the actual chronological history of \"Jane\" according to the story, although the story itself is still a classic example of a time paradox.\nReception.\nPhilosopher David Lewis considered \"'\u2014All You Zombies\u2014'\" and \"By His Bootstraps\" to be examples of \"perfectly consistent\" time travel stories. Stating that it and other Heinlein time-travel stories \"force the reader into contemplations of the nature of causality and the arrow of time\", Carl Sagan listed \"'\u2014All You Zombies\u2014'\" as an example of how science fiction \"can convey bits and pieces, hints and phrases, of knowledge unknown or inaccessible to the reader\". Stanis\u0142aw Lem, in his monograph \"Science Fiction and Futurology\", mentioned \"'\u2014All You Zombies\u2014'\" as an example of a minimal possible bootstrap paradox in SF.\nFilm adaptation.\nThe Spierig brothers directed the Australian science fiction film \"Predestination\" (2014) based on the story. The film starred Ethan Hawke and Sarah Snook.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59807", "revid": "1286233174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59807", "title": "Blowups Happen", "text": "1940 science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein\n\"Blowups Happen\" is a 1940 science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. It is one of two stories in which Heinlein, using only public knowledge of nuclear fission, anticipated the actual development of nuclear technology a few years later. The other story is \"Solution Unsatisfactory\", which is concerned with a nuclear weapon, although it is only a radiological \"dirty bomb\", not a nuclear explosive device.\nThe story was first published in \"Astounding Science Fiction\" in 1940, before any nuclear reactors had ever been built, and for its appearance in the 1946 anthology \"The Best of Science Fiction,\" Heinlein made some modifications to reflect how a reactor actually worked. In the omnibus \"The Past Through Tomorrow\", \"Blowups Happen\" is referred to as a 1940 story, but it mentions the 1945 atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, reflecting revisions made in 1946.\nThe story made a later appearance in \"The Worlds of Robert A. Heinlein\", a collection of short stories published in 1966. It also appears in his \"Expanded Universe\" in 1980, but here it appears in its original \"Astounding\" 1940 version: Heinlein writes in an introduction to the story: \"I now see, as a result of the enormous increase in the art in 33 years, more errors in the '46 version than I spotted in the '40 version when I checked it in '46\".\nThe story is one of the earliest in Heinlein's Future History chronology, taking place in the late 20th century.\nPlot.\nThe story describes the tensions among the staff of a nuclear reactor, described as a uranium-powered pile. Heinlein's concept of a nuclear reactor was one of a barely contained explosion, not the steady-state thermal plants developed later. As a consequence, the work is dangerous, and the slightest mistake could be catastrophic. By the time the story starts, all the technical staff are monitored by psychologists who have the authority to remove them from the work at any time lest they crack under the pressure and precipitate a disaster. The monitoring itself contributes to the problem of stress.\nThe supervisor calls up Dr. Lentz, a fictional student of Alfred Korzybski, to analyze the situation. Lentz determines that there is little to be done, and the reactor will have to be shut down. Another consultant, Captain Harrington of the United States Naval Observatory, arrives as Lentz is preparing to return home. Harrington has discovered that the calculations on the reactor have greatly underestimated the scale of the destruction, should the reactor go out of control, and proposes that the cratering of the moon is due to an extinct civilization that destroyed itself in such a manner. The situation seems hopeless, as the energy produced by the reactor is sorely needed on Earth, oil having become too scarce and valuable to use for fuel.\nIn a parallel subplot, some researchers have discovered a way to blend two isotopes that both solves safety problems and allows for nuclear-powered rockets. Using a method called \"calculus of statement\", the team uses this discovery, taking into account the social, psychological, physical, and economic variables pressuring the reactor to remain online, and concludes that the reactor should be launched into space to produce the new fuel, which would then be returned to Earth and burned safely in different reactors. The main reactor being in space removes the danger of planetary catastrophe but, by breeding the new fuel, still allows it to produce the needed energy.\nThe protagonists have difficulty convincing the board of directors for the reactor of this plan. However, Lentz, speaking for the local manager, finally gets the point across. Lentz explains the danger of the current situation factually, but at their continued refusal, threatens to denounce them in public, which could start a panic, while also offering to ennoble them should they shut it down. Finally they relent, and a rocket is quickly built. A man goes crazy just as they finish, but is stopped. The reactor is shut down in preparation for being moved.\nIn Heinlein's Future History, the next story sequentially is \"The Man Who Sold the Moon\", in which the reactor indeed explodes in space. The actual cause was the detonation of the service rocket's fuel, caused by the effects of cosmic radiation on the supposedly stable nuclear material.\nReception.\nIn 2016, the story was nominated for the 1941 Retro-Hugo Award for Best Novelette.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59808", "revid": "49636717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59808", "title": "By His Bootstraps", "text": "1941 science fiction novella by Robert A. Heinlein\n\"By His Bootstraps\" is a 20,000 word science fiction novella by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. It plays with some of the inherent paradoxes that would be caused by time travel.\nThe story was published in the October 1941 issue of \"Astounding Science Fiction\" under the pen name Anson MacDonald; the same issue has \"Common Sense\" under Heinlein's name. \"By His Bootstraps\" was reprinted in Heinlein's 1959 collection \"The Menace From Earth\", and in several subsequent anthologies, and is now available in at least two audio editions. Under the title \"The Time Gate\", it was also included in a 1958 Crest paperback anthology, \"Race to the Stars\".\nPlot summary.\nIn 1952, Bob Wilson locks himself in his room to finish his graduate thesis on a mathematical aspect of metaphysics, using the concept of time travel as a case in point. Bob does not care much at this point whether his thesis (that time travel is impossible) is valid; he is desperate for sleep and just wants to get it done and typed up by the deadline the next day to become an academic, since he thinks academia beats working for a living. Suddenly, although Bob had locked himself alone in his room, someone says, \u201cDon\u2019t bother with it. It's a lot of utter hogwash anyhow.\" The interloper, who looks strangely familiar, and to whom Bob takes a dislike, calls himself \"Joe\", and explains that he has come from the future through a Time Gate, a circle about in diameter in the air behind Joe. Joe tells Bob that great opportunities await him through the Gate and thousands of years in his future. By way of demonstration, Joe tosses Bob's hat into the Gate. It disappears.\nBob is reluctant. Joe plies him with drink, which Joe (a stranger, from Bob's point of view) inexplicably retrieves from its hiding place in Bob's apartment, and Bob becomes intoxicated. Bob's talk with Joe is interrupted by odd phone calls, first from a man who sounds familiar, and then from his sometime girlfriend, who gets upset when Bob says he hasn't seen her recently. Finally, Joe is about to manhandle Bob through the Gate when another man appears, one who looks very much like Joe. The newcomer does not want Bob to go. During the ensuing fight, Bob gets punched, sending him through the Gate.\nHe recovers his senses in a strange place. A somewhat older-looking, bearded man explains that he is some 30,000 years in the future. The man, calling himself Diktor, treats Bob to a sumptuous breakfast served by beautiful women, one of whom Bob speaks of admiringly. Diktor immediately gives that woman to Bob as a slave. Diktor explains that the humans of this age are handsome, cultured in a primitive fashion, but much more docile and good natured than their ancestors. An alien race, the High Ones, built the Gate and refashioned humanity into compliant servants, but the High Ones are gone now, leaving a world where a 20th-century \"go-getter\" can make himself king.\nDiktor asks him to go back through the Gate and bring back the man he finds on the other side. Bob agrees. Stepping through, he finds himself back in his own room, watching himself typing his thesis. Without much memory of what happened before, he reenacts the scene, this time from the other point of view, and calling himself \"Joe\" so as not to confuse his earlier self. Just as he is about to shove Bob through the Gate, another version of himself shows up. The fight happens as before, and Bob goes through the Gate.\nHis future self claims that Diktor is just trying to tangle them up so badly that they can never get untangled, but Joe goes through and meets Diktor again. Diktor gives him a list of things to buy in his own time and bring back. A little annoyed by Diktor's manner, Bob argues with him, but eventually returns to the past, back in his room once again.\nHe lives through the same scene for the third time, then realizes that he is now free of Diktor. Bob ponders the nature of the 20th-century society he lives in, finding it seedy and depressing. He is sure he no longer has time to finish his thesis, but it is obviously incorrect anyway, so he decides he will go back to the future through the Time Gate. While setting the Gate, he finds two things beside the controls: his hat, and a notebook containing translations between English words and the language of Diktor's subjects. He returns to his own time and collects the items on Diktor's list, which seem to be things a 20th-century man could find useful in making himself king in the future, intentionally writing a bad check for the purchases, after persuading the cashier that the check is good. He then visits a woman he had been dating, but has begun to dislike, and has his way with her, smugly intending to never see her again, and leaving his hat in her apartment. He phones his past self as a prank, quickly hanging up. After returning to the future, he adjusts the Gate to send himself back to a point ten years earlier, to give himself time to establish himself as the local chieftain. In doing so he hopes to preempt Diktor's influence, charting his own course instead.\nBob sets himself up as chief, taking precautions against the arrival of Diktor. He even adopts the name Diktor, which is simply the local word for \"chief.\" He experiments with the Time Gate, hoping to see the High Ones. Once, he does catch a glimpse of one and has a brief mental contact with it. The experience is so traumatizing that he runs away screaming, for the creature feels such sadness and other deep emotions that a 20th-century go-getter like Bob cannot bear it. He forces himself to return long enough to shut down the Gate, then stays away from it for more than two years. He does not notice that his hair has begun to whiten prematurely, as a result of the stress and shock. Having worn out the notebook through long use, he copies its text into a new, identical one.\nOne day, upon setting the Gate to view his old room in the past, he sees three versions of himself in a familiar arrangement. Shortly, his earliest self comes through. The circle has closed. He \"is\" Diktor\u2014the only Diktor there ever was. Wondering who actually compiled the notebook, Diktor prepares to brief Bob, who has to orchestrate events to ensure his own past.\nReception.\nFloyd C. Gale of \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" said of \"By His Bootstraps\", \"In 18 years I haven't seen its equal\" as a temporal-paradox story. Philosopher David Lewis considered \"By His Bootstraps\" and \"'\u2014All You Zombies\u2014'\" to be examples of \"perfectly consistent\" time travel stories. Stating that it and other Heinlein time-travel stories \"force the reader into contemplations of the nature of causality and the arrow of time\", Carl Sagan listed \"By His Bootstraps\" as an example of how science fiction \"can convey bits and pieces, hints and phrases, of knowledge unknown or inaccessible to the reader\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59809", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59809", "title": "Robert Heinlein/Coventry", "text": ""}
{"id": "59810", "revid": "40065947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59810", "title": "Coventry (short story)", "text": "1940 short story by Robert Heinlein\n\"Coventry\" is a science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, part of his Future History series. It was first published in the July 1940 issue of \"Astounding Science Fiction\", and later collected into the book \"Revolt in 2100\" in 1953. The title is inspired by the British idiom \"to send someone to Coventry\". In 2017, the story won the Prometheus Hall of Fame award.\nPlot summary.\nIn a future American society, everyone must accept the Covenant of non-violence, and psychologists can \"cure\" criminal or violent personality traits. The protagonist, David MacKinnon, is a romantic idealist who has been convicted of assault, and the court determines he is a substantial risk to commit violence in the future. He must accept treatment to remove his violent tendency, or be exiled to \"Coventry\", the area allocated to those who reject the Covenant or commit crimes and refuse psychological treatment, enclosed by an impassable electric field (the \"Barrier\").\nMacKinnon chooses to emigrate to escape what he sees as the boredom of a too-civilized society. But he discovers that Coventry is not the peaceful anarchy he envisioned. It is actually a bleak dystopia split into three separate \"countries\":\nOn arrival in New America, MacKinnon is arrested and jailed, and loses everything he had brought with him through the Barrier. He\u00a0is befriended by fellow inmate \"Fader\" Magee, and they break out of jail. MacKinnon learns that New America and the Free State have discovered how to breach the Barrier and are combining forces to attack the outside society. He and Fader break out of Coventry separately to warn of the imminent attack. In the outside world, MacKinnon learns that Fader is actually a government agent. Also, by risking his life for the good of the country, he has shown he is free of criminal tendencies and no longer needs therapy.\nInfluence on Dianetics.\nOn March 8, 1949, fellow science-fiction author L. Ron Hubbard wrote to Heinlein referencing Coventry as an influence on what would become Dianetics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Well, you didn't specify in your book what actual reformation took place in the society to make supermen. Got to thinking about it other day. The system is Excalibur. It makes nul A's. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59811", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59811", "title": "Delilah and The Space Rigger", "text": ""}
{"id": "59812", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59812", "title": "Delilah and the Space Rigger", "text": "1949 short story by Robert Heinlein\n\"Delilah and the Space Rigger\" is a science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. One of his Future History stories, it originally appeared in \"Blue Book\" in December 1949 and was reprinted in his collection, \"The Green Hills of Earth\" (and subsequently \"The Past Through Tomorrow\").\n\"Delilah and the Space Rigger\" is one of Heinlein's stories with a typically strong, smart, capable (for the American science fiction market of the time) female protagonist.\nPlot summary.\nBrooks McNye, a communications engineer, wangles a job as a radio technician (concealing her first name, Gloria) and joins the all-male crew of construction workers building a space station. On arrival, she is immediately confronted by \"Tiny\" Larsen, the hard-boiled construction superintendent, who had not realized she was female. He does not want women \"sniffing around my boys\" and orders her returned on the next shuttle, only to be forced by circumstances to keep her. Larsen is constantly putting his foot in his mouth with remarks like, \"Mind what [Hammond] tells you. He's a good man,\" only to hear a brisk, \"I know, I trained him.\" In the end, he is forced to admit that having a woman on the team has improved morale and efficiency, and he decides to stop discriminating on the basis of sex. He also asks that a chaplain be assigned to the station, reasoning, \"under the new policy we may need one anytime.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59813", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59813", "title": "Gentlemen, Be Seated!", "text": "1948 short story by Robert A. Heinlein\n\"Gentlemen, Be Seated\" is a science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. It was first published in the May 1948 issue of \"Argosy\" magazine. It was later included in two of Heinlein's collections, \"The Green Hills of Earth\" (1951), and \"The Past Through Tomorrow\" (1967).\nPlot summary.\nThe story tells of a visit to a tunnel on the surface of the Moon which goes awry when a pressure seal fails, trapping three men (a supervisor, a reporter, and a tunnel worker). The title of the story derives from the way they plug an air leak while awaiting rescue: by sitting on it.\nThe phrase \"Gentlemen, Be Seated!\" is the opening line of the interlocutor in a traditional minstrel show. It was also, at the time the story was written and while Heinlein attended, the opening line for all classes at the military and naval academies (as well as classes for officers at the various service schools) in the United States.\nThe story might have been inspired by an episode in \"Baron Munchausen\": The ship sprung a leak. It was my good fortune to discover it first. I found it a large hole about a foot diameter.\u00a0... This noble vessel was preserved, with all its crew, by a most fortunate thought! in short, I sat down over it.\u00a0... My situation, while I sat there, was rather cool, but the carpenter's art soon relieved me.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59814", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59814", "title": "&quot;If This Goes On\u2014&quot;", "text": "Science fiction novella by Robert A. Heinlein\n\"If This Goes On\u2014\" is a science fiction novella by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, first serialized in 1940 in \"Astounding Science-Fiction\" and revised and expanded to novel length for inclusion in the 1953 collection \"Revolt in 2100\". The story shows what might happen to Christianity in the United States with mass communications, applied psychology, and a hysterical populace. The story is part of Heinlein's \"Future History\" series.\nAt the 2016 WorldCon the story won the 1941 Retro-Hugo Award for Best Novella of 1940.\nPlot.\nThe story is set in a future theocratic American society, ruled by the latest in a series of fundamentalist Christian \"Prophets.\" The First Prophet was Nehemiah Scudder, a backwoods preacher turned President (elected in 2012), then dictator (no elections were held in 2016 or later).\nJohn Lyle, a junior army officer under the Prophet, is stationed at the Prophet's capital of New Jerusalem. He had been devout, but he finds himself questioning his faith when he falls for one of the Prophet's Virgins, Sister Judith. New to the vocation, Judith faints when she is called upon to submit sexually to the Prophet and is confined to her quarters until she sees the light. John confides in his far more worldly roommate, Zeb Jones, who is not shocked but even assists John. A clandestine meeting with Judith goes awry when they are forced to kill a spy. They are left with no choice but to seek aid from the Cabal, an underground revolutionary movement (Judith's friend, Sister Magdalene, is a member). The two men are inducted into the Cabal while they remain on duty in their army posts. Judith is arrested and tortured as part of the investigation into the death of the spy, and John and Zeb rescue her but leave enough clues that John is soon arrested and tortured himself. He gives little away and is himself rescued by the Cabal. Zeb and Magdalene have evaded arrest thanks to a clandestine distress signal, which John managed to leave for Zeb while he is arrested.\nJudith is spirited out of the country before John regains consciousness, and John is given a false identity to make his way to Cabal headquarters. He is detected en route, forced to flee, and arrives safely after several misadventures. He finds that Zeb and Magdalene, who he assumes are a couple, have made their way there before him. All take on significant roles in bringing to fruition the revolutionary plot, John as an aide to the commander, General Huxley.\nWorking there, John receives a literal \"Dear John\" letter from Judith that informs him of her impending marriage to a Mexican man she met while she was taking refuge in his country. He learns that Zeb and Magdalene have no marriage plans, as their strong personalities would inevitably clash, and he begins a romance with Magdalene.\nThe revolutionary plot is mostly successful, and the country other than New Jerusalem is seized. However, the capital must also be conquered to prevent it from serving as a rallying point for loyalists. Even as constitutional discussions go on, the new regime's troops, tempered to provide the greatest possible individual freedom (that is the origin of the 'Covenant' mentioned in other Heinlein works), prepare to take New Jerusalem. John and Magdalene are married just before the assault.\nDuring the fight, Huxley is wounded, and John must take over temporary command though he is not entitled by rank to do so. He gives the orders that bring victory. He then turns over command to the senior unwounded general and leads a squad invading the Prophet's private quarters. They find that he has been viciously killed by his own Virgins.\nFreemasonry.\nThe Cabal uses terminology associated with Freemasonry, and there are hints that the Masons are actually one of the groups involved in the loosely organized revolt against the government. (Heinlein himself was not a Mason, but he had considered joining the Masons as a young man.)\nCritical reception.\nDamon Knight in his 1967 book \"In Search of Wonder\" wrote of the novella:\nRevolution... has always been a favorite theme in science fiction. It's romantic, it's reliable, and\u2014as a rule\u2014it's as phony as a Martian princess.\nWho but Heinlein ever pointed out, as he does here in detail, that a modern revolution is big business? And who but Heinlein would have seen that fraternal organizations, for thirty years the butt of highbrow American humor, would make the perfect nucleus for an American underground against tyranny?\nA reviewer for \"The Economist\" in 2024 called the novel \"a peculiar mixture of pulpy action and political theorising\". He noted that the novel version included extensive postscript by the author explaining his concerns. He quoted Heinlein words from it:\nThere is a latent deep strain of religious fanaticism in [America]; it is rooted in our history and it has broken out many times in the past...[T]here has been a sharp rise in strongly evangelical sects in this country in recent years, some of which hold beliefs theocratic in the extreme, anti-intellectual, anti-scientific, and anti-libertarian...The capacity of the human mind for swallowing nonsense and spewing it forth in violent and repressive action has never yet been plumbed.\nIn academia, the story has been analyzed as an early critique (in science fiction) of \"religion as a manipulative, hegemonic social tool\", and argued to be an example of a feminist critique of religion. It has also been mentioned as one of the first portrayals of fictional religion in sci-fi.\nConnections with other works by Heinlein.\nSet in Heinlein's \"Future History\", the story is self-contained and\ndescribes the end of a theocratic government that had been established in 2012.\nThis government had been democratically elected but was quickly subverted by the\nelected president (and the first of the Prophets) Nehemiah Scudder. The context\nof this election was the societal disruptions brought about by the establishment\nof the \"new imperialism\", described in \"The Man Who Sold the Moon\", this\nimperialism being brought about by the development of practical interplanetary\ntravel. This leads to, as describe in \"Logic of Empire\", subsistence\nlevel wages at home and slavery in the colonies (the subject of \"Logic of Empire\", where \"colonists\" on Venus are for all intents and purposes slaves). Because of the economic dislocations brought about by this imperialism, revolutions occurred in and around 2012, in the United States, Venus and Little America and brought the end\nto interplanetary travel (the Interregnum). Incidentally, interplanetary travel\nwas implicitly assumed by Heinlein to be a solely American\nprovenance (note Heinlein assumes that Europe is destroyed in the future, first\nby \"the final blackout\" and then (in \"Time Enough For Love\" by Great\nChina). Heinlein is writing a \"future history\", and \"If This Goes On--\" is\ntowards the end of this history, the finale being the novellas \"Methuselah's Children\" (published in two parts). \"Methuselah's Children\" describes\na time approximately fifty years after the overthrow of the theocratic\ngovernment and depicts a society founded on the principles of \"semantics\"\n(Heinlein states in various places that the Prophets would never have taken\npower if a science of such has been established before 2012). \"If This Goes On--\" also describes briefly what the future government of the United States\nwould look like (the Covenant, a somewhat-idealized basis for government\ndepicted in \"Coventry\", \"Misfit\", and \"Methuselah's Children\"). Note, of course, in\n\"Methuselah's Children\", the principles of this Utopian government are\nquickly cast aside and the torture methods used by the Prophets are authorized\nagainst a sub-group of long-lived humans (the Howards, eponymously named after the foundation which funded selective breeding for longevity in humans).\nScudder was previously mentioned in passing in the short story \"Logic of Empire\" and would be again later on in Heinlein's final novel, \"To Sail Beyond the Sunset\". A story about the rise of Scudder, \"The Sound of His Wings\", is contained in the \"Future History\" timeline but was never written by Heinlein, who stated in the afterword to \"Revolt in 2100\": \"I will probably never write the story of Nehemiah Scudder, I dislike him too much.\" Also, a story called \"The Stone Pillow\", which would have depicted the earlier foredoomed opposition to the Theocracy, never got written; Heinlein noted that there was \"too much tragedy in real life\".\nThe 1940 version of \"If This Goes On\u2014\" was believed to be Heinlein's first novel until the unpublished work \"\" was discovered in 2003. The earlier unpublished novel also features a Nehemiah Scudder who comes very close to gaining power but is stopped at the last moment by the mobilization of Libertarians.\nWard Carson wrote: \"In \"For Us, the Living\", space colonization waits until the end of the twenty-first century and Scudder is defeated; in the \"Future History\" it happens a century earlier and Scudder takes over the US. Heinlein made no explicit remark on this, but a causal connection could be made: in the Future History the bold individualistic Americans emigrated into space in the end of the twentieth century, and were not present in America to stop it from falling into the fanatic's hands.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nhttps://"}
{"id": "59815", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59815", "title": "Its Great to Be Back", "text": ""}
{"id": "59816", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59816", "title": "It's Great to Be Back!", "text": "Short story by Robert A. Heinlein\n\"It's Great to Be Back!\" is a science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. One of his Future History stories, it was first published in \"The Saturday Evening Post\" in the July 26, 1947 issue and later reprinted in \"The Green Hills of Earth\" (and subsequently \"The Past Through Tomorrow\").\nPlot summary.\nA physical chemist and his wife (the MacRaes), who have been in residence in Luna City on the Moon for some time, spend much of their time volubly regretting having ever left Earth. When this attitude results in social conflict with \"Loonies\" who love their home, the couple feels isolated, misunderstood, and put-upon. They decide to return to \"dirt-side\", only to discover that the Earth of their imaginations bears only the faintest of resemblances to the actuality, which includes things unheard of in Luna, like smog, unpleasant weather, the common cold, and repairmen who refuse to make house calls. Ultimately, they discover that all they really want is to go back to Luna City, where they are welcomed with open arms by their peers (now that they have realized that the Moon is \"home\" after all) and settle down to be happy \"Lunatics\"."}
{"id": "59817", "revid": "49728110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59817", "title": "Life-Line", "text": "1939 short story by American author Robert A. Heinlein\n\"Life-Line\" is a short story by American author Robert A. Heinlein. Published in the August 1939 edition of \"Astounding\", it was Heinlein's first published short story.\nThe protagonist, Professor Hugo Pinero, builds a machine that will predict how long a person will live. It does this by sending a signal along the world line of a person and detecting the echo from the far end. Professor Pinero's invention has a powerful impact on the life insurance industry, as well as on his own life.\nPinero is mentioned in passing in the novels \"Time Enough for Love\" and \"Methuselah's Children\" when the practically immortal Lazarus Long mentions having been examined and being sent away because the machine is \"broken\".\nWriting history.\nHeinlein was motivated to write the story by an editorial in \"Thrilling Wonder Stories\" magazine, in which Hugo Gernsback wrote that he wanted to foster new talent in the field, and that \"We shall endeavor to present one amateur writer's story in each forthcoming issue [...] until further notice.\" \"Thrilling Wonder Stories\"'s rate at the time was 0.5\u00a2 per word. After Heinlein had written the 7,000-word story, he submitted it first to a rival magazine, \"Astounding\", which paid 1\u00a2 per word. \"Astounding\" bought the story, and at their higher rate, Heinlein was paid $70 ().\nAccording to Virginia Heinlein's introductory biography of her husband in \"Grumbles from the Grave\", upon receiving the check for the story Heinlein reportedly said, \"How long has this racket been going on?\" Later, Heinlein's authorized biography included a version of the story in which \"Thrilling Wonder Stories\" had advertised a $50 contest. The first known version of this story appeared in a 1985 interview published in \"Xignals\", a science fiction newsletter.\n\"Life-Line\" was later collected in \"The Worlds of Robert A. Heinlein\" (1966), \"Expanded Universe\" (1980), and in a Baen edition of \"The Man Who Sold The Moon\" (1987).\nReception.\nOne particular paragraph from \"Life-Line\" is often quoted in reference to (and criticism of) modern intellectual property rights:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There has grown in the minds of certain groups in this country the idea that just because a man or corporation has made a profit out of the public for a number of years, the government and the courts are charged with guaranteeing such a profit in the future, even in the face of changing circumstances and contrary to public interest. This strange doctrine is supported by neither statute or common law. Neither corporations or individuals have the right to come into court and ask that the clock of history be stopped, or turned back.\nIn the realm of science another passage has come to be quoted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are but two ways of forming an opinion in science. One is the scientific method; the other, the scholastic. One can judge from experiment, or one can blindly accept authority. To the scientific mind, experimental proof is all important and theory is merely a convenience in description, to be junked when it no longer fits. To the academic mind, authority is everything and facts are junked when they do not fit theory laid down by authority.\nA short film adaptation directed by Zack Dodson and produced by Eric R. Gignac was released in 2022.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59818", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59818", "title": "Logic of Empire", "text": "Novella exploring slavery by Robert A. Heinlein\n\"Logic of Empire\" is a science fiction novella by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. Part of his Future History series, it originally appeared in \"Astounding Science Fiction\" (March 1941) and was collected in \"The Green Hills of Earth\" (and subsequently \"The Past Through Tomorrow\").\nPlot summary.\nTwo well-off Earth men are arguing about whether there is slavery on Venus, and one of them gets shanghaied there, or so he believes; they later find out that they have bet one another about the topic, gotten drunk, and signed on. Upon his arrival, he finds his contract sold to a farmer. His discovery that it will take him years to work off his debt is compounded by his realization that he cannot get to sleep at night without \"rhira\", an expensive local narcotic, which thus increases his debt every day.\nThemes.\nOstensibly a tale about a man in the wrong place at the wrong time and his struggle to free himself from the oppressive circumstances in which he is plunged, the story also attempts to explain how slavery develops in a new colony. Even in the future, the technology available to a new colony is always initially low. If a machine to do a necessary job is too expensive to import (say a wheat harvester, a water pump, or even a washing machine), a human must do it instead. If too many jobs must be done by hand, and there is a shortage of labor compared with independent resources that free labor could take up (exploit - \"land\" although that condition is not clear in the story), a market for slavery develops. Decades later, while there is still an abundance of land, this market remains because the colony itself has quotas to meet and debts to repay and cannot spare the resources to develop local industries to make the machines itself, yet free labor still then does not have to bid its price down enough to out-compete slave labor.\nThroughout the story, Heinlein takes the view of the objective narrator in describing Venusian society. \"Logic of Empire\" places different rationales on the people who participate in slavery, only teasing a sort of socio-scientific inevitability of a slavery system. There are no real villains; everybody is just doing their job of trying to maximize income in a mercantilist system. Even the plantation owner who owns the hero is portrayed as a struggling and failing small businessman, whose main motivation is to secure a livelihood for his daughter.\nNehemiah Scudder.\nThere is in the story a casual reference to the rise of the fanatic preacher Nehemiah Scudder, who would eventually be elected president and establish a theocratic dictatorship which would rule the US for several generations. Heinlein considered writing a story focusing on his rise, which would have had the name \"The Sound of His Wings\" and chronologically followed directly upon \"Logic of Empire.\" He never did so, and a great gap was left in the Future History which resumes with the overthrow of the theocracy in \"If This Goes On\u2014\".\nAs an aside, Heinlein himself said he felt that 3 books would need to be devoted to Scudder to tell the story fully and he couldn\u2019t stand the guy enough to spend that much time with him."}
{"id": "59819", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59819", "title": "Methuselahs Children (short story)", "text": ""}
{"id": "59820", "revid": "133716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59820", "title": "Methuselah's Children (short story)", "text": ""}
{"id": "59822", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59822", "title": "Robert Heinlein/Misfit", "text": ""}
{"id": "59823", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59823", "title": "Misfit (short story)", "text": "1939 short story by Robert A. Heinlein\n\"Misfit\" is a science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. It was originally titled \"Cosmic Construction Corps\" before being renamed by the editor John W. Campbell and published in the November 1939 issue of \"Astounding Science Fiction\". \"Misfit\" was Heinlein's second published story. One of the earliest of Heinlein's Future History stories, it was later included in the collections \"Revolt in 2100\" and \"The Past Through Tomorrow\".\nPlot summary.\nA coming-of-age story that follows Andrew Jackson Libby, a boy from Earth with extraordinary mathematical ability but meager education. Finding few opportunities on Earth, he joins the \"Cosmic Construction Corps\", a future military-led version of the US Depression-era Civilian Conservation Corps employing out-of-work youth to construct the infrastructure needed to colonize the Solar System. With a group of other inexperienced young men he is assigned to a ship traveling to the asteroid belt, where their task is to build a base on an asteroid and then move it into a more convenient orbit between Earth and Mars. Libby comes to the Captain's attention during the process of blasting holes in the asteroid for rocket engines when Libby realizes that a mistake has been made in calculating the size of the charge, preventing a catastrophic blast. He is assigned to the ship's astrogation computer. During the move to the destination orbit, the computer malfunctions, and Libby takes over, performing all the complex calculations in his head. The asteroid is settled successfully into its final orbit.\n\"Slipstick\" Libby became one of Heinlein's recurring characters and would later appear in several works associated with Lazarus Long, among them \"Methuselah's Children\" and \"The Cat Who Walks Through Walls\".\nThe story includes one of the earliest uses of the term \"space marines\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59824", "revid": "49276436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59824", "title": "Ordeal in Space", "text": "1948 short story by Robert A. Heinlein\n\"Ordeal in Space\" is a science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, originally published in \"Town &amp; Country\", May 1948. It is one of Heinlein's Future History stories, and appears in his collection \"The Green Hills of Earth\".\nPlot summary.\nA spaceship's crewman is called to repair an antenna while his ship is still underpinned. He is unable to hold on, despite supreme effort; he drifts away from the ship and has far too much time to ponder things. When he returns to Earth, he is unable to work as a spaceman for has fear of heights. After living in fear and sadness for a time, he must face his troubles while rescuing a kitten stuck on the 35th-floor ledge of a building.\nHeinlein includes a variant verse to the hymn \"Eternal Father, Strong to Save\", dedicated \"to those who venture into space,\" in the story. Originally titled \"Broken Wings\", the story was rejected by \"The Saturday Evening Post\". A reading of this story was broadcast on BBC Radio 7 on July 14, 2007.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "59825", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59825", "title": "Robert Heinlein/Requiem", "text": ""}
{"id": "59826", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59826", "title": "Requiem (short story)", "text": "\"Requiem\" is a short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, a sequel to his science fiction novella \"The Man Who Sold the Moon\", although it was in fact published several years earlier than that story, in \"Astounding\", January 1940. The story was also performed as a play on October 27, 1955, on the NBC Radio Network program \"X Minus One\".\nIt is also the first story in the retrospective \"Requiem: New Collected Works by Robert A. Heinlein and Tributes to the Grand Master\".\nPlot.\nThe story centers around D. D. Harriman, the lead character of \"The Man Who Sold the Moon\". Harriman, a tycoon and latter-day robber baron, had always dreamed of going to the Moon, and had spent much of his career and resources making space flight a practical commercial enterprise. Unfortunately, his business partners prevented him from taking the early flights because they could not risk the public face of their company. Now an old man, Harriman has still not been to the Moon, a fact that frustrates him, since he lives in a world where space travel is so commonplace that carnivals have their own barnstorming spacecraft. Although no longer bound by his contractual obligations, he is now too old to pass the medical examination needed for space travel.\nVery wealthy, Harriman bribes two spacemen to help him get to the Moon after encountering them at a funfair in Butler, a small town outside Kansas City, Missouri (and Heinlein's birthplace), where they sell rides on their old, somewhat run-down ship.\nThe three of them fight many obstacles, including Harriman's heirs, who want him declared mentally incompetent or senile before he can spend their inheritance. In the end, Harriman finally makes it to the Moon, only to die on the surface soon after landing, content at finally having reached his goal. His body is left there, with his epitaph scrawled on the tag from an oxygen bottle. It is Robert Louis Stevenson's:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Under the wide and starry sky&lt;br&gt;\nDig the grave and let me lie:&lt;br&gt;\nGlad did I live and gladly die,&lt;br&gt;\nAnd I laid me down with a will!\nThis be the verse you grave for me:&lt;br&gt;\nHere he lies where he longed to be;&lt;br&gt;\nHome is the sailor, home from sea,&lt;br&gt;\nAnd the hunter home from the hill.\u2014\u200a\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59827", "revid": "50154972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59827", "title": "Searchlight", "text": "Intense focused beam lamp for improving visual detection\nA searchlight (or spotlight) is an apparatus that combines an extremely bright source (traditionally a carbon arc lamp) with a mirrored parabolic reflector to project a powerful beam of light of approximately parallel rays in a particular direction. It is usually constructed so that it can be swiveled about. The most common element used in modern searchlights is xenon (Xe). However, rare-earth elements such as lanthanum (La) and cerium (Ce) are used in phosphors to improve light quality in some specialized searchlights.\nMilitary use.\nThe first use of searchlights using carbon arc technology occurred during the Siege of Paris during the Franco-Prussian War. The Royal Navy used searchlights in 1882 to dazzle and prevent Egyptian forces from manning artillery batteries at Alexandria. Later that same year, the French and British forces landed troops under searchlights.\nBy 1907 the value of searchlights had become widely recognized. One recent use was to assist attacks by torpedo boats by dazzling gun crews on the ships being attacked. Other uses included detecting enemy ships at greater distances, as signaling devices, and to assist landing parties. Searchlights were also used by battleships and other capital vessels to locate attacking torpedo boats and were installed on many coastal artillery batteries for aiding night combat. They saw use in the Russo-Japanese War from 1904\u201305.\nSearchlights were installed on most naval capital ships from the late 19th century through WWII, both for tracking small, close-in targets such as torpedo boats, and for engaging enemy units in nighttime gun battles. The Imperial Japanese Navy especially was known for its intensive development of nighttime naval combat tactics and extensive training. The War in the Pacific saw a number of nocturnal engagements fought by searchlight, particularly the Battle of Savo Sound at Guadalcanal. Although searchlights remained in use throughout the war, the newly developed radar proved to be a far more effective locating device, and Japanese radar development lagged far behind that of the US.\nFirst World War.\nSearchlights were first used in the First World War to create \"artificial moonlight\" to enhance opportunities for night attacks by reflecting searchlight beams off the bottoms of clouds, a practice which continued in the Second World War. The term \"artificial moonlight\" was used to distinguish illumination provided by searchlights from that provided by natural moonlight, which was referred to as \"movement light\" in night-time manoeuvers. Searchlights were also heavily used in the defense of the UK against German nighttime bombing raids using Zeppelins.\nSecond World War.\nSearchlights were used extensively in defense against nighttime bomber raids during the Second World War. Controlled by sound locators and radars, searchlights could track bombers, indicating targets to anti-aircraft guns and night fighters and dazzling crews.\nSearchlights were occasionally used tactically in ground battles. One notable occasion was the Red Army use of searchlights during the Battle of the Seelow Heights in April 1945. 143 searchlights were directed at the German defence force, with the aim of temporarily blinding them during a Soviet offensive, begun with the largest artillery bombardment the world had ever seen until that point. However, the morning fog diffused the light and silhouetted the attacking Soviet forces, making them clearly visible to the Germans. The Soviets suffered heavy losses as a result and were forced to delay their invasion of the city.\nSecond World War-era searchlights include models manufactured by General Electric and by the Sperry Company. These were mostly of 60 inch (152.4\u00a0cm) diameter with rhodium plated parabolic mirror, reflecting a carbon arc discharge. Peak output was 800,000,000 candela. It was powered by a 15\u00a0kW generator and had an effective beam visibility of 28 to 35 miles (45 to 56\u00a0km) in clear low humidity.\nThe searchlight also found a niche for use by night fighters and anti-submarine warfare aircraft. The Turbinlite was a powerful searchlight mounted in the nose of an RAF Douglas Boston light bomber, converted into a night fighter to shoot down Luftwaffe night bombers. The aircraft would be directed in the general direction of the enemy by ground-based or metre-wave airborne radar, and the pilot would then switch on the Turbinlite, illuminating the enemy aircraft, which would then be shot down by accompanying RAF day fighters such as the Hawker Hurricane. This never proved very successful, as the light made the emitting aircraft a very big target for rear gunners, who would simply have to shoot into the light and be guaranteed to hit something eventually.\nDuring the Battle of the North Atlantic, RAF aircraft such as the Vickers Wellington were assigned to patrol for surfaced German U-boats at night, when they would be on the surface, charging their batteries. A large searchlight called a Leigh light was suspended from the bottom of the wing or fuselage, and would be used to illuminate the surfaced U-boat while it was being attacked with bombs and depth charges. The Leigh light was somewhat more successful than the Turbinlite, but in both cases the development of centimeter-wave radar proved to be the far more effective answer.\nWar in Ukraine.\nDuring the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, both the Russian Armed Forces and Territorial Defence Forces (Ukraine) have extensively used spotlights for both Civil defense purposes, as well as frontline anti-drone and anti-aircraft warfare.\nNon-military use.\nToday, searchlights are used in advertising, fairs, festivals and other public events. Their use was once common for movie premieres; the waving searchlight beams can still be seen as a design element in the logos of 20th Century Studios and the Fox television network. The world's most powerful searchlight today beams from the top of the pyramid-shaped Luxor Hotel in Las Vegas. It concentrates about 13,650,000 lumens from 39 7kW xenon lamps into a beam of about 9,129,000,000 candela.\n\"Tribute in Light\" is an art installation that uses two columns of searchlights to represent the former Twin Towers of the World Trade Center, in remembrance of the September 11 attacks. It is produced annually in Lower Manhattan.\nDisney parks uses searchlights in their nighttime fireworks displays. They are installed on top of the rooftops of several attractions in Fantasyland.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59828", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59828", "title": "Searchlight (short story)", "text": "1962 short science fiction story by Robert A. Heinlein\n\"Searchlight\" is a very short science fiction story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, about a little blind girl whose spaceship crashes on the Moon. The search for her takes advantage of her prodigious musical ability to locate her.\nIt was originally written in 1962 as part of an advertisement for Hoffman Electronics. Heinlein says that because it was so short it was much harder to write than writing novels. Perhaps because of this, it was the last short story Heinlein wrote; the remaining quarter-century of his career was devoted to writing novels and non-fiction essays.\n\"Searchlight\" is anthologized in \"The Worlds of Robert A. Heinlein\", a collection of short stories published in 1966 and his \"Expanded Universe\" in 1980."}
{"id": "59830", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59830", "title": "The Black Pits of Luna", "text": "1948 short story by Robert A. Heinlein\n\"The Black Pits of Luna\" is a science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, about a Boy Scout on a trip to the Moon and his novel way of finding his lost brother. Included as part of his Future History, it originally appeared in \"The Saturday Evening Post\", January 10, 1948, and was collected in \"The Green Hills of Earth\" (and subsequently \"The Past Through Tomorrow\").\nSynopsis.\nThe short story is told from the viewpoint of Dick Logan, a Boy Scout who has accompanied his father on a business trip to the Moon alongside his mother and little brother, \"Baby Darling\". They're encouraged to visit the Black Pits of Luna on the back side of the Moon, however upon arriving they are told that the tour is too dangerous for small children. Unwilling to deny their \"Baby Darling\", the parents raise a fuss until they are permitted to use a small space suit that had been special ordered for an elite's daughter. Dick is instructed to watch over his brother, however once on the tour he quickly becomes enthralled by the Black Pits' landscape and history.\nAs the tour comes to an end the family discovers that Baby Darling has wandered off. Searches are made for the child, however no one is able to locate the boy, who is at risk of running out of oxygen. Dick volunteers to help and quickly realizes that his brother would see the Pits as an excellent place to play hide-and-seek. He searches several locations matching his brother's favorite hiding spots, using his size to access spaces that grown men would be too big to search. He eventually succeeds in finding his brother, who has passed out in a small crevice. The short ends with the parents swearing to never return to the Moon while Dick himself plans on eventually returning.\nPublication history.\n\"The Black Pits of Luna\" was first published in \"The Saturday Evening Post\" on January 10, 1948 and featured illustrations by Fred Ludekens. It was later re-printed in \"The Green Hills of Earth\" and subsequently \"The Past Through Tomorrow\". The short has been translated into multiple languages.\nPer Jerome Winter, \"The Black Pits of Luna\" is one of four short stories that helped Heinlein reach a more mainstream market via \"The Saturday Evening Post\", the other four being \"The Green Hills of Earth\u201d (1947), \u201cSpace Jockey\u201d (1947), and \u201cIt\u2019s Great to Be Back!\u201d (1947).\nCritical reception and themes.\nIn her 2019 book \"The Pleasant Profession of Robert A. Heinlein\" Farah Mendlesohn wrote that the character of Dick is portrayed as more responsible than his entitled parents, which she states is implied to be a result of his participation in the Boy Scouts. The short story was praised in the \"Journal of College Science Teaching\" by William R. Brice, who stated that \"Although the plot and story line are somewhat juvenile, the descriptions of the lunar surface are excellent.\"\nGeorge Slusser criticized the portrayal of the unnamed mother character, further noting that Heinlein frequently received criticism from feminists because \"he presents women who do domestic duty as irrevocably stupid.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59831", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59831", "title": "The Green Hills of Earth", "text": "1947 short story by Robert A. Heinlein\n\"The Green Hills of Earth\" is a science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. One of his Future History stories, the short story originally appeared in \"The Saturday Evening Post\" (February 8, 1947), and it was collected in \"The Green Hills of Earth\" (and subsequently in \"The Past Through Tomorrow\"). Heinlein selected the story for inclusion in the 1949 anthology \"My Best Science Fiction Story\". \"The Green Hills of Earth\" is also the title of a song mentioned in several of Heinlein's novels. \nThe Rhysling Award for speculative fiction poetry awarded by the Science Fiction Poetry Association (SFPA) is named for the blind poet Rhysling in \u201cThe Green Hills of Earth.\u201d\nRhysling (crater) on the Moon was named by Apollo 15 astronauts. who quoted the last verse of Rhysling's song \"The green hills of Earth\" (from this story) as their third moonwalk was ending.\nPlot summary.\nIt is the story of \"Noisy\" Rhysling, the blind space-going songwriter whose poetic skills rival Rudyard Kipling's. Heinlein (himself a medically retired U.S. naval officer) spins a yarn about a radiation-blinded, unemployable spaceship engineer crisscrossing the Solar System writing and singing songs. The story takes the form of a nonfiction magazine article.\nThe events of the story concern the composition of the titular song. Rhysling realizes that his death of old age is near, and hitchhikes on a spaceship headed to Earth so he can die and be buried where he was born. A malfunction threatens the ship with destruction, and Rhysling enters the irradiated area to perform repairs. While completing the repairs, he knows that he will soon die of radiation poisoning and tells them to record his last song; he dies just moments after singing the final, titular verse.\nApollo 15.\nThe Apollo 15 astronauts named a number of craters in their landing area after favorite science fiction stories. Near \"Dune\" (after the Frank Herbert novel) and \"Earthlight\" (Arthur C. Clarke) craters was Rhysling (crater), named after the blind singer of the spaceways in \"The Green Hills of Earth\". They intended to read a bit of \"Green Hills of Earth\" at the crater, but the exigencies of lunar exploration kept it from happening. To squeeze it in, Capcom Joe Allen told them to \"come home again to the homes of men, to the cool green hills of Earth\" as their last moonwalk was ending:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAllen: As the space poet Rhysling (the blind poet in Robert Heinlein's The Green Hills of Earth) would say, we're ready for you to \"come back again to the homes of men on the cool green hills of Earth.\"\n[Scott - \"That's from the Green Hills of Earth. That's one we talked about before the flight. Have you read that one?\"]\n[Jones - \"Oh, yeah! That was a favorite when I was a kid. Had you read it?\"]\n[Scott - \"Sure. (Quoting from memory):&lt;br&gt;\n\"We pray for one last landing\"&lt;br&gt;\n\"on the globe that gave us birth\"&lt;br&gt;\n\"To rest our eyes on fleecy skies\"&lt;br&gt; \n\"and the cool green hills of Earth\".\n&lt;br&gt;\"]\n[Scott - \"In thinking about perception kind of stuff, if you think about where we are (at Hadley), the thing that's really different about the Earth is 'cool green hills' with the fleecy skies and the blue sky. So Heinlein's perception of a meaningful thing for the Blind Poet of the Spaceways is pretty good. That he could transport himself out.\"]\n[Jones - \"It was written sometime in the 40s, I think.\"]\n[Scott - \"And here we have black skies, and a gray surface. Dramatic difference. I always think it's amazing. Some of those science fiction guys can really project themselves out there that way.\"]\n[Jones - \"The good ones could.\"]\n[Scott - \"Cause one of the questions people ask about this is, 'Is the sky really all black?' Yeah. 'When it was daylight?' Yup. 'Wow!'\"]\n--https://\nScott's memory of this last verse does not match either of the versions in the story itself, which is fitting considering that \n\"most of the verses were collected after [Rhysling's] death from people who knew him\" and \"The Green Hills of Earth grew through twenty years\".\nThe songs.\nHeinlein wrote several fragments of lyrics and six full stanzas for the song.\nMoore and Kuttner also give fragments of lyrics in \"Quest of the Starstone.\"\nThe story features several other partial songs and a number of titles attributed to Rhysling. These are:\nSeveral are described as sexually explicit songs excluded from the official edition of Rhysling's works.\nFour collections of Rhysling's works are mentioned. They are:\nReferences in other Heinlein works.\nJoe-Jim Gregory, the two-headed mutant in \"Universe\", are both fond of \"Rhysling, the blind singer of the spaceways\". This reference to the character appeared six years before Heinlein actually published \"The Green Hills of Earth\".\nThe song \"The Green Hills of Earth\" is mentioned three times in \"Farmer in the Sky\" as a piece that Bill Lermer plays on his own accordion. Later in that same novel, Lermer is trying to identify a quote (\"I have lived and worked with men\") and guesses that it was written by Rhysling or Kipling.\nBoth the song \"The Green Hills of Earth\" and the character of Rhysling are mentioned in the novel \"Time Enough for Love\". At an early point in the novel, Lazarus Long bemoans the fact that he cannot \"pray for one last landing\" because the \"Green Hills of Earth\" have deteriorated and the planet is uninhabitable. Later, Lazarus tells the story of a blind accordion player who temporarily took residence in a bordello that he owned on Mars almost two thousand years ago. Although Heinlein readers can easily recognize the character, Lazarus himself does not \"recall his right name, if he had one.\"\n\"Since the Pusher Met My Cousin\" and \"That Red-Headed Venusburg Gal\" are both referred to, but no lyrics are provided, in Heinlein's \"Logic of Empire\".\nIn \"Stranger in a Strange Land\", writer Jubal Harshaw dictates a poem also named \"Death Song of a Wood's Colt\".\nSimilarity to other works.\nIn 1935 Ernest Hemingway published \"Green Hills of Africa\". There is, however, no clear evidence of Heinlein being influenced by this title.\nFilm, TV, radio/audio and theatrical adaptations.\nThe story was adapted for the \"Dimension X\" radio series (episode 10). It also appeared on the July 7, 1955, broadcast of the NBC Radio Network program \"X Minus One\". Both versions are told from the point of view of a friend of Rhysling's, and have Rhysling using a guitar instead of an accordion. As well as part of the title song (including the origin of a stanza about Venus) using the tune \"Rosin the Bow\", two verses of \"The Captain is a Father to His Crew\" are sung, plus choral verses of \"Jet Song\", and a complete and particularly beautiful version of \"The Grand Canal\".00:09:55 The songs were composed and sung by Tom Glazer in a manner akin to Woody Guthrie; Kenneth Williams played Rhysling as a backwoodsman from the Ozarks, an area not far from Heinlein's Missouri birthplace. The broadcast is available on the \"Old-Time Radio Classical Favorites\" release in the Smithsonian Institution's \"Radio Spirits\" series.\nAnother adaptation aired on the \"CBS Radio Workshop\" on July 21, 1957. The script was by Draper Lewis and Robert Heinlein, produced and directed by Dee Engelbach, with music by Clark Harrington. Everett Sloane played Rhysling, Berry Kroeger narrated, and other cast members included Jackson Beck, Danny Ocko, Ian Martin, Louis Volkman, and Bill Lipton.\nThe song \"The Green Hills of Earth\" which appears in the story was also used in the 11th episode of the third series of the British radio series, \"Journey into Space\".\nThe 1951 \u2013 1952 television series \"Out There\" (episode aired December 2, 1951) had a loosely adapted version of the story (Rhysling is on a mission to the asteroids with a crew which includes a beautiful blonde biologist) which starred singer John Raitt.\nIn 1977, Leonard Nimoy recorded a dramatic reading of the story as the title track of an album for Caedmon Records. Nimoy narrated the song lyric excerpts as originally written by Heinlein without singing them.\nThe story \"The Green Hills of Earth\" was read at Symphony Space by Kathleen Chalfant on 6/8/2001 and broadcast on the radio program Selected Shorts.\nOther references.\nIn his 2005 book \"Learning the World\", Ken MacLeod pays homage to this song: Chapter 17 (\"Fire in the Sky\") ends with a scene where a spacecraft evades an attack. The chapter ends with the background intercom blaring:\n'\"All Hands! Stand by! Free Falling!\"'\n'And the lights below us fade.'\nAnthony Boucher, who was a close friend of Heinlein's in the 1930s in Los Angeles, in his short story \"Man's Reach\" makes reference to Rhysling's \"Jet Song\", stating, \"The familiar words boomed forth with that loving vigor of all baritones who have never seen deep space\":\n'\"Feel her rise! Feel her drive!\"'\n'Straining steel, come alive...'\nIn Randall Garrett's short story \"The Man Who Hated Mars,\" the song plays in the Recreation Building of the penal colony on Mars, reminding all of what they've left.\nIn \"Islands in the Sky\" (Season 1, Episode 3, 1965) of Lost in Space, Dr. Smith says he wishes to return to the \"green hills of earth.\"\nNotes.\nIsaac Asimov recalled in 1969 \"I'll never forget the shock that rumbled through the entire world of science fiction fandom when ... Heinlein broke the 'slicks' barrier by having an undiluted science fiction story of his published in \"The Saturday Evening Post\"\".\nHeinlein credited the title of the song, \"The Green Hills of Earth\", to the short story \"Shambleau\" by C. L. Moore (first published in 1933),\nin which a spacefaring smuggler named Northwest Smith hums the tune. In another of C.L. Moore's Northwest Smith stories named \"The Cold Gray God\", published in 1935, the song is mentioned as a solar-wide hit by a singer named Rose Robertson. Moore and Henry Kuttner also have Northwest Smith hum the song in their 1937 short story \"Quest of the Starstone,\" which quotes several lines of lyrics.\nHeinlein revealed in the liner notes to the Leonard Nimoy album \"The Green Hills of Earth\" that he partially based Rhysling's unique abilities on a blind machinist he worked with at the Philadelphia Naval Yards during World War II. He never identified him beyond the name \"Tony.\" Heinlein was amazed that Tony had a perfect safety record and a production record equal to sighted machinists and could identify all his co-workers solely by the sound of their footsteps and other aural clues, without need of them speaking to him first. Tony also occasionally played the accordion and sang for the assembled shop. William H. Patterson, in his Heinlein biography \"Robert A. Heinlein: In Dialogue with His Century, Vol. 1 - Learning Curve (1907-1948)\", identified the blind machinist as Tony Damico.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59832", "revid": "32010320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59832", "title": "The Long Watch", "text": "1949 short story by Robert Heinlein\n\"The Long Watch\" is a science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. It is about a military officer who faces a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" by a would-be dictator.\nOriginally titled \"Rebellion on the Moon\", the story originally appeared in an edited version in the December 1949 \"American Legion Magazine\". It also featured in April 1955 \"Nebula Science Fiction Number 12\", illustrated by John J. Greengrass. It appears in Heinlein's short story collections \"The Green Hills of Earth\" and \"The Past Through Tomorrow\". While it is included in collections of Future History stories and appears on Heinlein's timeline chart, \"The Long Watch\" does not appear to share continuity with the history, but with \"Space Cadet\" published a year earlier.\nPlot summary.\nIn 1999, Lieutenant John Ezra Dahlquist is a member of the Space Patrol, an international organization with the custody of all Earth's remaining nuclear weapons. A young bomb officer and physicist at the Patrol's lunar base, he is apolitical and is devoted to his wife and young daughter. The base's executive officer Colonel Towers asks to meet with him. Towers and others want to overthrow the Earth government and plan to use the bombs to destroy \"an unimportant town or two\" so Earth takes them seriously. Dahlquist leads Towers to believe that he will cooperate, but he does not want his family to live under a dictatorship and plans to stop the coup by preventing the bombs' use.\nDahlquist locks himself in the bomb bunker, modifies a bomb to detonate by hand, and threatens to blow up himself and the bombs. He negotiates with Towers, pretending to be still na\u00efve; he hopes to give the government time to stop the coup. Dahlquist is growing tired, however, and if he falls asleep the conspirators may regain control. He decides to disable the bombs beyond the plotters' ability to repair them, despite the danger. The only way to do so is to open them up and break the plutonium core of each bomb. Dahlquist does so, but in the process exposes himself to a fatal dose of radiation. He dies \"very happy\".\nThe coup collapses and Towers shoots himself. The Patrol recovers Dahlquist's radioactive body and places it in a lead coffin. As Earth mourns the hero, his body is entombed in a marble monument, with an honor guard beyond the limit of safe approach.\nConnection with other Heinlein stories.\nIn \"Space Cadet\", Ezra Dahlquist is one of \"[t]hose who helped create the Tradition of the Patrol\". New recruits view a display about his heroism, \"the day shameful and glorious in the history of the Patrol\". At every Patrol roll call, his name is called with those of three other Patrol heroes. A skeptical candidate to become a Patrol cadet comments that Dahlquist disobeyed his commanding officer in performing the acts he is commended for, and that if things had gone the other way, Dahlquist would have been deemed a traitor. However, a patrol regulation read from the handbook by Cadet Matt Dodson reads: \"\u2014but the responsibility of determining the legality of the order rests on the person ordered as well as on the person giving the order\", suggesting that he was within regulations to do so.\nAs the protagonist dies at the end, he sees, standing around him, a number of heroes who sacrificed themselves for others in history, including Rodger Young, a soldier who died in World War II helping his unit retreat, who was recognized as a war hero at the time of the story. Heinlein also referred to Young's heroism in \"Starship Troopers\", in which the protagonist's starship was named after Young, and the recall used to bring the soldiers home was \"The Ballad of Rodger Young\".\nComparison with actual history.\nThe story assumed that placing nuclear missiles on the Moon would be an acceptable act in international relations by 1999, and that such a nuclear base would in effect have Earth at its mercy - leading to the potential of this power being abused, as it very nearly is in the story. This was an entirely plausible possibility at the time of writing.\nIn actual history, the possibility for such positioning of nuclear weapons on the Moon was averted, before the actual Moon landing in 1969, through the Outer Space Treaty, providing that\nWith the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union signing the treaty in 1967 and most other nations joining in later, there are not known to be any space-based nuclear weapons such as Heinlein envisioned.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59833", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59833", "title": "The Man Who Sold The Moon", "text": ""}
{"id": "59834", "revid": "91088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59834", "title": "The Man Who Sold the Moon", "text": "1950 science fiction novella by Robert A. Heinlein\nThe Man Who Sold the Moon is a science fiction novella by American author Robert A. Heinlein, written in 1949 and published in 1950. A part of his \"Future History\" and prequel to \"Requiem\", it covers events around a fictional first Moon landing in 1978 and the schemes of Delos D. Harriman, a businessman who is determined to personally reach and control the Moon.\nPlot.\nDelos David \"D. D.\" Harriman, \"the last of the Robber Barons\", is obsessed with being the first to travel to\u2014and possess\u2014the Moon. He asks his business partner, George Strong, and other tycoons to invest in the venture. Most dismiss Harriman's plans as foolhardy: Nuclear rocket fuel is scarce as the space station that produces it blew up, also destroying the only existing spaceship. The necessary technology for a chemical-fueled rocket stretches the boundaries of current engineering. The endeavor is both incredibly costly and of uncertain profitability. One skeptic offers to sell \"all of my interest in the Moon[...] for fifty cents\"; Harriman accepts and tries to buy the other associates' interests as well. Strong and two others agree to back his plans.\nThe technical problems are solvable with money and talent. To solve the tougher financial problems, Harriman exploits commercial and political rivalries. He implies to the Moka-Coka company, for example, that rival soft drink maker 6+ plans to turn the Moon into a massive billboard, using a rocket to scatter black dust on the surface in patterns. To an anti-Communist associate, he suggests that the Russians may print the hammer and sickle across the face of the Moon if they get to it first. To a television network, he offers the Moon as a reliable and uncensorable broadcasting station.\nHarriman seeks to avoid government ownership of the Moon. As it passes directly overhead only in a narrow band north and south of the equator, he uses a legal principle that states that property rights extend to infinity above a land parcel. On that basis, Mexico, Central and parts of South America, and other countries in those latitudes around the world, have a claim on the Moon. The United States also has a claim due to Florida and Texas. By arranging for many countries to assert their rights Harriman persuades the United Nations to, as a compromise, assign management of the Moon to his company.\nMoney remains the main difficulty. Harriman liquidates his assets, risks bankruptcy, damages his marriage, and raises funds in numerous legitimate and semi-legitimate ways; \"I\", he says, \"would cheat, lie, steal, beg, bribe\u2014do \"anything\" to accomplish what we have accomplished\". Children donate money for a promise of all contributors' names engraved on a plaque left on the Moon. The names, however, will be microscopic in size. Harriman sells land and naming rights to craters, and plans to sell postal covers canceled on the Moon to collectors. He starts rumors that diamonds exist in moondust, intending to secretly place gems in the rocket to convince people that the rumors are true. Harriman will strenuously deny that the diamonds are from the Moon, being merely part of a scientific experiment; he expects people not to believe him, but he will not be guilty of actual fraud.\nHarriman wants to be on the first flight of the \"Pioneer\" but the ship only has room for one pilot, Leslie LeCroix. The multistage rocket launches from Peterson Field, near Colorado Springs, Colorado, lands on the Moon, and returns to Earth. Harriman is the first to open the rocket's hatch; the canceled postal covers were left behind to save weight and he needs to get them aboard surreptitiously. While doing so, he asks LeCroix for the \"lunar\" diamonds. The pilot complies, then produces real lunar diamonds as well.\nAs Harriman predicted, once the first flight succeeds, many seek to invest in his venture to make more flights using a catapult launcher built on Pikes Peak. The next flight will begin a lunar colony. Harriman intends to be on the ship, but the majority owners of the venture object to his presence on the flight; he is too valuable to the company to risk in space. The rocket leaves without Harriman, who \"looks as Moses must have looked, when he gazed out over the promised land\".\nRelated works.\nThe Man Who Sold the Moon is also the title of two collections of Heinlein's short stories. Both collections include \"Let There Be Light\", \"The Roads Must Roll\", and \"Requiem\"; the first also includes \"Life-Line\" and \"Blowups Happen\".\nAlthough the 1950 science fiction film \"Destination Moon\" is generally described as being based on Heinlein's 1947 novel \"Rocket Ship Galileo\", the story in fact bears a much closer resemblance to \"The Man Who Sold the Moon\". However, the technology of \"The Man Who Sold the Moon\" is very different: its rocket is multi-staged, while \"Destination Moon\" uses a single-stage-to-orbit spaceship that takes off and lands vertically, both on Earth and the Moon. (Dialogue in the film makes it very clear that the spaceship is nuclear powered.)\nThe novella also inspired David Bowie's 1970 song \"The Man Who Sold the World\", in both its title and its central themes.\nInfluence on other Heinlein works.\nHarriman appears in \"Requiem\" as an old man who has still not been able to go to the Moon. It was published in 1940, 11 years before \"The Man Who Sold the Moon\".\nThe name \"Harriman\" reappears in many \"Future History\" stories as the name of various businesses and foundations, indicating that Harriman's impact on that timeline is significant. The name is also used in \"Variable Star\", a novel outlined by Heinlein but written by Spider Robinson following Heinlein's death; the novel diverges from the Future History.\nReferences.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59835", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59835", "title": "The Menace from Earth", "text": "\"The Menace From Earth\" is a science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, first published in the August 1957 issue of \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\".\nPlot summary.\nThe story is set in the near future, when the Moon is colonized with people living in underground cities. The \"menace\" of the title is a glamorous woman tourist who visits the Moon colony. She is assigned a young guide named Holly, a 15-year-old girl and aspiring starship designer who is the first-person narrator. Holly's best friend Jeff develops a crush on the \"groundhog\" visitor, Ariel. As Jeff spends more time with Ariel, Holly becomes jealous and begins to doubt his friendship.\nLiving in an underground city on the Moon, Holly and Jeff's hobby is flying with strap-on wings in a great cavern, made possible because the gravity field is one sixth the strength of Earth's and the air pressure in the cavern is kept high enough. Ariel wants to try flying, and Holly, in order not to appear jealous, offers to teach her. However, during her first flight, Ariel loses control at a great height, falling toward the ground. Holly swoops down and saves her life, breaking both arms in the process as she cushions Ariel's fall.\nIn the hospital afterward, Ariel gently explains some things to Holly. Ariel is twice the age of the teenagers, and could never be romantically interested in Jeff. More to the point, Jeff is not in love with her but with Holly. Ariel tells how in the aftermath of the crash Jeff arrived \"like an avenging angel\", ignoring Ariel to cradle the unconscious Holly in his arms, sobbing.\nFollowing this revelation, Jeff arrives in the hospital room and Ariel tactfully leaves the two alone. After some embarrassed banter, Jeff kisses Holly for the first time.\nAnalysis.\nOne of Heinlein's stories written from a female perspective, with his typically strong, independent, capable (for this era) female protagonist. It effectively contrasts a traditional teenage romance story against realistically drawn details of everyday life as a colonist on the Moon.\nRelationship to other Heinlein works.\n\"The Man Who Sold the Moon\" sets the basis for lunar exploration and development in Heinlein's Future History. The lunar colony in the story is described in more detail in \"The Moon is a Harsh Mistress\". The memorial referred to in the story is set up in \"The Black Pits of Luna\". Holly is also one of the many Heinlein characters mentioned in \"The Number of the Beast\".\nReception.\nFloyd C. Gale of \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" called \"The Menace from Earth\" a \"startler\", praising it as a \"Ladies Home Journal\" story \"set in a wildly imaginative alien environment\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59836", "revid": "40812388", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59836", "title": "The Roads Must Roll", "text": "1940 science fiction short story by Robert A. Heinlein\n\"The Roads Must Roll\" is a 1940 science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. It was selected for \"The Science Fiction Hall of Fame, Volume One, 1929\u20131964\" anthology in 1970.\nThe story is set in the near future, when \"roadtowns\" (wide rapidly moving passenger platforms similar to moving sidewalks, but reaching speeds of 100\u00a0mph) have replaced highways and railways as the dominant transportation method in the United States.\nHeinlein's themes are technological change and social cohesion. The fictional social movement he calls \"functionalism\" (which is unrelated to the real-life sociological theory of the same name), advances the idea that one's status and level of material reward in a society must and should depend on the functions one performs for that society.\nPlot summary.\nIn the first section of the narrative, a stormy meeting takes place at a Sacramento Sector Guild Hall of the technicians working \"down inside\", among the very noisy great rotors which keep the moving roads going. Speakers voice various grievances and call for immediate strike action. \"Shorty\" Van Kleeck, the Chief Deputy Engineer of the Sacramento sector, appears and declares his sympathy with the technicians' demands and effectively places himself at their head. As would become clear later, it was Van Kleeck who instigated the technicians' agitation in the first place.\nThe road's workforce is sharply divided into two classes \u2013 the technicians, who are unionized civilians, and the engineers, who are organized as Transport Cadets, an elite paramilitary organization formed by the US Military to keep this crucial infrastructure running. The technicians feel some hostility to the \"arrogant\" engineers. Van Kleeck \u2013 himself a senior engineer who had \"come up from the ranks\" manipulates this hostility, with the intention of catapulting himself into a position of personal power.\nAfter this initial scene, the point of view shifts \u2013 and remains for the rest of the story \u2013 to Van Kleeck's superior Larry Gaines, Chief Engineer of the Diego-Reno Roadtown \u2013 at the outset yet unaware of the brewing trouble. He is busy entertaining Mr. Blenkinsop, the Australian Transport Minister, who is looking into Road technology with an eye to introducing it in Australia. Gaines's explanation of the Road machinery to Blenkinsop is a device to bring the reader into the world of the Roads.\nLarry Gaines is dining with his Australian guest in a moving restaurant on the road when one of the moving sidewalk strips stops unexpectedly. This causes a chain reaction of people falling from the stopped strip onto the fast moving strips next to it, and vice versa. The entire length of the Road becomes a scene of carnage. The reader already knows that this was the result of the ruthless action taken by Van Kleeck and his confederates. Gaines quickly concludes that this is no mechanical failure but sabotage, and that the technicians who maintain the Stockton section of the road are responsible. The rebels have stopped the strip \u2013 heedless of the resulting killing and wounding of numerous people traveling the moving road \u2013 as a demonstration to encourage their fellow technicians around the country to rebel against the Cadets.\nGaines calls the Stockton office and learns that the leader of the rebellion is his own deputy Van Kleeck, who defiantly declares \"The Functionalist Revolution\". Holding to a radical social theory, \"Functionalism,\" the rebel technicians were persuaded that their role in maintaining the nation's transport infrastructure is more important than that of any other workers and that they should therefore be in control. Blenkinsop is left behind at one of Road stations as Gaines takes charge of the advance on the Stockton office.\nGoing into the machinery under the roadway that runs it, Gaines takes command of the response. He doesn't order the Road stopped, since that would leave millions of commuters stranded, but instead has the military evacuate the riders, a time-consuming procedure. In command of a hastily gathered corps of armed cadets, he proceeds up the underground access tunnel toward Stockton on \"tumblebugs,\" motorized and gyroscopically stabilized unicycles much like the later real-life Segway. As the military advance proceeds, they arrest rebel technicians and cross connect the wiring of the machinery, motor by motor, to take control away from the rebels in the Stockton office.\nOver the videophone Van Kleeck warns that he has a button rigged to blow up the Road if Gaines doesn't capitulate \u2013 which could cause countless deaths, possibly running into millions. Gaines doesn't understand how Van Kleeck has gotten so many technicians to side with him; psychological screening tests are supposed to guarantee that technicians don't have the temperament to revolt. Then Gaines realizes that Deputy Van Kleeck was able to move revolution-prone workers into his sector because, as deputy, Van Kleeck had access to the psychological files on the technicians. Gaines accesses Shorty's psychological profile and studies the neurotic traits that have made him a demagogue.\nAsking for a parley, Gaines is taken to the Stockton office and faces Shorty. There he uses his knowledge of Shorty's psychology to push him into a nervous breakdown and overpowers him, gaining control of the 'suicide' button. The Cadets attack the office and the rebellion is ended.\nLater, Gaines ponders the changes that will have to be made to make sure there is never a recurrence of these events: more psychological testing, more careful oversight, and more \"esprit de corps\". He concludes that the price of high-tech transportation like the Roadways is eternal vigilance. He then suddenly realizes that he had let the Australian Transport Minister kick his heels in an empty office the whole night, and rushes off to apologize.\nThemes.\nDamon Knight, in his introduction to the paper-back edition from the New English Library edition of \"The Past Through Tomorrow, Vol 1.\", compares the story to the then-current power of Jimmy Hoffa and the Teamsters Union. He also notes that Heinlein successfully predicted urban sprawl driven by cheap and efficient transport, as well as the development of 'pseudopods' of urban development between communities.\nFarah Mendlesohn linked the story to corporatism.https://academic.oup.com/liverpool-scholarship-online/book/43258/chapter-abstract/363004116\nAdaptation.\n\"The Roads Must Roll\" was adapted for the radio shows \"Dimension X\" in 1950 and \"X Minus One\" in 1956.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59838", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59838", "title": "Robert Heinlein/Universe", "text": ""}
{"id": "59839", "revid": "188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59839", "title": "Universe (short story by Robert Heinlein)", "text": ""}
{"id": "59840", "revid": "43682752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59840", "title": "\u2014We Also Walk Dogs", "text": "1941 science fiction short\n\"\u2014We Also Walk Dogs\" is a science fiction short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. One of his Future History stories, it was first published in \"Astounding Science Fiction\" (July 1941, as by Anson MacDonald) and collected in \"The Green Hills of Earth\" (and subsequently \"The Past Through Tomorrow\").\nAlthough considered part of the Future History, the story has no references to other stories in the canon, and features elements such as anti-gravity that are not fully consistent with other stories.\nPlot summary.\n\"General Services\" is a very successful company that provides various personal services such as shopping for you or walking your dogs or supplying a host for a party, but also proudly advertises that no job is too large. One ad campaign idea which the staff discusses is \"Want somebody murdered? Then DON'T call General Services. But for \"anything else\", call... It Pays!\". The business model involves knowing to whom to subcontract work. The technology used involves rapid access to client data and the use of personal, portable telephones.\nThe company is asked to do the impossible: enable an interplanetary conference to be held on Earth, whose strong gravity is inhospitable to many of the native races of other planets and moons in the solar system. The solution of holding the conference on Mars or Luna is considered politically unacceptable.\nIn a side plot, the team also have to deal with a rich woman who wants to visit her son recuperating from a skiing injury over a thousand miles away while simultaneously conducting a fashionable party at her home. The solution is to conduct her to her son's side while using 3-D projection to have her appear at the party. They charge a hefty fee for this. The fee is doubled when the woman selfishly tries to insist on hiring one of the team as her personal social secretary.\nMuch of the action of the story is not, as one might expect, about the science or engineering of creating an antigravity device to allow the conference to take place, but about how to persuade the world's leading physicist, a Dr. O'Neill, to undertake the job. O'Neill is too wealthy to be tempted by money, but longs to possess a museum piece, a Chinese porcelain bowl called \"The Flower of Forgetfulness\". The team have to find a way to get the bowl from its current location in a London museum. This involves the creation of a duplicate and some underhand tactics. When they receive it, they discover that it is indeed one of the most beautiful objects imaginable.\nThe anti-gravity generator is created, the government's conference goes well, and O'Neill is paid and receives the bowl. General Services also asserts ownership of the anti-gravity invention, against the government's attempts to claim it. O'Neill was under salaried contract at the time, with the bowl as a bonus, so by law General Services would own all the work that he did for them. O'Neill would have helped the government to grab the invention, but the team asks him for one condition: that the three of them, personally, be allowed to visit and view the bowl from time to time. Caught by surprise, he agrees and begins to regard them as potential friends.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59841", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59841", "title": "Space Cadet (novel)", "text": ""}
{"id": "59842", "revid": "1300006773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59842", "title": "Red Planet (novel)", "text": "1949 SF novel by Robert A. Heinlein\nRed Planet is a 1949 science fiction novel by Robert A. Heinlein about students at boarding school on the planet Mars. It represents the first appearance of Heinlein's idealized Martian elder race (see also \"Stranger in a Strange Land\"). The version published in 1949 featured a number of changes forced on Heinlein by Scribner's, since it was published as part of the Heinlein juveniles. After Heinlein's death, the book was reissued by Del Rey Books as the author originally intended.\nPlot summary.\nMars has been colonized by humans, but is governed by an administrator appointed by an Earth-based company - the colonists have no political power. Colonial teenagers Jim Marlowe and Frank Sutton travel to the Lowell Academy boarding school for the start of the academic year. Jim takes along his native Martian pet, Willis the Bouncer, a round furry ball the size of a volleyball, who is about as intelligent as a human child and has a photographic memory for sounds, which he can also reproduce perfectly. At a rest stop, Willis wanders off and encounters one of the adult sentient Martians. The three-legged alien takes the two boys and Willis to participate in a ritual called \"growing together\" with a group of its fellows. They also share water, making Jim and Frank \"water friends\" with the Martian, named Gekko.\nAt school, Jim gets into trouble with the authoritarian headmaster, Mr. Howe, who confiscates Willis, claiming that it is against the new rules to have pets. When Jim and Frank sneak into Howe's office and rescue Willis, the bouncer repeats two overheard conversations between Howe and Beecher, the unscrupulous colonial administrator of Mars, detailing Beecher's plans for Willis and for the colony. When Beecher learns Howe has a bouncer, he is ecstatic; the London Zoo is willing to pay a hefty price for a specimen. Worse, Beecher has secretly planned to prevent the annual migration of the colonists (to avoid 12 months of severe winter weather) in order to save money. The boys run away from school to warn their parents and the colony.\nThe boys set out to skate the thousands of miles on the frozen Martian canals to their homes. During the trip, Frank gets sick. On the third night, they are forced to take shelter inside a giant Martian cabbage-plant (nearly suffocating when it folds up at night). The next day they meet some native Martians, who accept Jim because of his relationship to Willis and water-friendship with Gekko. The Martians treat Frank's illness and send the two boys home by a swift, previously unknown subway.\nOnce warned, Jim's father quickly organizes the migration, hoping to catch Beecher off guard. The colonists reach and take over the boarding school, turning it into a temporary shelter. Howe locks himself in his office, while Beecher sets up automatic, photosensor-controlled weapons outside to stop the malcontents (as he calls them) from leaving. After two colonists are killed trying to surrender, and the power to the building is cut, the colonists decide they have no choice but to fight back. The colonists organize a raiding party, with the boys taking part, capture Beecher's office and proclaim the colony's independence from Earth.\nSeveral Martians enter the school area, and one of them shows up in the door leading to Howe's office, hiding him from sight. When the Martian turns away, Howe is nowhere to be found. The Martians then go to Beecher's building, and when they leave, he also has vanished. The Martians had been content to allow humans to share their planet, but Beecher's threat to Willis has made them reconsider. They present the colonists with an ultimatum: leave the planet or else. Dr. MacRae negotiates with the Martians, and succeeds in persuading them to let the colonists stay, mainly because of Jim's strong friendship with Willis.\nMacRae theorizes that Martians start life as bouncers, metamorphose into adults, then continue to exist after their deaths as the \"old ones\". In the end, Jim resigns himself to giving Willis up so the bouncer can undergo the transformation to adulthood.\nAs with \"Podkayne of Mars\", there are two versions of the ending. As originally written (and published much later) it is made clear that Willis will not emerge as an adult for 40 years. Heinlein's publishers edited and changed this, as well as a discussion early in the novel in which MacRae expresses strong support for adults and older children being free to carry handguns, and opposition to any government which would restrict that.\nCritical reception.\nSurveying Heinlein's juvenile novels, Jack Williamson characterized \"Red Planet\" as Heinlein's first genuinely successful effort in the sequence, saying that \"Heinlein [has] found his true direction ... The Martian setting is logically constructed and rich in convincing detail [while] the characters are engaging and the action develops naturally.\"\nP. Schuyler Miller, reviewing the original edition, praised the novel's \"verisimilitude, the attention to detail which Heinlein's adult readers know well. . . . the explanations are never dragged in for their own sake, and the plot grows naturally out of the setting.\"\nConnections with \"Stranger in a Strange Land\".\nThe life cycle of Martians (as described by MacRae) is the same in \"Stranger in a Strange Land\". It is noted in this novel that the \"old ones\" inhabit two planes of existence: the physical and the (unspecified) other. Further, the water friends theme is recapitulated in \"Stranger in a Strange Land\" as \"water brothers.\" Furthermore, the Martian ability to make an item or person disappear, which was a major plot point in \"Stranger\", is demonstrated here. Jack Williamson writes that \"The Martians in this story have a special interest, because they are the educators of Valentine Michael Smith [and] they display the same appalling powers that Smith brings back to Earth.\"\nThe general description of Martian society as characterized by reverence for freedom is similar. For instance, the Martian Gekko \"radiates displeasure\" upon understanding what is meant by \"london-zoo,\" and further discovering that Howe meant to sell Willis to a zoo\u2014a reaction not dissimilar to that of Mike, who often senses a \"wrongness\" in cages, and whose first impulse when encountering the caged animals of a zoo is to attempt to set them free.\nAdaptations.\nIn 1994, the novel was adapted (and much altered) by Gunther-Wahl Productions into an animated miniseries for Fox Kids.\nInfluences.\nThe background of Mars presented in the novel, as a desert planet crisscrossed by giant Martian canals built by an ancient civilization to bring water from the polar ice caps, is a common scenario in science fiction novels of the early 20th century, and was actually put forward as a plausible theory by some astronomers around the turn of the last century, notably Percival Lowell, mentioned in the novel. It stems from early telescope observations of Mars by 19th century astronomers who, beginning with the Italian Giovanni Schiaparelli in 1877, believed they saw straight lines on the planet. Schiaparelli called them \"canali\" (grooves), which was popularly mistranslated into English as \"canals\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59844", "revid": "31306163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59844", "title": "The Number of the Beast (novel)", "text": "1980 novel by Robert A. Heinlein\nThe Number of the Beast is a science fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, published in 1980. Excerpts from the novel were serialized in the magazine \"Omni\" (October\u2013November 1979).\nPlot.\nThe book is a series of multiple perspective narratives primarily by each of the four main characters: Zebadiah \"Zeb\" John Carter, programmer Dejah Thoris \"Deety\" Burroughs Carter, her mathematics professor father Jacob Burroughs, and off-campus socialite Hilda Corners. The names \"Dejah Thoris\", \"Burroughs\", and \"Carter\" are overt references to John Carter and Dejah Thoris, the protagonists of the Barsoom novels by Edgar Rice Burroughs.\nIn the opening, Deety is dancing with Zeb at a party at Hilda's mansion. Deety is trying to get Zeb to meet her father to discuss what she thinks is an article Zeb wrote about n-dimensional space, even going so far as to offer herself. Zeb figures out and explains to Deety that he is not the one who wrote the article but a relative with a similar name.\nAfter dancing a very intimate tango, Zeb jokingly suggests the dance was so strong they should get married, and Deety agrees. Zeb is taken aback but then accepts. As they are leaving, Deety and Zeb rescue Jacob from a heated argument he is having with another faculty member before a fight breaks out. As they are approaching their vehicles, Hilda comes out, deciding to tag along. Zeb, having a premonition, grabs the three of them and ducks behind another vehicle before Jacob and Deety's vehicle explodes. Zeb gets everyone into his modified air car \"Gay Deceiver\" and by activating the \"Deceiver\"'s flying capability, escapes undetected by the authorities or the criminals who put a bomb in the other vehicle.\nZeb flies to Elko, Nevada, the state being the only one to allow people to get married 24 hours a day with no waiting period or blood test. The incidents have so traumatized Jacob that he has agreed to marry Hilda and so they have a double ceremony. The couples then go to Jacob's hidden cabin in the woods, where they have their honeymoons.\nThus begins the series of adventures that the four embark upon as they travel in the \"Gay Deceiver\", which is equipped with the professor's \"continua\" device and armed by the Australian Defence Force. The continua device was built by Professor Burroughs while he was formulating his theories on \"n\"-dimensional non-Euclidean geometry. The geometry of the novel's universe contains six dimensions\u00a0\u2013 the three spatial dimensions, known to the real world, and three time dimensions: \"t\", the real world's temporal dimension, \"\u03c4\" (Greek tau), and \"\u0442\" (Cyrillic te). The continua device can travel on all six axes. The continua device allows travel into various fictional universes, such as the Land of Oz, as well as through time. \nAn attempt by the four adventurers to visit Barsoom takes them to an apparently different version of Mars: the Great Game (replete with ornithopters) was being played out between the Russian Empire and the Victorian era British Empire in an early example of the Steampunk genre. \nNear the end of the novel, however, Heinlein's recurring character Lazarus Long hints that the four had travelled to Barsoom and that Russo-British imperial contest which they witnessed was an illusion imposed on them by the telepathically adept Barsoomians:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... E.R.B.'s universe is no harder to reach than any other and Mars is in its usual orbit. But that does not mean that you will find Jolly Green Giants and gorgeous red princesses dressed only in jewels. Unless invited, you are likely to find a Potemkin Village illusion tailored to your subconscious...\nTitle.\nIn the novel, the biblical number of the beast turns out to be not 666 but formula_1 = 10,314,424,798,490,535,546,171,949,056, the initial number of parallel universes accessible through the continua device. It is later theorized by the character Jacob that the number may be merely the instantly accessible universes from a given location and that there is a larger structure that implies an infinite number of universes.\nLiterary significance and reception.\nJack Kirwan wrote in \"National Review\" that the novel is \"about two men and two women in a time machine safari through this and other universes. But describing \"The Number of the Beast\" thus is like saying \"Moby Dick\" is about a one-legged guy trying to catch a fish.\" He went on to state that Heinlein celebrates the \"competent person\".\nSue K. Hurwitz wrote in her review for the \"School Library Journal\" that it is \"a catalog of Heinlein's sins as an author; it is sophomoric, sexist, militantly right wing, and excessively verbose\" and commentary that the book's ending was \"a devastating parody of SF conventions\u2014will have genre addicts rolling on the floor. It's garbage, but right from the top of the heap.\"\nHeinlein buff David Potter explained on alt.fan.heinlein, in a posting reprinted on the Heinlein Society, that the entire book is actually \"one of the greatest textbooks on narrative fiction ever produced, with a truly magnificent set of examples of \"how not to do it\" right there in the foreground, and constant explanations of how to do it right, with literary references to people and books that \"did\" do it right, in the background.\" He noted that \"every single time there's a boring lecture or tedious character interaction going on in the foreground, there's an example of how to do it \"right\" in the background.\"\nGreg Costikyan reviewed \"The Number of the Beast\" in \"Ares Magazine\" #5 and commented: \"No one writes like Heinlein, and what is a disappointment from him would be a smashing success from anyone else.\"\nJames Nicoll has credited it as having taught him that he does not have to finish reading every book he begins.\n\"The Pursuit of the Pankera\".\nIn 2020, a previously unpublished manuscript by Heinlein was released as The Pursuit of the Pankera. Using the same premise and characters as \"The Number of the Beast\", the first third of the two novels are the same. In the remainder of \"The Pursuit of the Pankera\", the characters visit fictional universes, primarily Barsoom, Oz, and the world of E. E. Doc Smith's \"Lensman\" series.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59845", "revid": "512560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59845", "title": "Friday (novel by Robert Heinlein)", "text": ""}
{"id": "59846", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59846", "title": "The Man Who Sold the Moon (short story collection)", "text": "1950 collection of science fiction short stories by Robert A. Heinlein\nThe Man Who Sold the Moon is the title of a 1950 collection of science fiction short stories by American writer Robert A. Heinlein.\nThe stories, part of Heinlein's Future History series, appear in the first edition as follows:\nEarly paperback printings omitted \"Life-Line\" and \"Blowups Happen\", as well as Campbell's introduction.\nReception.\nBoucher and McComas praised the 1950 edition as Heinlein \"at his superlative best\". In his \"Books\" column for \"F&amp;SF\", Damon Knight selected \"The Man Who Sold the Moon\" as one of the 10 best science fiction books of the 1950s. P. Schuyler Miller said that \"Heinlein is a master of concealed technology\u00a0... no other writer [has] worked out the scientific minutiae of his settings so fully or so unobtrusively\", praising as well Heinlein's skill at crafting \"the human engineering details of each situation\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59848", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59848", "title": "The Green Hills of Earth (short story collection)", "text": "1951 collection of science fiction short stories by Robert A. Heinlein\nThe Green Hills of Earth is a collection of science fiction short stories by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, published in 1951, including short stories published as early as 1941. The stories are part of Heinlein's Future History. The title story is the tale of an old space mariner reflecting upon his planet of birth. According to an acknowledgement at the beginning of the book, the phrase \"the green hills of Earth\" is derived from a story by C. L. Moore.\nContents.\nThe short stories are as follows, in the order they appear in the book:\nAll of the above stories were also included in the 1967 collection \"The Past Through Tomorrow\".\nReception.\nBoucher and McComas described the collection as \"an outstanding book\", noting that the \"slick\" stories published in non-genre magazines included \"classics in a new form\". P. Schuyler Miller noted that most of the contents were \"simple stories of human reactions\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59850", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59850", "title": "Assignment in Eternity", "text": "1953 collection of novellas by Robert Heinlein\nAssignment in Eternity, is a collection of four science fiction and science fantasy novellas by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, first published in hardcover by Fantasy Press in 1953. The stories, some of which were revised somewhat from their original magazine publication, were:\nHeinlein dedicated the book \"To Sprague and Catherine\": L. Sprague de Camp (his friend and science fiction author) and his wife Catherine Crook de Camp.\n\"Assignment in Eternity\" was almost immediately picked up for mass market paperback publication by New American Library's Signet line and is currently (as of 2007) offered by Baen Books in trade paper format, with a republication of Heinlein's Future History chart, even though none of the stories falls into the Future History.\nThe four stories are loosely related as speculation on what\u2014that we are not already aware of\u2014makes one a human. \"Jerry Is a Man\" makes the most straightforward examination of the theme, a court making a legal ruling on the human rights of genetically engineered intelligent creatures. \"Gulf\", a story connected by its story materials to Kuttner's Baldy stories and Wilmar Shiras' \"In Hiding\", suggests that superior individuals already living among us might become a new step in hominid evolution; \"Lost Legacy\" suggests that every person has unused paranormal abilities that can be awakened by esoteric training comparable to that used by the supermen of \"Gulf\". \"Elsewhen\" suggests that the human mind is not bound to our here-and-now \"slum of space-time\" but can go voyaging into alternative timetracks of possibility. Although written in 1939, using materials popularized by J. W. Dunne, the story has gained new currency in the wake of the Wheeler-Everett \"Many Worlds\" hypothesis.\nThe story materials of all four novellas were revisited by Heinlein in later, more expansive novels. A number of figures of \"Lost Legacy\", for example, are carried into \"Stranger in a Strange Land\" (1961), a book which ultimately could be said to have the same theme as the 1939 novella. Situations and individuals from both \"Gulf\" and \"Jerry Was a Man\" are examined in Friday (1982). And the \"multiverse\" concept first explored in \"Elsewhen\" gets very full treatment in Heinlein's last novels, particularly \"The Number of the Beast\" (1980), \"The Cat Who Walks Through Walls\" (1985) and \"To Sail Beyond the Sunset\" (1987).\nReception.\nBoucher and McComas were unenthusiastic about the collection, saying it contained \"two lightweight and entertaining novelets and two pretty weak short novels.\" P. Schuyler Miller similarly found the stories \"not up to the best in the \"Future History\" series or the author's recent teen-age books.\" \"The New York Times\" reviewer Villiers Gerson reported the collection evidenced Heinlein's status as \"one of the ablest craftsmen writing science fiction.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59851", "revid": "45987849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59851", "title": "Revolt in 2100", "text": "1953 science fiction collection by Robert A. Heinlein\nRevolt in 2100 is a 1953 science fiction collection by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, part of his Future History series.\nThe book consists of:\n\"If This Goes On\u2014\" is a short novel detailing a rebellion against an American theocracy. Heinlein revised and expanded the magazine version for this publication. \"Coventry\" and \"Misfit\" are short stories showing the succeeding secular liberal society with \"Coventry\" presenting the point of view of characters who reject it.\nThe book's afterword describes three unwritten stories which would have described the beginning of the theocracy and the beginning of the rebellion against it. \"The Sound of His Wings\" would have followed a televangelist named Nehemiah Scudder who rode a populist, racist wave of support to the presidency. \"Eclipse\" would have described the subsequent collapse of American society, with emphasis on the withdrawal from space travel by the new regime. \"The Stone Pillow\" would have covered the rise of the rebellion which the protagonists of \"If This Goes On\u2014\" later join.\nReviewer Groff Conklin described the book as \"a classic\" and the lead story as \"a smashing tale of revolution in the United States\". Boucher and McComas, however, described the collection as \"[i]mpressive in its time, and important in the development of modern science fiction\", but found it highly uneven, \"with pages worthy of the mature 1954 Heinlein ... followed immediately by passages from the author's literary apprenticeship\". P. Schuyler Miller found it to be \"a distinctly minor Heinlein contribution, ... way below the mark Heinlein has set himself in his recent teen-age books\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59852", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59852", "title": "The Robert Heinlein Omnibus", "text": "Anthology of science fiction\nThe Robert Heinlein Omnibus is an anthology of science fiction published in 1958, containing a novel, a novella and a short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59853", "revid": "50863457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59853", "title": "Retroreflector", "text": "Device to reflect radiation back to its source\nA retroreflector (sometimes called a retroflector or cataphote) is a device or surface that reflects light or other radiation back to its source with minimum scattering. This works at a wide range of angle of incidence, unlike a planar mirror, which does this only if the mirror is exactly perpendicular to the wave front, having a zero angle of incidence. Being directed, the retroflector's reflection is brighter than that of a diffuse reflector. Corner reflectors and cat's eye reflectors are the most used kinds.\nTypes.\nThere are several ways to obtain retroreflection:\nCorner reflector.\nA set of three mutually perpendicular reflective surfaces, placed to form the internal corner of a cube, work as a retroreflector. The three corresponding normal vectors of the corner's sides form a basis (\"x\", \"y\", \"z\") in which to represent the direction of an arbitrary incoming ray, [\"a\", \"b\", \"c\"]. When the ray reflects from the first side, say x, the ray's \"x\"-component, \"a\", is reversed to \u2212\"a\", while the \"y\"- and \"z\"-components are unchanged. Therefore, as the ray reflects first from side x then side y and finally from side z the ray direction goes from [\"a\", \"b\", \"c\"] to [\u2212\"a\", \"b\", \"c\"] to [\u2212\"a\", \u2212\"b\", \"c\"] to [\u2212\"a\", \u2212\"b\", \u2212\"c\"] and it leaves the corner with all three components of its direction exactly reversed.\nCorner reflectors occur in two varieties. In the more common form, the corner is literally the truncated corner of a cube of transparent material such as conventional optical glass. In this structure, the reflection is achieved either by total internal reflection or silvering of the outer cube surfaces. The second form uses mutually perpendicular flat mirrors bracketing an air space. These two types have similar optical properties.\nA large relatively thin retroreflector can be formed by combining many small corner reflectors, using the standard hexagonal tiling.\nCat's eye.\nAnother common type of retroreflector consists of refracting optical elements with a reflective surface, arranged so that the focal surface of the refractive element coincides with the reflective surface, typically a transparent sphere and (optionally) a spherical mirror. In the paraxial approximation, this effect can be achieved with lowest divergence with a single transparent sphere when the refractive index of the material is exactly one plus the refractive index ni of the medium from which the radiation is incident (ni is around 1 for air). In that case, the sphere surface behaves as a concave spherical mirror with the required curvature for retroreflection. In practice, the optimal index of refraction may be lower than \"ni\" + 1 \u2245 2 due to several factors. For one, it is sometimes preferable to have an imperfect, slightly divergent retroreflection, as in the case of road signs, where the illumination and observation angles are different. Due to spherical aberration, there also exists a radius from the centerline at which incident rays are focused at the center of the rear surface of the sphere. Finally, high index materials have higher Fresnel reflection coefficients, so the efficiency of coupling of the light from the ambient into the sphere decreases as the index becomes higher. Commercial retroreflective beads thus vary in index from around 1.5 (common forms of glass) up to around 1.9 (commonly barium titanate glass).\nThe spherical aberration problem with the spherical cat's eye can be solved in various ways, one being a spherically symmetrical index gradient within the sphere, such as in the Luneburg lens design. Practically, this can be approximated by a concentric sphere system.\nBecause the back-side reflection for an uncoated sphere is imperfect, it is fairly common to add a metallic coating to the back half of retroreflective spheres to increase the reflectance, but this implies that the retroreflection only works when the sphere is oriented in a particular direction.\nAn alternative form of the cat's eye retroreflector uses a normal lens focused onto a curved mirror rather than a transparent sphere, though this type is much more limited in the range of incident angles that it retroreflects.\nThe term \"cat's eye\" derives from the resemblance of the cat's eye retroreflector to the optical system that produces the well-known phenomenon of \"glowing eyes\" or eyeshine in cats and other vertebrates (which are only reflecting light, rather than actually glowing). The combination of the eye's lens and the cornea form the refractive converging system, while the tapetum lucidum behind the retina forms the spherical concave mirror. Because the function of the eye is to form an image on the retina, an eye focused on a distant object has a focal surface that approximately follows the reflective tapetum lucidum structure, which is the condition required to form a good retroreflection.\nThis type of retroreflector can consist of many small versions of these structures incorporated in a thin sheet or in paint. In the case of paint containing glass beads, the paint adheres the beads to the surface where retroreflection is required and the beads protrude, their diameter being about twice the thickness of the paint.\nPhase-conjugate mirror.\nA third, much less common way of producing a retroreflector is to use the nonlinear optical phenomenon of phase conjugation. This technique is used in advanced optical systems such as high-power lasers and optical transmission lines. Phase-conjugate mirrors reflect an incoming wave so that the reflected wave exactly follows the path it has previously taken, and require a comparatively expensive and complex apparatus, as well as large quantities of power (as nonlinear optical processes can be efficient only at high enough intensities). However, phase-conjugate mirrors have an inherently much greater accuracy in the direction of the retroreflection, which in passive elements is limited by the mechanical accuracy of the construction.\nOperation.\nRetroreflectors are devices that operate by returning light back to the light source along the same light direction. The coefficient of luminous intensity, \"RI\", is the measure of a reflector performance, which is defined as the ratio of the strength of the reflected light (luminous intensity) to the amount of light that falls on the reflector (normal illuminance). A reflector appears brighter as its RI value increases.\nThe \"RI\" value of the reflector is a function of the color, size, and condition of the reflector. Clear or white reflectors are the most efficient, and appear brighter than other colors. The surface area of the reflector is proportional to the RI value, which increases as the reflective surface increases.\nThe RI value is also a function of the spatial geometry between the observer, light source, and reflector. Figures 1 and 2 show the observation angle and entrance angle between the automobile's headlights, bicycle, and driver. The observation angle is the angle formed by the light beam and the driver's line of sight. Observation angle is a function of the distance between the headlights and the driver's eye, and the distance to the reflector. Traffic engineers use an observation angle of 0.2 degrees to simulate a reflector target about 800 feet in front of a passenger automobile. As the observation angle increases, the reflector performance decreases. For example, a truck has a large separation between the headlight and the driver's eye compared to a passenger vehicle. A bicycle reflector appears brighter to the passenger car driver than to the truck driver at the same distance from the vehicle to the reflector.\nThe light beam and the normal axis of the reflector as shown in Figure 2 form the entrance angle. The entrance angle is a function of the orientation of the reflector to the light source. For example, the entrance angle between an automobile approaching a bicycle at an intersection 90 degrees apart is larger than the entrance angle for a bicycle directly in front of an automobile on a straight road. The reflector appears brightest to the observer when it is directly in line with the light source.\nThe brightness of a reflector is also a function of the distance between the light source and the reflector. At a given observation angle, as the distance between the light source and the reflector decreases, the light that falls on the reflector increases. This increases the amount of light returned to the observer and the reflector appears brighter.\nApplications.\nOn roads.\nRetroreflection (sometimes called retroflection) is used on road surfaces, road signs, vehicles, and clothing (large parts of the surface of special safety clothing, less on regular coats). When the headlights of a car illuminate a retroreflective surface, the reflected light is directed towards the car and its driver (rather than in all directions as with diffuse reflection). However, a pedestrian can see retroreflective surfaces in the dark only if there is a light source directly between them and the reflector (e.g., via a flashlight they carry) or directly behind them (e.g., via a car approaching from behind). \"Cat's eyes\" are a particular type of retroreflector embedded in the road surface and are used mostly in the UK and parts of the United States.\nCorner reflectors are better at sending the light back to the source over long distances, while spheres are better at sending the light to a receiver somewhat off-axis from the source, as when the light from headlights is reflected into the driver's eyes.\nRetroreflectors can be embedded in the road (level with the road surface), or they can be raised above the road surface. Raised reflectors are visible for very long distances (typically 0.5\u20131 kilometer or more), while sunken reflectors are visible only at very close ranges due to the higher angle required to properly reflect the light. Raised reflectors are generally not used in areas that regularly experience snow during winter, as passing snowplows can tear them off the roadways. Stress on roadways caused by cars running over embedded objects also contributes to accelerated wear and pothole formation.\nRetroreflective road paint is thus very popular in Canada and parts of the United States, as it is not affected by the passage of snowplows and does not affect the interior of the roadway. Where weather permits, embedded or raised retroreflectors are preferred as they last much longer than road paint, which is weathered by the elements, can be obscured by sediment or rain, and is ground away by the passage of vehicles.\nFor signs.\nFor traffic signs and vehicle operators, the light source is a vehicle's headlights, where the light is sent to the traffic sign face and then returned to the vehicle operator. Retroreflective traffic sign faces are manufactured with glass beads or prismatic reflectors embedded in a base sheeting layer so that the face reflects light, therefore making the sign appear more bright and visible to the vehicle operator under darkened conditions. According to the United States National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), the Traffic Safety Facts 2000 publication states the fatal crash rate is 3-4 times more likely during nighttime crashes than daytime incidents.\nA misconception many people have is that retroreflectivity is only important during night-time travel. However, in recent years, more states and agencies require that headlights be turned on in inclement weather such as rain and snow. According to the United States Federal Highway Administration (FHWA): Approximately 24% of all vehicle accidents occur during adverse weather (rain, sleet, snow and fog). Rain conditions account for 47% of weather-related accidents. These statistics are based on 14-year averages from 1995 to 2008.\nThe FHWA's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices requires that signs be either illuminated or made with retroreflective sheeting materials, and though most signs in the U.S. are made with retroreflective sheeting materials, they degrade over time. Until now, there has been little information available to determine how long the retroreflectivity lasts. The MUTCD now requires that agencies maintain traffic signs to a set of minimum levels but provide a variety of maintenance methods that agencies can use for compliance. The minimum retroreflectivity requirements do not imply that an agency must measure every sign. Rather, the new MUTCD language describes methods that agencies can use to maintain traffic sign retroreflectivity at or above the minimum levels.\nIn Canada, aerodrome lighting can be replaced by appropriately colored retroreflectors, the most important of which are the white retroreflectors that delineate the runway edges, and must be seen by aircraft equipped with landing lights up to 2 nautical miles away.\nShips, boats, emergency gear.\nRetroflective tape is recognized and recommended by the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) because of its high reflectivity of both light and radar signals. Application to life rafts, personal flotation devices, and other safety gear makes it easy to locate people and objects in the water at night. When applied to boat surfaces it creates a larger radar signature\u2014particularly for fiberglass boats, which produce very little radar reflection on their own. It conforms to International Maritime Organization regulation, IMO Res. A.658 (16) and meets U.S. Coast Guard specification 46 CFR Part 164, Subpart 164.018/5/0. Examples of commercially available products are 3M part numbers 3150A and 6750I, and Orafol Oralite FD1403.\nSurveying.\nIn surveying, a retroreflector\u2014usually referred to as a prism\u2014is normally attached on a surveying pole and is used as a target for distance measurement, for example, a total station. The instrument operator or robot aims a laser beam at the retroreflector. The instrument measures the propagation time of the light and converts it to a distance. Prisms are used with survey and 3D point monitoring systems to measure changes in horizontal and vertical position of a point.\nTwo prisms may also serve as targets for angle measurements, using total stations or simpler theodolites; this usage, reminiscent of the heliotrope, does not involve retroreflection per se, it only requires visibility by means of any source of illumination (such as the sun) for direct sighting to the center of the target prism as seen from the optical instrument.\nIn space.\nOn the Moon.\nAstronauts on the Apollo 11, 14, and 15 missions left retroreflectors on the Moon as part of the Lunar Laser Ranging Experiment. The Soviet \"Lunokhod 1\" and \"Lunokhod 2\" rovers also carried smaller arrays. Reflected signals were initially received from \"Lunokhod 1\", but no return signals were detected from 1971 until 2010, at least in part due to some uncertainty in its location on the Moon. In 2010, it was found in Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter photographs and the retroreflectors have been used again. \"Lunokhod 2's\" array continues to return signals to Earth. Even under good viewing conditions, only a single reflected photon is received every few seconds. This makes the job of filtering laser-generated photons from naturally occurring photons challenging.\nVikram lander of Chandrayaan-3 left Laser Retroreflector Array (LRA) instrument supplied by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center as part of international collaboration with ISRO. On 12 December 2023, Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter was successfully able to detect transmitted laser pulses from Vikram lander.\nOn Mars.\nA similar device, the Laser Retroreflector Array (LaRA), has been incorporated in the Mars \"Perseverance\" rover. The retroreflector was designed by the National Institute for Nuclear Physics of Italy, which built the instrument on behalf of the Italian Space Agency.\nIn satellites.\nMany artificial satellites carry retroreflectors so they can be tracked from ground stations. Some satellites were built solely for laser ranging.\nLAGEOS, or Laser Geodynamics Satellites, are a series of scientific research satellites designed to provide an orbiting laser ranging benchmark for geodynamical studies of the Earth. There are two LAGEOS spacecraft: LAGEOS-1 (launched in 1976), and LAGEOS-2 (launched in 1992). They use cube-corner retroreflectors made of fused silica glass. As of 2020, both LAGEOS spacecraft are still in service. Three STARSHINE satellites equipped with retroreflectors were launched beginning in 1999. The LARES satellite was launched on February 13, 2012. (See also: List of laser ranging satellites.)\nOther satellites include retroreflectors for orbit calibration and orbit determination, such as in satellite navigation (e.g., all Galileo satellites, most GLONASS satellites, IRNSS satellites, BeiDou, QZSS, and two GPS satellites) as well as in satellite gravimetry (GOCE) satellite altimetry (e.g., TOPEX/Poseidon, Sentinel-3).\nRetroreflectors can also be used for inter-satellite laser ranging instead of ground-tracking (e.g., GRACE-FO).\nThe BLITS (Ball Lens In The Space) spherical retroreflector satellite was placed into orbit as part of a September 2009 Soyuz launch by the Federal Space Agency of Russia with the assistance of the International Laser Ranging Service, an independent body originally organized by the International Association of Geodesy, the International Astronomical Union, and international committees. The ILRS central bureau is located at the United States' Goddard Space Flight Center.\nThe reflector, a type of Luneburg lens, was developed and manufactured by the Institute for Precision Instrument Engineering (IPIE) in Moscow. The mission was interrupted in 2013 after a collision with space debris.\nFree-space optical communication.\nModulated retroreflectors, in which the reflectance is changed over time by some means, are the subject of research and development for free-space optical communications networks. The basic concept of such systems is that a low-power remote system, such as a sensor mote, can receive an optical signal from a base station and reflect the modulated signal back to the base station. Since the base station supplies the optical power, this allows the remote system to communicate without excessive power consumption. Modulated retroreflectors also exist in the form of modulated phase-conjugate mirrors (PCMs). In the latter case, a \"time-reversed\" wave is generated by the PCM with temporal encoding of the phase-conjugate wave (see, e.g., SciAm, Oct. 1990, \"The Photorefractive Effect,\" David M. Pepper, \"et al.\").\nInexpensive corner-aiming retroreflectors are used in user-controlled technology as optical datalink devices. Aiming is done at night, and the necessary retroreflector area depends on aiming distance and ambient lighting from street lamps. The optical receiver itself behaves as a weak retroreflector because it contains a large, precisely focused lens that detects illuminated objects in its focal plane. This allows aiming without a retroreflector for short ranges.\nOther uses.\nRetroreflectors are used in the following example applications:\nHistory.\nMany prey and predator animals have naturally retroreflective eyes by having a reflective layer called the Tapetum lucidum behind the retina, since this doubles the light that their retina receives.\nInspired by the natural world, the inventor of road 'cat's eyes' was Percy Shaw of Boothtown, Halifax, West Yorkshire, England. When the tram-lines were removed in the nearby suburb of Ambler Thorn, he realised that he had been using the polished steel rails to navigate at night. The name \"cat's eye\" comes from Shaw's inspiration for the device: the eyeshine reflecting from the eyes of a cat. In 1934, he patented his invention (patents Nos. 436,290 and 457,536), and on 15 March 1935, founded Reflecting Roadstuds Limited in Halifax to manufacture the items. The name \"Catseye\" is their trademark. The retroreflecting lens had been invented six years earlier for use in advertising signs by Richard Hollins Murray, an accountant from Herefordshire and, as Shaw acknowledged, they had contributed to his idea.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59854", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59854", "title": "Retrordirective mirror", "text": ""}
{"id": "59855", "revid": "43066271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59855", "title": "Rhea (mythology)", "text": "Ancient Greek goddess and mother of the gods\nIn Greek mythology, Rhea, Rhia or Rheia (; Ancient Greek: \u1fec\u03ad\u03b1 or \u1fec\u03b5\u03af\u03b1 ) was one of the Titans, the children of Uranus (Sky) and Gaia (Earth). She was the sister and wife of Cronus, and by him, the mother of the six Olympians: Hestia, Demeter, Hera, Hades, Poseidon, and Zeus.\nWhen Cronus learnt that he was destined to be overthrown by one of his children like his father before him, he swallowed all the children Rhea bore as soon as they were born. When Rhea had her sixth and final child, Zeus, she spirited him away and hid him in Crete, giving Cronus a rock to swallow instead, thus saving her youngest son who would go on to challenge his father's rule and rescue the rest of his siblings. Following Zeus's defeat of Cronus and the rise of the Olympian gods into power, Rhea withdraws from her role as the queen of the gods to become a supporting figure on Mount Olympus. She has some roles in the new Olympian era. She attended the birth of her grandson Apollo and raised her other grandson Dionysus. After Persephone was abducted by Hades, Rhea was sent to Demeter by Zeus. In the myth of Pelops, she resurrects the unfortunate youth after he has been slain.\nIn early traditions, she is known as \"the mother of gods\" and therefore is strongly associated with Gaia and Cybele, who have similar functions. The classical Greeks saw her as the mother of the Olympian gods and goddesses. The Romans identified her with Magna Mater (their form of Cybele), and the Goddess Ops.\nEtymology.\nSome ancient etymologists derived \"\" () (by metathesis) from (, 'ground', 'earth'); the same is suggested also by Ioannes Stamatakos. Other roots have been suggested by modern scholarship but Hjalmar Frisk considers a convincing etymology to be lacking.\nA different tradition, embodied in Plato and in Chrysippus, connected the word with (\"\", 'flow, discharge'), Alternatively, the name \"Rhea\" may be connected with words for the pomegranate: (), and later ().\nThe name \"Rhea\" may ultimately derive from a Pre-Greek or Minoan source.\nAn alternative etymological hypothesis is that \"re\u201d (cloud/sky) as a foundational element in the ancient Illyric or pre-Albanian vocabulary could symbolize the sky or celestial phenomena. Given that Uranus is the sky god in Greek mythology, and \"Rhea\" is his daughter, it\u2019s plausible to hypothesize that her name might have roots linked to \"cloud\" or \"sky\" in the ancient Balkanic language.\nTherefore, \"Rhea\", as a daughter of Uranus, could be etymologically connected to this root, implying \"daughter of the sky\" or \"cloud-born,\" fitting her mythological role as a primordial sky goddess or divine mother associated with celestial elements.\nFamily.\nRhea is the sister of the Titans (Oceanus, Crius, Hyperion, Iapetus, Coeus, Themis, Theia, Phoebe, Tethys, Mnemosyne, Cronus, and sometimes Dione), the Cyclopes, the Hecatoncheires, the Giants, the Meliae, and the Erinyes; and the half-sister of Aphrodite (in some versions), Typhon, Python, Pontus, Thaumas, Phorcys, Nereus, Eurybia, and Ceto.\nAccording to Hesiod, Rhea had six children with Cronus: Hestia, Demeter, Hera, Hades, Poseidon, and Zeus. The philosopher Plato recounts that Rhea, Cronus, and Phorcys were the eldest children of Oceanus and Tethys.\nAccording to the Orphic myths, Zeus wanted to marry his mother Rhea. After Rhea refused to marry him, Zeus turned into a snake and raped her. She had Persephone with Zeus.\nMythology.\nBirth and children.\nRhea was born to the earth goddess Gaia and the sky god Uranus, one of their twelve (or thirteen) Titan children. According to Hesiod, Uranus imprisoned all his children, while Apollodorus states he only imprisoned the Cyclopes and the Hecatoncheires, not the Titans. With the help of Gaia, the youngest child, Cronus, overthrew his father, became king in his place, freed his siblings, and took his sister Rhea to wife. Ophion and Eurynome, a daughter of Oceanus, were said to have ruled snowy Mount Olympus in the early age. Rhea and Cronus fought them, and threw them into the waves of the Ocean, thus becoming rulers in their place. Rhea, skilled in wrestling, battled Eurynome specifically.\nGaia and Uranus told Cronus that just as he had overthrown his own father and become ruler of the cosmos, he was destined to be overcome by his own child; so as each of his children was born, he swallowed them. Rhea, Uranus, and Gaia devised a plan to save the last child, Zeus. Rhea gave birth to Zeus in a cavern on the island of Crete and gave Cronus a stone wrapped in swaddling clothes, which he promptly swallowed; Rhea hid Zeus in a cave on Mount Ida. Her attendants, the warrior-like Kouretes and Dactyls, acted as bodyguards for the infant Zeus, helping to conceal his whereabouts from his father. In some accounts, by the will of Rhea a golden dog guarded a goat which offered her udder and gave nourishment to the infant Zeus. Later on, Zeus changed the goat into an immortal among the stars while the golden dog that guarded the sacred spot in Crete was stolen by Pandareus.\"\"\nIn an obscure version, attested only on the east frieze of a temple at Lagina, the goddess of crossroads Hecate assisted Rhea in saving Zeus from his father. The frieze shows Hecate presenting to Cronus the swaddled stone while the real infant is being whisked away in safety.\nWhile Zeus was still an infant hidden in Crete, Rhea caught her husband Cronus with his mistress the nymph Philyra in the act; Cronus then transformed into a horse and galloped away, in order not to be seen by his wife.\nIn some accounts, Rhea along with Metis gave Cronus the potion that made him disgorge the children he had eaten.\nOlympian era.\nFollowing Zeus's ascension, Rhea withdrew from spotlight as she was no longer queen of gods, but remained an ally of her children and their families.\nIn some traditions, Rhea disapproved of her children Hera and Zeus getting married, so the two had to elope in order to be together. Rhea was present in the birth of her grandson Apollo, along with many other goddesses, the most notable exceptions being Hera and Eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth, whose absence left Leto in terrible agony. Rhea was said to be a goddess who eased childbirth for women.\nAfter Demeter reunited with her daughter Persephone, Zeus sent Rhea to persuade Demeter to return to Olympus and rejoin the gods.\nRhea raised another one of her grandsons, Dionysus, after the fiery death of his mother, the mortal princess Semele. Later on she went on to heal Dionysus's raging madness, which had been inflicted on him by the jealous Hera, causing him to wander around aimlessly for some time. Rhea gave Dionysus the amethyst, which was thought to prevent drunkenness. Rhea sometimes joined Dionysus and his Maenads in their frenzy dances.\nAccording to Bacchylides, it was Rhea herself who restored Pelops to life after his father Tantalus cut him down.\nRhea and Aphrodite rescued Creusa, the wife of Aphrodite's son Aeneas, from the slavery the Greeks would have subjected her to after the fall of Troy. As for Aeneas, when he landed in Italy, a local warlord named Turnus set his pine-framed vessels ablaze. Rhea (or Cybele), remembering that those hulls had been crafted from trees felled on her holy mountains, transformed the vessels into sea nymphs.\nAfter Melanion won the hand of Atalanta in marriage thanks to the help he received from Aphrodite, he neglected to thank her. Thus the goddess inflicted them with great passion for each other when they were near a temple of Rhea. The two then proceeded to have sex inside the temple. In anger, Rhea turned them into lions.\nAt some point, a mortal man named Sangas offended the goddess, and she turned him into a river that bore his name; Sangarius (now Sakarya River) in Asia Minor. In a similar manner a Phrygian man named Pyrrhus tried to rape her, but the goddess changed him into stone for his hubris.\nIn one Orphic myth, Zeus was filled with desire for his mother and pursued her, only for Rhea to refuse him and change into a serpent to flee. Zeus also turned himself into a serpent and raped her. The child born from that union was their daughter Persephone, and afterwards Rhea became Demeter. The child, Persephone, was born so deformed that Rhea ran away from her frightened, and did not breastfeed her daughter.\nCult.\nRhea had \"no strong local cult or identifiable activity under her control.\" She was originally worshiped on the island of Crete, identified in mythology as the site of Zeus's infancy and upbringing. Her cults employed rhythmic, raucous chants and dances, accompanied by the tympanon (a wide, handheld drum), to provoke a religious ecstasy. Her priests impersonated her mythical attendants, the Curetes and Dactyls, with a clashing of bronze shields and cymbals.\nThe tympanon's use in Rhea's rites may have been the source for its use in Cybele's \u2013 in historical times, the resemblances between the two goddesses were so marked that some Greeks regarded Cybele as their own Rhea, who had deserted her original home on Mount Ida in Crete and fled to the wilds of Phrygia to escape Cronus.\nRhea was often referred to as \"Meter Theon\" (\"Mother of the Gods\") and there were several temples around Ancient Greece dedicated to her under that name. Pausanias mentioned temples dedicated to Rhea under the name Meter Theon in Anagyros in Attika, Megalopolis in Arkadia, on the Acropolis of Ancient Corinth, and in the district of Keramaikos in Athens, where the statue was made by Pheidias. In Sparta there was furthermore a sanctuary to \"Meter Megale\" (\"[the] Great Mother\"). Olympia had both an altar and a temple to the Meter Theon:\n A temple of no great size [at Olympia] in the Doric style they have called down to the present day Metroion (Temple of the Mother), keeping its ancient name. No image lies in it of the Meter Theon (Mother of the Gods), but there stand in it statues of Roman emperors.\nHer temple in Akriai, Lakedaimon, was said to be her oldest sanctuary in the Peloponnese:\n Well worth seeing here [at Akriai, Lakedaimon,] are a temple and marble image of the Meter Theon (Mother of the Gods). The people of Akriai say that this is the oldest sanctuary of this goddess in the Peloponnesus.\nStatues of her were also standing in the sanctuaries of other gods and in other places, such as a statue of Parian marble by Damophon in Messene. The scene in which Rhea gave Chronos a stone in the place of Zeus after his birth was assigned to have taken place on Petrakhos Mountain in Arcadia as well as on Mount Thaumasios in Arcadia, both of which were holy places:\n Mount Thaumasios (Wonderful) lies beyond the river Maloitas [in Arkadia], and the Methydrians hold that when Rhea was pregnant with Zeus, she came to this mountain and enlisted as her allies, in case Kronos should attack her, Hopladamos and his few Gigantes. They allow that she gave birth to her son on some part of Mount Lykaios, but they claim that here Kronos was deceived, and here took place the substitution of a stone for the child that is spoken of in the Greek legend. On the summit of the mountain is Rhea's Cave, into which no human beings may enter save only the women who are sacred to the goddess.\nThe center of the worship of Rhea was however on Crete, where Mount Ida was said to be the birthplace of Zeus. Reportedly, there was a \"House of Rhea\" in Knossos:\n The Titanes had their dwelling in the land about Knosos [in Krete], at the place where even to this day men point out foundations of a house of Rhea and a cypress grove which has been consecrated to her from ancient times.\nUpon Mount Ida, there was a cave sacred to Rhea:\n In Crete there is said to be a sacred cave full of bees. In it, as storytellers say, Rhea gave birth to Zeus; it is a sacred place and no one is to go near it, whether god or mortal. At the appointed time each year a great blaze is seen to come out of the cave. Their story goes on to say that this happens whenever the blood from the birth of Zeus begins to boil up. The sacred bees that were the nurses of Zeus occupy this cave.\nIconography.\nRhea only appears in Greek art from the fourth century BC, when her iconography draws on that of Cybele; the two therefore are often indistinguishable; both can be shown wearing a crown (either a Mural crown or a Polos), seated on a throne flanked by lions, riding a lion, and on a chariot drawn by two lions. In Roman religion, her counterpart Cybele was Magna Mater deorum Idaea, who was brought to Rome and was identified in as an ancestral Trojan deity. On a functional level, Rhea was thought equivalent to Roman Ops or \"Opis\".\nDepiction in ancient literature.\nIn Homer, Rhea is the mother of the gods, although not a universal mother like Cybele, the Phrygian Great Mother, with whom she was later identified.\nIn the \"Argonautica\" by Apollonius of Rhodes, the fusion of Rhea and Phrygian Cybele is completed. \"Upon the Mother depend the winds, the ocean, the whole earth beneath the snowy seat of Olympus; whenever she leaves the mountains and climbs to the great vault of heaven, Zeus himself, the son of Cronus, makes way, and all the other immortal gods likewise make way for the dread goddess,\" the seer Mopsus tells Jason in \"Argonautica\"; Jason climbed to the sanctuary high on Mount Dindymon to offer sacrifice and libations to placate the goddess, so that the Argonauts might continue on their way. For her \"temenos\" they wrought an image of the goddess, a \"xoanon\", from a vine-stump. There \"they called upon the mother of Dindymon, mistress of all, the dweller in Phrygia, and with her Titias and Kyllenos who alone of the many Cretan Daktyls of Ida are called 'guiders of destiny' and 'those who sit beside the Idaean Mother'.\" They leapt and danced in their armour: \"For this reason the Phrygians still worship Rhea with tambourines and drums\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59856", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59856", "title": "Rhea (moon)", "text": "Second-largest moon of Saturn\nRhea () is the second-largest moon of Saturn and the ninth-largest moon in the Solar System, with a diameter of 1,528 kilometers (949 miles). It is the smallest body in the Solar System that is confirmed to be in hydrostatic equilibrium. Rhea has a nearly circular orbit around Saturn, but it is also tidally locked, like Saturn's other major moons; that is, it rotates with the same period it revolves (orbits), so one hemisphere always faces towards the planet.\nThe moon itself has a fairly low density, composed of roughly three-quarters ice and only one-quarter rock. The surface of Rhea is heavily cratered, with distinct leading and trailing hemispheres. Like the moon Dione, it has high-albedo ice cliffs that appear as bright wispy streaks visible from space. The surface temperature varies between \u2212174\u00a0\u00b0C and \u2212220\u00a0\u00b0C.\nRhea was discovered in 1672 by Giovanni Domenico Cassini. Since then, it has been visited by both Voyager probes and was the subject of close targeted flybys by the \"Cassini\" orbiter in 2005, 2007, 2010, 2011, and once more in 2013.\nDiscovery.\nRhea was discovered by Giovanni Domenico Cassini on 23 December 1672, with a telescope made by Giuseppe Campani. Cassini named the four moons he discovered (Tethys, Dione, Rhea, and Iapetus) \"Sidera Lodoicea\" (the stars of Louis) to honor King Louis XIV. Rhea was the second moon of Saturn that Cassini discovered, and the third moon discovered around Saturn overall.\nName.\nRhea is named after the Titan Rhea of Greek mythology, the mother of the first generation of Olympian gods and wife of Cronus, the Greek counterpart of the god Saturn. It is also designated \"Saturn\u00a0V\" (being the fifth major moon going outward from the planet, after Mimas, Enceladus, Tethys, and Dione).\nAstronomers fell into the habit of referring to them and Titan as \"Saturn\u00a0I\" through \"Saturn\u00a0V\". Once Mimas and Enceladus were discovered, in 1789, the numbering scheme was extended to \"Saturn\u00a0VII\", and then to \"Saturn\u00a0VIII\" with the discovery of Hyperion in 1848.\nRhea was not named until 1847, when John Herschel (son of William Herschel, discoverer of the planet Uranus and two other moons of Saturn, Mimas and Enceladus) suggested in \"Results of Astronomical Observations made at the Cape of Good Hope\" that the names of the Titans, sisters and brothers of Cronus (Saturn, in Roman mythology), be used.\nPlanetary moons other than Earth's were never given symbols in the astronomical literature. Denis Moskowitz, a software engineer who designed most of the dwarf planet symbols, proposed a Greek rho (the initial of Rhea) combined with the crook of the Saturn symbol as the symbol of Rhea (). This symbol is not widely used.\nOrbit.\nThe orbit of Rhea has very low eccentricity (0.001), meaning it is nearly circular. It has a low inclination of less than a degree, inclined by only 0.35\u00b0 from Saturn's equatorial plane.\nRhea is tidally locked and rotates synchronously; that is, it rotates at the same speed it revolves (orbits), so one hemisphere is always facing towards Saturn. This is called the near pole. Equally, one hemisphere always faces forward, relative to the direction of movement; this is called the leading hemisphere; the other side is the trailing hemisphere, which faces backwards relative to the moon's motion.\nPhysical characteristics.\nSize, mass, and internal structure.\nRhea is the second largest moon of Saturn, but with a mean diameter of 1,528 kilometers (949 miles) it is less than a third the radius of Saturn's largest moon, Titan. Rhea is an icy body with a density of about 1.236 g/cm3. This low density indicates that it is made of ~25% rock (density ~3.25 g/cm3) and ~75% water ice (density ~0.93 g/cm3). A layer of Ice II (a high-pressure and extra-low temperature form of ice) is believed, based on the moon's temperature profile, to start around beneath the surface. Although Rhea is the ninth-largest moon in the Solar System, it is only the tenth-most massive. Indeed, Oberon, the second-largest moon of Uranus, has almost the same size, but is significantly denser than Rhea (1.63 vs 1.24) and thus more massive, although Rhea is slightly larger by volume. The surface area of the moon can be estimated at , about the size of Australia (7,688,287 km2).\nBefore the \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" mission, it was assumed that Rhea had a rocky core. However, measurements taken during a close flyby by the \"Cassini\" orbiter in 2005 cast this into doubt. In a paper published in 2007 it was claimed that the axial dimensionless moment of inertia coefficient was 0.4. Such a value indicated that Rhea had an almost homogeneous interior (with some compression of ice in the center) while the existence of a rocky core would imply a moment of inertia of about 0.34. In the same year, another paper claimed the moment of inertia was about 0.37. Rhea being either partially or fully differentiated would be consistent with the observations of the \"Cassini\" probe. A year later, yet another paper claimed that the moon may not be in hydrostatic equilibrium, meaning that the moment of inertia cannot be determined from the gravity data alone. In 2008, an author of the first paper tried to reconcile these three disparate results. He concluded that there is a systematic error in the \"Cassini\" radio Doppler data used in the analysis, but, after restricting the analysis to a subset of data obtained closest to the moon, he arrived at his old result that Rhea was in hydrostatic equilibrium and had a moment of inertia of about 0.4, again implying a homogeneous interior.\nThe triaxial shape of Rhea is consistent with a homogeneous body in hydrostatic equilibrium rotating at Rhea's angular velocity. Modelling in 2006 suggested that Rhea could be barely capable of sustaining an internal liquid-water ocean through heating by radioactive decay; such an ocean would have to be at about 176\u00a0K, the eutectic temperature for the water\u2013ammonia system. More recent indications are that Rhea has a homogeneous interior and hence that this ocean does not exist.\nSurface features.\nRhea's features resemble those of Dione, with distinct and dissmillar leading and trailing hemispheres, suggesting similar composition and histories. The temperature on Rhea is 99\u00a0K (\u2212174\u00a0\u00b0C) in direct sunlight and between 73\u00a0K (\u2212200\u00a0\u00b0C) and 53\u00a0K (\u2212220\u00a0\u00b0C) in the shade.\nRhea has a rather typical heavily cratered surface, with the exceptions of a few large Dione-type chasmata or fractures (formerly known as wispy terrain) on the trailing hemisphere (the side facing away from the direction of motion along Rhea's orbit) and a very faint \"line\" of material at Rhea's equator that may have been deposited by material deorbiting from its rings. Rhea has two very large impact basins on its hemisphere facing away from Saturn, which are about 400 and 500\u00a0km across. The more northerly and less degraded of the two, called Tirawa, is roughly comparable in size to the basin Odysseus on Tethys. There is a 48\u00a0km-diameter impact crater at 112\u00b0W that is prominent because of an extended system of bright rays, which extend up to away from the crater, across most of one hemisphere. This crater, called Inktomi, is nicknamed \"The Splat\", and may be one of the youngest craters on the inner moons of Saturn. This was hypothesized in a 2007 paper published by \"Lunar and Planetary Science\". Rhea's impact craters are more crisply defined than the flatter craters that are pervasive on Ganymede and Callisto; it is theorized that this is due to a much lower surface gravity (0.26 m/s2, compared to Ganymede's 1.428\u00a0m/s2 and Callisto's 1.235\u00a0m/s2) and a stiffer crust of ice. Similarly, ejecta blankets \u2013 asymmetrical blankets of ejected particles surrounding impact craters \u2013 are not present on Rhea, potentially another result of the moon's low surface gravity.\nIts surface can be divided into two geologically different areas based on crater density; the first area contains craters which are larger than 40\u00a0km in diameter, whereas the second area, in parts of the polar and equatorial regions, has only craters under that size. This suggests that a major resurfacing event occurred some time during its formation. The leading hemisphere is heavily cratered and uniformly bright. As on Callisto, the craters lack the high relief features seen on the Moon and Mercury. It has been theorized that these cratered plains are up to four billion years old on average. On the trailing hemisphere there is a network of bright swaths on a dark background, and fewer craters. It is believed, based on data from the Cassini probe, that these are tectonic features: depressions (graben) and troughs, with ice-covered cliff sides causing the lines' whiteness (more technically their albedo). The extensive dark areas are thought to be deposited tholins, which are a mix of complex organic compounds generated on the ice by pyrolysis and radiolysis of simple compounds containing carbon, nitrogen and hydrogen. The trailing side of Rhea's surface is irradiated by Saturn's magnetosphere, which may cause chemical-level changes on the surface, including radiolysis (see ). Particles from Saturn's E-ring are also flung onto the moon's leading hemisphere, coating it.\nRhea has some evidence of endogenic activity \u2013 that is, activity originating from within the moon, such as heating and cryovolcanic activity: there are fault systems and craters with uplifted bases (so-called \"relaxed\" craters), although the latter is apparently only present in large craters more than across.\nFormation.\nThe moons of Saturn are thought to have formed through co-accretion, a similar process to that believed to have formed the planets in the Solar System. As the young giant planets formed, they were surrounded by discs of material that gradually coalesced into moons. However, a model proposed by Erik Asphaug and Andreas Reufer for the formation of Titan may also shine a new light on the origin of Rhea and Iapetus. In this model, Titan was formed in a series of giant impacts between pre-existing moons, and Rhea and Iapetus are thought to have formed from part of the debris of these collisions.\nAtmosphere.\nOn November 27, 2010, NASA announced the discovery of an extremely tenuous atmosphere\u2014an exosphere. It consists of oxygen and carbon dioxide in proportion of roughly 5 to 2. The surface density of the exosphere is from 105 to 106 molecules in a cubic centimeter, depending on local temperature. The main source of oxygen is radiolysis of water ice at the surface via irradiation from the magnetosphere of Saturn. The source of the carbon dioxide is less clear, but it may be related to oxidation of the organics present in ice or to outgassing of the moon's interior.\nPossible ring system.\nOn March 6, 2008, NASA announced that Rhea may have a weak ring system. This would mark the first discovery of rings around a moon. The rings' existence was inferred by observed changes in the flow of electrons trapped by Saturn's magnetic field as \"Cassini\" passed by Rhea. Dust and debris could extend out to Rhea's Hill sphere, but were thought to be denser nearer the moon, with three narrow rings of higher density. The case for a ring was strengthened by the subsequent finding of the presence of a set of small ultraviolet-bright spots distributed along Rhea's equator (interpreted as the impact points of deorbiting ring material). However, when \"Cassini\" made targeted observations of the putative ring plane from several angles, there was no evidence of ring material found, suggesting that another explanation for the earlier observations is needed.\nExploration.\nThe first images of Rhea were obtained by \"Voyager 1 &amp; 2\" spacecraft in 1980\u20131981.\nThere were five close targeted fly-bys by the \"Cassini\" orbiter, which was one part of the dual orbiter and lander \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" mission. Launched in 1997, \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" was targeted at the Saturn system; in total it took more than 450 thousand images. \"Cassini\" passed Rhea at a distance of 500\u00a0km on November 26, 2005; at a distance of 5,750\u00a0km on August 30, 2007; at a distance of 100\u00a0km on March 2, 2010; at 69\u00a0km flyby on January 11, 2011; and a last flyby at 992\u00a0km on March 9, 2013.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59858", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59858", "title": "Rhea (bird)", "text": "Genus of birds\nThe rhea ( ), also known as the \u00f1and\u00fa ( ) or South American ostrich, is a South American ratite (flightless bird without a keel on the sternum bone) of the order Rheiformes. Rheas are distantly related to the two African ostriches and Australia's emu (the largest, second-largest and third-largest living ratites, respectively), with rheas placing just behind the emu in height and overall size. \nMost taxonomic authorities recognize two extant species: the greater or American rhea (\"Rhea americana\"), and the lesser or Darwin's rhea (\"Rhea pennata\"). The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) classifies the puna rhea as another species instead of a subspecies of the lesser rhea. The IUCN currently rates the greater and puna rheas as near-threatened in their native ranges, while Darwin's rhea is of least concern, having recovered from past threats to its survival. In addition, the feral population of the greater rhea in Germany appears to be growing. However, control efforts are underway and seem to succeed in controlling the birds' population growth. Similarly to ostriches and emus, rheas are fairly popular livestock and pets, regularly kept and bred on farms, ranches, private parks, and by aviculturists, mainly in North and South America and Europe.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"rhea\" was used in 1752 by Paul M\u00f6hring and adopted as the English common name. M\u00f6hring named the bird after the Greek Titan Rhea, whose Ancient Greek name () is thought to come from (\"\u00e9ra\", \"ground\"). This was fitting with the rhea being a flightless ground bird. Depending on the South American region, the rhea is known locally as (Guaran\u00ed \u2013or related Tupi \"nhand\u00fa-g\u00fbas\u00fa\"\u2013 meaning \"big spider\" most probably concerning their habit of opening and lowering alternate wings when they run), (Portuguese), (Aymara and Quechua), or (Mapudungun). is the common name in many European languages and may sometimes be heard in English.\nTaxonomy and systematics.\nThe genus \"Rhea\" was introduced by French zoologist Mathurin Jacques Brisson in 1760 with the greater rhea (\"Rhea americana\") as the type species.\nExtant species.\nThe genus contains two extant species and eight subspecies, although one subspecies is disputed:\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:15%; min-width:180px;\"|Common name\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:25%;\"|Scientific name and subspecies\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:15%; min-width:180px;\"|Range\n!scope\n\"col\" style\n\"width:16%; min-width:112px;\"\n!scope=\"row\"|Greater rhea\n!scope=\"row\"|Darwin's rhea or lesser rhea\n\"Rhea pennata\" was not always in the genus \"Rhea\". In 2008, the SACC, the last holdout, approved merging the genera \"Rhea\" and \"Pterocnemia\" on August 7, 2008. This merging of genera leaves only the genus \"Rhea\". A former fourth species of rhea, \"Rhea nana\", was described by Lydekker in 1894 based on a single egg found in Patagonia, but today no major authorities consider it valid.\nDescription.\nRheas are large, flightless birds with grey-brown plumage, long legs, and long necks, similar to an ostrich. Large males of \"R. americana\" can reach tall at the head, at the back and can weigh up to . The lesser rhea is smaller, with a height of . Their wings are large for a flightless bird () and are spread while running, to act like sails. Unlike most birds, rheas have only three toes. Their tarsus has 18 to 22 horizontal plates on the front of it. They also store urine separately in an expansion of the cloaca.\nDistribution and habitat.\nRheas are from South America only and are limited within the continent to Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay. They are grassland birds, and both species prefer open land. The greater rheas live in open grasslands, pampas and chaco woodlands. They prefer to breed near water and prefer lowlands, seldom going above . On the other hand, the lesser rhea will inhabit most shrubland, grassland, even desert salt puna up to .\nFeral populations in Europe.\nA small population of rheas has emerged in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, northeastern Germany, after several couples escaped from an exotic meat farm near L\u00fcbeck in the late 1990s. Contrary to expectations, the large birds adapted well to conditions in the German countryside. A monitoring system has been in place since 2008. By 2014, there was already a population of well over 100 birds in an area of between the river Wakenitz and the A20 motorway, slowly expanding eastward.\nThe population grew steadily for several years. By autumn 2018, their numbers had significantly increased to about 600. As such, local farmers claim increasing damage to their fields, and some biologists say the rheas pose a growing risk to local wildlife. Still protected by German natural conservation law, a local discussion developed regarding how to handle the situation. Eventually, Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania's government allowed limited hunting of the birds, explicitly to just reduce the population's growth and not to wipe them out. At this point, it was generally agreed that the rheas should be allowed to stay in the region. By spring 2021, just 247 rheas were counted; this development was attributed to both the hunting and the increased caution of the animals. Several had begun to avoid humans more than previously and retreated into the woods. Some members of this rhea population have also expanded into other areas; at least twice individual rheas who probably originated in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania were sighted in Brandenburg's High Fl\u00e4ming Nature Park, over from their usual range. By early 2023, 91 rheas were counted in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania; the population decline was attributed to both hunting as well as harsher weather of previous years. By this point, German authorities believed a stable population of 50 adult birds would be optimal for the local ecosystem and agriculture. Researchers concluded that the feral population was subject to substantial fluctuations but remained healthy, adaptable, and entrenched in the area.\nThere also appears to be a small population of wild rheas in the United Kingdom. In March 2021, about 20 rheas were reportedly running free on a residential estate in Hertfordshire. Local police could not identify any owner, so they assumed they were wild birds. Once caught, authorities intend to place them in a suitable nature reserve to allow them to develop as a colony.\nBehavior.\nIndividual and flocking.\nRheas tend to be silent birds, except when they are chicks or the male seeks a mate. During the breeding season, the male will attempt to attract females by calling. This call is a loud booming noise. While calling like this, they will lift the front of their body and ruffle their plumage, all while keeping their neck stiff. They will then extend and raise their wings and run short distances, alternating with their wings. He may then single out a female and walk alongside or in front of her with a lowered head and spread wings. If the female notices him, he will wave his neck back and forth in a figure eight. Finally, a female may offer herself, and copulation will commence.\nDuring the non-breeding season they may form flocks of between 20 and 25 birds, although the lesser rhea forms smaller flocks than this. When in danger, they flee in a zigzag course, using one wing and the other, similar to a rudder. During the breeding season, the flocks break up.\nDiet.\nMostly, rheas are herbivorous and prefer broad-leafed plants, but they also eat fruits, seeds, roots, and insects such as grasshoppers, small reptiles, and rodents. Young rheas eat only insects for the first few days. Outside the breeding season, they gather in flocks and feed with deer and cattle.\nReproduction.\nRheas are polygynandrous, with males courting between two and twelve females and females commonly mating with multiple dominant males during the breeding season. After mating, the male builds a nest where each female lays eggs. The nest is a simple scrape in the ground, lined with grass and leaves. The male incubates from ten to sixty eggs. The male will use a decoy system and place some eggs outside the nest, then sacrifice these to predators so they do not attempt to get inside the nest. The male may use another subordinate male to incubate his eggs while he finds another group of females to start a second nest with. The chicks hatch within 36 hours of each other. Right before hatching, the chicks begin to whistle. The group of females, meanwhile, may move on and mate with other males. While caring for the young, the males will charge at any perceived threat approaching the chicks, including female rheas and humans. The young reach full adult size in about six months but do not breed until they reach two years of age.\nStatus and conservation.\nThe numbers of the greater and puna rhea are decreasing as their habitats shrink. Both are considered near threatened by the IUCN. The IUCN also states that they are both approaching vulnerable status. The lesser rhea is classified as least concern.\nHuman interaction.\nRheas have many uses in South America. Feathers are used for feather dusters, skins are used for cloaks or leather, and their meat is a staple to many people.\nGauchos traditionally hunt rheas on horseback, throwing \"bolas\" or \"boleadoras\"\u2014a throwing device consisting of three balls joined by rope\u2014at their legs, which immobilises the bird. The rhea is pictured on Argentina's 1-centavo coin minted in 1987, and on the Uruguayan 5-peso coin.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59860", "revid": "3525933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59860", "title": "List of illustrators", "text": "This is an alphabetical list of illustrators.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n * See also\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59861", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59861", "title": "Experiment", "text": "Scientific procedure performed to validate a hypothesis\nAn experiment is a procedure carried out to support or refute a hypothesis, or determine the efficacy or likelihood of something previously untried. Experiments provide insight into cause-and-effect by demonstrating what outcome occurs when a particular factor is manipulated. Experiments vary greatly in goal and scale but always rely on repeatable procedure and logical analysis of the results. There also exist natural experimental studies.\nA child may carry out basic experiments to understand how things fall to the ground, while teams of scientists may take years of systematic investigation to advance their understanding of a phenomenon. Experiments and other types of hands-on activities are very important to student learning in the science classroom. Experiments can raise test scores and help a student become more engaged and interested in the material they are learning, especially when used over time. Experiments can vary from personal and informal natural comparisons (e.g. tasting a range of chocolates to find a favorite), to highly controlled (e.g. tests requiring complex apparatus overseen by many scientists that hope to discover information about subatomic particles). Uses of experiments vary considerably between the natural and human sciences.\nExperiments typically include controls, which are designed to minimize the effects of variables other than the single independent variable. This increases the reliability of the results, often through a comparison between control measurements and the other measurements. Scientific controls are a part of the scientific method. Ideally, all variables in an experiment are controlled (accounted for by the control measurements) and none are uncontrolled. In such an experiment, if all controls work as expected, it is possible to conclude that the experiment works as intended, and that results are due to the effect of the tested variables.\nOverview.\nIn the scientific method, an experiment is an empirical procedure that arbitrates competing models or hypotheses. Researchers also use experimentation to test existing theories or new hypotheses to support or disprove them.\nAn experiment usually tests a hypothesis, which is an expectation about how a particular process or phenomenon works. However, an experiment may also aim to answer a \"what-if\" question, without a specific expectation about what the experiment reveals, or to confirm prior results. If an experiment is carefully conducted, the results usually either support or disprove the hypothesis. According to some philosophies of science, an experiment can never \"prove\" a hypothesis, it can only add support. On the other hand, an experiment that provides a counterexample can disprove a theory or hypothesis, but a theory can always be salvaged by appropriate ad hoc modifications at the expense of simplicity.\nAn experiment must also control the possible confounding factors\u2014any factors that would mar the accuracy or repeatability of the experiment or the ability to interpret the results. Confounding is commonly eliminated through scientific controls and/or, in randomized experiments, through random assignment.\nIn engineering and the physical sciences, experiments are a primary component of the scientific method. They are used to test theories and hypotheses about how physical processes work under particular conditions (e.g., whether a particular engineering process can produce a desired chemical compound). Typically, experiments in these fields focus on replication of identical procedures in hopes of producing identical results in each replication. Random assignment is uncommon.\nIn medicine and the social sciences, the prevalence of experimental research varies widely across disciplines. When used, however, experiments typically follow the form of the clinical trial, where experimental units (usually individual human beings) are randomly assigned to a treatment or control condition where one or more outcomes are assessed. In contrast to norms in the physical sciences, the focus is typically on the average treatment effect (the difference in outcomes between the treatment and control groups) or another test statistic produced by the experiment. A single study typically does not involve replications of the experiment, but separate studies may be aggregated through systematic review and meta-analysis.\nThere are various differences in experimental practice in each of the branches of science. For example, agricultural research frequently uses randomized experiments (e.g., to test the comparative effectiveness of different fertilizers), while experimental economics often involves experimental tests of theorized human behaviors without relying on random assignment of individuals to treatment and control conditions.\nHistory.\nOne of the first methodical approaches to experiments in the modern sense is visible in the works of the Arab mathematician and scholar Ibn al-Haytham. He conducted his experiments in the field of optics\u2014going back to optical and mathematical problems in the works of Ptolemy\u2014by controlling his experiments due to factors such as self-criticality, reliance on visible results of the experiments as well as a criticality in terms of earlier results. He was one of the first scholars to use an inductive-experimental method for achieving results. In his \"Book of Optics\" he describes the fundamentally new approach to knowledge and research in an experimental sense:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We should, that is, recommence the inquiry into its principles and premisses, beginning our investigation with an inspection of the things that exist and a survey of the conditions of visible objects. We should distinguish the properties of particulars, and gather by induction what pertains to the eye when vision takes place and what is found in the manner of sensation to be uniform, unchanging, manifest and not subject to doubt. After which we should ascend in our inquiry and reasonings, gradually and orderly, criticizing premisses and exercising caution in regard to conclusions\u2014our aim in all that we make subject to inspection and review being to employ justice, not to follow prejudice, and to take care in all that we judge and criticize that we seek the truth and not to be swayed by opinion. We may in this way eventually come to the truth that gratifies the heart and gradually and carefully reach the end at which certainty appears; while through criticism and caution we may seize the truth that dispels disagreement and resolves doubtful matters. For all that, we are not free from that human turbidity which is in the nature of man; but we must do our best with what we possess of human power. From God we derive support in all things.\nAccording to his explanation, a strictly controlled test execution with a sensibility for the subjectivity and susceptibility of outcomes due to the nature of man is necessary. Furthermore, a critical view on the results and outcomes of earlier scholars is necessary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is thus the duty of the man who studies the writings of scientists, if learning the truth is his goal, to make himself an enemy of all that he reads, and, applying his mind to the core and margins of its content, attack it from every side. He should also suspect himself as he performs his critical examination of it, so that he may avoid falling into either prejudice or leniency.\nThus, a comparison of earlier results with the experimental results is necessary for an objective experiment\u2014the visible results being more important. In the end, this may mean that an experimental researcher must find enough courage to discard traditional opinions or results, especially if these results are not experimental but results from a logical/ mental derivation. In this process of critical consideration, the man himself should not forget that he tends to subjective opinions\u2014through \"prejudices\" and \"leniency\"\u2014and thus has to be critical about his own way of building hypotheses. \nFrancis Bacon (1561\u20131626), an English philosopher and scientist active in the 17th century, became an influential supporter of experimental science in the English renaissance. He disagreed with the method of answering scientific questions by deduction\u2014similar to Ibn al-Haytham\u2014and described it as follows: \"Having first determined the question according to his will, man then resorts to experience, and bending her to conformity with his placets, leads her about like a captive in a procession.\" Bacon wanted a method that relied on repeatable observations, or experiments. Notably, he first ordered the scientific method as we understand it today. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There remains simple experience; which, if taken as it comes, is called accident, if sought for, experiment. The true method of experience first lights the candle [hypothesis], and then by means of the candle shows the way [arranges and delimits the experiment]; commencing as it does with experience duly ordered and digested, not bungling or erratic, and from it deducing axioms [theories], and from established axioms again new experiments.\nIn the centuries that followed, people who applied the scientific method in different areas made important advances and discoveries. For example, Galileo Galilei (1564\u20131642) accurately measured time and experimented to make accurate measurements and conclusions about the speed of a falling body. Antoine Lavoisier (1743\u20131794), a French chemist, used experiment to describe new areas, such as combustion and biochemistry and to develop the theory of conservation of mass (matter). Louis Pasteur (1822\u20131895) used the scientific method to disprove the prevailing theory of spontaneous generation and to develop the germ theory of disease. Because of the importance of controlling potentially confounding variables, the use of well-designed laboratory experiments is preferred when possible.\nA considerable amount of progress on the design and analysis of experiments occurred in the early 20th century, with contributions from statisticians such as Ronald Fisher (1890\u20131962), Jerzy Neyman (1894\u20131981), Oscar Kempthorne (1919\u20132000), Gertrude Mary Cox (1900\u20131978), and William Gemmell Cochran (1909\u20131980), among others.\nTypes.\nExperiments might be categorized according to a number of dimensions, depending upon professional norms and standards in different fields of study.\nIn some disciplines (e.g., psychology or political science), a 'true experiment' is a method of social research in which there are two kinds of variables. The independent variable is manipulated by the experimenter, and the dependent variable is measured. The signifying characteristic of a true experiment is that it randomly allocates the subjects to neutralize experimenter bias, and ensures, over a large number of iterations of the experiment, that it controls for all confounding factors.\nDepending on the discipline, experiments can be conducted to accomplish different but not mutually exclusive goals: test theories, search for and document phenomena, develop theories, or advise policymakers. These goals also relate differently to validity concerns.\nControlled experiments.\nA controlled experiment often compares the results obtained from experimental samples against \"control\" samples, which are practically identical to the experimental sample except for the one aspect whose effect is being tested (the independent variable). A good example would be a drug trial. The sample or group receiving the drug would be the experimental group (treatment group); and the one receiving the placebo or regular treatment would be the control one. In many laboratory experiments it is good practice to have several replicate samples for the test being performed and have both a positive control and a negative control. The results from replicate samples can often be averaged, or if one of the replicates is obviously inconsistent with the results from the other samples, it can be discarded as being the result of an experimental error (some step of the test procedure may have been mistakenly omitted for that sample). Most often, tests are done in duplicate or triplicate. A positive control is a procedure similar to the actual experimental test but is known from previous experience to give a positive result. A negative control is known to give a negative result. The positive control confirms that the basic conditions of the experiment were able to produce a positive result, even if none of the actual experimental samples produce a positive result. The negative control demonstrates the base-line result obtained when a test does not produce a measurable positive result. Most often the value of the negative control is treated as a \"background\" value to subtract from the test sample results. Sometimes the positive control takes the quadrant of a standard curve.\nAn example that is often used in teaching laboratories is a controlled protein assay. Students might be given a fluid sample containing an unknown (to the student) amount of protein. It is their job to correctly perform a controlled experiment in which they determine the concentration of protein in the fluid sample (usually called the \"unknown sample\"). The teaching lab would be equipped with a protein standard solution with a known protein concentration. Students could make several positive control samples containing various dilutions of the protein standard. Negative control samples would contain all of the reagents for the protein assay but no protein. In this example, all samples are performed in duplicate. The assay is a colorimetric assay in which a spectrophotometer can measure the amount of protein in samples by detecting a colored complex formed by the interaction of protein molecules and molecules of an added dye. In the illustration, the results for the diluted test samples can be compared to the results of the standard curve (the blue line in the illustration) to estimate the amount of protein in the unknown sample.\nControlled experiments can be performed when it is difficult to exactly control all the conditions in an experiment. In this case, the experiment begins by creating two or more sample groups that are probabilistically equivalent, which means that measurements of traits should be similar among the groups and that the groups should respond in the same manner if given the same treatment. This equivalency is determined by statistical methods that take into account the amount of variation between individuals and the number of individuals in each group. In fields such as microbiology and chemistry, where there is very little variation between individuals and the group size is easily in the millions, these statistical methods are often bypassed and simply splitting a solution into equal parts is assumed to produce identical sample groups.\nOnce equivalent groups have been formed, the experimenter tries to treat them identically except for the one \"variable\" that he or she wishes to isolate. Human experimentation requires special safeguards against outside variables such as the \"placebo effect\". Such experiments are generally \"double blind\", meaning that neither the volunteer nor the researcher knows which individuals are in the control group or the experimental group until after all of the data have been collected. This ensures that any effects on the volunteer are due to the treatment itself and are not a response to the knowledge that he is being treated.\nIn human experiments, researchers may give a subject (person) a stimulus that the subject responds to. The goal of the experiment is to measure the response to the stimulus by a test method.\nIn the design of experiments, two or more \"treatments\" are applied to estimate the difference between the mean responses for the treatments. For example, an experiment on baking bread could estimate the difference in the responses associated with quantitative variables, such as the ratio of water to flour, and with qualitative variables, such as strains of yeast. Experimentation is the step in the scientific method that helps people decide between two or more competing explanations\u2014or hypotheses. These hypotheses suggest reasons to explain a phenomenon or predict the results of an action. An example might be the hypothesis that \"if I release this ball, it will fall to the floor\": this suggestion can then be tested by carrying out the experiment of letting go of the ball, and observing the results. Formally, a hypothesis is compared against its opposite or null hypothesis (\"if I release this ball, it will not fall to the floor\"). The null hypothesis is that there is no explanation or predictive power of the phenomenon through the reasoning that is being investigated. Once hypotheses are defined, an experiment can be carried out and the results analysed to confirm, refute, or define the accuracy of the hypotheses.\nExperiments can be also designed to estimate spillover effects onto nearby untreated units.\nNatural experiments.\nThe term \"experiment\" usually implies a controlled experiment, but sometimes controlled experiments are prohibitively difficult, impossible, unethical or illegal. In this case researchers resort to natural experiments or quasi-experiments. Natural experiments rely solely on observations of the variables of the system under study, rather than manipulation of just one or a few variables as occurs in controlled experiments. To the degree possible, they attempt to collect data for the system in such a way that contribution from all variables can be determined, and where the effects of variation in certain variables remain approximately constant so that the effects of other variables can be discerned. The degree to which this is possible depends on the observed correlation between explanatory variables in the observed data. When these variables are \"not\" well correlated, natural experiments can approach the power of controlled experiments. Usually, however, there is some correlation between these variables, which reduces the reliability of natural experiments relative to what could be concluded if a controlled experiment were performed. Also, because natural experiments usually take place in uncontrolled environments, variables from undetected sources are neither measured nor held constant, and these may produce illusory correlations in variables under study.\nMuch research in several science disciplines, including economics, human geography, archaeology, sociology, cultural anthropology, geology, paleontology, ecology, meteorology, and astronomy, relies on quasi-experiments. For example, in astronomy it is clearly impossible, when testing the hypothesis \"Stars are collapsed clouds of hydrogen\", to start out with a giant cloud of hydrogen, and then perform the experiment of waiting a few billion years for it to form a star. However, by observing various clouds of hydrogen in various states of collapse, and other implications of the hypothesis (for example, the presence of various spectral emissions from the light of stars), we can collect data we require to support the hypothesis. An early example of this type of experiment was the first verification in the 17th century that light does not travel from place to place instantaneously, but instead has a measurable speed. Observation of the appearance of the moons of Jupiter were slightly delayed when Jupiter was farther from Earth, as opposed to when Jupiter was closer to Earth; and this phenomenon was used to demonstrate that the difference in the time of appearance of the moons was consistent with a measurable speed.\nField experiments.\nField experiments are so named to distinguish them from laboratory experiments, which enforce scientific control by testing a hypothesis in the artificial and highly controlled setting of a laboratory. Often used in the social sciences, and especially in economic analyses of education and health interventions, field experiments have the advantage that outcomes are observed in a natural setting rather than in a contrived laboratory environment. For this reason, field experiments are sometimes seen as having higher external validity than laboratory experiments. However, like natural experiments, field experiments suffer from the possibility of contamination: experimental conditions can be controlled with more precision and certainty in the lab. Yet some phenomena (e.g., voter turnout in an election) cannot be easily studied in a laboratory.\nObservational studies.\nAn observational study is used when it is impractical, unethical, cost-prohibitive (or otherwise inefficient) to fit a physical or social system into a laboratory setting, to completely control confounding factors, or to apply random assignment. It can also be used when confounding factors are either limited or known well enough to analyze the data in light of them (though this may be rare when social phenomena are under examination). For an observational science to be valid, the experimenter must know and account for confounding factors. In these situations, observational studies have value because they often suggest hypotheses that can be tested with randomized experiments or by collecting fresh data.\nFundamentally, however, observational studies are not experiments. By definition, observational studies lack the manipulation required for Baconian experiments. In addition, observational studies (e.g., in biological or social systems) often involve variables that are difficult to quantify or control. Observational studies are limited because they lack the statistical properties of randomized experiments. In a randomized experiment, the method of randomization specified in the experimental protocol guides the statistical analysis, which is usually specified also by the experimental protocol. Without a statistical model that reflects an objective randomization, the statistical analysis relies on a subjective model. Inferences from subjective models are unreliable in theory and practice. In fact, there are several cases where carefully conducted observational studies consistently give wrong results, that is, where the results of the observational studies are inconsistent and also differ from the results of experiments. For example, epidemiological studies of colon cancer consistently show beneficial correlations with broccoli consumption, while experiments find no benefit.\nA particular problem with observational studies involving human subjects is the great difficulty attaining fair comparisons between treatments (or exposures), because such studies are prone to selection bias, and groups receiving different treatments (exposures) may differ greatly according to their covariates (age, height, weight, medications, exercise, nutritional status, ethnicity, family medical history, etc.). In contrast, randomization implies that for each covariate, the mean for each group is expected to be the same. For any randomized trial, some variation from the mean is expected, of course, but the randomization ensures that the experimental groups have mean values that are close, due to the central limit theorem and Markov's inequality. With inadequate randomization or low sample size, the systematic variation in covariates between the treatment groups (or exposure groups) makes it difficult to separate the effect of the treatment (exposure) from the effects of the other covariates, most of which have not been measured. The mathematical models used to analyze such data must consider each differing covariate (if measured), and results are not meaningful if a covariate is neither randomized nor included in the model.\nTo avoid conditions that render an experiment far less useful, physicians conducting medical trials\u2014say for U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval\u2014quantify and randomize the covariates that can be identified. Researchers attempt to reduce the biases of observational studies with matching methods such as propensity score matching, which require large populations of subjects and extensive information on covariates. However, propensity score matching is no longer recommended as a technique because it can increase, rather than decrease, bias. Outcomes are also quantified when possible (bone density, the amount of some cell or substance in the blood, physical strength or endurance, etc.) and not based on a subject's or a professional observer's opinion. In this way, the design of an observational study can render the results more objective and therefore, more convincing.\nEthics.\nBy placing the distribution of the independent variable(s) under the control of the researcher, an experiment\u2014particularly when it involves human subjects\u2014introduces potential ethical considerations, such as balancing benefit and harm, fairly distributing interventions (e.g., treatments for a disease), and informed consent. For example, in psychology or health care, it is unethical to provide a substandard treatment to patients. Therefore, ethical review boards are supposed to stop clinical trials and other experiments unless a new treatment is believed to offer benefits as good as current best practice. It is also generally unethical (and often illegal) to conduct randomized experiments on the effects of substandard or harmful treatments, such as the effects of ingesting arsenic on human health. To understand the effects of such exposures, scientists sometimes use observational studies to understand the effects of those factors.\nEven when experimental research does not directly involve human subjects, it may still present ethical concerns. For example, the nuclear bomb experiments conducted by the Manhattan Project implied the use of nuclear reactions to harm human beings even though the experiments did not directly involve any human subjects. \nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59862", "revid": "36449898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59862", "title": "Escape Velocity (video game)", "text": "Escape Velocity is a single-player role-playing space trading and combat video game series first introduced in 1996 by Ambrosia Software for the Macintosh. Two other similar games based on the original, \"EV Override\" and \"Escape Velocity Nova\", followed in 1998 and 2002 respectively, the latter of which is also available on Microsoft Windows. In addition there is a trading card game available based on the storyline of the \"EV Nova\" universe.\nThe series was created as a joint effort between several people and groups. Matt Burch programmed all three games in their entirety except for the registration system and various libraries. He also devised and created the scenario for the first game. Ambrosia Software, headed by Andrew Welch, managed marketing, registration, and distribution, as well as providing several external libraries used by the games. Early test versions of the game went by the name 'Merc' (short for 'mercenary'). Peter Cartwright wrote the scenario for \"EV Override\" and the Australian company ATMOS created the scenario of \"EV Nova\"; both originated as plug-ins for the preceding games before being picked up by Ambrosia as sequels. The fighter pilot voices in the original game were provided by Patrick Delahanty. A plug-in of additional phrases was also created and later included as part of \"EV Override\".\nA remake of \"EV Override\" named \"Cosmic Frontier: Override\" was launched on April 21, 2020, by Peter Cartwright, scenario designer at Ambrosia Software, and reached its funding goal on May 24, 2020.\nLicensing and technical features.\nThe first two \"Escape Velocity\" games are only available in their original forms for the Apple Macintosh and are Classic-only. \"EV Nova\" is a Carbon application and runs natively on both the original Mac OS and Mac OS X, and has been ported to Windows. Version 1.1.0 of \"EV Nova\", released in December 2008, is a Universal Binary, and runs natively on Intel-based Macs. Adapted versions of the scenarios of the first two games that run natively in \"EV Nova\" are available for free.\nThis series follows the general licensing rule for Ambrosia Software. All three games are shareware. Ambrosia's shareware system allows most distribution of unregistered games. Copies of the first two \"Escape Velocity\" games will work without limitation for 30 days. Afterwards, the player is simply reminded at startup that they have not registered, and told how many times they have run the game, as well as for how many hours it has been run. There is also the character called 'Cap'n Hector' (named after Ambrosia's mascot and office parrot) who reminds the player to register. During the trial this is done by flying by the player's ship and sending a message. After the trial period has expired, the character starts attacking the player, but in \"EV Override\", Cap'n Hector also steals the player's credits. Players can not damage Cap'n Hector directly, though in the original game it was possible for splash damage to disable or destroy her ship.\nAn unregistered copy of \"EV Nova\" is more limited. In addition to the attacks by Cap'n Hector, certain ships and technologies cannot be obtained after the thirty-day trial ends, and even before then, the game's story lines stop about two thirds of the way through, and plug-ins are not supported. Once the game has been registered, Cap'n Hector and all of the other restrictions disappear from the game.\nThe entire series features an open-ended plug-in architecture, allowing new scenarios to be written by users. This technology is based on the Macintosh resource fork format, making it possible to develop plug-ins without using any purpose-designed editors (though several editors exist and are popular since they make the task much easier). Since Windows does not support resource forks and it is therefore impossible to preserve them when transferring files to Windows-based computers, an alternate format and a conversion system were devised for the Windows version of the game.\nGameplay.\nMuch of the game takes place in two-dimensional space, with the player flying a ship from a third-person overhead perspective. The player has the option of engaging in both combat and trade. Players are able to fly through hundreds of star systems, which are connected to each other by hyperlinks. Ships travel between star systems along the hyperlinks by engaging their hyperdrive, a form of faster-than-light travel. In Nova, wormholes or hypergates may also be utilized for instantaneous travel. Most systems contain stellar objects such as planets and space stations. Players can land on these objects, where they may be given the option to trade, gain missions, and purchase new spaceships or add-on outfits for their current spaceship. The plot is advanced through missions available from facilities on planets as well as NPCs flying through space. Players can choose which missions to follow and which governments to form a good relationship with or to be entirely neutral. They can choose to be a trader or a mercenary or an asteroid miner among a number of things or a combination of several.\nThe three games are alike in gameplay only; the universe and plot are completely separate and unrelated between the releases (though \"EV Nova\" contains the Kestrel from \"EV\" with a description of being from another universe). Each release's engine contains improvements on the previous version, although by far the most significant improvements were made in the third release.\nA turbo boost can be acquired which, when activated, plays an audio clip from the introduction to the British television program \"Thunderbirds\".\nOccasionally the player will encounter Sinistar, including his voice files.\nPremise.\nThe plot of the original \"Escape Velocity\" involves disputes between the Confederation government and a Rebellion against it. As noted earlier, the player may choose sides (or not) based on who they believe is right, who they believe is stronger, who they believe it is more profitable to support, or any other criteria. The player begins with a shuttlecraft resembling those from \"Star Trek\".\nGovernments.\nThe \"Confederation\" is one of two main governments in the original game. According to the game, as humanity expanded into the Milky Way galaxy, the new colonies operated independently of each other. However, an invasion by an unknown alien race forced the colonies to unify under Earth's leadership. This became known as the Confederation. The Confederation and the aliens fought a bloody war, with millions of humans being killed. Eventually the Confederation prevailed. At the start of the game, the Confederation and the Rebellion are locked in a bloody stalemate. The Confederation uses four ships in its military, namely the Confederate Patrol Ship, the Confederate Gunboat, the Confederate Frigate and the Confederate Cruiser.\nThe \"Rebellion\" is the other main government in \"Escape Velocity\". According to the game, after winning the war with the aliens, the Confederation did not relinquish its naval power and began exploiting the resources of the outer worlds. Those worlds eventually seceded, provoking a civil war. The Rebellion is in turn criticized for its aggressive nature, support of quasi-criminal organizations, and attacks on civilian shipping and liners. The Rebellion uses four ships in their campaign against the Confederation, namely the Manta, the Rebel Destroyer, the Rebel Cruiser and the Escort Carrier, the last of which is seen only when the player is working for the Confederation.\nThe \"Cydonians\" of \"New Cydonia\" and \"Letheans\" of \"Lethe Prime\" occupy two systems in the galactic southeast of the galaxy and are also locked in a war over water rights at the start of the game; more specific information regarding the conflict is never provided. Both sides utilize the Defender, the Argosy, and the Corvette when fighting in space. The Cydonians also use the Lightning, whereas the Letheans supplement these ships with the Rapier.\nThe game also includes several trading corporations, including \"Starbound Shipping\", \"Consolidated Express\", and \"United Galactic Express\". Starbound Shipping and United Galactic Express are both in direct (and sometimes violent) competition with Consolidated Express, and are therefore de facto allies. \"Astex Mining Corporation\" is a mining company that works exclusively for the Confederation, and as a result is often targeted by the Rebellion and its sympathizers.\nThe \"Artemis Group\" are a family run organization devoted to eliminating pirates as well as ensure the galactic order remains balanced. They attempt to prevent either the Confederation or Rebellion from winning the civil war.\nThe starting planet, \"Levo\", which is in a system by the same name, has a militia patrolling it to defend it from Pirates, though Pirates never appear in the system except when following the player because of valuable cargo in their possession.\nThere are a number of Pirates in the game, who immediately attempt to destroy any non-Pirate ship they spot, with the exception of the player once they have achieved a high combat rating. The Pirates do not plunder their targets due to limitations in the game; the player, however, is allowed to board ships, and may from there steal money, cargo, fuel, or ammunition, or attempt to capture the ship for use as their own or as an escort. Another key detail, Pirates may board the player's ship if they disable it. In \"EV Nova\", Pirates do board and plunder ships, including the player's.\nReception.\n\"MacUser\" named \"Escape Velocity\" the best shareware game of 1996.\nLegacy.\n\"Escape Velocity\" has two sequels: \"Override\" (1998) and \"Nova\" (2002).\nMany subsequent games explicitly cite \"Escape Velocity\" as an or the primary influence on their design, such as \"3030 Deathwar\", \"Endless Sky\", \"Gaia Beyond\", \"Space RPG\", and \"Naev\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59863", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59863", "title": "Correspondence principle", "text": "Physics principle formulated by Niels Bohr\nIn physics, a correspondence principle is any one of several premises or assertions about the relationship between classical and quantum mechanics. \nThe physicist Niels Bohr coined the term in 1920 during the early development of quantum theory; he used it to explain how quantized classical orbitals connect to quantum radiation. \nModern sources often use the term for the idea that the behavior of systems described by quantum theory reproduces classical physics in the limit of large quantum numbers: for large orbits and for large energies, quantum calculations must agree with classical calculations. A \"generalized\" correspondence principle refers to the requirement for a broad set of connections between any old and new theory.\nHistory.\nMax Planck was the first to introduce the idea of quanta of energy, while studying black-body radiation in 1900. In 1906, he was also the first to write that quantum theory should replicate classical mechanics at some limit, particularly if the Planck constant \"h\" were taken to be infinitesimal. With this idea, he showed that Planck's law for thermal radiation leads to the Rayleigh\u2013Jeans law, the classical prediction (valid for large wavelength).\nNiels Bohr used a similar idea, while developing his model of the atom. In 1913, he provided the first postulates of what is now known as old quantum theory. Using these postulates he obtained that for the hydrogen atom, the energy spectrum approaches the classical continuum for large \"n\" (a quantum number that encodes the energy of the orbit). Bohr coined the term \"correspondence principle\" during a lecture in 1920.\nArnold Sommerfeld refined Bohr's theory leading to the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization condition. Sommerfeld referred to the correspondence principle as Bohr's magic wand (), in 1921.\nBohr's correspondence principle.\nThe seeds of Bohr's correspondence principle appeared from two sources. First Sommerfeld and Max Born developed a \"quantization procedure\" based on the action angle variables of classical Hamiltonian mechanics. This gave a mathematical foundation for stationary states of the Bohr-Sommerfeld model of the atom. The second seed was Albert Einstein's quantum derivation of Planck's law in 1916. Einstein developed the statistical mechanics for Bohr-model atoms interacting with electromagnetic radiation, leading to absorption and two kinds of emission, spontaneous and stimulated emission. But for Bohr the important result was the use of classical analogies and the Bohr atomic model to fix inconsistencies in Planck's derivation of the blackbody radiation formula.\nBohr used the word \"correspondence\" in italics in lectures and writing before calling it a correspondence principle. He viewed this as a correspondence between quantum motion and radiation, not between classical and quantum theories. He writes in 1920 that there exists \"a far-reaching correspondence between the various types of possible transitions between the stationary states on the one hand and the various harmonic components of the motion on the other hand.\"\nBohr's first article containing the definition of the correspondence principle was in 1923, in a summary paper entitled (in the English translation) \"On the application of quantum theory to atomic structure\". In his chapter II, \"The process of radiation\", he defines his correspondence principle as a condition connecting harmonic components of the electron moment to the possible occurrence of a radiative transition. In modern terms, this condition is a selection rule, saying that a given quantum jump is possible if and only if a particular type of motion exists in the corresponding classical model.\nFollowing his definition of the correspondence principle, Bohr describes two applications. First he shows that the frequency of emitted radiation is related to an integral which can be well approximated by a sum when the quantum numbers inside the integral are large compared with their differences. Similarly he shows a relationship for the intensities of spectral lines and thus the rates at which quantum jumps occur.\nThese asymptotic relationships are expressed by Bohr as consequences of his general correspondence principle. However, historically each of these applications have been called \"the correspondence principle\".\nThe PhD dissertation of Hans Kramers working in Bohr's group in Copenhagen applied Bohr's correspondence principle to account for all of the known facts of the spectroscopic Stark effect, including some spectral components not known at the time of Kramers work.\nSommerfeld had been skeptical of the correspondence principle as it did not seem to be a consequence of a fundamental theory; Kramers' work convinced him that the principle had heuristic utility nevertheless. Other physicists picked up the concept, including work by John Van Vleck and by Kramers and Heisenberg on dispersion theory. The principle became a cornerstone of the semi-classical Bohr-Sommerfeld atomic theory;\nBohr's 1922 Nobel prize was partly awarded for his work with the correspondence principle.\nDespite the successes, the physical theories based on the principle faced increasing challenges in the early 1920s. Theoretical calculations by Van Vleck and by Kramers of the ionization potential of Helium disagreed significantly with experimental values. Bohr, Kramers, and John C. Slater responded with a new theoretical approach now called the BKS theory based on the correspondence principle but disavowing conservation of energy. Einstein and Wolfgang Pauli criticized the new approach, and the Bothe\u2013Geiger coincidence experiment showed that energy was conserved in quantum collisions.\nWith the existing theories in conflict with observations, two new quantum mechanics concepts arose. First, Heisenberg's 1925 \"Umdeutung\" paper on matrix mechanics was inspired by the correspondence principle, although he did not cite Bohr. Further development in collaboration with Pascual Jordan and Max Born resulted in a mathematical model without connection to the principle. Second, Schrodinger's wave mechanics in the following year similarly did not use the principle. Both pictures were later shown to be equivalent and accurate enough to replace old quantum theory. These approaches have no atomic orbits: the correspondence is more of an analogy than a principle.\nDirac's correspondence.\nPaul Dirac developed significant portions of the new quantum theory in the second half of the 1920s. While he did not apply Bohr's correspondence principle, he developed a different, more formal classical\u2013quantum correspondence. Dirac connected the structures of classical mechanics known as Poisson brackets to analogous structures of quantum mechanics known as commutators:\nformula_1\nBy this correspondence, now called canonical quantization, Dirac showed how the mathematical form of classical mechanics could be recast as a basis for the new mathematics of quantum mechanics.\nDirac developed these connections by studying the work of Heisenberg and Kramers on dispersion, work that was directly built on Bohr's correspondence principle; the Dirac approach provides a mathematically sound path towards Bohr's goal of a connection between classical and quantum mechanics. While Dirac did not call this correspondence a \"principle\", physics textbooks refer to his connections a \"correspondence principle\".\nThe classical limit of wave mechanics.\nThe outstanding success of classical mechanics in the description of natural phenomena up to the 20th century means that quantum mechanics must do as well in similar circumstances. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Judged by the test of experience, the laws of classical physics have brilliantly justified themselves in all processes of motion\u2026 It must therefore be laid down as an unconditionally necessary postulate, that the new mechanics \u2026 must in all these problems reach the same results as the classical mechanics.\u2014\u200a\nOne way to quantitatively define this concept is to require quantum mechanical theories to produce classical mechanics results as the quantum of action goes to zero, formula_2. This transition can be accomplished in two different ways.\nFirst, the particle can be approximated by a wave packet, and the indefinite spread of the packet with time can be ignored. In 1927, Paul Ehrenfest proved his namesake theorem that showed that Newton's laws of motion hold on average in quantum mechanics: the quantum statistical expectation value of the position and momentum obey Newton's laws.\nSecond, the individual particle view can be replaced with a statistical mixture of classical particles with a density matching the quantum probability density. This approach led to the concept of semiclassical physics, beginning with the development of WKB approximation used in descriptions of quantum tunneling for example.\nModern view.\nWhile Bohr viewed \"correspondence\" as principle aiding his description of quantum phenomena, fundamental differences between the mathematical structure of quantum and of classical mechanics prevents correspondence in many cases. Rather than a principle, \"there may be in some situations an approximate correspondence between classical and quantum concepts,\" physicist Asher Peres put it. Since quantum mechanics operates in a discrete space and classical mechanics in a continuous one, any correspondence will be necessarily fuzzy and elusive.\nIntroductory quantum mechanics textbooks suggest that quantum mechanics goes over to classical theory in the limit of high quantum numbers or in a limit where the Planck constant in the quantum formula is reduced to zero, formula_2. However such correspondence is not always possible. For example, classical systems can exhibit chaotic orbits which diverge but quantum states are unitary and maintain a fixed overlap.\nGeneralized correspondence principle.\nThe term \"generalized correspondence principle\" has been used in the study of the history of science to mean the reduction of a new scientific theory to an earlier scientific theory in appropriate circumstances. This requires that the new theory explain all the phenomena under circumstances for which the preceding theory was known to be valid; it also means that new theory will retain large parts of the older theory. The generalized principle applies correspondence across aspects of a complete theory, not just a single formula as in the classical limit correspondence. For example, Albert Einstein in his 1905 work on relativity noted that classical mechanics relied on Galilean relativity while electromagnetism did not, and yet both work well. He produced a new theory that combined them in a way that reduced to these separate theories in approximations.\nIronically the singular failure of this \"generalized correspondence principle\" concept of scientific theories is the replacement of classical mechanics with quantum mechanics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59864", "revid": "1011382050", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59864", "title": "Socialist Republic of Vietnam", "text": ""}
{"id": "59865", "revid": "50746644", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59865", "title": "Secure cryptoprocessor", "text": "Device used for encryption\nA secure cryptoprocessor is a dedicated computer-on-a-chip or microprocessor for carrying out cryptographic operations, embedded in a packaging with multiple physical security measures, which give it a degree of tamper resistance. Unlike cryptographic processors that output decrypted data onto a bus in a secure environment, a secure cryptoprocessor does not output decrypted data or decrypted program instructions in an environment where security cannot always be maintained.\nThe purpose of a secure cryptoprocessor is to act as the keystone of a security subsystem, eliminating the need to protect the rest of the subsystem with physical security measures.\nExamples.\nA hardware security module (HSM) contains one or more secure cryptoprocessor chips. These devices are high grade secure cryptoprocessors used with enterprise servers. A hardware security module can have multiple levels of physical security with a single-chip cryptoprocessor as its most secure component. The cryptoprocessor does not reveal keys or executable instructions on a bus, except in encrypted form, and zeros keys by attempts at probing or scanning. The crypto chip(s) may also be potted in the hardware security module with other processors and memory chips that store and process encrypted data. Any attempt to remove the potting will cause the keys in the crypto chip to be zeroed. A hardware security module may also be part of a computer (for example an ATM) that operates inside a locked safe to deter theft, substitution, and tampering.\nModern smartcards are probably the most widely deployed form of secure cryptoprocessor, although more complex and versatile secure cryptoprocessors are widely deployed in systems such as Automated teller machines, TV set-top boxes, military applications, and high-security portable communication equipment. Some secure cryptoprocessors can even run general-purpose operating systems such as Linux inside their security boundary. Cryptoprocessors input program instructions in encrypted form, decrypt the instructions to plain instructions which are then executed within the same cryptoprocessor chip where the decrypted instructions are inaccessibly stored. By never revealing the decrypted program instructions, the cryptoprocessor prevents tampering of programs by technicians who may have legitimate access to the sub-system data bus. This is known as bus encryption. Data processed by a cryptoprocessor is also frequently encrypted.\nThe Trusted Platform Module (TPM) is an implementation of a secure cryptoprocessor that brings the notion of trusted computing to ordinary PCs by enabling a secure environment. Present TPM implementations focus on providing a tamper-proof boot environment, and persistent and volatile storage encryption.\nSecurity chips for embedded systems are also available that provide the same level of physical protection for keys and other secret material as a smartcard processor or TPM but in a smaller, less complex and less expensive package. They are often referred to as cryptographic authentication devices and are used to authenticate peripherals, accessories and/or consumables. Like TPMs, they are usually turnkey integrated circuits intended to be embedded in a system, usually soldered to a PC board.\nFeatures.\nSecurity measures used in secure cryptoprocessors:\nDegree of security.\nSecure cryptoprocessors, while useful, are not invulnerable to attack, particularly for well-equipped and determined opponents (e.g. a government intelligence agency) who are willing to expend enough resources on the project.\nOne attack on a secure cryptoprocessor targeted the IBM 4758. A team at the University of Cambridge reported the successful extraction of secret information from an IBM 4758, using a combination of mathematics, and special-purpose codebreaking hardware. However, this attack was not practical in real-world systems because it required the attacker to have full access to all API functions of the device. Normal and recommended practices use the integral access control system to split authority so that no one person could mount the attack.\nWhile the vulnerability they exploited was a flaw in the software loaded on the 4758, and not the architecture of the 4758 itself, their attack serves as a reminder that a security system is only as secure as its weakest link: the strong link of the 4758 hardware was rendered useless by flaws in the design and specification of the software loaded on it.\nSmartcards are significantly more vulnerable, as they are more open to physical attack. Additionally, hardware backdoors can undermine security in smartcards and other cryptoprocessors unless investment is made in anti-backdoor design methods.\nIn the case of full disk encryption applications, especially when implemented without a boot PIN, a cryptoprocessor would not be secure against a cold boot attack if data remanence could be exploited to dump memory contents after the operating system has retrieved the cryptographic keys from its TPM.\nHowever, if all of the sensitive data is stored only in cryptoprocessor memory and not in external storage, and the cryptoprocessor is designed to be unable to reveal keys or decrypted or unencrypted data on chip bonding pads or solder bumps, then such protected data would be accessible only by probing the cryptoprocessor chip after removing any packaging and metal shielding layers from the cryptoprocessor chip. This would require both physical possession of the device as well as skills and equipment beyond that of most technical personnel.\nOther attack methods involve carefully analyzing the timing of various operations that might vary depending on the secret value or mapping the current consumption versus time to identify differences in the way that '0' bits are handled internally vs. '1' bits. Or the attacker may apply temperature extremes, excessively high or low clock frequencies or supply voltage that exceeds the specifications in order to induce a fault. The internal design of the cryptoprocessor can be tailored to prevent these attacks.\nSome secure cryptoprocessors contain dual processor cores and generate inaccessible encryption keys when needed so that even if the circuitry is reverse engineered, it will not reveal any keys that are necessary to securely decrypt software booted from encrypted flash memory or communicated between cores.\nThe first single-chip cryptoprocessor design was for copy protection of personal computer software (see US Patent 4,168,396, Sept 18, 1979) and was inspired by Bill Gates's Open Letter to Hobbyists.\nHistory.\nThe hardware security module (HSM), a type of secure cryptoprocessor, was invented by Egyptian-American engineer Mohamed M. Atalla, in 1972. He invented a high security module dubbed the \"Atalla Box\" which encrypted PIN and ATM messages, and protected offline devices with an un-guessable PIN-generating key. In 1972, he filed a patent for the device. He founded Atalla Corporation (now Utimaco Atalla) that year, and commercialized the \"Atalla Box\" the following year, officially as the Identikey system. It was a card reader and customer identification system, consisting of a card reader console, two customer PIN pads, intelligent controller and built-in electronic interface package. It allowed the customer to type in a secret code, which is transformed by the device, using a microprocessor, into another code for the teller. During a transaction, the customer's account number was read by the card reader. It was a success, and led to the wide use of high security modules.\nFearful that Atalla would dominate the market, banks and credit card companies began working on an international standard in the 1970s. The IBM 3624, launched in the late 1970s, adopted a similar PIN verification process to the earlier Atalla system. Atalla was an early competitor to IBM in the banking security market.\nAt the National Association of Mutual Savings Banks (NAMSB) conference in January 1976, Atalla unveiled an upgrade to its Identikey system, called the Interchange Identikey. It added the capabilities of processing online transactions and dealing with network security. Designed with the focus of taking bank transactions online, the Identikey system was extended to shared-facility operations. It was consistent and compatible with various switching networks, and was capable of resetting itself electronically to any one of 64,000 irreversible nonlinear algorithms as directed by card data information. The Interchange Identikey device was released in March 1976. Later in 1979, Atalla introduced the first network security processor (NSP). Atalla's HSM products protect 250million card transactions every day as of 2013, and secure the majority of the world's ATM transactions as of 2014.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59866", "revid": "33921713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59866", "title": "Charleston (dance)", "text": "American swing dance\nThe Charleston is a dance named after the harbor city of Charleston, South Carolina. The rhythm was popularized in mainstream dance music in the United States by a 1923 tune called \"The Charleston\" by composer/pianist James P. Johnson, which originated in the Broadway show \"Runnin' Wild\" and became one of the most popular hits of the decade. \"Runnin' Wild\" ran from 28 October 1923 through 28 June 1924. The Charleston dance's peak popularity occurred from mid-1926 to 1927.\nOrigins.\nWhile the dance probably came from the \"star\" or challenge dances that were all part of the African-American dance called Juba, the particular sequence of steps which appeared in \"Runnin' Wild\" were probably newly devised for popular appeal. \"At first, the step started off with a simple twisting of the feet, to rhythm in a lazy sort of way. When the dance hit Harlem, a new version was added. It became a fast kicking step, kicking the feet, both forward and backward and later done with a tap.\" Further changes were undoubtedly made before the dance was put on stage. In the words of Harold Courlander, while the Charleston had some characteristics of traditional Black American dance, it \"was a synthetic creation, a newly devised conglomerate tailored for widespread popular appeal.\" Although the step known as \"Jay-Bird\" and other specific movement sequences are of Afro-American origin, no record of the Charleston dance being performed as such on the plantation has been discovered.\nAlthough it achieved popularity when the song \"Charleston\", sung by Elisabeth Welch, was added to the production \"Runnin' Wild\", the dance itself had first been introduced in Irving C. Miller's \"Liza\" in the spring of 1923. Although the name was new, Willie \"The Lion\" Smith noted that the dance was known well before that; in particular, he mentions the version done by Russell Brown under the name \"Geechie dance\". The \"Charleston\" composer James P. Johnson said that he had seen it danced as early as 1913 in New York City in the San Juan Hill neighborhood, at the Jungles Casino.\nThe characteristic Charleston beat, which Johnson said he first heard from Charleston dockworkers, incorporates the clave rhythm and was considered by composer and critic Gunther Schuller to be synonymous with the Habanera and the Spanish Tinge. Johnson actually recorded several \"Charlestons\" and in later years derided most of them as being of \"that same damn beat.\" Several of these were recorded on player piano rolls, some of which have survived to this day.\nThe Charleston and similar dances such as the Black Bottom which involved \"kicking up your heels\" were very popular in the latter 1920s. The trend subsided after 1930, probably in part because the new fashion for floor-level sheath evening dresses, which constricted the legs, did not suit them. In a British Path\u00e9 Instructional Short of 1933, a new variation \u2013 the \"Crawl Charleston\" \u2013 is demonstrated by Santos Casini and Jean Mence, a very sedate dance similar to a tango or waltz. It was not until dress hemlines rose toward the end of the thirties that the Charleston is again seen in film.\nA slightly different form of Charleston became popular in the 1930s and 1940s, and is associated with Lindy Hop. In this later form, the hot jazz timing of the '20s Charleston was adapted to suit swing jazz music. This style of Charleston has many common names, including Lindy Charleston, Savoy Charleston, '30s or '40s Charleston, and Swinging Charleston, and its basic step takes eight counts and is danced either alone or with a partner. Frankie Manning and other Savoy dancers saw themselves as doing Charleston steps within the Lindy rather than dancing the Charleston itself.\nContemporary Charleston.\nToday Charleston is an important dance in Lindy Hop dance culture, danced in many permutations: alone (solo), with a partner, or in groups of couples or solo dancers. The basic step allows for a vast range of variations and improvisation. Both the 20s and Swinging Charleston styles are popular today, though swinging Charleston is more commonly integrated into Lindy Hop dancing.\nThe Guinness World Record for the largest Charleston dance is 1,096 participants, set by Revel In Dance in Shrewsbury, UK on September 22nd 2018.\nSolo.\nCharleston can be danced solo, or with a partner. Its simple, flexible basic step makes it easy to concentrate on styling, improvisation and musicality.\nWhichever style of Charleston one chooses, whether dancing alone, with a partner, or in groups, the basic step resembles the natural movement of walking, though it is usually performed in place. The arms swing forward and backwards, with the right arm coming forward as the left leg 'steps' forwards, and then moving back as the left arm and right leg begin their forward movement. Toes are not pointed, but feet usually form a right angle with the leg at the ankle. Arms are usually extended from the shoulder, either with straight lines, or more frequently with bent elbows and hands at right angles from the wrist (characteristics of many African dances). Styling varies with each Charleston type from this point.\nSolo 20s Charleston.\nSolo 20s Charleston gained popularity in the early 2000s, in many local Lindy Hop scenes around the world, prompted by competitions such as the Ultimate Lindy Hop Showdown (in 2005 and 2006 particularly) and workshops in the dance taught by high-profile dancers such as the Harlem Hot Shots (formerly known as The Rhythm Hot Shots) and a range of independent dancers.\nUsually danced to hot jazz music recorded or composed in the 1920s, solo 20s Charleston is styled quite differently from the Charleston associated with the 1930s, 1940s and Lindy Hop, though they are structurally similar.\nSolo 20s Charleston is usually danced to music at comparatively high tempos (usually above 200 or 250 beats per minute, with tempos above 300 BPM considered 'fast'), and is characterized by high-energy dancing. Faster movements are often contrasted with slower, dragging steps and improvisations.\nAs it is danced today, solo 20s Charleston often combines steps from several dances associated with the 1920s. The most valued form of solo 20s Charleston combines choreography with improvisation and creative variations on familiar dance steps. Above all, the most popular and most \"successful\" solo 20s Charleston dancers respond to the music in creative ways to express themselves.\nSolo 20s Charleston is often danced in groups on the social dance floor or in formal choreography. Latterly, a derivative of the Charleston, known as the 'Chevin', has been witnessed in European dance halls. The origins of the Chevin are not known; however, some proponents suggest it is named after Elliott Chevin, a Serbian freedom fighter.\nSolo 20s Charleston competition.\nSolo 20s Charleston competitions often make use of elements of the jam circle format, where individual competitors take turns dancing alone for the audience (usually for intervals of a phrase or number of phrases). Competitors move forwards to the audience out of an informal line, usually taking advantage of this movement to perform 'strolls' or other 'traveling' steps, taking the opportunity to \"shine\".\nDespite the emphasis on solo dancing in these sorts of competitions, there is often much interaction between competitors and between the audience and competitors, frequently in the employment of comic devices (such as \"silly walks\" or impersonations) or showy and physically impressive \"stunt\" moves. This type of interaction is typical of the call and response of West African and Afro-American music and dance. In this call and response, audiences and fellow competitors encourage dancers with cheers, shouts, applause, physical gestures and other feedback.\nThis sort of competition structure is increasingly popular in Lindy Hop communities around the world, providing added challenges for dancers, new types of pleasure for audiences and emphasizing social dancing skills such as improvisation and musicality. This structure also echoes the cutting contests of jazz music which Ralph Ellison describes in his stories about live jazz music in the 1930s.\nPartner Charleston.\nPartner Charleston uses the basic step described above, though stylistic changes over the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s affected the styling, as well as ways of holding a partner. Traditionally partner Charleston was danced by a man and a woman, but now both men and women may dance with same gender.\n20s Partner Charleston.\nIn the 20s Partner Charleston, couples stand facing each other in a traditional European partner dancing pose, often referred to as closed position which aids leading and following. The leader's right hand is placed on the follower's back between their shoulder blades. The follower's left hand rests on the leader's shoulder or biceps. The leader's left hand and the follower's right hand are clasped palm to palm, held either at shoulder height or higher. Partners may maintain space between their bodies or dance with their torsos touching.\nThe basic step is for the leader to touch their left foot behind them, but not to shift their weight, on counts 1 and 2, while the follower mirrors the motion by touching their right foot in front of them without shifting weight. On counts 3 and 4, both partners bring their feet back to a standing position, but shift their weight onto the foot they have just moved. On counts 5 and 6, the leader touches their right foot in front of themselves while the follower touches their left foot back. On 7 and 8, both feet are brought back to the standing position where the necessary weight shift occurs to allow the basic step to repeat.\n30s and 40s Partner Charleston.\n30s and 40s Partner Charleston involves a number of positions, including \"jockey position\", where closed position is opened out so that both partners may face forward, without breaking apart.\nIn \"side-by-side\" Charleston, partners open out the closed position entirely, so that their only points of connection are at their touching hips, and where the lead's right hand and arm touch the follower's back, and the follower's left hand and arm touch the leader's shoulder and arm. Both partners then swing their free arms as they would in solo Charleston. In both jockey and side-by-side Charleston, the leader steps back onto their left foot, while the follower steps back onto their right.\nIn \"tandem Charleston\", one partner stands in front of the other (usually the follower, though the arrangement may vary), and both step back onto their left feet to begin. The partner behind holds the front partner's hands at their hip height, and their joined arms swing backwards and forwards as in the basic step.\nThere are numerous other variations on these holds, including \"hand-to-hand\" Charleston, and countless variations on the footwork (including Johnny's Drop, freezes, Savoy kicks and so on). Names for each vary in different local Lindy Hop scenes, though most have historic names associated with their creators or people in the community of the day. Aria Zapata and Teresa were the most famous dancers at the time.\nGroups.\nIn swing dance or Lindy Hop communities today, both solo 20s Charleston and \"solo\" swinging Charleston are often danced in groups arranged in a loose circle on the social dance floor, in two long lines of facing dancers (evenly spaced) or in other formations in more strictly choreographed performances.\nThey may choose to follow steps 'called' either by a designated Caller or by each dancer in turn. In this called context, the group perform the same step for a phrase, or until the new step is \"called\". Individual dancers often improvise within the structure of the called step, bringing their own personal \"flavor\".\nThere are many local variations on this group dancing, including the following. One person will typically call out a variation (such as turning 360 degrees in place on counts 5\u201310), which is then done by everyone beginning the next measure and again for the following 2 measures. If the caller doesn't call another step immediately, the dancers return to the (default) basic step. Switching sides is sometimes called, upon which the dancers hop on the left foot across to the other side on counts 5\u20138, turning 180 degrees to the left.\nIn the more casual social group context, individual dancers may choose to dance \"alone\", improvising in response to the music or copying dancers around them.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59868", "revid": "38516105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59868", "title": "Interpreter (computing)", "text": "Software that executes encoded logic\nIn computing, an interpreter is software that executes source code without first compiling it to machine code. An interpreted runtime environment differs from one that processes CPU-native executable code which requires translating source code before executing it. An interpreter may translate the source code to an intermediate format, such as bytecode. A hybrid environment may translate the bytecode to machine code via just-in-time compilation, as in the case of .NET and Java, instead of interpreting the bytecode directly.\nBefore the widespread adoption of interpreters, the execution of computer programs often relied on compilers, which translate and compile source code into machine code. Early runtime environments for Lisp and BASIC could parse source code directly. Thereafter, runtime environments were developed for languages (such as Perl, Raku, Python, MATLAB, and Ruby), which translated source code into an intermediate format before executing to enhance runtime performance.\nCode that runs in an interpreter can be run on any platform that has a compatible interpreter. The same code can be distributed to any such platform, instead of an executable having to be built for each platform. Although each programming language is usually associated with a particular runtime environment, a language can be used in different environments. Interpreters have been constructed for languages traditionally associated with compilation, such as ALGOL, Fortran, COBOL, C and C++.\nHistory.\nIn the early days of computing, compilers were more commonly found and used than interpreters because hardware at that time could not support both the interpreter and interpreted code and the typical batch environment of the time limited the advantages of interpretation.\nInterpreters were used as early as 1952 to ease programming within the limitations of computers at the time (e.g. a shortage of program storage space, or no native support for floating point numbers). Interpreters were also used to translate between low-level machine languages, allowing code to be written for machines that were still under construction and tested on computers that already existed. The first interpreted high-level language was Lisp. Lisp was first implemented by Steve Russell on an IBM 704 computer. Russell had read John McCarthy's paper, \"Recursive Functions of Symbolic Expressions and Their Computation by Machine, Part I\", and realized (to McCarthy's surprise) that the Lisp \"eval\" function could be implemented in machine code. The result was a working Lisp interpreter which could be used to run Lisp programs, or more properly, \"evaluate Lisp expressions\".\nThe development of editing interpreters was influenced by the need for interactive computing. In the 1960s, the introduction of time-sharing systems allowed multiple users to access a computer simultaneously, and editing interpreters became essential for managing and modifying code in real-time. The first editing interpreters were likely developed for mainframe computers, where they were used to create and modify programs on the fly. One of the earliest examples of an editing interpreter is the EDT (Editor and Debugger for the TECO) system, which was developed in the late 1960s for the PDP-1 computer. EDT allowed users to edit and debug programs using a combination of commands and macros, paving the way for modern text editors and interactive development environments.\nUse.\nNotable uses for interpreters include:\nEfficiency.\nInterpretive overhead is the runtime cost of executing code via an interpreter instead of as native (compiled) code. Interpreting is slower because the interpreter executes multiple machine-code instructions for the equivalent functionality in the native code. In particular, access to variables is slower in an interpreter because the mapping of identifiers to storage locations must be done repeatedly at run-time rather than at compile time. But faster development (due to factors such as shorter edit-build-run cycle) can outweigh the value of faster execution speed; especially when prototyping and testing when the edit-build-run cycle is frequent.\nAn interpreter may generate an intermediate representation (IR) of the program from source code in order to achieve goals such as fast runtime performance. A compiler may also generate an IR, but the compiler generates machine code for later execution whereas the interpreter prepares to execute the program. These differing goals lead to differing IR design. Many BASIC interpreters replace keywords with single byte tokens which can be used to find the instruction in a jump table. A few interpreters, such as the PBASIC interpreter, achieve even higher levels of program compaction by using a bit-oriented rather than a byte-oriented program memory structure, where commands tokens occupy perhaps 5 bits, nominally \"16-bit\" constants are stored in a variable-length code requiring 3, 6, 10, or 18 bits, and address operands include a \"bit offset\". Many BASIC interpreters can store and read back their own tokenized internal representation.\nThere are various compromises between the development speed when using an interpreter and the execution speed when using a compiler. Some systems (such as some Lisps) allow interpreted and compiled code to call each other and to share variables. This means that once a routine has been tested and debugged under the interpreter it can be compiled and thus benefit from faster execution while other routines are being developed.\nImplementation.\nSince the early stages of interpreting and compiling are similar, an interpreter might use the same lexical analyzer and parser as a compiler and then interpret the resulting abstract syntax tree.\nExample.\nAn expression interpreter written in C++.\nimport std;\nusing std::runtime_error;\nusing std::unique_ptr;\nusing std::variant;\n// data types for abstract syntax tree\nenum class Kind: char { \n VAR, \n CONST, \n SUM, \n DIFF, \n MULT, \n DIV, \n PLUS, \n MINUS, \n NOT \n// forward declaration\nclass Node;\nclass Variable { \npublic:\n int* memory; \nclass Constant {\npublic:\n int value; \nclass UnaryOperation {\npublic:\n unique_ptr&lt;Node&gt; right; \nclass BinaryOperation { \npublic:\n unique_ptr&lt;Node&gt; left;\n unique_ptr&lt;Node&gt; right;\nusing Expression = variant&lt;Variable, Constant, BinaryOperation, UnaryOperation&gt;;\nclass Node {\npublic:\n Kind kind;\n Expression e;\n// interpreter procedure\nnodiscard\nint executeIntExpression(const Node&amp; n) {\n int leftValue;\n int rightValue;\n switch (n-&gt;kind) {\n case Kind::VAR:\n return std::get&lt;Variable&gt;(n.e).memory;\n case Kind::CONST:\n return std::get&lt;Constant&gt;(n.e).value;\n case Kind::SUM:\n case Kind::DIFF:\n case Kind::MULT:\n case Kind::DIV:\n const BinaryOperation&amp; bin = std::get&lt;BinaryOperation&gt;(n.e);\n leftValue = executeIntExpression(bin.left.get());\n rightValue = executeIntExpression(bin.right.get());\n switch (n.kind) {\n case Kind::SUM: \n return leftValue + rightValue;\n case Kind::DIFF: \n return leftValue - rightValue;\n case Kind::MULT: \n return leftValue * rightValue;\n case Kind::DIV: \n if (rightValue == 0) {\n throw runtime_error(\"Division by zero\");\n return leftValue / rightValue;\n case Kind::PLUS: \n case Kind::MINUS: \n case Kind::NOT:\n const UnaryOperation&amp; un = std::get&lt;UnaryOperation&gt;(n.e);\n rightValue = executeIntExpression(un.right.get());\n switch (n.kind) {\n case Kind::PLUS:\n return +rightValue;\n case Kind::MINUS:\n return -rightValue;\n case Kind::NOT: \n return !rightValue;\n default: \n std::unreachable();\nJust-in-time compilation.\nJust-in-time (JIT) compilation is the process of converting an intermediate format (i.e. bytecode) to native code at runtime. As this results in native code execution, it is a method of avoiding the runtime cost of using an interpreter while maintaining some of the benefits that lead to the development of interpreters.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59869", "revid": "9228610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59869", "title": "Worldcom", "text": ""}
{"id": "59874", "revid": "12530063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59874", "title": "Schr\u00f6dinger equation", "text": "Description of a quantum-mechanical system\n \nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation is a partial differential equation that governs the wave function of a non-relativistic quantum-mechanical system. Its discovery was a significant landmark in the development of quantum mechanics. It is named after Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger, an Austrian physicist, who postulated the equation in 1925 and published it in 1926, forming the basis for the work that resulted in his Nobel Prize in Physics in 1933.\nConceptually, the Schr\u00f6dinger equation is the quantum counterpart of Newton's second law in classical mechanics. Given a set of known initial conditions, Newton's second law makes a mathematical prediction as to what path a given physical system will take over time. The Schr\u00f6dinger equation gives the evolution over time of the wave function, the quantum-mechanical characterization of an isolated physical system. The equation was postulated by Schr\u00f6dinger based on a postulate of Louis de Broglie that all matter has an associated matter wave. The equation predicted bound states of the atom in agreement with experimental observations.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation is not the only way to study quantum mechanical systems and make predictions. Other formulations of quantum mechanics include matrix mechanics, introduced by Werner Heisenberg, and the path integral formulation, developed chiefly by Richard Feynman. When these approaches are compared, the use of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation is sometimes called \"wave mechanics\".\nThe equation given by Schr\u00f6dinger is nonrelativistic because it contains a first derivative in time and a second derivative in space, and therefore space and time are not on equal footing. Paul Dirac incorporated special relativity and quantum mechanics into a single formulation that simplifies to the Schr\u00f6dinger equation in the non-relativistic limit. This is the Dirac equation, which contains a single derivative in both space and time. Another partial differential equation, the Klein\u2013Gordon equation, led to a problem with probability density even though it was a relativistic wave equation. The probability density could be negative, which is physically unviable. This was fixed by Dirac by taking the so-called square root of the Klein\u2013Gordon operator and in turn introducing Dirac matrices. In a modern context, the Klein\u2013Gordon equation describes spin-less particles, while the Dirac equation describes spin-1/2 particles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinition.\nPreliminaries.\nIntroductory courses on physics or chemistry typically introduce the Schr\u00f6dinger equation in a way that can be appreciated knowing only the concepts and notations of basic calculus, particularly derivatives with respect to space and time. A special case of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation that admits a statement in those terms is the position-space Schr\u00f6dinger equation for a single nonrelativistic particle in one dimension:\nformula_1\nHere, formula_2 is a wave function, a function that assigns a complex number to each point formula_3 at each time formula_4. The parameter formula_5 is the mass of the particle, and formula_6 is the \"potential energy function\" that represents the environment in which the particle exists. The constant formula_7 is the imaginary unit, and formula_8 is the reduced Planck constant, which has units of action (energy multiplied by time).\nBroadening beyond this simple case, the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics developed by Paul Dirac, David Hilbert, John von Neumann, and Hermann Weyl defines the state of a quantum mechanical system to be a vector formula_9 belonging to a separable complex Hilbert space formula_10. This vector is postulated to be normalized under the Hilbert space's inner product, that is, in Dirac notation it obeys formula_11. The exact nature of this Hilbert space is dependent on the system\u00a0\u2013 for example, for describing position and momentum the Hilbert space is the space of square-integrable functions formula_12, while the Hilbert space for the spin of a single proton is the two-dimensional complex vector space formula_13 with the usual inner product.\nPhysical quantities of interest \u2013 position, momentum, energy, spin \u2013 are represented by observables, which are self-adjoint operators acting on the Hilbert space. A wave function can be an eigenvector of an observable, in which case it is called an eigenstate, and the associated eigenvalue corresponds to the value of the observable in that eigenstate. More generally, a quantum state will be a linear combination of the eigenstates, known as a quantum superposition. When an observable is measured, the result will be one of its eigenvalues with probability given by the Born rule: in the simplest case the eigenvalue formula_14 is non-degenerate and the probability is given by formula_15, where formula_16 is its associated eigenvector. More generally, the eigenvalue is degenerate and the probability is given by formula_17, where formula_18 is the projector onto its associated eigenspace.\nA momentum eigenstate would be a perfectly monochromatic wave of infinite extent, which is not square-integrable. Likewise a position eigenstate would be a Dirac delta distribution, not square-integrable and technically not a function at all. Consequently, neither can belong to the particle's Hilbert space. Physicists sometimes regard these eigenstates, composed of elements outside the Hilbert space, as \"generalized eigenvectors\". These are used for calculational convenience and do not represent physical states. Thus, a position-space wave function formula_2 as used above can be written as the inner product of a time-dependent state vector formula_20 with unphysical but convenient \"position eigenstates\" formula_21:\nformula_22\nTime-dependent equation.\nThe form of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation depends on the physical situation. The most general form is the time-dependent Schr\u00f6dinger equation, which gives a description of a system evolving with time:\nTime-dependent Schr\u00f6dinger equation\u00a0\"(general)\"\nformula_23\nwhere formula_4 is time, formula_25 is the state vector of the quantum system (formula_26 being the Greek letter psi), and formula_27 is an observable, the Hamiltonian operator.\nThe term \"Schr\u00f6dinger equation\" can refer to both the general equation, or the specific nonrelativistic version. The general equation is indeed quite general, used throughout quantum mechanics, for everything from the Dirac equation to quantum field theory, by plugging in diverse expressions for the Hamiltonian. The specific nonrelativistic version is an approximation that yields accurate results in many situations, but only to a certain extent (see relativistic quantum mechanics and relativistic quantum field theory).\nTo apply the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, write down the Hamiltonian for the system, accounting for the kinetic and potential energies of the particles constituting the system, then insert it into the Schr\u00f6dinger equation. The resulting partial differential equation is solved for the wave function, which contains information about the system. In practice, the square of the absolute value of the wave function at each point is taken to define a probability density function. For example, given a wave function in position space formula_2 as above, we have\nformula_29\nTime-independent equation.\nThe time-dependent Schr\u00f6dinger equation described above predicts that wave functions can form standing waves, called stationary states. These states are particularly important as their individual study later simplifies the task of solving the time-dependent Schr\u00f6dinger equation for \"any\" state. Stationary states can also be described by a simpler form of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, the time-independent Schr\u00f6dinger equation:\nTime-independent Schr\u00f6dinger equation (\"general\")\nformula_30 is the energy of the system. This is only used when the Hamiltonian itself is not dependent on time explicitly. However, even in this case the total wave function is dependent on time as explained in the section on linearity below. In the language of linear algebra, this equation is an eigenvalue equation. Therefore, the wave function is an eigenfunction of the Hamiltonian operator with corresponding eigenvalue(s) formula_31.\nProperties.\nLinearity.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation is a linear differential equation, meaning that if two state vectors formula_32 and formula_33 are solutions, then so is any linear combination\nformula_34\nof the two state vectors where a and b are any complex numbers. Moreover, the sum can be extended for any number of state vectors. This property allows superpositions of quantum states to be solutions of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation. Even more generally, it holds that a general solution to the Schr\u00f6dinger equation can be found by taking a weighted sum over a basis of states. A choice often employed is the basis of energy eigenstates, which are solutions of the time-independent Schr\u00f6dinger equation. In this basis, a time-dependent state vector formula_20 can be written as the linear combination\nformula_36\nwhere formula_37 are complex numbers and the vectors formula_38 are solutions of the time-independent equation formula_39.\nUnitarity.\nHolding the Hamiltonian formula_27 constant, the Schr\u00f6dinger equation has the solution\nformula_41\nThe operator formula_42 is known as the time-evolution operator, and it is unitary: it preserves the inner product between vectors in the Hilbert space. Unitarity is a general feature of time evolution under the Schr\u00f6dinger equation. If the initial state is formula_43, then the state at a later time formula_4 will be given by\nformula_45\nfor some unitary operator formula_46. Conversely, suppose that formula_46 is a continuous family of unitary operators parameterized by formula_4. Without loss of generality, the parameterization can be chosen so that formula_49 is the identity operator and that formula_50 for any formula_51. Then formula_46 depends upon the parameter formula_4 in such a way that\nformula_54\nfor some self-adjoint operator formula_55, called the \"generator\" of the family formula_46. A Hamiltonian is just such a generator (up to the factor of the Planck constant that would be set to 1 in natural units).\nTo see that the generator is Hermitian, note that with formula_57, we have\nformula_58 so formula_46 is unitary only if, to first order, its derivative is Hermitian.\nChanges of basis.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation is often presented using quantities varying as functions of position, but as a vector-operator equation it has a valid representation in any arbitrary complete basis of kets in Hilbert space. As mentioned above, \"bases\" that lie outside the physical Hilbert space are also employed for calculational purposes. This is illustrated by the \"position-space\" and \"momentum-space\" Schr\u00f6dinger equations for a nonrelativistic, spinless particle. The Hilbert space for such a particle is the space of complex square-integrable functions on three-dimensional Euclidean space, and its Hamiltonian is the sum of a kinetic-energy term that is quadratic in the momentum operator and a potential-energy term:\nformula_60\nWriting formula_61 for a three-dimensional position vector and formula_62 for a three-dimensional momentum vector, the position-space Schr\u00f6dinger equation is\nformula_63\nThe momentum-space counterpart involves the Fourier transforms of the wave function and the potential:\nformula_64\nThe functions formula_65 and formula_66 are derived from formula_20 by\nformula_68\nformula_69\nwhere formula_70 and formula_71 do not belong to the Hilbert space itself, but have well-defined inner products with all elements of that space.\nWhen restricted from three dimensions to one, the position-space equation is just the first form of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation given above. The relation between position and momentum in quantum mechanics can be appreciated in a single dimension. In canonical quantization, the classical variables formula_3 and formula_73 are promoted to self-adjoint operators formula_74 and formula_75 that satisfy the canonical commutation relation\nformula_76\nThis implies that\nformula_77\nso the action of the momentum operator formula_75 in the position-space representation is formula_79. Thus, formula_80 becomes a second derivative, and in three dimensions, the second derivative becomes the Laplacian formula_81.\nThe canonical commutation relation also implies that the position and momentum operators are Fourier conjugates of each other. Consequently, functions originally defined in terms of their position dependence can be converted to functions of momentum using the Fourier transform. In solid-state physics, the Schr\u00f6dinger equation is often written for functions of momentum, as Bloch's theorem ensures the periodic crystal lattice potential couples formula_82 with formula_83 for only discrete reciprocal lattice vectors formula_84. This makes it convenient to solve the momentum-space Schr\u00f6dinger equation at each point in the Brillouin zone independently of the other points in the Brillouin zone.\nProbability current.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation is consistent with local probability conservation. It also ensures that a normalized wavefunction remains normalized after time evolution. In matrix mechanics, this means that the time evolution operator is a unitary operator. In contrast to, for example, the Klein Gordon equation, although a redefined inner product of a wavefunction can be time independent, the total volume integral of modulus square of the wavefunction need not be time independent.\nThe continuity equation for probability in nonrelativistic quantum mechanics is stated as: \nformula_85where\nformula_86\nis the probability current or probability flux (flow per unit area).\nIf the wavefunction is represented as &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, where formula_87 is a real function that represents the complex phase of the wavefunction, then the probability flux is calculated as:formula_88 Hence, the spatial variation of the phase of a wavefunction is said to characterize the probability flux of the wavefunction. Although the factor formula_89 appears to play the role of velocity, it does not represent velocity at a point since simultaneous measurement of position and velocity violates uncertainty principle.\nSeparation of variables.\nIf the Hamiltonian is not an explicit function of time, Schr\u00f6dinger's equation reads: \nformula_90 The operator on the left side depends only on time; the one on the right side depends only on space.\nSolving the equation by separation of variables means seeking a solution of the form of a product of spatial and temporal parts\nformula_91\nwhere formula_92 is a function of all the spatial coordinate(s) of the particle(s) constituting the system only, and formula_93 is a function of time only. Substituting this expression for formula_26 into the time dependent left hand side shows that formula_93 is a phase factor:\nformula_96\nA solution of this type is called \"stationary,\" since the only time dependence is a phase factor that cancels when the probability density is calculated via the Born rule.\nThe spatial part of the full wave function solves the equation\nformula_97\nwhere the energy formula_31 appears in the phase factor.\nThis generalizes to any number of particles in any number of dimensions (in a time-independent potential): the standing wave solutions of the time-independent equation are the states with definite energy, instead of a probability distribution of different energies. In physics, these standing waves are called \"stationary states\" or \"energy eigenstates\"; in chemistry they are called \"atomic orbitals\" or \"molecular orbitals\". Superpositions of energy eigenstates change their properties according to the relative phases between the energy levels. The energy eigenstates form a basis: any wave function may be written as a sum over the discrete energy states or an integral over continuous energy states, or more generally as an integral over a measure. This is an example of the spectral theorem, and in a finite-dimensional state space it is just a statement of the completeness of the eigenvectors of a Hermitian matrix.\nSeparation of variables can also be a useful method for the time-independent Schr\u00f6dinger equation. For example, depending on the symmetry of the problem, the Cartesian axes might be separated, as in\nformula_99\nor radial and angular coordinates might be separated:\nformula_100\nExamples.\nParticle in a box.\nThe particle in a one-dimensional potential energy box is the most mathematically simple example where restraints lead to the quantization of energy levels. The box is defined as having zero potential energy \"inside\" a certain region and infinite potential energy \"outside\". For the one-dimensional case in the formula_3 direction, the time-independent Schr\u00f6dinger equation may be written\nformula_102\nWith the differential operator defined by\nformula_103\nthe previous equation is evocative of the classic kinetic energy analogue,\nformula_104\nwith state formula_105 in this case having energy formula_31 coincident with the kinetic energy of the particle.\nThe general solutions of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation for the particle in a box are\nformula_107\nor, from Euler's formula,\nformula_108\nThe infinite potential walls of the box determine the values of formula_109 and formula_110 at formula_111 and formula_112 where formula_105 must be zero. Thus, at formula_111,\nformula_115\nand formula_116. At formula_112,\nformula_118\nin which formula_119 cannot be zero as this would conflict with the postulate that formula_105 has norm 1. Therefore, since formula_121, formula_122 must be an integer multiple of formula_123,\nformula_124\nThis constraint on formula_110 implies a constraint on the energy levels, yielding\nformula_126\nA finite potential well is the generalization of the infinite potential well problem to potential wells having finite depth. The finite potential well problem is mathematically more complicated than the infinite particle-in-a-box problem as the wave function is not pinned to zero at the walls of the well. Instead, the wave function must satisfy more complicated mathematical boundary conditions as it is nonzero in regions outside the well. Another related problem is that of the rectangular potential barrier, which furnishes a model for the quantum tunneling effect that plays an important role in the performance of modern technologies such as flash memory and scanning tunneling microscopy.\nHarmonic oscillator.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation for this situation is\nformula_127\nwhere formula_128 is the displacement and formula_129 the angular frequency. Furthermore, it can be used to describe approximately a wide variety of other systems, including vibrating atoms, molecules, and atoms or ions in lattices, and approximating other potentials near equilibrium points. It is also the basis of perturbation methods in quantum mechanics.\nThe solutions in position space are\nformula_130\nwhere formula_131, and the functions formula_132 are the Hermite polynomials of order formula_133. The solution set may be generated by\nformula_134\nThe eigenvalues are\nformula_135\nThe case formula_136 is called the ground state, its energy is called the zero-point energy, and the wave function is a Gaussian.\nThe harmonic oscillator, like the particle in a box, illustrates the generic feature of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation that the energies of bound eigenstates are discretized.\nHydrogen atom.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation for the electron in a hydrogen atom (or a hydrogen-like atom) is\nformula_137\nwhere formula_138 is the electron charge, formula_139 is the position of the electron relative to the nucleus, formula_140 is the magnitude of the relative position, the potential term is due to the Coulomb interaction, wherein formula_141 is the permittivity of free space and\nformula_142\nis the 2-body reduced mass of the hydrogen nucleus (just a proton) of mass formula_143 and the electron of mass formula_144. The negative sign arises in the potential term since the proton and electron are oppositely charged. The reduced mass in place of the electron mass is used since the electron and proton together orbit each other about a common center of mass, and constitute a two-body problem to solve. The motion of the electron is of principal interest here, so the equivalent one-body problem is the motion of the electron using the reduced mass.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation for a hydrogen atom can be solved by separation of variables. In this case, spherical polar coordinates are the most convenient. Thus,\nformula_145\nwhere \"R\" are radial functions and formula_146 are spherical harmonics of degree formula_147 and order formula_148. This is the only atom for which the Schr\u00f6dinger equation has been solved for exactly. Multi-electron atoms require approximate methods. The family of solutions are:\nformula_149\nwhere\nApproximate solutions.\nIt is typically not possible to solve the Schr\u00f6dinger equation exactly for situations of physical interest. Accordingly, approximate solutions are obtained using techniques like variational methods and WKB approximation. It is also common to treat a problem of interest as a small modification to a problem that can be solved exactly, a method known as perturbation theory.\nSemiclassical limit.\nOne simple way to compare classical to quantum mechanics is to consider the time-evolution of the \"expected\" position and \"expected\" momentum, which can then be compared to the time-evolution of the ordinary position and momentum in classical mechanics. The quantum expectation values satisfy the Ehrenfest theorem. For a one-dimensional quantum particle moving in a potential formula_157, the Ehrenfest theorem says\nformula_158\nAlthough the first of these equations is consistent with the classical behavior, the second is not: If the pair formula_159 were to satisfy Newton's second law, the right-hand side of the second equation would have to be\nformula_160\nwhich is typically not the same as formula_161. For a general formula_162, therefore, quantum mechanics can lead to predictions where expectation values do not mimic the classical behavior. In the case of the quantum harmonic oscillator, however, formula_162 is linear and this distinction disappears, so that in this very special case, the expected position and expected momentum do exactly follow the classical trajectories.\nFor general systems, the best we can hope for is that the expected position and momentum will \"approximately\" follow the classical trajectories. If the wave function is highly concentrated around a point formula_164, then formula_165 and formula_166 will be \"almost\" the same, since both will be approximately equal to formula_167. In that case, the expected position and expected momentum will remain very close to the classical trajectories, at least for as long as the wave function remains highly localized in position.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation in its general form\nformula_168\nis closely related to the Hamilton\u2013Jacobi equation (HJE)\nformula_169\nwhere formula_170 is the classical action and formula_171 is the Hamiltonian function (not operator). Here the generalized coordinates formula_172 for formula_173 (used in the context of the HJE) can be set to the position in Cartesian coordinates as formula_174.\nSubstituting\nformula_175\nwhere formula_176 is the probability density, into the Schr\u00f6dinger equation and then taking the limit formula_177 in the resulting equation yield the Hamilton\u2013Jacobi equation.\nDensity matrices.\nWave functions are not always the most convenient way to describe quantum systems and their behavior. When the preparation of a system is only imperfectly known, or when the system under investigation is a part of a larger whole, density matrices may be used instead. A density matrix is a positive semi-definite operator whose trace is equal to 1. (The term \"density operator\" is also used, particularly when the underlying Hilbert space is infinite-dimensional.) The set of all density matrices is convex, and the extreme points are the operators that project onto vectors in the Hilbert space. These are the density-matrix representations of wave functions; in Dirac notation, they are written formula_178\nThe density-matrix analogue of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation for wave functions is\nformula_179\nwhere the brackets denote a commutator. This is variously known as the von Neumann equation, the Liouville\u2013von Neumann equation, or just the Schr\u00f6dinger equation for density matrices. If the Hamiltonian is time-independent, this equation can be easily solved to yield\nformula_180\nMore generally, if the unitary operator formula_46 describes wave function evolution over some time interval, then the time evolution of a density matrix over that same interval is given by\nformula_182\nUnitary evolution of a density matrix conserves its von Neumann entropy.\nRelativistic quantum physics and quantum field theory.\nThe one-particle Schr\u00f6dinger equation described above is valid essentially in the nonrelativistic domain. For one reason, it is essentially invariant under Galilean transformations, which form the symmetry group of Newtonian dynamics. Moreover, processes that change particle number are natural in relativity, and so an equation for one particle (or any fixed number thereof) can only be of limited use. A more general form of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation that also applies in relativistic situations can be formulated within quantum field theory (QFT), a framework that allows the combination of quantum mechanics with special relativity. The region in which both simultaneously apply may be described by relativistic quantum mechanics. Such descriptions may use time evolution generated by a Hamiltonian operator, as in the Schr\u00f6dinger functional method.\nKlein\u2013Gordon and Dirac equations.\nAttempts to combine quantum physics with special relativity began with building relativistic wave equations from the relativistic energy\u2013momentum relation\nformula_183\ninstead of nonrelativistic energy equations. The Klein\u2013Gordon equation and the Dirac equation are two such equations. The Klein\u2013Gordon equation,\nformula_184\nwas the first such equation to be obtained, even before the nonrelativistic one-particle Schr\u00f6dinger equation, and applies to massive spinless particles. Historically, Dirac obtained the Dirac equation by seeking a differential equation that would be first-order in both time and space, a desirable property for a relativistic theory. Taking the \"square root\" of the left-hand side of the Klein\u2013Gordon equation in this way required factorizing it into a product of two operators, which Dirac wrote using 4 \u00d7 4 matrices formula_185. Consequently, the wave function also became a four-component function, governed by the Dirac equation that, in free space, read\nformula_186\nThis has again the form of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, with the time derivative of the wave function being given by a Hamiltonian operator acting upon the wave function. Including influences upon the particle requires modifying the Hamiltonian operator. For example, the Dirac Hamiltonian for a particle of mass \"m\" and electric charge \"q\" in an electromagnetic field (described by the electromagnetic potentials \"\u03c6\" and A) is:\nformula_187\nin which the \u03b3 = (\"\u03b3\"1, \"\u03b3\"2, \"\u03b3\"3) and \"\u03b3\"0 are the Dirac gamma matrices related to the spin of the particle. The Dirac equation is true for all particles, and the solutions to the equation are 4-component spinor fields with two components corresponding to the particle and the other two for the antiparticle.\nFor the Klein\u2013Gordon equation, the general form of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation is inconvenient to use, and in practice the Hamiltonian is not expressed in an analogous way to the Dirac Hamiltonian. The equations for relativistic quantum fields, of which the Klein\u2013Gordon and Dirac equations are two examples, can be obtained in other ways, such as starting from a Lagrangian density and using the Euler\u2013Lagrange equations for fields, or using the representation theory of the Lorentz group in which certain representations can be used to fix the equation for a free particle of given spin (and mass).\nIn general, the Hamiltonian to be substituted in the general Schr\u00f6dinger equation is not just a function of the position and momentum operators (and possibly time), but also of spin matrices. Also, the solutions to a relativistic wave equation, for a massive particle of spin \"s\", are complex-valued spinor fields.\nFock space.\nAs originally formulated, the Dirac equation is an equation for a single quantum particle, just like the single-particle Schr\u00f6dinger equation with wave function formula_2. This is of limited use in relativistic quantum mechanics, where particle number is not fixed. Heuristically, this complication can be motivated by noting that mass\u2013energy equivalence implies material particles can be created from energy. A common way to address this in QFT is to introduce a Hilbert space where the basis states are labeled by particle number, a so-called Fock space. The Schr\u00f6dinger equation can then be formulated for quantum states on this Hilbert space. However, because the Schr\u00f6dinger equation picks out a preferred time axis, the Lorentz invariance of the theory is no longer manifest, and accordingly, the theory is often formulated in other ways.\nHistory.\nFollowing Max Planck's quantization of light (see black-body radiation), Albert Einstein interpreted Planck's quanta to be photons, particles of light, and proposed that the energy of a photon is proportional to its frequency, one of the first signs of wave\u2013particle duality. Since energy and momentum are related in the same way as frequency and wave number in special relativity, it followed that the momentum formula_73 of a photon is inversely proportional to its wavelength formula_14, or proportional to its wave number formula_110:\nformula_192\nwhere formula_193 is the Planck constant and formula_194 is the reduced Planck constant. Louis de Broglie hypothesized that this is true for all particles, even particles which have mass such as electrons. He showed that, assuming that the matter waves propagate along with their particle counterparts, electrons form standing waves, meaning that only certain discrete rotational frequencies about the nucleus of an atom are allowed.\nThese quantized orbits correspond to discrete energy levels, and de Broglie reproduced the Bohr model formula for the energy levels. The Bohr model was based on the assumed quantization of angular momentum formula_195 according to\nformula_196\nAccording to de Broglie, the electron is described by a wave, and a whole number of wavelengths must fit along the circumference of the electron's orbit:\nformula_197\nThis approach essentially confined the electron wave in one dimension, along a circular orbit of radius formula_198.\nIn 1921, prior to de Broglie, Arthur C. Lunn at the University of Chicago had used the same argument based on the completion of the relativistic energy\u2013momentum 4-vector to derive what we now call the de Broglie relation. Unlike de Broglie, Lunn went on to formulate the differential equation (presumably by combining the classical Helmholz equation with de Broglie's relations formula_199 and formula_200) now known as the Schr\u00f6dinger equation and solve for its energy eigenvalues for the hydrogen atom; the paper was rejected by the \"Physical Review\", according to Kamen.\nFollowing up on de Broglie's ideas, physicist Peter Debye made an offhand comment that if particles behaved as waves, they should satisfy some sort of wave equation. Inspired by Debye's remark, Schr\u00f6dinger decided to find a proper 3-dimensional wave equation for the electron. He was guided by William Rowan Hamilton's analogy between mechanics and optics, encoded in the observation that the zero-wavelength limit of optics resembles a mechanical system\u2014the trajectories of light rays become sharp tracks that obey Fermat's principle, an analog of the principle of least action.\nThe equation he found is\nformula_201\nBy that time Arnold Sommerfeld had refined the Bohr model with relativistic corrections. Schr\u00f6dinger used the relativistic energy\u2013momentum relation to find what is now known as the Klein\u2013Gordon equation in a Coulomb potential (in natural units):\nformula_202\nHe found the standing waves of this relativistic equation, but the relativistic corrections disagreed with Sommerfeld's formula. Discouraged, he put away his calculations and secluded himself with a mistress in a mountain cabin in December 1925.\nWhile at the cabin, Schr\u00f6dinger decided that his earlier nonrelativistic calculations were novel enough to publish and decided to leave off the problem of relativistic corrections for the future. Despite the difficulties in solving the differential equation for hydrogen (he had sought help from his friend the mathematician Hermann Weyl) Schr\u00f6dinger showed that his nonrelativistic version of the wave equation produced the correct spectral energies of hydrogen in a paper published in 1926. Schr\u00f6dinger computed the hydrogen spectral series by treating a hydrogen atom's electron as a wave formula_203, moving in a potential well formula_157, created by the proton. This computation accurately reproduced the energy levels of the Bohr model.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation details the behavior of formula_26 but says nothing of its \"nature\". Schr\u00f6dinger tried to interpret the real part of formula_206 as a charge density, and then revised this proposal, saying in his next paper that the modulus squared of formula_26 is a charge density. This approach was, however, unsuccessful. In 1926, just a few days after this paper was published, Max Born successfully interpreted formula_26 as the probability amplitude, whose modulus squared is equal to probability density. Later, Schr\u00f6dinger himself explained this interpretation as follows:\nInterpretation.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation provides a way to calculate the wave function of a system and how it changes dynamically in time. However, the Schr\u00f6dinger equation does not directly say \"what,\" exactly, the wave function is. The meaning of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation and how the mathematical entities in it relate to physical reality depends upon the interpretation of quantum mechanics that one adopts.\nIn the views often grouped together as the Copenhagen interpretation, a system's wave function is a collection of statistical information about that system. The Schr\u00f6dinger equation relates information about the system at one time to information about it at another. While the time-evolution process represented by the Schr\u00f6dinger equation is continuous and deterministic, in that knowing the wave function at one instant is in principle sufficient to calculate it for all future times, wave functions can also change discontinuously and stochastically during a measurement. The wave function changes, according to this school of thought, because new information is available. The post-measurement wave function generally cannot be known prior to the measurement, but the probabilities for the different possibilities can be calculated using the Born rule. Other, more recent interpretations of quantum mechanics, such as relational quantum mechanics and QBism, also give the Schr\u00f6dinger equation a status of this sort.\nSchr\u00f6dinger himself suggested in 1952 that the different terms of a superposition evolving under the Schr\u00f6dinger equation are \"not alternatives but all really happen simultaneously\". This has been interpreted as an early version of Everett's many-worlds interpretation. This interpretation, formulated independently in 1956, holds that \"all\" the possibilities described by quantum theory \"simultaneously\" occur in a multiverse composed of mostly independent parallel universes. This interpretation removes the axiom of wave function collapse, leaving only continuous evolution under the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, and so all possible states of the measured system and the measuring apparatus, together with the observer, are present in a real physical quantum superposition. While the multiverse is deterministic, we perceive non-deterministic behavior governed by probabilities, because we do not observe the multiverse as a whole, but only one parallel universe at a time. Exactly how this is supposed to work has been the subject of much debate. Why should we assign probabilities at all to outcomes that are certain to occur in some worlds, and why should the probabilities be given by the Born rule? Several ways to answer these questions in the many-worlds framework have been proposed, but there is no consensus on whether they are successful.\nBohmian mechanics reformulates quantum mechanics to make it deterministic, at the price of adding a force due to a \"quantum potential\". It attributes to each physical system not only a wave function but in addition a real position that evolves deterministically under a nonlocal guiding equation. The evolution of a physical system is given at all times by the Schr\u00f6dinger equation together with the guiding equation.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59875", "revid": "84417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59875", "title": "Universal gas constant", "text": ""}
{"id": "59877", "revid": "42195518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59877", "title": "Gas constant", "text": "Physical constant equivalent to the Boltzmann constant, but in different units\nThe molar gas constant (also known as the gas constant, universal gas constant, or ideal gas constant) is denoted by the symbol \"R\" or . It is the molar equivalent to the Boltzmann constant, expressed in units of energy per temperature increment per amount of substance, rather than energy per temperature increment per \"particle\". The constant is also a combination of the constants from Boyle's law, Charles's law, Avogadro's law, and Gay-Lussac's law. It is a physical constant that is featured in many fundamental equations in the physical sciences, such as the ideal gas law, the Arrhenius equation, and the Nernst equation.\nThe gas constant is the constant of proportionality that relates the energy scale in physics to the temperature scale and the scale used for amount of substance. Thus, the value of the gas constant ultimately derives from historical decisions and accidents in the setting of units of energy, temperature and amount of substance. The Boltzmann constant and the Avogadro constant were similarly determined, which separately relate energy to temperature and particle count to amount of substance.\nThe gas constant \"R\" is defined as the Avogadro constant \"N\"A multiplied by the Boltzmann constant \"k\" (or \"k\"B):\n formula_1\n = .\nSince the 2019 revision of the SI, both \"N\"A and \"k\" are defined with exact numerical values when expressed in SI units. As a consequence, the SI value of the molar gas constant is exact.\nSome have suggested that it might be appropriate to name the symbol \"R\" the Regnault constant in honour of the French chemist Henri Victor Regnault, whose accurate experimental data were used to calculate the early value of the constant. However, the origin of the letter \"R\" to represent the constant is elusive. The universal gas constant was apparently introduced independently by August Friedrich Horstmann (1873) and Dmitri Mendeleev who reported it first on 12 September 1874. Using his extensive measurements of the properties of gases, Mendeleev also calculated it with high precision, within 0.3% of its modern value.\nThe gas constant occurs in the ideal gas law:formula_2where \"P\" is the absolute pressure, \"V\" is the volume of gas, \"n\" is the amount of substance, \"m\" is the mass, and \"T\" is the thermodynamic temperature. \"R\"specific is the mass-specific gas constant. The gas constant is expressed in the same unit as molar heat.\nDimensions.\nFrom the ideal gas law \"pV\" = \"nRT\" we get\n formula_3\nwhere \"p\" is pressure, \"V\" is volume, \"n\" is number of moles of a given substance, and \"T\" is temperature.\nAs pressure is defined as force per area of measurement, the gas equation can also be written as\n formula_4\nArea and volume are (length)2 and (length)3 respectively. Therefore:\n formula_5\nSince force \u00d7 length = work,\n formula_6\nThe physical significance of \"R\" is work per mole per kelvin. It may be expressed in any set of units representing work or energy (such as joules), units representing temperature on an absolute scale (such as kelvin or rankine), and any system of units designating a mole or a similar pure number that allows an equation of macroscopic mass and fundamental particle numbers in a system, such as an ideal gas (see Avogadro constant).\nInstead of a mole the constant can be expressed by considering the normal cubic metre.\nOtherwise, we can also say that\n formula_7\nTherefore, we can write \"R\" as\n formula_8\nAnd so, in terms of SI base units,\n \"R\" = .\nRelationship with the Boltzmann constant.\nThe Boltzmann constant \"k\"B (alternatively \"k\") may be used in place of the molar gas constant by working in pure particle count, \"N\", rather than amount of substance, \"n\", since\n formula_9\nwhere \"N\"A is the Avogadro constant. For example, the ideal gas law in terms of the Boltzmann constant is\n formula_10\nwhere \"N\" is the number of particles (molecules in this case), or to generalize to an inhomogeneous system the local form holds:\n formula_11\nwhere \"n\" = \"N\"/\"V\" is the number density. Finally, by defining the kinetic energy associated to the temperature,\n formula_12\nthe equation becomes simply\n formula_13\nwhich is the form usually encountered in statistical mechanics and other branches of theoretical physics.\nMeasurement and replacement with defined value.\nAs of 2006, the most precise measurement of \"R\" had been obtained by measuring the speed of sound \"c\"a(\"P\",\u00a0\"T\") in argon at the temperature \"T\" of the triple point of water at different pressures \"P\", and extrapolating to the zero-pressure limit \"c\"a(0,\u00a0\"T\"). The value of \"R\" is then obtained from the relation\n formula_14\nwhere\n \"\u03b3\"0 is the heat capacity ratio (5/3 for monatomic gases such as argon);\n \"T\" is the temperature, \"T\"TPW = 273.16\u00a0K by the definition of the kelvin at that time;\n \"A\"r(Ar) is the relative atomic mass of argon, and \"M\"u\u00a0=\u00a0 as defined at the time.\nHowever, following the 2019 revision of the SI, \"R\" now has an exact value defined in terms of other exactly defined physical constants.\nSpecific gas constant.\nThe specific gas constant of a gas or a mixture of gases (\"R\"specific) is given by the molar gas constant divided by the molar mass (\"M\") of the gas or mixture:\n formula_15\nJust as the molar gas constant can be related to the Boltzmann constant, so can the specific gas constant by dividing the Boltzmann constant by the molecular mass of the gas:\n formula_16\nAnother important relationship comes from thermodynamics. Mayer's relation relates the specific gas constant to the specific heat capacities for a calorically or thermally perfect gas.\n formula_17\nwhere \"cp\" is the specific heat capacity for a constant pressure, and \"cV\" is the specific heat capacity for a constant volume.\nIt is common, especially in engineering applications, to represent the specific gas constant by the symbol \"R\". In such cases, the universal gas constant is usually given a different symbol such as \"R\" to distinguish it. In any case, the context and/or unit of the gas constant should make it clear as to whether the universal or specific gas constant is being referred to.\nIn case of air, using the perfect gas law and the standard sea-level conditions (SSL) (air density \"\u03c1\"0 = 1.225\u00a0kg/m3, temperature \"T\"0 = 288.15\u00a0K and pressure \"p\"0 = ), we have that \"R\"air = \"P\"0/(\"\u03c1\"0\"T\"0) = . Then the molar mass of air is computed by \"M\"0 = \"R\"/\"R\"air = .\nU.S. Standard Atmosphere.\nThe U.S. Standard Atmosphere, 1976 (USSA1976) defines the gas constant \"R\"\u2217 as\n \"R\"\u2217 = = .\nNote the use of the kilomole, with the resulting factor of in the constant. The USSA1976 acknowledges that this value is not consistent with the cited values for the Avogadro constant and the Boltzmann constant. This disparity is not a significant departure from accuracy, and USSA1976 uses this value of \"R\"\u2217 for all the calculations of the standard atmosphere. When using the ISO value of \"R\", the calculated pressure increases by only 0.62\u00a0pascal at 11\u00a0kilometres (the equivalent of a difference of only 17.4\u00a0centimetres or 6.8\u00a0inches) and 0.292\u00a0Pa at 20\u00a0km (the equivalent of a difference of only 33.8\u00a0cm or 13.2\u00a0in).\nAlso note that this was well before the 2019 SI redefinition, through which the constant was given an exact value.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59878", "revid": "4977632", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59878", "title": "Molar gas constant", "text": ""}
{"id": "59879", "revid": "31696229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59879", "title": "1938 FIFA World Cup", "text": "Association football tournament in France\nInternational football competition\nThe 1938 FIFA World Cup was the 3rd edition of the World Cup, the quadrennial international football championship for senior men's national teams. It was held in France from 4 to 19 June 1938. Italy defended its title in the final, beating Hungary 4\u20132. Italy's 1934 and 1938 teams hold the distinction of being the only men's national team to win the World Cup multiple times under the same coach, Vittorio Pozzo. It would be the last World Cup until 1950; the 1942 and 1946 World Cups were cancelled due to World War II.\nHost selection.\nFrance was chosen as host nation by FIFA in Berlin on 13 August 1936. France was chosen over Argentina and Germany in the first round of voting. The decision to hold a second consecutive tournament in Europe (after Italy in 1934) caused outrage in South America, where it was believed that the venue should alternate between the two continents. This was the last World Cup to be staged before the outbreak of the Second World War.\nQualification.\nBecause of the decision to hold a second successive World Cup in Europe, many teams from the Americas did not join the competition or withdrew after an initial application. Most of the South American teams, including Uruguay and Argentina, declined to take part in the competition after the controversy of the Peru v Austria match at the Football tournament of the 1936 Summer Olympics. The United States and Mexico joined the qualifying rounds but eventually withdrew. Argentina submitted a late application (which was accepted), before a definitive withdrawal due to disagreements between the National Federation and the local clubs. Spain meanwhile could not participate due to the ongoing Spanish Civil War. \nIt was the first time that the hosts, France, and the title holders, Italy, qualified automatically. Title holders were given an automatic entry into the World Cup from 1938 until 2002.\nOf the 14 remaining places, eleven were allocated to Europe, two to the Americas, and one to Asia. As a result, only three non-European nations took part: Brazil, Cuba (making their debut) and Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia, also making their debut), the latter being the first Asian country to participate in a FIFA World Cup. This is the smallest ever number of teams from outside the host continent to compete at a FIFA World Cup.\nAustria qualified for the World Cup, but after qualification was complete, the Anschluss united Austria with Germany. Austria subsequently did not take part to the tournament, with some Austrian players joining the German squad, although not including Austrian star player Matthias Sindelar, who refused to play for the unified team. Austria's place remained empty and Sweden, which would have been Austria's initial opponent, progressed directly to the second-round by default.\nOther teams to make their World Cup debuts included Poland and Norway.\nList of qualified teams.\nThe following 16 teams originally qualified for the final tournament. However, 15 teams participated after Austria's withdrawal due to the Anschluss.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormat.\nThe knockout format from 1934 was retained. If a match was tied after 90 minutes, then 30 minutes of extra time were played. If the score was still tied after extra time, the match would be replayed. This was the last World Cup tournament that used a straight knockout format.\nFinal draw.\nThe draw was staged in Paris on 5 March 1938. As the qualifying process was still ongoing, many paper slips reported the names of two Teams, which were both in competition to qualify.\nThe FIFA committee identified eight seeded teams, irrespective of their current qualification. The seeded teams were: Argentina, Austria, Brazil, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, Hungary and Italy, so six European teams and two South-American.\nThe whole table was drawn the same day: Round of 16, Quarter-finals, Semi-finals. The Teams were drawn in the following order:\nRound of 16\nA. Germany vs. Switzerland or Portugal\nB. Austria vs. Sweden\nC. Hungary or Greece vs. USA or Dutch East Indies\nD. France vs. Belgium or Luxembourg\nE. Argentina or Central America vs. Romania\nF. Czechoslovakia or Bulgaria vs. Netherlands or Luxembourg\nG. Brazil vs. Poland or Yugoslavia\nH. Italy vs. Norway\nQuarter-finals\n1. Winner B vs. Winner E\n2. Winner A vs. Winner C\n3. Winner D vs. Winner H\n4. Winner F vs. Winner G\nSemi-finals\nWinner 4 vs. Winner 3\nWinner 2 vs. Winner 1\nOn 15 March 1938, Austria was invaded by Nazi Germany and the Austria National Team disappeared.\nArgentina withdrew from the tournament after disagreements between the clubs and the National Federation.\nSo two of the original seeded Teams did not take part to the final competition.\nSummary.\nSweden was given a bye due to Austria's withdrawal.\nFive of the seven first round matches required extra time to break the deadlock; two games still went to a replay. In one replay, Cuba advanced to the next round at the expense of Romania. In the other replay, Germany, which had led 1\u20130 in the first game against Switzerland, led 2\u20130 but eventually was beaten 2\u20134. This loss, which took place in front of a hostile, bottle-throwing crowd in Paris, was blamed by German coach Sepp Herberger on a defeatist attitude from the five Austrian players he had been forced to include; a German journalist later commented that \"Germans and Austrians prefer to play against each other even when they're in the same team\". Until they were knocked out in the group stage in 2018, this was the only time Germany had failed to advance past the first round, and until their penalty shoot-out victory over France in the round of 16 of UEFA Euro 2020, this would be the last time Switzerland advanced past the first knockout game of a tournament.\nSweden advanced directly to the quarter-finals as a result of Austria's withdrawal, and they proceeded to beat Cuba 8\u20130. The hosts, France, were beaten by the holders, Italy, and Switzerland were seen off by Hungary. Czechoslovakia took Brazil to extra time in a notoriously feisty match in Bordeaux before succumbing in a replay; the South Americans proved too strong for the depleted Czechoslovak side (both Old\u0159ich Nejedl\u00fd and Franti\u0161ek Pl\u00e1ni\u010dka had suffered broken bones in the first game) and won 2\u20131. This was the last match to be replayed in a World Cup.\nHungary destroyed Sweden in one of the semi-finals 5\u20131, while Italy and Brazil had the first of their many important World Cup clashes in the other. The Brazilians were without their star player Le\u00f4nidas, who was injured, and the Italians won 2\u20131. Brazil topped Sweden 4\u20132 for third place.\nRumour has it, before the finals Benito Mussolini was to have sent a telegram to the team, saying \"Vincere o morire!\" (literally translated as \"Win or die!\"). This should not have been meant as a literal threat, but instead just an encouragement to win. However, no record remains of such a telegram, and World Cup player Pietro Rava said, when interviewed in 2001, \"No, no, no, that's not true. He sent a telegram wishing us well, but no never 'win or die'.\"\nThe final itself took place at the Stade Olympique de Colombes in Paris. Vittorio Pozzo's Italian side took the lead early, but Hungary equalised within two minutes. The Italians took the lead again shortly after, and by the end of the first half were leading the Hungarians 3\u20131. Hungary never really got back into the game. With the final score favouring the Italians 4\u20132, Italy became the first team to successfully defend the title and were once more crowned World Cup winners.\nBecause of World War II, the World Cup would not be held for next 12 years, until 1950. As a result, Italy were the reigning World Cup holders for a record 16 years, from 1934 to 1950. The Italian Vice-president of FIFA, Dr. Ottorino Barassi, hid the trophy in a shoe-box under his bed throughout the Second World War and thus saved it from falling into the hands of occupying troops.\nVenues.\nEleven venues in ten cities were planned to host the tournament; of these, all hosted matches except the Stade de Gerland in Lyon, which did not due to Austria's withdrawal.\nSquads.\nFor a list of all squads that appeared in the final tournament, see \"1938 FIFA World Cup squads\".\nGoalscorers.\nWith seven goals, Le\u00f4nidas was the top scorer in the tournament. In total, 84 goals were scored by 42 players, with two of them credited as own goals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFIFA retrospective ranking.\nIn 1986, FIFA published a report that ranked all teams in each World Cup up to and including 1986, based on progress in the competition, overall results and quality of the opposition. The rankings for the 1938 tournament were as follows:\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59880", "revid": "43698778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59880", "title": "Security by obscurity", "text": ""}
{"id": "59881", "revid": "14650386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59881", "title": "Ideal gas law", "text": "Equation of the state of a hypothetical ideal gas\nThe ideal gas law, also called the general gas equation, is the equation of state of a hypothetical ideal gas. It is a good approximation of the behavior of many gases under many conditions, although it has several limitations. It was first stated by Beno\u00eet Paul \u00c9mile Clapeyron in 1834 as a combination of the empirical Boyle's law, Charles's law, Avogadro's law, and Gay-Lussac's law. The ideal gas law is often written in an empirical form:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2, formula_3 and formula_4 are the pressure, volume and temperature respectively; formula_5 is the amount of substance; and formula_6 is the ideal gas constant.\nIt can also be derived from the microscopic kinetic theory, as was achieved (independently) by August Kr\u00f6nig in 1856 and Rudolf Clausius in 1857.\nFormulations.\nThe state of an amount of gas is determined by its pressure, volume, and temperature. The modern form of the equation relates these simply in two main forms. The temperature used in the equation of state is an absolute temperature: the appropriate SI unit is the kelvin.\nCommon forms.\nThe most frequently introduced forms are:formula_7where:\nIn SI units, \"p\" is measured in pascals, \"V\" is measured in cubic meters, \"n\" is measured in moles, and \"T\" in kelvins (the Kelvin scale is a shifted Celsius scale, where 0 K = \u2212273.15\u00a0\u00b0C, the lowest possible temperature). \"R\" has for value 8.314 J/(mol\u00b7K) = 1.989 \u2248 2 cal/(mol\u00b7K), or 0.0821 L\u22c5atm/(mol\u22c5K).\nMolar form.\nHow much gas is present could be specified by giving the mass instead of the chemical amount of gas. Therefore, an alternative form of the ideal gas law may be useful. The chemical amount, \"n\" (in moles), is equal to total mass of the gas (\"m\") (in kilograms) divided by the molar mass, \"M\" (in kilograms per mole):\n formula_16\nBy replacing \"n\" with \"m\"/\"M\" and subsequently introducing density \"\u03c1\" = \"m\"/\"V\", we get:\n formula_17\n formula_18\n formula_19\nDefining the specific gas constant \"R\"specific as the ratio \"R\"/\"M\",\n formula_20\nThis form of the ideal gas law is very useful because it links pressure, density, and temperature in a unique formula independent of the quantity of the considered gas. Alternatively, the law may be written in terms of the specific volume \"v\", the reciprocal of density, as\n formula_21\nIt is common, especially in engineering and meteorological applications, to represent the specific gas constant by the symbol \"R\". In such cases, the universal gas constant is usually given a different symbol such as formula_22 or formula_23 to distinguish it. In any case, the context and/or units of the gas constant should make it clear as to whether the universal or specific gas constant is being used.\nStatistical mechanics.\nIn statistical mechanics, the following molecular equation (i.e. the ideal gas law in its theoretical form) is derived from first principles:\n formula_24\nwhere \"p\" is the absolute pressure of the gas, \"n\" is the number density of the molecules (given by the ratio \"n\" = \"N\"/\"V\", in contrast to the previous formulation in which \"n\" is the \"number of moles\"), \"T\" is the absolute temperature, and \"k\"B is the Boltzmann constant relating temperature and energy, given by:\n formula_25\nwhere \"N\"A is the Avogadro constant.\nThe form can be further simplified by defining the kinetic energy corresponding to the temperature:\n formula_26\nso the ideal gas law is more simply expressed as:\n formula_27\nFrom this we notice that for a gas of mass \"m\", with an average particle mass of \"\u03bc\" times the atomic mass constant, \"m\"u, (i.e., the mass is \"\u03bc\"\u00a0Da) the number of molecules will be given by\n formula_28\nand since \"\u03c1\" = \"m\"/\"V\" = \"n\u03bcm\"u, we find that the ideal gas law can be rewritten as\n formula_29\nIn SI units, \"p\" is measured in pascals, \"V\" in cubic metres, \"T\" in kelvins, and \"k\"B = in SI units.\nCombined gas law.\nCombining the laws of Charles, Boyle, and Gay-Lussac gives the combined gas law, which can take the same functional form as the ideal gas law. This form does not specify the number of moles, and the ratio of formula_30 to formula_4 is simply taken as a constant:\n formula_32\nwhere formula_33 is the pressure of the gas, formula_3 is the volume of the gas, formula_4 is the absolute temperature of the gas, and formula_36 is a constant. More commonly, when comparing the same substance under two different sets of conditions, the law is written as:\n formula_37\nEnergy associated with a gas.\nAccording to the assumptions of the kinetic theory of ideal gases, one can consider that there are no intermolecular attractions between the molecules, or atoms, of an ideal gas. In other words, its potential energy is zero. Hence, all the energy possessed by the gas is the kinetic energy of the molecules, or atoms, of the gas.\n formula_38\nThis corresponds to the kinetic energy of \"n\" moles of a monoatomic gas having 3 degrees of freedom: \"x\", \"y\", \"z\". The table here below gives this relationship for different amounts of a monoatomic gas.\nApplications to thermodynamic processes.\nThe table below essentially simplifies the ideal gas equation for a particular process, making the equation easier to solve using numerical methods.\nA thermodynamic process is defined as a system that moves from state 1 to state 2, where the state number is denoted by a subscript. As shown in the first column of the table, basic thermodynamic processes are defined such that one of the gas properties (\"P\", \"V\", \"T\", \"S\", or \"H\") is constant throughout the process.\nFor a given thermodynamic process, in order to specify the extent of a particular process, one of the properties ratios (which are listed under the column labeled \"known ratio\") must be specified (either directly or indirectly). Also, the property for which the ratio is known must be distinct from the property held constant in the previous column (otherwise the ratio would be unity, and not enough information would be available to simplify the gas law equation).\nIn the final three columns, the properties (\"p\", \"V\", or \"T\") at state 2 can be calculated from the properties at state 1 using the equations listed.\n a. In an isentropic process, system entropy (\"S\") is constant. Under these conditions, \"p\"1\"V\"1\"\u03b3\" = \"p\"2\"V\"2\"\u03b3\", where \"\u03b3\" is defined as the heat capacity ratio, which is constant for a calorifically perfect gas. The value used for \"\u03b3\" is typically 1.4 for diatomic gases like nitrogen (N2) and oxygen (O2), (and air, which is 99% diatomic). Also \"\u03b3\" is typically 1.6 for mono atomic gases like the noble gases helium (He), and argon (Ar). In internal combustion engines \"\u03b3\" varies between 1.35 and 1.15, depending on constitution gases and temperature.\n b. In an isenthalpic process, system enthalpy (\"H\") is constant. In the case of free expansion for an ideal gas, there are no molecular interactions, and the temperature remains constant. For real gases, the molecules do interact via attraction or repulsion depending on temperature and pressure, and heating or cooling does occur. This is known as the Joule\u2013Thomson effect. For reference, the Joule\u2013Thomson coefficient \u03bcJT for air at room temperature and sea level is 0.22\u00a0\u00b0C/bar.\nDeviations from ideal behavior of real gases.\nThe equation of state given here (\"PV\" = \"nRT\") applies only to an ideal gas, or as an approximation to a real gas that behaves sufficiently like an ideal gas. There are in fact many different forms of the equation of state. Since the ideal gas law neglects both molecular size and intermolecular attractions, it is most accurate for monatomic gases at high temperatures and low pressures. The molecular size becomes less important for lower densities, i.e. for larger volumes at lower pressures, because the average distance between adjacent molecules becomes much larger than the molecular size. The relative importance of intermolecular attractions diminishes with increasing thermal kinetic energy, i.e., with increasing temperatures. More detailed \"equations of state\", such as the van der Waals equation, account for deviations from ideality caused by molecular size and intermolecular forces.\nDerivations.\nEmpirical.\nThe empirical laws that led to the derivation of the ideal gas law were discovered with experiments that changed only 2 state variables of the gas and kept every other one constant.\nAll the possible gas laws that could have been discovered with this kind of setup are:\nwhere \"P\" stands for pressure, \"V\" for volume, \"N\" for number of particles in the gas and \"T\" for temperature; where formula_45 are constants in this context because of each equation requiring only the parameters explicitly noted in them changing.\nTo derive the ideal gas law one does not need to know all 6 formulas, one can just know 3 and with those derive the rest or just one more to be able to get the ideal gas law, which needs 4.\nSince each formula only holds when only the state variables involved in said formula change while the others (which are a property of the gas but are not explicitly noted in said formula) remain constant, we cannot simply use algebra and directly combine them all. This is why: Boyle did his experiments while keeping \"N\" and \"T\" constant and this must be taken into account (in this same way, every experiment kept some parameter as constant and this must be taken into account for the derivation).\nKeeping this in mind, to carry the derivation on correctly, one must imagine the gas being altered by one process at a time (as it was done in the experiments). The derivation using 4 formulas can look like this:\nat first the gas has parameters formula_46\nSay, starting to change only pressure and volume, according to Boyle's law (Equation 1), then:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter this process, the gas has parameters formula_47\nUsing then equation (5) to change the number of particles in the gas and the temperature,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter this process, the gas has parameters formula_48\nUsing then equation (6) to change the pressure and the number of particles,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter this process, the gas has parameters formula_49\nUsing then Charles's law (equation 2) to change the volume and temperature of the gas,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter this process, the gas has parameters formula_50\nUsing simple algebra on equations (7), (8), (9) and (10) yields the result:\nformula_51 or formula_52 where formula_53 stands for the Boltzmann constant.\nAnother equivalent result, using the fact that formula_54, where \"n\" is the number of moles in the gas and \"R\" is the universal gas constant, is:\nformula_55 which is known as the ideal gas law.\nIf three of the six equations are known, it may be possible to derive the remaining three using the same method. However, because each formula has two variables, this is possible only for certain groups of three. For example, if you were to have equations (1), (2) and (4) you would not be able to get any more because combining any two of them will only give you the third. However, if you had equations (1), (2) and (3) you would be able to get all six equations because combining (1) and (2) will yield (4), then (1) and (3) will yield (6), then (4) and (6) will yield (5), as well as would the combination of (2) and (3) as is explained in the following visual relation:\nwhere the numbers represent the gas laws numbered above.\nIf you were to use the same method used above on 2 of the 3 laws on the vertices of one triangle that has a \"O\" inside it, you would get the third.\nFor example:\nChange only pressure and volume first:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nthen only volume and temperature:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nthen as we can choose any value for formula_56, if we set formula_57, equation (2') becomes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCombining equations (1') and (3') yields formula_58, which is equation (4), of which we had no prior knowledge until this derivation.\nTheoretical.\nKinetic theory.\nThe ideal gas law can also be derived from first principles using the kinetic theory of gases, in which several simplifying assumptions are made, chief among which are that the molecules, or atoms, of the gas are point masses, possessing mass but no significant volume, and undergo only elastic collisions with each other and the sides of the container in which both linear momentum and kinetic energy are conserved.\nFirst we show that the fundamental assumptions of the kinetic theory of gases imply that\n formula_59\nConsider a container in the formula_60 Cartesian coordinate system. For simplicity, we assume that a third of the molecules moves parallel to the formula_61-axis, a third moves parallel to the formula_62-axis and a third moves parallel to the formula_63-axis. If all molecules move with the same velocity formula_64, denote the corresponding pressure by formula_65. We choose an area formula_66 on a wall of the container, perpendicular to the formula_61-axis. When time formula_68 elapses, all molecules in the volume formula_69 moving in the positive direction of the formula_61-axis will hit the area. There are formula_71 molecules in a part of volume formula_69 of the container, but only one sixth (i.e. a half of a third) of them moves in the positive direction of the formula_61-axis. Therefore, the number of molecules formula_74 that will hit the area formula_66 when the time formula_68 elapses is formula_77.\nWhen a molecule bounces off the wall of the container, it changes its momentum formula_78 to formula_79. Hence the magnitude of change of the momentum of one molecule is formula_80. The magnitude of the change of momentum of all molecules that bounce off the area formula_66 when time formula_68 elapses is then formula_83. From formula_84 and formula_85 we get\n formula_86\nWe considered a situation where all molecules move with the same velocity formula_64. Now we consider a situation where they can move with different velocities, so we apply an \"averaging transformation\" to the above equation, effectively replacing formula_65 by a new pressure formula_33 and formula_90 by the arithmetic mean of all squares of all velocities of the molecules, i.e. by formula_91 Therefore\n formula_92\nwhich gives the desired formula.\nUsing the Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution, the fraction of molecules that have a speed in the range formula_64 to formula_94 is formula_95, where\n formula_96\nand formula_36 denotes the Boltzmann constant. The root-mean-square speed can be calculated by\n formula_98\nUsing the integration formula\n formula_99\nit follows that\n formula_100\nfrom which we get the ideal gas law:\n formula_101\nStatistical mechanics.\nLet q = (\"q\"x, \"q\"y, \"q\"z) and p = (\"p\"x, \"p\"y, \"p\"z) denote the position vector and momentum vector of a particle of an ideal gas, respectively. Let F denote the net force on that particle. Then (two times) the time-averaged kinetic energy of the particle is:\n formula_102\nwhere the first equality is Newton's second law, and the second line uses Hamilton's equations and the equipartition theorem. Summing over a system of \"N\" particles yields\n formula_103\nBy Newton's third law and the ideal gas assumption, the net force of the system is the force applied by the walls of the container, and this force is given by the pressure \"P\" of the gas. Hence\n formula_104\nwhere dS is the infinitesimal area element along the walls of the container. Since the divergence of the position vector q is\n formula_105\nthe divergence theorem implies that\n formula_106\nwhere \"dV\" is an infinitesimal volume within the container and \"V\" is the total volume of the container.\nPutting these equalities together yields\n formula_107\nwhich immediately implies the ideal gas law for \"N\" particles:\n formula_108\nwhere \"n\" = \"N\"/\"N\"A is the number of moles of gas and \"R\" = \"N\"A\"k\"B is the gas constant.\nQuantum mechanics.\nAn additional derivation is possible using the particle in a box model of quantum mechanics. In a rectangular box of dimensions formula_109, the possible quantized energy levels are given as\n formula_110\nwhere formula_111, formula_112 and formula_113 are the quantum numbers for translational motion in the three base directions, formula_114, formula_115 and formula_116 are the kinetic energies associated with translational motion in these directions. The force (formula_117) acting upon the wall perpendicular to direction formula_118 is calculated as the derivative of the particle energy with respect to a change in side length formula_118\n formula_120\nThe overall force is calculated as the sum of the contributions form formula_15 independent particles as\n formula_122\nThen the equipartition theorem is used to give the average value of formula_114 as\n formula_124\nFinally, pressure formula_33 is calculated as the ratio of the force and the area it acts upon:\n formula_126\nAnalogs of this derivation for cylindrical and spherical boxes give the same result.\n formula_127\nOther dimensions.\nwhere formula_128 is the extent of the \"d\"-dimensional domain in which the gas exists. The quantity dimension of the pressure-like quantity formula_129 changes with the space dimensionality \"d\": it corresponds to a force per length (for \"d\"{{=}}1), force per area (\"d\"{{=}}2), or force per volume (\"d\"{{=}}3)."}
{"id": "59883", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59883", "title": "Kerckhoff's principle", "text": ""}
{"id": "59886", "revid": "47080019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59886", "title": "Blast beat", "text": "Type of drum beat\n&lt;score raw=\"1\" sound=\"1\"&gt;\\version \"2.22.0\"\n\\score {\n \\tempo 4 = 180\n \\repeat volta 2 {\n \u00ab{cymra8 cymra cymra cymra cymra cymra cymra cymra}\\\\{&lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 }\u00bb\\break\n\\score {\n \\unfoldRepeats {\n \\drums \\with {midiInstrument = \"drums\"}{\n \\repeat volta 2 {\n \u00ab{cymra8 cymra cymra cymra cymra cymra cymra cymra}\\\\{&lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 &lt;bd sne&gt;8 }\u00bb\\break\n}&lt;/score&gt; Hammer Blast beat drum pattern\nA blast beat is a type of drum beat that originated in hardcore punk and grindcore, and is often associated with certain styles of extreme metal, namely black metal, death metal and their respective subgenres, and occasionally in metalcore. In Adam MacGregor's definition, \"the blast-beat generally comprises a repeated, sixteenth-note figure played at a very fast tempo, and divided uniformly among the bass drum, snare, and ride, crash, or hi-hat cymbal.\" Blast beats have been described by \"PopMatters\" contributor Whitney Strub as, \"maniacal percussive explosions, less about rhythm per se than sheer sonic violence\". According to Brad Schlueter of \"Drum!\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The 'original' or traditional blastbeat is a single-stroke roll played between your cymbal and snare, with your kick playing simultaneously with every cymbal hit.\"\nNapalm Death is said to have coined the term, though this style of drumming had previously been used by others for its characteristically chaotic sound.\nHistory.\nAntecedents in jazz and rock.\nAlthough most commonly associated with hardcore punk and extreme metal, the earliest forms of what would later become the blast beat are noted to have appeared in jazz music. A commonly cited early example that somewhat resembles the modern technique is a brief section of Sam Woodyard's drum solo during a 1962 rendition of \"Kinda Dukish\" with the Duke Ellington orchestra. A clip of the performance under the title \"The first blast beat in the world\" garnered almost one million views on YouTube. Woodyard's example, however, lacks the modern inclusion of kick drum and cymbal work into the beat. Another early instance can be heard in Sunny Murray's 1966 or '67 performance on a live recording \"Holy Ghost\" with saxophonist Albert Ayler, although this did not receive an official release until the 1998 reissue of \"Albert Ayler in Greenwich Village\". Prior to these two examples resurfacing and receiving the attention in the 2010s, AllMusic contributor Thom Jurek credited Tony Williams as the \"true inventor of the blastbeat\" for his frenetic performance on \"Dark Prince\" for Trio of Doom in 1979, officially released only in 2007. \nSome early antecedents of blast beats have also been identified in rock music. An early example of a proto-blast beat can be found in the Tielman Brothers' 1959 single, \"Rock Little Baby of Mine\" during the instrumental break. Drummer Steve Ross of the band Coven also plays an \"attempt\" at a blast beat in the track \"Dignitaries of Hell\" off the group's 1969 album, \"Witchcraft Destroys Minds &amp; Reaps Souls\".\nFour early examples of blast beats were performed in 1970: King Crimson's \"The Devil's Triangle\" off their sophomore release \"In the Wake of Poseidon\" includes proto-blastbeats in the later half of the song; Mike Fouracre of Marsupilami performs many blast beats throughout their self-titled album, most notably on \"And the Eagle Chased the Dove to Its Ruin\"; Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer's track \"The Barbarian\" contains a very brief blast beat in the outro; Bill Ward, drummer of pioneering heavy metal band Black Sabbath, played a few blast beats on a live performance of their song \"War Pigs\" (e.g. at timestamps 3:52 and 6:38).\nModern hardcore and metal blast beats.\nThe blast beat as it is known today originated in the hardcore punk and grindcore scenes of the 1980s. Contrary to popular belief, blast beats originated from punk and hardcore music, not metal music. In the UK punk and hardcore scene of the early 1980s there were many bands attempting to play as fast as possible. English band Napalm Death coined the term \"blast beat\", although this style of drumming had previously been practiced by others. Daniel Ekeroth argues that the [hardcore] blast beat was first performed by the Swedish group Asocial on their 1982 demo. D.R.I. (1983, \"No Sense\"), Beastie Boys (1982, track 5, \"Riot Fight\"), Sepultura (1985, track 11, \"Antichrist\"), S.O.D. (1985, track 11, \"Milk\"), Sarc\u00f3fago (1986, track 10, \"Satanas\"), and Repulsion also included the technique prior to Napalm Death's emergence. Rockdetector contributor Garry Sharpe-Young credits D.R.I.'s Eric Brecht as the first on their 1983 debut but credits Napalm Death with making it better known. \nIn 1985, Napalm Death, then an emerging grindcore band, replaced their former drummer Miles \"Rat\" Ratledge with Mick Harris, who brought to the band a whole new level of speed. Harris is credited with developing the term \"blast beat\", describing the fast notes played on the kick and snare. Harris started using the blast beat as a fundamental aspect of Napalm Death's early musical compositions. It was finally with Napalm Death's first full-length album \"Scum\" (1987) that blast beat started to evolve into a distinct musical expression of its own. Blast beats became popular in extreme music from the mid to late 1980s . The blast beat evolved into its modern form as it was developed in the American death metal and grindcore scene of the late 1980s and early 1990s. Pete Sandoval, drummer of Terrorizer (1986\u20131989) and later Morbid Angel (1984\u20132013), purportedly was the first to use blast beats in metronomic time (and not as arhythmic or non-metric white noise) and thus gave it a more useful musical characteristic for timekeeping.\nBlast beats eventually appeared in commercially successful metal music, beginning with Fear Factory's album \"Demanufacture\" (1995) and Slipknot's album \"Iowa\" (2001).\nCharacteristics.\n&lt;score raw=\"1\" sound=\"1\"&gt;\\version \"2.22.0\"\n\\score {\n \\tempo 4 = 180\n \\repeat volta 2 {\n \u00ab{cymra8 cymra cymra cymra cymra cymra cymra cymra}\\\\{ bd16 sne bd sne bd sne bd sne bd sne bd sne bd sne bd sne}\u00bb\\break\n\\score {\n \\unfoldRepeats {\n \\drums \\with {midiInstrument = \"drums\"}{\n \\repeat volta 2 {\n \u00ab{cymra8 cymra cymra cymra cymra cymra cymra cymra}\\\\{ bd16 sne bd sne bd sne bd sne bd sne bd sne bd sne bd sne}\u00bb\n}&lt;/score&gt; Traditional blast beat drum pattern\nA blast beat is traditionally played as an alternating single-stroke roll broken up between the kick drum and the snare drum. Blast beats are counted in 32nd or 16th notes. In a modern musical context blast beats are usually regarded as such when played at a minimum of above 90 beats per minute 32nd notes, or 180 bpm 16th notes. Early blast beats were generally quite slow and less precise compared to today's standards. Nowadays, a blast beat is normally played from 180 bpm 16th notes up to such high tempos as in the range of 250-280 bpm 16th notes (or even higher). There is also the \"gravity blast\", not to be confused with the one-handed \"gravity roll\" (see below). This technique uses the rim of the snare drum as a fulcrum, allowing two snare hits with one downward motion (essentially doing the work of two hands with only one).\nTypical blast beats consist of 8th-note patterns between both the bass and snare drum alternately, with the hi-hat or the ride synced. Variations exist such as displacing hi-hat/ride, snare and bass drum hits and/or using other cymbals such as splashes, crashes, chinas and even tambourines for accenting, for example when using odd time or playing progressively. While playing 8th or 8th note triplets some drummers choose to play in sync with one foot while others split the 8th notes between both feet. In blast beats in general, the notes on the kick drum can be played either with one foot only or by alternating both feet, referred to as a \"two-foot\" or \"economy\" blast.\nVariations.\nAs blast beats have evolved, different types and interpretations have emerged. There are four main variations of the blast beat: the traditional blast, the bomb blast, the hammer blast and the freehand blast.\nThe traditional blast beat is a single-stroke roll alternating between the snare drum and kick drum. The ride hand is usually playing in unison with the kick drum. The traditional blast beat is structurally very similar to the skank beat, which can be regarded as a predecessor and a half time variation of the traditional blast beat. The skank beat originated in the early punk and thrash metal scene as a drum beat for extreme music. The skank beat is similar to the blast beat as it alternates between the kick and the snare, with the difference that the ride hand plays notes in unison with both kick and snare. A skank beat is in other words a sped up 2/4 rock or polka beat. In the US the skank beat was early on also referred to as the \"Slayer\" or \"thrash\" beat due to its popularity among thrash metal bands such as Slayer.\nThe bomb blast is essentially a combination of blast beat and double bass drumming. When measured in 16th notes a bomb blast consists of 8th notes on the snare played above a 16th notes kick drum line. Most drummers play this beat by leading with the snare, while the traditional blast beat is usually led with the kick. The bomb blast became popular among 1990s death metal bands such as Cannibal Corpse, which is why the bomb blast is also referred to as the \"Cannibal\" blast.\nThe hammer blast is played with the kick and snare in unison. Instead of playing 8th notes kick and snare in alternation and thus creating a 16th notes roll, the hammer blast is played as a straight 8th notes roll on the kick and snare simultaneously. The advantage of the hammer blast is that only one fast hand is needed, which usually is the drummer's leading hand (right for right-handed and left for left-handed). If the weaker hand can't keep up with the 8th notes snare line, it can play quarter notes. The kick drum line can be played with one foot as well as a two-footed economy blast. When played at an extremely fast tempo, the hammer blast can be referred to as a \"hyper blast\". The hammer blast became popular in death metal music of the early 1990s.\nThe freehand blast, also known as the gravity blast, utilizes the gravity roll technique in a blast beat context. Of all the main blast beat variations, this one is the most recent to have emerged. The snare line is played as a 16th notes single stroke roll, also known as a gravity roll or single handed roll. The roll is played with an up and down motion in which you push and pull the drumstick on and off the snare drum. By using the snare rim as a fulcrum you create a stroke each time you push and pull the drumstick up and down. In this way, the player can double the output of notes to match the amount of notes produced by two feet on the bass drum. It usually presents similarly to a unison hammer blast, but at double the tempo of what would be possible with normal techniques. One drawback is that this blast has a limited volume. The concept behind the gravity roll is not new, but is noted for being brought into modern music by drummer Johhny Rabb. Rabb has published the book \"The Official Freehand Technique\", which covers the gravity roll technique. The term \"gravity roll\" or \"gravity blast,\" while common and accepted usage, is less correct than \"freehand roll\" or \"fulcrum roll\" in that the technique does not rely on gravity and can be played sideways, inverted, or in a zero gravity environment. A combination of the gravity blast and the bomb blast (i.e. both the kick and the snare is playing 16th notes in unison) is called a gravity bomb.\nExamples.\nExamples of the four main blast beat variations in drum tab:\n C- x-x-x-x-x-x-x-x-| C- x-x-x-x-x-x-x-x-| C- x-x-x-x-x-x-x-x-| C- x-x-x-x-x-x-x-x-|\n S- o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-| S- -o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o| S- o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-| S- oooooooooooooooo|\n B- o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-| B- o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-| B- oooooooooooooooo| B- o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-|\nThe first example is a hammer blast. The second example shows a traditional blast beat - essentially a skank beat played at a high tempo (this particular one leads with the bass drum, but the snare can lead as well). Example #3 shows a blast beat with double bass, known as a bomb blast. Example #4 illustrates a freehand blast, also known as a gravity blast and is the only one that showcases the proper speed of a modern blast beat.\nReception.\nThe blast beat has drawn criticism from some musicians in the heavy metal community due to what they perceive as a lack of \"groove\" associated with the technique, as well as the inaccessibility of its sound to listeners who are not musicians. \nVinnie Paul, drummer of the American heavy metal band Pantera delineated to \"Blabbermouth\", \"It's drummers playing for drummers... There's no melody, there's no song and there's no chorus. It just doesn't take you anywhere... I just can't groove to that beat.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59887", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59887", "title": "Top twenty highest grossing films", "text": ""}
{"id": "59888", "revid": "18833090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59888", "title": "IEC (disambiguation)", "text": "IEC most commonly refers to the International Electrotechnical Commission.\nIEC may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59889", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59889", "title": "Royal Spanish Academy", "text": "Official regulator for the Spanish language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Royal Spanish Academy (, ; RAE) is Spain's official royal institution with a mission to ensure the stability of the Spanish language. It is based in Madrid, Spain, and is affiliated with national language academies in 22 other Hispanophone nations through the Association of Academies of the Spanish Language. \nThe RAE dedicates itself to language planning by applying linguistic prescription aimed at promoting linguistic unity within and between various territories, to ensure a common standard. The proposed language guidelines are shown in a number of works.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1711, Spain, unlike France, Italy and Portugal, did not have a large dictionary with a comprehensive and collegially elaborated lexicographical repertoire. \nThe initial nucleus of the future Academy was formed that same year by the eight novatores who met in the library of the palace of , Duke of Escalona and Marquess of Villena, located in the Plaza de las Descalzas Reales in Madrid.\nThe Spanish Academy was founded in 3 August 1713 on the initiative of Pacheco, with the purpose of \"fixing the voices and words of the Castilian language in their greatest propriety, elegance and purity\". The objective was to fix the language in the state of fullness that it had reached during the 16th century and that had been consolidated in the 17th century. \nThe Italian Accademia della Crusca founded in 1582 and the Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise founded in 1635 were taken as models. \nThe first official session of the new corporation was held at the residence of Pacheco on 6 July 1713, an event that is recorded in the book of minutes, begun on 3 August 1713. \nIts creation, with twenty-four elected members was approved on 3 October 1714 by Royal Decree of Philip V, that gave the academy the right to be called the \"Royal Spanish Academy\". This meant that the academicians enjoyed the preeminences and exemptions granted to the servants of the Royal Household. It had its first seat at number 26 Valverde Street, from where it moved to Alarc\u00f3n Street, corner of Felipe IV, its definitive seat.\nThe emblem chosen was a fiery crucible placed on the fire, with the legend (\"cleans, fixes and gives splendor\").\nCollective utility became the main hallmark of the Spanish Academy, differentiating itself from other academies that had proliferated in the golden centuries and that were conceived as mere occasional literary gatherings.\nThe RAE began establishing rules for the orthography of Spanish beginning in 1741 with the first edition of the (spelled from the second edition onwards). The proposals of the Academy became the official norm in Spain by royal decree in 1844, and they were also gradually adopted by the Spanish-speaking countries in the Americas.\nSeveral reforms were introduced in the (1959, New Norms of Prosody and Orthography). Since the establishment of the Association of Academies of the Spanish Language in 1951, the Spanish academy works in close consultation with the other Spanish language academies in its various works and projects. The 1999 Orthography was the first to be edited by the twenty two academies together. The current rules and practical recommendations on spelling are presented in the latest edition of the (2010).\nThe headquarters, opened in 1894, is located at Calle Felipe IV, 4, in the ward of Jer\u00f3nimos, next to the . The Center for the Studies of the Royal Spanish Academy, opened in 2007, is located at Calle Serrano 187\u2013189.\nFundamentals.\nAccording to Salvador Guti\u00e9rrez, an academic numerary of the institution, the Academy does not dictate the rules but studies the language, collects information and presents it. The rules of the language are simply the continued use of expressions, some of which are collected by the Academy. Although he also says that it is important to read and write correctly. \nArticle 1 of the statutes of the Royal Spanish Academy, translated from Spanish, says the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Academy is an institution with legal personality whose main mission is to ensure that the changes experienced by the Spanish language in its constant adaptation to the needs of its speakers do not break the essential unity it maintains throughout the Hispanic world. It must equally ensure that this evolution preserves the characteristic nature of the language, as gradually consolidated over the centuries, as well as establishing and disseminating the criteria for its proper and correct use, and contributing to its splendor.\nTo achieve these ends, it shall study and promote the study of the history and present of Spanish, it shall disseminate the writings, literary\u2014especially classics\u2014and non-literary, that it deems important for the knowledge of such matters, and will seek to keep alive the memory of those who, in Spain or in the Americas, have cultivated our language with glory.\nAs a member of the Association of Academies of the Spanish Language, it shall maintain a special relation with the corresponding and associated academies.\nComposition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMembers of the Academy are known as (), chosen from among prestigious people within the arts and sciences, including several Spanish-language authors, known as The Immortals (Spanish: ), similarly to their French Academy counterparts. The numeraries (Spanish: \"N\u00fameros)\" are elected for life by the other academicians. Each academician holds a seat labeled with a letter from the Spanish alphabet, with upper and lower case letters denoting separate seats. Only eight letters of the alphabet do not have\u2014nor have they had in the past\u2014representation in the seats of the RAE: \"v\", \"w\", \"x\", \"y\", \"z\", \"\u00d1\", \"W\", \"Y\".\nThe Academy has included Latin American members from the time of Rafael Mar\u00eda Baralt, although some Spanish-speaking countries have their own academies of the language.\nNotable past academicians.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59890", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59890", "title": "Institute for Catalan Studies", "text": "Catalan academic institution\nThe Institute for Catalan Studies ( ), also known by the acronym IEC, is an academic institution which seeks to undertake research and study into \"all elements of Catalan culture\". It is based in Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.\nIEC.\nThe IEC is known principally for its work in standardising the Catalan language. The Institute's current president is Joan Dom\u00e8nec Ros Aragon\u00e8s, elected to the office for four years in 2013 and to a second term in 2017, following Salvador Giner, elected to the office for four years in 2005 and to a second term in 2009. The IEC is based in Barcelona, the capital of Catalonia, and the second largest city in Spain.\nEnric Prat de la Riba, who was to become the first President of the Commonwealth of Catalonia, signed the founding document of the Institute, as president of the Provincial Deputation of Barcelona on 17 June 1907. The IEC is one of a number of cultural and scientific institutions created at that time to lend greater prestige to the Catalan language and culture; others include the (Library of Catalonia), the \"Escola Industrial\" (Industrial School), the Hiking Club of Catalonia, the \"Escola Superior de Belles Arts\" (Higher School of Fine Arts) and the \"Escola del Treball\" (School of Labour), \"el Centre de Recerca Matem\u00e0tica\". Prat de la Riba also founded the \"Escola de l'Administraci\u00f3 Local\" (School of Local Administration), in order to create a body of Catalan civil servants for the regional government.\nThe IEC was admitted to the Union Acad\u00e9mique Internationale in 1922, shortly after the establishment of the latter.\nDuring the dictatorship of Franco, along with many other Catalan cultural institutions, the Institut lived a semiclandestine existence, and was not officially restored to its previous status in the field of language standardisation until a 1991 bill was passed by the (also restored) Catalan Parliament.\nThe IEC inspired the creation of the Institut d'Estudis Occitans in Occitania. Occitania is an area in southern France where Occitan (often called \"Proven\u00e7al\") has historically been spoken.\nPhilological Section.\nThe IEC's Philological Section was founded in 1911. Antoni Maria Alcover served as its first president. Along with Pompeu Fabra, the Philological Section worked to establish a series of spelling norms that were approved by members in 1913. These became the foundation of modern written Catalan which are still in use today. Similarly, in 1917, the \"Diccionari Ortogr\u00e0fic de l'Institut\" was published; it soon became a dictionary of spelling norms irredeemably tied to the reputation of former Institute Director Pompeu Fabra. The dictionary went through several editions, with the last released in 1937. This work and others were the basis of Fabra's \"Diccionari General de la Llengua Catalana\" published in 1932, a general-purpose dictionary that became a standard reference work throughout the various Catalan-speaking territories.\nOfficially the IEC provides standards for the language as a whole: the Philological Section has members from Catalonia proper, Northern Catalonia (located in France), the Balearic Islands, Valencia, Alghero in Sardinia and the Principality of Andorra (the only country where Catalan is the sole official language). However, the Valencian Region south of Catalonia has its own language academy, the \"Acad\u00e8mia Valenciana de la Llengua\", which nevertheless formally acknowledges that theirs is one variant of the common language. In an area known as the \"Franja de Ponent\", the eastern edge of Aragon adjacent to Catalonia where Catalan is spoken by about 44,000 inhabitants, the rules are followed \"de facto\" although Catalan is not an official language in that region.\nOther IEC works of note include the \"Diccionari de la Llengua Catalana\" published in 1995, and the regionally sensitive \"Diccionari Catal\u00e0-Valenci\u00e0-Balear\" (Catalan-Valencian-Balearic Dictionary). Notable members of the Philological Section include Josep Carner, \u00c0ngel Guimer\u00e0, Joan Maragall, and Aina Moll Marqu\u00e8s.\nSocietat Catalana de Terminologia.\nThe Societat Catalana de Terminologia (Catalan Terminology Society \u2013 SCATERM) is a subsidiary society of the Institut d'Estudis Catalans (Institute for Catalan Studies \u2013 IEC) which is attached to the latter's Philological Section and brings together all the organisations and professionals involved in Catalan terminology and disseminates terminological activities carried out in Catalan-speaking areas.\nHistory of the Societat Catalana de Terminologia.\nThe Societat Catalana de Terminologia was founded as the Associaci\u00f3 Catalana de Terminologia (Catalan Terminology Association \u2013 ACATERM) following a proposal presented at the 1st Terminology and Language Services Conference on 18 May 2001 at Pompeu Fabra University (UPF). Under this initiative, a management committee consisting of members of various institutions in Catalan-speaking areas was responsible for steering the founding process. It was made up of representatives from the Uni\u00f3 de Federacions Esportives de Catalunya (Sports Federations Union of Catalonia \u2013 UFEC), the terminology centre TERMCAT, the Institut Universitari de Ling\u00fc\u00edstica Aplicada (University Institute for Applied Linguistics \u2013 IULA) at the UPF and the language services at the Autonomous University of Barcelona, the Universitat Polit\u00e8cnica de Catalunya \u2013 BarcelonaTech and Jaume I University at Castell\u00f3.\nSocietat Catalana de Terminologia's activities.\nSCATERM regularly runs academic conferences, seminars and training courses. Every two months it publishes the electronic newsletter Butllet\u00ed de la Societat Catalana de Terminologia and every six months the terminology journal Termin\u00e0lia (as a hardcopy and online) which is both a specialist peer-reviewed scientific journal and also an informative magazine. It also publishes two collections created in 2009: \"Mem\u00f2ries de la Societat Catalana de Terminologia\", which features the proceedings of the most important events organised by the Society and in particular its annual conference, and \"Eines de Terminologia\", which includes monographs concerning the study and practice of terminology.\nIn order to drive research into terminology, SCATERM holds a biennial award for students as part of the awards and scholarships given by the IEC called the Societat Catalana de Terminologia Award.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59891", "revid": "49450241", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59891", "title": "Vedea", "text": "The Vedea () is a river in southern Romania that flows from the Cotmeana Plateau and empties into the Danube. It has a total length of 224\u00a0km, of which 33\u00a0km is regulated. Its drainage basin area is 5,430\u00a0km2.\nIt flows in Arge\u0219, Olt and Teleorman counties. The towns Alexandria and Ro\u0219iorii de Vede lie in the vicinity of the river.\nThe name of the river is Dacian in origin, from Indo-European *\"wed\", \"water\".\nTowns and villages.\nThe following towns and villages are situated along the river Vedea, from source to mouth: F\u0103ge\u021belu, Spineni, T\u0103tule\u0219ti, Opta\u0219i, Corbu, Tufeni, Ghimpe\u021beni, Nicolae Titulescu, V\u0103leni, Stejaru, Ro\u0219iorii de Vede, Vedea, Peretu, Plosca, Mavrodin, Buzescu, Alexandria, Poroschia, Br\u00e2nceni, Sm\u00e2rdioasa, Cervenia, Con\u021be\u0219ti, Bragadiru, Bujoru.\nTributaries.\nThe following rivers are tributaries of the Vedea (from source to mouth):\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59892", "revid": "23012287", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59892", "title": "List of highest-grossing films", "text": "Films generate income from several revenue streams, including theatrical exhibition, home video, television broadcast rights, and merchandising. However, theatrical box-office earnings are the primary metric for trade publications in assessing the success of a film, mostly because of the availability of the data compared to sales figures for home video and broadcast rights, but also because of historical practice. Included on the list are charts of the top box-office earners (ranked by both the nominal and real value of their revenue), a chart of high-grossing films by calendar year, a timeline showing the transition of the highest-grossing film record, and a chart of the highest-grossing film franchises and series. All charts are ranked by international theatrical box-office performance where possible, excluding income derived from home video, broadcasting rights, and merchandise.\nTraditionally, war films, musicals, and historical dramas have been the most popular genres, but franchise films have been among the best performers of the 21st century. There is strong interest in the superhero genre, with eleven films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe featuring among the nominal top-earners. The most successful superhero film, \"\", is also the second-highest-grossing film on the nominal earnings chart, and there are four films in total based on the \"Avengers\" comic books charting in the top twenty. Other Marvel Comics adaptations have also had success with the \"Spider-Man\" and \"X-Men\" properties, while films based on \"Batman\" and \"Superman\" from DC Comics have generally performed well. \"Star Wars\" is also represented in the nominal earnings chart with five films, while the \"Jurassic Park\" franchise features prominently. Although the nominal earnings chart is dominated by films adapted from pre-existing properties and sequels, it is headed by \"Avatar\", which is an original work. Animated family films have performed consistently well, with Disney films enjoying lucrative re-releases prior to the home-video era. Disney also enjoyed later success with films such as \"Frozen\" and its sequel, and \"The Lion King\" (along with its computer-animated remake), as well as its Pixar division, of which \"Inside Out 2\", \"Incredibles 2\", and \"Toy Story 3\" and \"4\" have been the best performers. Beyond Disney and Pixar animation, China's \"Ne Zha 2\" (the highest-grossing animated film), and the \"Despicable Me\" and \"Shrek\" series have met with the most success.\nWhile inflation has eroded the achievements of most films from the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, there are franchises originating from that period that are still active. Besides the \"Star Wars\" and \"Superman\" franchises, \"James Bond\" and \"Godzilla\" films are still being released periodically; all four are among the highest-grossing franchises. Some of the older films that held the record of highest-grossing film still have respectable grosses by today's standards, but no longer compete numerically against today's top-earners in an era of much higher individual ticket prices. When those prices are adjusted for inflation, however, then \"Gone with the Wind\"\u2014which was the highest-grossing film outright for twenty-five years\u2014is still the highest-grossing film of all time. All grosses on the list are expressed in U.S. dollars at their nominal value, except where stated otherwise.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHighest-grossing films.\nWith a worldwide box-office gross of over $2.9\u00a0billion, \"Avatar\" is proclaimed to be the \"highest-grossing\" film, but such claims usually refer to theatrical revenues only and do not take into account home video and television income, which can form a significant portion of a film's earnings. Once revenue from home entertainment is factored in, it is not immediately clear which film is the most successful. \"Titanic\" earned $1.2\u00a0billion from video and DVD sales and rentals, in addition to the $2.2\u00a0billion it grossed in theaters. While complete sales data are not available for \"Avatar\", it earned $345\u00a0million from the sale of sixteen\u00a0million DVD and Blu-ray units in North America, and ultimately sold a total of thirty\u00a0million DVD and Blu-ray units worldwide. After home video income is accounted for, both films have earned over $3\u00a0billion each. Television broadcast rights also substantially add to a film's earnings and, as of 2010, a film often earned the equivalent of as much as 20\u201325% of its theatrical box office for two television runs, on top of pay-per-view revenues; \"Titanic\" earned a further $55\u00a0million from the NBC and HBO broadcast rights, equating to about 9% of its North American gross.\nWhen a film is highly exploitable as a commercial property, its ancillary revenues can dwarf its income from direct film sales. \"The Lion King\" (1994) earned over $2\u00a0billion in box-office and home video sales, but this pales in comparison to the $8\u00a0billion earned at box offices around the world by the stage adaptation. Merchandising can be extremely lucrative too: \"The Lion King\" also sold $3\u00a0billion of merchandise, while Pixar's \"Cars\"\u2014which earned $462\u00a0million in theatrical revenues and was only a modest hit by comparison to other Pixar films\u2014generated global merchandise sales of over $8\u00a0billion in the five years after its 2006 release. Pixar had another huge hit with \"Toy Story 3\", which generated almost $10\u00a0billion in merchandise retail sales in addition to the $1\u00a0billion it earned at the box office.\nOn this chart, films are ranked by the revenues from theatrical exhibition at their nominal value, along with the highest positions they attained. Seven films in total have grossed in excess of $2\u00a0billion worldwide, with \"Avatar\" ranked in the top position. All of the films have had a theatrical run (including re-releases) in the 21st century, and films that have not played during this period do not appear on the chart because of ticket-price inflation, population size and ticket purchasing trends not being considered.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0\u2020 \"Background shading indicates films playing in the week commencing in theaters around the world\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;TThe totals given for \"Titanic\" at Box Office Mojo and The Numbers are both incorrect. Prior to the 2023 re-release, the totals at both trackers were inflated above the true figure. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;SMThe worldwide total for \"Spider-Man: No Way Home\" at Box Office Mojo is incorrect, by virtue of double-counting the original Spanish gross in its 2024 re-release total. For this reason totals are sourced to an archived version of Box Office Mojo prior to when the error crept in. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;FBox Office Mojo stopped updating its main total for \"Frozen\" in August 2014, while it was still in release. The total listed here incorporates subsequent earnings in Japan, Nigeria, Spain, the United Kingdom and Germany up to the end of 2015 but omits earnings in Turkey, Iceland, Brazil, and Australia (2016), which amount to a few hundred thousand dollars. The total is rounded to $1\u00a0million to compensate for the numerical inaccuracy. It was re-released in the United Kingdom in December 2017 with the featurette \"Olaf's Frozen Adventure\", earning an additional $2.3 million. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;F8In the case of \"The Fate of the Furious\" the gross is from an archived version of Box Office Mojo, after irregularities were discovered in the current figure. Ongoing weekly drops in the totals for several countries\u2014Argentina being the worst affected\u2014led to a drop in the overall worldwide total. In view of what appears to be an aberration in the source, a previous figure is provided. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;RK\"The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King\" saw its original gross corrected in early 2020. The result of this correction is that \"Spider-Man: Far From Home\", \"Captain Marvel\" and \"Transformers: Dark of the Moon\" all peaked one place lower than shown in the accompanying source. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;DKRThe worldwide total for \"The Dark Knight Rises\" at Box Office Mojo is incorrect, by virtue of double-counting the original Australian gross in its 2024 re-release total. For this reason totals are sourced to an archived version of Box Office Mojo prior to when the error crept in. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;TS3Box Office Mojo revised the grosses for Pixar films in August 2016, resulting in the gross for \"Toy Story 3\" being corrected from $1.063\u00a0billion to $1.067\u00a0billion. This means that it peaked at number 4 at the end of its run, ahead of \"\", rather than at number 5 as indicated by the source. \nHighest-grossing films adjusted for inflation.\nBecause of the long-term effects of inflation, notably the significant increase of movie theater ticket prices, the list unadjusted for inflation gives far more weight to later films. The unadjusted list, while commonly found in the press, is therefore largely meaningless for comparing films widely separated in time, as many films from earlier eras will never appear on a modern unadjusted list, despite achieving higher commercial success when adjusted for price increases. To compensate for the devaluation of the currency, some charts make adjustments for inflation, but not even this practice fully addresses the issue, since ticket prices and inflation do not necessarily parallel one another. For example, in 1970, tickets cost $1.55 or about $6.68 in inflation-adjusted 2004 dollars; by 1980, prices had risen to about $2.69, a drop to $5.50 in inflation-adjusted 2004 dollars. Ticket prices have also risen at different rates of inflation around the world, further complicating the process of adjusting worldwide grosses.\nAnother complication is release in multiple formats for which different ticket prices are charged. One notable example of this phenomenon is \"Avatar\", which was also released in 3D and IMAX: almost two-thirds of tickets for that film were for 3D showings with an average price of $10, and about one-sixth were for IMAX showings with an average price over $14.50, compared to a 2010 average price of $7.61 for 2D films. Social and economic factors such as population change and the growth of international markets also have an effect on the number of people purchasing theater tickets, along with audience demographics where some films sell a much higher proportion of discounted children's tickets, or perform better in big cities where tickets cost more.\nThe measuring system for gauging a film's success is based on unadjusted grosses, mainly because historically this is the way it has always been done because of the practices of the film industry: the box-office receipts are compiled by theaters and relayed to the distributor, which in turn releases them to the media. Converting to a more representative system that counts ticket sales rather than gross is also fraught with problems because the only data available for older films are the sale totals. As the motion picture industry is highly oriented towards marketing currently released films, unadjusted figures are always used in marketing campaigns so that new blockbuster films can much more easily achieve a high sales ranking, and thus be promoted as a \"top film of all time\", so there is little incentive to switch to a more robust analysis from a marketing or even newsworthy point of view.\nDespite the inherent difficulties in accounting for inflation, several attempts have been made. Estimates depend on the price index used to adjust the grosses, and the exchange rates used to convert between currencies can also affect the calculations, both of which can have an effect on the ultimate rankings of an inflation adjusted list. \"Gone with the Wind\"\u2014first released in 1939\u2014is generally considered to be the most successful film, with \"Guinness World Records\" in 2014 estimating its adjusted global gross at $3.4\u00a0billion. Estimates for \"Gone with the Wind\"'s adjusted gross have varied substantially: its owner, Turner Entertainment, estimated its adjusted earnings at $3.3\u00a0billion in 2007, a few years earlier than the \"Guinness\" estimate; other estimates fall either side of this amount, with one putting its gross just under $3\u00a0billion in 2010, while another provided an alternative figure of $3.8\u00a0billion in 2006. Which film is \"Gone with the Wind\"'s nearest rival depends on the set of figures used: \"Guinness\" had \"Avatar\" in second place with $3\u00a0billion, while other estimates saw \"Titanic\" in the runner-up spot with first-run worldwide earnings of almost $2.9\u00a0billion at 2010 prices.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;InfInflation adjustment is carried out using the Consumer price index for advanced economies published by the International Monetary Fund. The index is uniformly applied to the grosses in the chart published by \"Guinness World Records\" in 2014, beginning with the 2014 index. The figures in the above chart take into account inflation that has occurred in every year since then, through 2024. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;GWThe adjusted gross for \"Gone with the Wind\" includes the original release and reissue grosses up to 1998, adjusted from the Guinness base year, and the 2019 gross adjusted from the 2020 index. There have been several limited re-releases in the 2020s, but the grosses from these reissues are not represented in the adjusted gross. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;A1The adjusted gross for \"Avatar\" includes revenue from the original release and all four reissues. The original release and 2010 Special Edition grosses are adjusted from the Guinness base year, whilst the 2020 and 2021 grosses are adjusted from the 2021 index and the 2022 gross from 2022. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;T\"Guinness\"' adjusted total for \"Titanic\" only increased by $102,000,000 between the 2012 (published in 2011) and 2015 editions, a rise of 4.2% shared by the other adjusted totals in the chart, and omitted the gross from a 3D re-release in 2012. This chart incorporates the gross of $343,550,770 from the reissue and adjusts it from the 2013 index. \"Titanic\" grossed a further $ during limited re-releases in 2017 and 2020, and these have been incorporated into the gross from the 25th anniversary reissue and adjusted from the 2023 index. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;ETThe adjusted gross for \"E.T.\" includes revenue from the original release and all re-releases. The original release along with the 1985 and 2002 reissues are adjusted from the Guinness base year, whilst the 2020 and 2022 grosses are adjusted from the 2022 index. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;AEThe gross for \"Avengers: Endgame\" is adjusted from the 2020 index. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;TFAThe gross for \"Star Wars: The Force Awakens\" is adjusted from the 2016 index. \nHigh-grossing films by year.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Glossary: Distributor rentals\nBox-office figures are reported in either gross revenue or \"distributor rentals\", the latter being especially true of older films. Commonly mistaken for home video revenue, distributor rentals are the distributor's share of the film's theatrical revenue (i.e. the box office gross less the exhibitor's cut). Historically, the rental price averaged at 30\u201340% when the distributors owned the theater chains, equating to just over a third of the gross being paid to the distributor of the film. In the modern marketplace, rental fees can vary greatly\u2014depending on a number of factors\u2014although the films from the major studios average out at 43%.\nAudience tastes were fairly eclectic during the 20th century, but several trends did emerge. During the silent era, films with war themes were popular with audiences, with \"The Birth of a Nation\" (American Civil War), \"The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse\", \"The Big Parade\" and \"Wings\" (all World War I) becoming the most successful films in their respective years of release, with the trend coming to an end with \"All Quiet on the Western Front\" in 1930. With the advent of sound in 1927, the musical\u2014the genre best placed to showcase the new technology\u2014took over as the most popular type of film with audiences, with 1928 and 1929 both being topped by musical films. The genre continued to perform strongly in the 1930s, but the outbreak of World War II saw war-themed films dominate again during this period, starting with \"Gone with the Wind\" (American Civil War) in 1939, and finishing with \"The Best Years of Our Lives\" (World War II) in 1946. \"Samson and Delilah\" (1949) saw the beginning of a trend of increasingly expensive historical dramas set during Ancient Rome/biblical times throughout the 1950s as cinema competed with television for audiences, with \"Quo Vadis\", \"The Robe\", \"The Ten Commandments\", \"Ben-Hur\" and \"Spartacus\" all becoming the highest-grossing film of the year during initial release, before the genre started to wane after several high-profile failures. The success of \"White Christmas\" and \"South Pacific\" in the 1950s foreshadowed the comeback of the musical in the 1960s with \"West Side Story\", \"Mary Poppins\", \"My Fair Lady\", \"The Sound of Music\" and \"Funny Girl\" all among the top films of the decade. The 1970s saw a shift in audience tastes to high concept films, with six such films made by either George Lucas or Steven Spielberg topping the chart during the 1980s. The 21st century has seen an increasing dependence on franchises and adaptations, with the box-office dominance of films based on pre-existing intellectual property at record levels.\nSteven Spielberg (1975, 1981, 1982, 1989 and 1993) and Cecil B. DeMille (1932, 1947, 1949, 1952 and 1956) tie as the most represented directors on the chart with five films apiece occupying the annual top spot. William Wyler (1942, 1946, 1959 and 1968) and James Cameron (1991, 1997, 2009 and 2022) are each represented by four films, whilst D. W. Griffith (1915, 1916 and 1920), George Roy Hill (1966, 1969 and 1973) and the Russo brothers (2016, 2018 and 2019) all feature heavily with three films apiece. George Lucas directed two chart-toppers in 1977 and 1999, but also served in a strong creative capacity as a producer and writer in 1980, 1981, 1983, and 1989 as well. The following directors have also all directed two films on the chart: Frank Lloyd, King Vidor, Frank Capra, Michael Curtiz, Leo McCarey, Alfred Hitchcock, David Lean, Stanley Kubrick, Guy Hamilton, Mike Nichols, William Friedkin, Peter Jackson, Gore Verbinski, and Michael Bay; Mervyn LeRoy, Ken Annakin and Robert Wise are each represented by one solo credit and one shared credit, and John Ford co-directed two films. Disney films are usually co-directed and some directors have served on several winning teams: Wilfred Jackson, Hamilton Luske, Clyde Geronimi, David Hand, Ben Sharpsteen, Wolfgang Reitherman and Bill Roberts have all co-directed at least two films on the list. Only seven directors have topped the chart in consecutive years: McCarey (1944 and 1945), Nichols (1966 and 1967), Spielberg (1981 and 1982), Jackson (2002 and 2003), Verbinski (2006 and 2007) and the Russo brothers (2018 and 2019).\nBecause of release schedules\u2014especially in the case of films released towards the end of the year\u2014and different release patterns across the world, many films can do business in two or more calendar years; therefore the grosses documented here are not confined to just the year of release. Grosses are not limited to original theatrical runs either, with many older films often being re-released periodically so the figures represent all the business a film has done since its original release; a film's first-run gross is included in brackets after the total if known. Because of incomplete data it cannot be known for sure how much money some films have made and when they made it, but generally the chart chronicles the films from each year that went on to earn the most. In the cases where estimates conflict both films are recorded, and in cases where a film has moved into first place because of being re-released the previous record-holder is also retained.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0\u2020 \"Background shading indicates films playing in the week commencing in theaters around the world\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n(...) Since grosses are not limited to original theatrical runs, a film's first-run gross is included in brackets after the total if known.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;*Canada and U.S. gross only. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;RDistributor rental. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;TBATo be ascertained. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;INNo contemporary sources provide figures for \"20,000 Leagues Under the Sea\", although The Numbers provides a figure of $8,000,000 for the North American box-office gross. However, it is possible this figure has been mistaken for the gross of the 1954 remake which also earned $8,000,000 in North American rentals. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;FHSome sources such as The Numbers state that \"Aloma of the South Seas\" is the highest grossing film of the year, earning $3\u00a0million. However, no contemporary sources provide figures for \"Aloma of the South Seas\", so it is unclear what the $3\u00a0million figure relates to. If it were the rental gross then that would have made it not only the highest-grossing film of the year, but one of the highest-grossing films of the silent era, and if that is the case it would be unusual for both \"International Motion Picture Almanac\" and \"Variety\" to omit it from their lists. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;SSIt is not clear if the figure for \"Sunny Side Up\" is for North America or worldwide. Other sources put its earnings at $2\u00a0million, which may suggest the higher figure is the worldwide rental, given the confusion over international figures during this period. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;ONThe figure for \"It Happened One Night\" is not truly representative of its success: it was distributed as a package deal along with more than two dozen other Columbia films, and the total earnings were averaged out; the true gross would have been much higher. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;S7\"Snow White\"'s $418\u00a0million global cume omits earnings outside of North America from 1987 onwards. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;GWIt is not absolutely clear how much \"Gone with the Wind\" earned from its initial release. Contemporary accounts often list it as earning $32\u00a0million in North American rentals and retrospective charts have often duplicated this claim; however, it is likely this was the worldwide rental figure. Trade journals would collate the data by either obtaining it from the distributors themselves, who were keen to promote a successful film, or by surveying theaters and constructing an estimate. Distributors would often report the worldwide rental since the higher figure made the film appear more successful, while estimates were limited to performance in North America; therefore it was not unusual for worldwide and North American rentals to be mixed up. Following the outbreak of World War II, many of the foreign markets were unavailable to Hollywood so it became standard practice to just report on North American box-office performance. In keeping with this new approach, the North American rental for \"Gone with the Wind\" was revised to $21\u00a0million in 1947 ($11\u00a0million lower than the previous figure), and as of 1953\u2014following the 1947 re-release\u2014\"Variety\" was reporting earnings of $26\u00a0million. Through 1956, MGM reported cumulative North American earnings of $30,015,000 and foreign earnings of $18,964,000, from three releases. Worldwide rentals of $32\u00a0million from the initial release is consistent with the revised figures and later reported worldwide figures: they indicate that the film earned $21\u00a0million in North America and $11\u00a0million overseas from the initial release, and added a further $9\u00a0million in North America and $8\u00a0million overseas from subsequent re-releases up to 1956. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;MD\"Mom and Dad\" does not generally feature in 'high-gross' lists such as those published by \"Variety\" due to its independent distribution. Essentially belonging to the exploitation genre, it was marketed as an educational sex hygiene film in an effort to circumvent censorship laws. Falling foul of the Motion Picture Production Code, \"Mom and Dad\" was prevented from obtaining mainstream distribution and restricted to independent and drive-in theaters. It was the biggest hit of its kind, and remained in continual distribution until the 1970s when hardcore pornography eventually took over. At the end of 1947 it had earned $2\u00a0million, and by 1949, $8\u00a0million; by 1956 it had earned $22\u00a0million in rentals, representing a gross of $80\u00a0million, and would have easily placed in the top ten films in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Estimates of its total earnings are as high as $100\u00a0million. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;UNChopra-Gant stipulates that the figure given for \"Unconquered\" is for North American box-office, but as was common at the time, the chart confuses worldwide and North American grosses. Other sources state that the takings for \"Forever Amber\" ($8\u00a0million) and \"Life with Father\" ($6.5\u00a0million) were in fact worldwide rental grosses, so it is possible this is also true of \"Unconquered\". \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;CIThe Cinerama figures represent gross amounts. Since the Cinerama corporation owned the theaters there were no rental fees for the films, meaning the studio received 100% of the box-office gross, unlike the case with most other films where the distributor typically receives less than half the gross. Since \"Variety\" at the time ranked films by their U.S. and Canadian rental, they constructed a hypothetical rental figure for the Cinerama films to provide a basis for comparison to other films in their chart: in the case of \"This Is Cinerama\", the $50\u00a0million worldwide gross was reconfigured as a $12.5\u00a0million U.S. rental gross; this is exactly 25% of the amount reported by Cinerama, so \"Variety\"'s formula seemingly halved the gross to obtain an estimate for the U.S. share, and halved it again to simulate a rental fee. All five Cinerama features collectively generated $120\u00a0million in worldwide box office receipts. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;GS\"Variety\" put the worldwide rental for \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" at around $18.35\u00a0million (with $12.8\u00a0million coming from the United States) a year after its release; however, Birchard puts its earnings at just over $15\u00a0million up to 1962. It is likely that Birchard's figure is just the North American gross rental, and includes revenue from the 1954 and 1960 reissues. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;SWThe \"first run\" \"Star Wars\" grosses do not include revenue from the 1997 special-edition releases; however, the figure does include revenue from the re-releases prior to the special editions. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;HP1The \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" reissue totals recorded by Box Office Mojo for Brazil (2020), Italy (2021), Netherlands (2021) and South Korea (2021) have been deducted from the lifetime gross due to Box Office Mojo double-counting the original release grosses in those countries. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;HP8Production costs were shared with \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows\u00a0\u2013 Part 1\". \nTimeline of highest-grossing films.\nAt least eleven films have held the record of 'highest-grossing film' since \"The Birth of a Nation\" assumed the top spot in 1915. Both \"The Birth of a Nation\" and \"Gone with the Wind\" spent twenty-five consecutive years apiece as the highest-grosser, with films directed by Steven Spielberg and James Cameron holding the record on three occasions each. Spielberg became the first director to break his own record when \"Jurassic Park\" overtook \"E.T.\", and Cameron emulated the feat when \"Avatar\" broke the record set by \"Titanic\". When it took over the top spot in 2019, \"Avengers: Endgame\" became the first sequel to hold the record of highest-grossing film, and in doing so interrupted thirty-six years of Spielberg/Cameron dominance before \"Avatar\" reclaimed the top spot two years later in 2021 upon a re-release.\nSome sources claim that \"The Big Parade\" superseded \"The Birth of a Nation\" as highest-grossing film, eventually being replaced by \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\", which in turn was quickly usurped by \"Gone with the Wind\". Exact figures are not known for \"The Birth of a Nation\", but contemporary records put its worldwide earnings at $5.2\u00a0million as of 1919. Its international release was delayed by World War I, and it was not released in many foreign territories until the 1920s; coupled with further re-releases in the United States, its $10\u00a0million earnings as reported by \"Variety\" in 1932 are consistent with the earlier figure. At this time, \"Variety\" still had \"The Birth of a Nation\" ahead of \"The Big Parade\" ($6,400,000) on distributor rentals and\u2014if its estimate is correct\u2014\"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" ($8,500,000) would not have earned enough on its first theatrical run to take the record; although it would have been the highest-grossing 'talkie', displacing \"The Singing Fool\" ($5,900,000). Although received wisdom holds that it is unlikely \"The Birth of a Nation\" was ever overtaken by a silent-era film, the record would fall to 1925's \"Ben-Hur\" ($9,386,000) if \"The Birth of a Nation\" earned significantly less than its estimated gross. In addition to its gross rental earnings through public exhibition, \"The Birth of a Nation\" played at a large number of private, club and organizational engagements which figures are unavailable for. It was hugely popular with the Ku Klux Klan who used it to drive recruitment, and at one point \"Variety\" estimated its total earnings to stand at around $50\u00a0million. Despite later retracting the claim, the sum has been widely reported even though it has never been substantiated. While it is generally accepted that \"Gone with the Wind\" took over the record of highest-grossing film on its initial release\u2014which is true in terms of public exhibition\u2014it is likely it did not overtake \"The Birth of a Nation\" in total revenue until a much later date, with it still being reported as the highest earner up until the 1960s. \"Gone with the Wind\" itself may have been briefly overtaken by \"The Ten Commandments\" (1956), which closed at the end of 1960 with worldwide rentals of $58\u201360\u00a0million compared to \"Gone with the Wind\"'s $59\u00a0million; if it did claim the top spot its tenure there was short-lived, since \"Gone with the Wind\" was re-released the following year and increased its earnings to $67\u00a0million. Depending on how accurate the estimates are, the 1959 remake of \"Ben-Hur\" may also have captured the record from \"Gone with the Wind\": as of the end of 1961 it had earned $47\u00a0million worldwide, and by 1963 it was trailing \"Gone with the Wind\" by just $2\u00a0million with international takings of $65\u00a0million, ultimately earning $66\u00a0million from its initial release.\nAnother film purported to have been the highest-grosser is the 1972 pornographic film \"Deep Throat\". In 1984, Linda Lovelace testified to a United States Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on juvenile justice that the film had earned $600\u00a0million; this figure has been the subject of much speculation, since if it is accurate then the film would have made more money than \"Star Wars\", and finished the 1970s as the highest-grossing film. The main argument against this figure is that it simply did not have a wide enough release to sustain the sort of sums that would be required for it to ultimately gross this amount. Exact figures are not known, but testimony in a federal trial in 1976\u2014about four years into the film's release\u2014showed the film had grossed over $25\u00a0million. Roger Ebert has reasoned it possibly did earn as much as $600\u00a0million on paper, since mobsters owned most of the adult movie theaters during this period and would launder income from drugs and prostitution through them, so probably inflated the box-office receipts for the film.\n\"The Birth of a Nation\", \"Gone with the Wind\", \"The Godfather\", \"Jaws\", \"Star Wars\", \"E.T.\", and \"Avatar\" all increased their record grosses with re-releases. The grosses from their original theatrical runs are included here along with totals from re-releases up to the point that they lost the record; therefore the total for \"The Birth of a Nation\" includes income from its reissues up to 1940; the total for \"Star Wars\" includes revenue from the late 1970s and early 1980s reissues but not from the 1997 Special Edition; the total for \"E.T.\" incorporates its gross from the 1985 reissue but not from 2002. The total for \"Avatar\"'s first appearance on the chart includes revenue from the 2010 Special Edition, which represents all of its earnings up to the point it relinquished the record, whereas its second appearance also incorporates revenue from a 2020 re-release in the Asia-Pacific region as well as the 2021 re-release in China which helped it to reclaim the record. \"Gone with the Wind\" is likewise represented twice on the chart: the 1940 entry includes earnings from its staggered 1939\u20131942 release (roadshow/\u200bgeneral release/\u200bsecond-run) along with all of its revenue up to the 1961 reissue prior to losing the record to \"The Sound of Music\" in 1966; its 1971 entry\u2014after it took back the record\u2014includes income from the 1967 and 1971 reissues but omitting later releases. \"The Godfather\" was re-released in 1973 after its success at the 45th Academy Awards, and \"Jaws\" was released again in 1976, and their grosses here most likely include earnings from those releases. \"The Sound of Music\", \"The Godfather\", \"Jaws\", \"Jurassic Park\", and \"Titanic\" have all increased their earnings with further releases, but they are not included in the totals here because they had already conceded the record prior to being re-released.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;RDistributor rental. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;\u2021Includes revenue from re-releases. If a film increased its gross through re-releases while holding the record, the year in which it recorded its highest gross is also noted in italics. \nHighest-grossing franchises and film series.\nPrior to 2000, only seven film series had grossed over $1\u00a0billion at the box office: \"James Bond\", \"Star Wars\", \"Indiana Jones\", \"Rocky\", \"Batman\", \"Jurassic Park\", and \"Star Trek\". Since the turn of the century, that number has increased to over a hundred. This is partly due to inflation and market growth, but it is also due to Hollywood's adoption of the franchise model: films that have built-in brand recognition such as being based on a well-known literary source or an established character. The methodology is based on the concept that films associated with things audiences are already familiar with can be more effectively marketed to them, and as such are known as \"pre-sold\" films within the industry.\nA franchise is typically defined to be at least two works derived from a common intellectual property. Traditionally, the work has a tautological relationship with the property, but this is not a prerequisite. An enduring staple of the franchise model is the concept of the \"crossover\", which can be defined as \"a story in which characters or concepts from two or more discrete texts or series of texts meet\". A consequence of a crossover is that an intellectual property may be utilized by more than one franchise. For example, \"\" belongs to not only the Batman and Superman franchises, but also to the DC Extended Universe, which is a \"shared universe\". A shared universe is a particular type of crossover where a number of characters from a wide range of fictional works wind up sharing a fictional world. The most successful shared universe in the medium of film is the Marvel Cinematic Universe, a crossover between multiple superhero properties owned by Marvel Comics. The Marvel Cinematic Universe is also the highest-grossing franchise, amassing over $32\u00a0billion at the box office.\nThe \"Spider-Man\" films are the highest-grossing series based on a single property, earning over $11\u00a0billion at the box office (although the Eon \"James Bond\" films have earned over $19\u00a0billion in total when adjusted to current prices). The Marvel Cinematic Universe has had the most films gross over $1\u00a0billion, with eleven. The four \"Avengers\" films, the two \"Frozen\" films, and the two \"Avatar\" films are the only franchises where each installment has grossed over $1\u00a0billion, although the \"Black Panther\" and \"Inside Out\" series and the \"Fengshen Cinematic Universe\" have averaged over $1\u00a0billion per film.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\"Background shading indicates that at least one film in the series is playing in the week commencing in theaters around the world\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;SShared universes for which some properties also have their own entries. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;*Canada and U.S. gross only. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;RDistributor rental. \n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBox office sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFranchise and series sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59893", "revid": "31696229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59893", "title": "1950 FIFA World Cup", "text": "Association football tournament in Brazil\nInternational football competition\nThe 1950 FIFA World Cup was the 4th edition of the FIFA World Cup, the quadrennial international football championship for senior men's national teams. It was held in Brazil from 24 June to 16 July 1950. It was the first World Cup tournament in over twelve years, as the 1942 and 1946 World Cups were cancelled due to World War II. Italy, the two-time defending champions, were eliminated in the first round for the first time in history. Uruguay, who had won the inaugural competition in 1930, defeated the host nation, Brazil, in the deciding match of the four-team group of the final round, causing what is sometimes known as one of the biggest upsets in sports history, occasionally called the Maracana\u00e7o. This was the only tournament not decided by a one-match final. It was also the inaugural tournament where the trophy was referred to as the Jules Rimet Cup, to mark the 25th anniversary of Jules Rimet's presidency of FIFA.\nHost selection.\nBecause of World War II, the World Cup had not been staged since 1938; the planned World Cups of 1942 and 1946 were both cancelled. After the war, FIFA were keen to resurrect the competition as soon as possible, and they began making plans for a World Cup tournament to take place. In the aftermath of the war, much of Europe lay in ruins. As a result, FIFA had difficulties finding a country interested in hosting the event, since many governments believed that their scarce resources ought to be devoted to more urgent priorities than a sporting tournament.\nThe World Cup was at risk of not being held for sheer lack of interest from the international community, until Brazil presented a bid at the 1946 FIFA Congress, offering to host the event on condition that the tournament take place in 1950 rather than the originally proposed year of 1949. Brazil and Germany had been the leading bidders to host the cancelled 1942 World Cup; since both the 1934 and 1938 tournaments had been held in Europe, football historians generally agree that the 1942 event would most likely have been awarded to a South American host country. Brazil's new bid was very similar to the mooted 1942 bid and was quickly accepted.\nQualification.\nHaving secured a host nation, FIFA would dedicate some time to persuading countries to send their national teams to compete.\nItaly was of particular interest as the long-standing defending champions, having won the two previous tournaments in 1934 and 1938; however, Italy's national team was weakened severely as most of its starting line-up perished in the Superga air disaster one year before the start of the tournament. The Italians were eventually persuaded to attend, and travelled by boat rather than by plane.\nBrazil (the host country) and Italy (the defending champion) qualified automatically, leaving 14 places remaining. Of these, seven were allocated to Europe, six to the Americas, and one to Asia.\nFormer Axis powers.\nBoth Germany (still occupied and partitioned) and Japan (still occupied) were unable to participate. The Japan Football Association (suspended for failure to pay dues in 1945) and the German Football Association (disbanded in 1945 and reorganised in January 1950) were not readmitted to FIFA until September 1950, while the Deutscher Fu\u00dfball-Verband der DDR in East Germany was not admitted to FIFA until 1952. The French-occupied Saarland had been accepted by FIFA two weeks before the World Cup.\nUnited Kingdom nations.\nThe Home Nations were invited to take part, having rejoined FIFA four years earlier, after 17 years of self-imposed exile. It was decided to use the 1949\u201350 British Home Championship as a qualifying group, with the top two teams qualifying. England finished first and Scotland second.\nTeams refusing to participate.\nA number of teams refused to participate in the qualifying tournament, including most nations behind the Iron Curtain, such as the Soviet Union, 1934 finalists Czechoslovakia, and 1938 finalists Hungary. Ultimately, Yugoslavia was the only Eastern European nation to take part in the tournament.\nWithdrawals during qualification.\nArgentina, Ecuador, and Peru in South America withdrew after the qualifying draw, in Argentina's case because of a dispute with the Brazilian Football Confederation. This meant that Chile, Bolivia, Paraguay, and Uruguay qualified from South America by default. In Asia, the Philippines, Indonesia, and Burma all withdrew, leaving India to qualify by default. In Europe, Austria withdrew, claiming its team was too inexperienced. Belgium also withdrew from the qualification tournament. These withdrawals meant that Switzerland and Turkey qualified without having to play their final round of matches.\nQualified teams and withdrawals after qualification.\nThe following 16 teams originally qualified for the final tournament:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBefore the qualification competition, George Graham, chairman of the Scottish Football Association (SFA), had said that Scotland would only travel to Brazil as winners of the Home Championship (England, by contrast, had committed to attending, even if they finished in second place). After Scotland ended up in second place behind England, the Scottish captain George Young, encouraged by England captain Billy Wright, pleaded with the SFA to change its mind and accept the place in Brazil; however, Graham refused to change his position and so Scotland withdrew from the tournament.\nTurkey also withdrew, citing financial conditions that included the cost of travelling to South America. FIFA invited Portugal, Republic of Ireland and France, who had been eliminated in qualifying, to fill the gaps left by Scotland and Turkey. Portugal and Republic of Ireland refused, but France initially accepted and was entered into the draw.\nDraw and withdrawals after the draw.\nThe draw, held in Rio on 22 May 1950, allocated the fifteen remaining teams into four groups:\nAfter the draw, the Indian football association, All India Football Federation (AIFF) decided against going to the World Cup, citing travel costs (although FIFA had agreed to bear a major part of the travel expenses), lack of practice time, team selection issues, and valuing the Olympics over the FIFA World Cup. Although FIFA had imposed a rule banning barefoot play following the 1948 Summer Olympics, where India had played barefoot, the Indian captain at the time, Sailen Manna, claimed that this was not part of the AIFF's decision. According to Indian sports journalist Jaydeep Basu, India did not participate because the AIFF did not have confidence in its players.\nFrance also withdrew, citing the amount of travel that would be required between the venues of the Group 4 matches. There was not enough time to invite further replacement teams or to reorganise the groups, so the tournament featured only thirteen teams, with just three nations in Group 3 and two nations in Group 4. France's withdrawal, coupled with Belgium's before qualifying and Romania's elimination, meant that Brazil had become the only team to have played in every World Cup from its inauguration in 1930 to date, a mark that has persisted to the present day.\nOf the thirteen teams that competed, only one, England, was making its debut. Several of the teams from the Americas teams were competing for the first time since the inaugural 1930 tournament \u2013 this included Uruguay, as well as Mexico, Chile, Paraguay, and Bolivia. Yugoslavia was also making its first appearance since 1930. Spain and the United States qualified for the first time since 1934.\nFormat.\nA new playing format was proposed by the Brazilian organisers of the tournament to maximise matches and ticket sales since the stadium and infrastructure were so costly. The 13 teams were divided into four first-round groups (or \"pools\" as they were then called) of four teams, with the winner of each group advancing to a final group stage, playing in round-robin format to determine the cup winner. A straight knockout tournament, as had been used in 1934 and 1938, would have featured only sixteen games (including the third-place playoff), while the proposed two rounds of the group format would guarantee thirty games, and thus more ticket revenue. In addition, this format would guarantee each team at least three games, and thus provide more incentive for European teams to make the journey to South America and compete. FIFA originally resisted this proposal, but reconsidered when Brazil threatened to back out of hosting the tournament if this format was not used.\nIn each group, teams were awarded 2 points for a win and 1 point for a draw. Had there been a tie on points for first place in a group, a playoff would have been held to determine the group winner.\nThe entire tournament was arranged in such a way that the four first-round groups had no geographical basis. Hence, several teams were obliged to cover large distances to complete their programme, although Brazil was allowed to play two of its three group matches in Rio de Janeiro while its other group game was held in the relatively nearby city of S\u00e3o Paulo.\nSummary.\nA combined Great Britain team had recently beaten the rest of Europe 6\u20131 in an exhibition match and England went into the competition as one of the favourites; however, they went crashing out after a shock 1\u20130 defeat by the United States and a 1\u20130 defeat by Spain. Italy, the defending champions, lost their unbeaten record at the World Cup finals with a 3\u20132 defeat by Sweden in its opening match and failed to progress to the second round.\nThe final match in Group 1 between Switzerland and Mexico was the second time a national team did not play in their own kit, the first being 1934 match between Austria and Germany when both teams arrived with white kits, and the Austrians borrowed blue kits from club side Napoli. Both teams arrived with only their red kits, so the Brazilian Football Confederation tossed a coin, with Mexico thus earning the right to play in their own kit, a right they waived as a friendly gesture, allowing the Swiss to wear their own kit while Mexico changed. The local team that lent their shirts was Esporte Clube Cruzeiro from Porto Alegre. The shirts had vertical blue and white stripes.\nThe final group stage involved the teams that had won their groups: Brazil, Spain, Sweden and 1930 FIFA World Cup champions Uruguay, who were making their first World Cup appearance since winning the inaugural tournament. The World Cup winner would be the team that finished on top of this group. The final group's six matches were shared between Rio de Janeiro and S\u00e3o Paulo. Brazil played all its final group matches at the Est\u00e1dio do Maracan\u00e3 in Rio while the games that did not involve the host nation were played in S\u00e3o Paulo.\nBrazil won their first two matches with a 7\u20131 thrashing of Sweden and 6\u20131 rout of Spain, putting them on top of the group with one game left to play against Uruguay; in second and only a point behind. Brazil had scored 23 goals in the tournament and only conceded four, and so were strong favourites. The two teams had played three matches against each other in the Copa R\u00edo Branco, played in Brazil two months previously, with one match won by Uruguay 4\u20133 and two by Brazil (2\u20131 and 1\u20130), who won the tournament. Thus the difference in quality between the teams was not excessive; unlike Spain and Sweden the Uruguayans were used to the challenges in the big South American stadiums.\nOn 16 July, before a huge home crowd of 199,954 (some estimated as 205,000) in the Est\u00e1dio do Maracan\u00e3, the host nation only had to draw against Uruguay and the trophy would be theirs. After such crushing victories over Spain and Sweden, it looked certain they would take the title, and the home nation duly went ahead in the second minute of the second half, thanks to a goal from Fria\u00e7a. However, Uruguay equalised and then, with just over 11\u00a0minutes left to play, went ahead 2\u20131 when Alcides Ghiggia squeaked a goal past Moacyr Barbosa, so Uruguay was crowned World Cup champions for a second time. This stunning defeat surprised Brazil to the point of shock and is known as the \"Maracanazo\" (\"Maracan\u00e3 blow\"). Barbosa was blamed for the defeat, for which he suffered for the rest of his life as the match became part of Brazilian Tragedy. In 2000, shortly before his death, he said in an interview:\"The maximum punishment in Brazil is 30 years' imprisonment, but I have been paying, for something I am not even responsible for, by now, for 50 years.\"The average attendance of nearly 61,000 per game, aided greatly by eight matches (including five featuring hosts Brazil) held in the newly built Maracan\u00e3, set a record that would not be broken until 1994. Not counting the Maracan\u00e3 matches, the average attendance was a still-impressive 37,500; however, the only venues that saw crowds comparable to or greater than those in recent World Cups were the Maracan\u00e3 and S\u00e3o Paulo. Other venues saw considerably smaller crowds.\nAntonio Carbajal from Mexico was the last living player from this World Cup, he died in 2023.\nVenues.\nSix venues in six cities around Brazil hosted the 22 matches played for this tournament. The Maracan\u00e3 in the then-capital of Rio de Janeiro hosted eight matches, including all but one of the host's matches, including the \"Maracanazo\" match in the second round-robin group that decided the winners of the tournament. The Pacaembu stadium in S\u00e3o Paulo hosted six matches; these two stadiums in S\u00e3o Paulo and Rio were the only venues that hosted the second round-robin matches. The Est\u00e1dio Independ\u00eancia in Belo Horizonte hosted three matches, the Durival de Britto stadium in Curitiba and the Eucaliptos stadium in Porto Alegre each hosted two matches, and the Ilha do Retiro stadium in far-away Recife only hosted one match. In order to present itself as a modern country, Brazil invested a today's equivalent of 290 million US-Dollars into new stadiums. The newly built Maracan\u00e3 cost around 275 million US-Dollars alone.\nMatch officials.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGroup stage.\nGroup 3.\n\u00a0India was also drawn into this group, but withdrew before playing.\nGroup 4.\n\u00a0France was also drawn into this group, but withdrew before playing.\nGoalscorers.\nWith nine goals, Brazil's Ademir was the tournament's top scorer. In total, 88 goals were scored by 47 players.\nAlcides Ghiggia of Uruguay became the second player ever to score in every game: Gy\u00f6rgy S\u00e1rosi of Hungary was the first who scored at least one goal at his every World Cup appearance (1934: 1 match/1 goal, 1938: 4 matches/5 goals), Just Fontaine would be the third in 1958 and Jairzinho the fourth (and, as of 2025, the last) in 1970.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFIFA retrospective ranking.\nIn 1986, FIFA published a report that ranked all teams in each World Cup up to and including 1986, based on progress in the competition, overall results and quality of the opposition. The rankings for the 1950 tournament were as follows:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59895", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59895", "title": "Pathogens", "text": ""}
{"id": "59896", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59896", "title": "Willie Davenport", "text": "American athlete and bobsledder (1943\u20132002)\nWilliam \"Willie\" D. Davenport (June 8, 1943 \u2013 June 17, 2002) was an American sprint runner.\nBiography.\nHe attended Howland High School and college at Southern University and A&amp;M College in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.\nDavenport took part in his first Olympics in 1964, but injured his thigh and was eliminated in the semifinals. He competed in the 110 m hurdles at the 1964, 1968, 1972 and 1976 Summer Olympics, winning a gold medal in 1968 and a bronze in 1976, and finishing fourth in 1972. In 1980 he took part in the Winter Olympics as a runner for the American bobsleigh team. Because of the boycott, and the quirk of participating in the Winter Olympics, he was the only U.S. track and field athlete to participate in the 1980 Olympics. In Mexico City in 1968, he reached the final and won, later saying, \"From the first step, the gun, I knew I had won the race.\" In 1972 he finished fourth, and in his third consecutive Olympic 110 m hurdles final, in 1976, he won a bronze medal.\nDavenport was a member of the Southern Jaguars football team in college, and immediately departed the 1968 Olympics after winning the gold to join the team for the final games. He was drafted by the New Orleans Saints as a wide receiver in the sixth round (138th overall) of the 1969 NFL/AFL draft, but a misunderstanding about his college eligibility prompted the Saints to withdraw the selection. When it turned out he was allowed to play, the San Diego Chargers picked him in the 16th round (408th overall) but he and the team could not agree to a contract. The Saints drafted him again in 1970 in the 12th round (296th overall) as a defensive back, though he did not join them either.\nAt his last Olympics in 1980, Davenport was a bobsleigh runner, ending up 12th in the four-man competition. Davenport's other achievements include five national championships in the 60 yard hurdles indoor event. By participating in the 1980 bobsleigh competition, he became one of the first two African Americans to compete in the bobsled in the Winter Olympics. Jeff Gadley, a decathlete from State University of New York at Plattsburgh, competed internationally in the four-man bobsled for the US the year before the Lake Placid Olympics, then Davenport joined Gadley's team right before the 1980 Olympics. Davenport drew much media attention, but was not the first.\nIn 1985, Davenport competed at the Masters Outdoor World Championship in Rome.\nDavenport died of a heart attack at age 59 at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport on June 17, 2002. He was a U.S. Army private at the time of his first Olympic participation and a colonel in the United States Army National Guard at the time of his death.\nLegacy.\nIn 1977 he was inducted into the Mt. SAC Relays Hall of Fame, and in 1982 into the National Track and Field Hall of Fame.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59897", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59897", "title": "Mamo Wolde", "text": "Ethiopian marathon runner (1932\u20132002)\nDegaga \"Mamo\" Wolde (; 12 June 1932 \u2013 26 May 2002) was an Ethiopian long-distance runner who competed in track, cross-country, and road running events. He was the winner of the marathon at the 1968 Summer Olympics.\nEarly life.\nDegaga was born on 12 June 1932 in Ada'a to an Oromo family. His younger brother, Demissie Wolde (b. 8 March 1937), also became an international distance running star.\nIn 1951, Degaga moved to Addis Ababa.\nAthletics career.\nAt his first Olympic appearance in 1956, Degaga competed in the 800 m, 1,500 m and the 4x400 relay.\nHe did not compete in the 1960 Summer Olympics, when Abebe Bikila became the first Ethiopian to win a gold medal. Degaga claimed his absence was due to the government's desire to send him on a peacekeeping mission to the Congo during the Congo Crisis. According to him, in the government's ensuing conflict with the Ethiopian Olympic Committee, who wanted him to compete, he did not get sent to either event. However, athlete Said Moussa Osman, who represented Ethiopia in the 800 m at the 1960 Olympics, stated that Degaga lost at the trials and did not make it to the team.\nBeginning in the 1960s, Degaga's focus changed from middle distance races to long distances. He made Ethiopia's first mark at international cross-country races when he took the International Juan Muguerza in Elgoibar, Spain, winning in 1963 and 1964, and at the Cross de San Donostin in San Sebastian, Spain, in the same years. He placed fourth in the 10,000 m at the 1964 Summer Olympics, which was won by Billy Mills of the United States in one of the biggest upsets in the history of Olympic competition. Demissie also became a marathon runner.\nBoth brothers competed in Tokyo, in the 1964 Olympic marathon. On 3 August 1964, in the Ethiopian Olympic trials, a race held at 8,000 feet, Degaga qualified by running 2:16:19.2, just 4/10ths of a second behind Abebe Bikela, with Demissie finishing 2:19:30, for 3rd place. Although Degaga dropped out early, Demessie, after being among the leaders for much of the 1964 Olympic race, finished tenth in 2:21:25.2. On 21 April 1965, as part of the opening ceremonies for the second season of the 1964/1965 New York World's Fair, Abebe and Degaga participated in an exclusive ceremonial half marathon. They ran from the Arsenal in Central Park at 64th Street &amp; Fifth Avenue in Manhattan to the Singer Bowl at the fair. They carried with them a parchment scroll with greetings from Haile Selassie. In 1967, he repeated his wins in San Sebastian and Elgiobar, and won again at the latter event in 1968.\nIn the 1968 Summer Olympics, Degaga became the second Ethiopian to win gold in the marathon. Earlier in the same Olympics, he had won the silver medal in the 10,000 m. At the age of 40, Degaga won his third Olympic medal placing third in 2:15:08 at the 1972 Olympic marathon, while Demissie placed 18th in 2:20:44.0. Degaga also won the marathon race in the 1973 All-Africa Games. He blamed his Olympic third place showing in 1972 on ill-fitting shoes forced on him by Ethiopian officials. He became only the second person in Olympic history (Bikila was the first) to medal in successive Olympic marathons. Both medalists who finished ahead of Degaga, Frank Shorter from the U.S.A., and Belgium's Karel Lismont would repeat Degaga's feat in 1976 as they finished second and third behind East Germany's Waldemar Cierpinski. Cierpinski repeated his win in 1980. Since Cierpnski, Erick Wainaina finished third in Atlanta in 1996 and second in Sydney in 2000, and Eliud Kipchoge won in Rio in 2016 and in Tokyo in 2021. Degaga also won the marathon race in the 1973 All-Africa Games.\nMilitary career.\nIn 1951, Degaga joined the Imperial Guard. He later served as a peacekeeper in Korea from 1953 to 1955.\nArrest.\nIn 1993, Degaga was arrested on the accusation that he participated in a Red Terror execution during the regime of the dictator Mengistu Haile Mariam. He argued that although he was present at the killing, he was not a direct participant. The IOC campaigned the Ethiopian government for his release. In early 2002 he was convicted and sentenced to six years of imprisonment. Therefore, he was released because he had spent nine years in detention already waiting for his trial.\nDeath.\nOn 26 May 2002, Degaga died of liver cancer at age 69, just a few months after his release. He had been married twice and had three children; a son, Samuel, with his first wife, and two children, Addis Alem and Tabor, with his second wife. Degaga is interred in Saint Joseph's Church Cemetery in Addis Ababa.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59898", "revid": "506179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59898", "title": "Carbondale", "text": "Carbondale may refer to:\nPlaces.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "59899", "revid": "47650571", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59899", "title": "Chatham, Kent", "text": "Town in Kent, England\nChatham ( ) is a town within the Medway unitary authority in the ceremonial county of Kent, England. The town forms a conurbation with neighbouring towns Gillingham, Rochester, Strood and Rainham. In 2020 it had a population of 80,596.\nThe town developed around Chatham Dockyard and several barracks for the British Army and the Royal Navy, together with 19th-century forts which provided a defensive shield for Chatham Dockyard. The Corps of Royal Engineers is still based in Chatham at Brompton Barracks.\nChatham Dockyard closed on 31 March 1984, but the remaining naval buildings are an attraction for a flourishing tourist industry. Following closure, part of the site was developed as a commercial port, other parts were redeveloped for business and residential use, and part was used as the Chatham Historic Dockyard museum. Its attractions include the submarine .\nThe town benefits from key transport connections, with Chatham Waterfront bus station and Chatham railway station serving as the main interchanges for the area. It is the administrative headquarters of Medway Council. which is a Unitary Authority, as well as its principal retail and shopping location.\nToponymy.\nThe name \"Chatham\" is first attested in a charter of 880 (surviving in a twelfth-century manuscript); it appears again in a charter of 975 as \"C\u00e6tham\", and in the Domesday Book of 1086 as \"Ceteham\". The first element of the name comes from the Common Brittonic word that survives in modern Welsh as (\"woodland\"). The second element is the Old English word (\"settlement\"). At the point when the current name was coined, then, it meant \"settlement at Chat\". The Old English term for the settlement's inhabitants is also reconstructable from a twelfth-century copy of a charter of 995, as *.\nHistory.\nThe A2 road passes by Chatham along the line of the ancient Celtic route which the Druids used for ceremonial purposes. It was paved by the Romans, and named Watling Street by the Anglo-Saxons. Among certain archaeological finds here have been the remains of a Roman-era cemetery.\nChatham was a long, small village on the banks of the River Medway. By the 16th century, warships were being moored at Jillingham Water (Gillingham), because of its strategic sheltered location between London and the European continent. It was established as a Royal Dockyard by Queen Elizabeth I in 1568, and most of Chatham Dockyard lies within Gillingham. Initially a refitting base, it became a shipbuilding yard; from then until the late 19th century, further expansion of the yard took place. In its time, many thousands of personnel in the Royal Navy were employed at Chatham Dockyard, and many hundreds of vessels were launched there, including \"HMS Victory,\" which was constructed from 23 July 1759 to 30 April 1762. After World War I ended on 11 November 1918 numerous submarines were also built in Chatham Dockyard.\nIn addition to Chatham Dockyard, defensive fortifications were built to protect it from attack. Upnor Castle had been built in 1567, but had proved ineffectual; the Dutch raid on the Medway from 19 June 1667 to 24 June 1667, during the Second Anglo-Dutch War, showed that more defences were required along the banks of the River Medway. The fortifications, which became more elaborate as the threat of invasion grew, were begun during 18 October 1756 as a complex across the neck of the Medway Peninsula formed by the bend in the River Medway, and included Fort Amherst. The threat of a land-based attack from the south during the 19th century led to the construction of more Napoleonic Forts.\nThe second phase of fortress-building happened from September 1806 to February 1819, and included Fort Pitt (later used as a hospital and the site of the initial Army Medical School). The 1859 Royal Commission on the Defence of the United Kingdom ordered, \"Inter Alia\" (\"Among Other Things\"), a third outer ring of Napoleonic Forts: these included Fort Luton, Fort Bridgewoods, and Fort Borstal.\nThese fortifications required military personnel to man them and Army Barracks to house those men. These included Kitchener Barracks (c 1750-80), the Royal Marine Barracks (c 1780), Brompton Artillery Barracks (1806) and Melville Barracks (opened 1820 as a Naval Hospital, RM Barracks from 1905). HMS Collingwood and HMS Pembroke were both Naval Barracks.\nIn response to the huge manpower needs, the village of Chatham and other nearby villages and towns grew commensurately. Trams, and later buses, linked those places to bring in the workforce. The area between the High Street and Luton village illustrates part of that growth, with its many streets of Victorian terraces.\nThe importance of Chatham Dockyard gradually declined as the resources of the Royal Navy in the United Kingdom were reduced or moved to other locations, and eventually, on 31 March 1984, it shut. The buildings of Chatham Dockyard were preserved as the historic site Chatham Historic Dockyard (operated by Chatham Historic Dockyard Trust), which was under consideration as a World Heritage Site the site is being used for other purposes. Part of the St Mary's Island section is now used as a marina, and the remainder is being developed for housing, commercial and other uses, branded as \"Chatham Maritime\".\nGovernance.\nChatham lost its independence as a borough under the Local Government Act 1972, by which, on 1 April 1974, it became part of the Borough of Medway, a non-metropolitan district of the county of Kent; under subsequent renaming the borough became the Borough of Rochester-upon-Medway (1979); and, from 1982, the City of Rochester-upon-Medway. Under the most recent change, in 1998, and with the addition of the Borough of Gillingham, the Borough of Medway became a unitary authority area, administratively separate from Kent. It remains part of the county of Kent for ceremonial purposes.\nMedway Council has recently moved its main administration building to Gun Wharf, the site of the earliest part of the dockyard, a former Lloyd's office building. It was built between 1976 and 1978 and is Grade II listed.\nChatham is part of the parliamentary constituency of Chatham and Aylesford. Before 1997, Chatham had been included in the constituencies of Mid Kent, Rochester and Chatham and Chatham.\nChatham has proven to be a marginal parliamentary seat. Since 1945, the members of parliament for Chatham have been as follows:\nGeography.\nChatham is situated where the lower part of the dip slope of the North Downs meets the River Medway which at this point is flowing in a south\u2013north direction. This gives the right bank, where the town stands, considerable advantages from the point of view of river use. Compared with the opposite bank, the river is fast-flowing and deep. The town lies below at river level, curving round to occupy a south-easterly trending valley (The Brook), in which lies the High Street. Beyond the Chatham Dockyard was marshy land, now called St Mary's Island, and has several new developments of housing estates. The New Road crosses the scene below the vantage point of the illustration.\nThe valley continues southeastwards as the Luton Valley, in which is the erstwhile village of that name; and Capstone Valley. The \"Darland Banks\", the northern slopes of the Luton Valley above these valleys, are unimproved chalk grassland. The opposite slopes are the \u2018'Daisy Banks'\u2019 and \u2018'Coney Banks'\u2019, along which some of the defensive forts were built (including Fort Luton, in the trees to the left)\nUntil the start of the 20th century, most of the south part of the borough was entirely rural, with a number of farms and large tracts of woodland. The beginning of what is now Walderslade was when a speculative builder began to build the core of the village in \"Walderslade Bottoms\".\nDemography.\nChatham became a market town in its own right in the 19th century, and a municipal borough in 1890. By 1831 its population had reached more than 16,000. By 1961 it had reached 48,800.\nEconomy.\nThe closure of the Royal Navy Dockyard on 31 March 1984 had the effect of changing the employment statistics of the town. About 7,000 people lost their jobs. The unemployment rate went up to 23.5%. From early April 1984 to December 1985, and onwards, the Medway Towns began to have an increase in alcohol and drug-related, antisocial behaviour, which many residents then realized had largely been caused by the closure of the Royal Navy Dockyard on 31 March 1984, and the resulting mass redundancies. There has been a concerted effort to revitalise the Thames Gateway area and one of the largest employers in Chatham is now Vanquis Bank Ltd, a subsidiary of Vanquis Banking Group.\nLandmarks.\nThe Chatham Naval Memorial commemorates the 18,500 officers, ranks and ratings of the Royal Navy who were lost or buried at sea in World War I and World War II. The Chatham Naval Memorial was constructed from March 1924 to October 1924. The addition of the obelisk and Portland stone plaque walls and surroundings were constructed between June 1952 to October 1952. It stands on the Great Lines, the escarpment ridge between Chatham and Gillingham.\nThe Grade II listed building Chatham Town Hall was built in January 1900; it stands in The Brook opposite a former public house called Churchills, and is of a unique architectural design. With Chatham being part of the Medway Towns, it took on a new role as the Medway Arts Centre on 20 April 1987, with the promotional motto \"Putting The Arts Back into The Medway\". There were many events held within the Medway Arts Centre, including stage plays, craft fairs, snooker tournaments and party nights. Likewise during 12 May 1990, the Medway Arts Centre organised a large parade, composed of dancers, musicians, artists and sculptors, who stood upon theatrical lorry floats. The vehicles were initially parked up next to the entrance into the Theatre Royal Cafe, a popular restaurant in the Chatham Town Hall, on Whiffens Avenue, and then started to travel along Military Road in Chatham, and onward to Rochester, Strood and Frindsbury, where sweets, chocolate, posters, badges, plastic hats, leaflets, stickers and T-shirts were handed out to the crowds, to promote the Medway Arts Centre. On 28 April 1997, the Medway Arts Centre became The Brook Theatre. \nThe Pentagon Shopping Centre stands in Chatham Town Centre and serviced the Pentagon Bus Station that was closed on 30 September 2011. Chatham Waterfront bus station opened in October 2011. It replaced the previous Pentagon Bus Station in Chatham, which was opened during 16 October 1970, before the Pentagon Shopping Centre was opened on 30 June 1975, which by that time was considered an unwelcoming environment for passengers.\nTransport.\nThe Medway, apart from Chatham Dockyard, has always had an important role in communication: historically it provided a means for the transport of goods to and from the interior of Kent. Stone, timber and iron from the Weald for shipbuilding and agricultural produce were among the cargoes. Sun Pier in Chatham was one of many such along the river. By 1740, barges of forty tons could navigate as far upstream as Tonbridge. Today its use is confined to tourist traffic; apart from the marina, there are many yacht moorings on the river itself.\nThe position of the road network in Chatham began with the building of the Roman Road (Watling Street, which passed through the town. Turnpike trusts were established locally, so that the length from Chatham to Canterbury was turnpiked in 1730; and the Chatham to Maidstone Road (now the A230) was also turnpiked before 1750. The High Street was bypassed in 1769, by the \"New Road\" (see illustration (1)) leading from the top of Star Hill Rochester, to the bottom of Chatham Hill at Luton Arches. This also became inadequate for the London cross-channel traffic and the \"Medway Towns Bypass\", the M2 motorway, was constructed to divert through traffic south of the Medway Towns.\nChatham is the hub of the Medway Towns. This fact means that the existing roadway system has always proved inadequate for the amount of traffic it has to handle, and various schemes have been tried by Rochester-Upon-Medway City Council, to alleviate the congestion. The High Street itself is traffic free, so all traffic on Best Street and Railway Street has to skirt around it. The basic west\u2013east routes are The Brook to the north and New Road to the south, but the additional problems caused by the situation of the Pentagon Bus Station meant that conflicting traffic flows were the result, from 1975 and onward. From April 1986 and onward until October 1987, the town centre remodelling of Chatham began, and Railway Street was realigned into becoming part of an inner ring road, that became a one-way system. This redevelopment included the demolition of the House of Holland department store in January 1987, and the construction of the \"Sir John Hawkins Flyover\" in Chatham, that was opened in February 1989, so the traffic could be carried from south to north over the High Street.\nIn September 2006, the one-way system was abandoned and two-way traffic reintroduced on most of the ring-road system. Further work on the road system commenced early in 2009, and as of early 2010, the demolition of the \"Sir John Hawkins Flyover\" has been completed. It was replaced by a street-level, buses only, road coupled with repositioning of the bus station. The new Waterfront bus station opened in October 2011.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChatham railway station, opened in 1858, serves both the North Kent and the Chatham Main Lines, and is the interchange between the two lines. It lies in the valley between the Fort Pitt and the Chatham Tunnels. There are three trains an hour to London Victoria, two trains an hour to London Charing Cross, two trains an hour to Luton (via London Bridge, St Pancras and Luton Airport Parkway) and two services an hour to St Pancras via High Speed 1. The former services run to Dover and Ramsgate; the Charing Cross services terminate at Gillingham and the High Speed services terminate at Faversham.\nPart of the industrial railway in what is now Chatham Historic Dockyard is still in operation, run by the North Kent Industrial Locomotive Society for the Dockyard Trustees.\nBuses are operated by Arriva Southern Counties and Nu-Venture to various destinations. They serve other towns in Medway including Gillingham, Grain, Strood and Rochester and also to other towns in Kent including Maidstone, Gravesend, Blue Bell Hill and Sittingbourne. There is also an express bus via Strood and Rochester and A2 to Bluewater in Greenhithe.\nReligion.\nIn the 19th century the ecclesiastical parish of Chatham included Luton and Brompton and also Chatham Intra (land on the river that was administered by the City of Rochester). Chatham's parish church, St Marys, which stood on Dock Road, was rebuilt in 1788. St John's was a Waterloo church built in 1821 by Robert Smirke, and restructured in 1869 by Gordon Macdonald Hills; it ceased being an active church in 1964, and is currently used as an art project. St Paul's New Road was built in 1854; declared redundant in 1974, it has been demolished. St Peter's Troy Town was built in 1860. Christchurch Luton was built in 1843, replaced in 1884. The Royal Dockyard Church (1806) was declared redundant in 1981.\nSt Michael's is a Roman Catholic Church, that was built in 1863. There is a Unitarian Chapel built in 1861.\nChatham is reputed to be the home of the first Baptist Chapel in North Kent, the Zion Baptist Chapel in Clover Street. The first known pastor was Edward Morecock who settled there in 1663. During the time of Oliver Cromwell Edward Morecock had been a sea-captain and had been injured in battle. His knowledge of the River Medway is reputed to have preserved him from persecution in the reign of King Charles II. A second Baptist chapel was founded about 1702. The Ebenezer Chapel dates from 1662.\nhttp:// was built by Simon Magnus in 1867 on the Chatham end of Rochester High Street in Rochester.\nEducation.\nFor a full list of schools serving Chatham visit List of schools in Medway.\nSports.\nThe town's Association Football club, Chatham Town F.C., plays in the Premier Division of the Isthmian League having gained two successive promotions in the 21/22 and 22/23 seasons. Lordswood F.C. plays in the Southern Counties East Football League. The defunct Chatham Excelsior F.C. were one of the early pioneers of football in Southern England.\nFootball league side Gillingham F.C. are seen to represent Medway as a whole.\nHolcombe Hockey Club is one of the largest in the country, and are based in Chatham. The men's 1st XI are part of the England Hockey League.\nKite Flying is possible, especially power kiting on the Great Lines Heritage Park (between Gillingham and Chatham) and at Capstone Farm Country Park.\nSkiing is also possible near Capstone Farm Country Park at Capstone Ski Slope and Snowboard Centre.\nPopular culture.\nOn a cultural level, Chatham gave birth to several creative movements in literature, art and music. In the period from October 1977 until March 1982 the Medway Delta Sound emerged. The term was coined as a joke by the Chatham-born writer, painter and musician Billy Childish after the Medway Towns-based record label of Russell Wilkins, Empire Records, used the phrase \"From The Medway Delta\". Several bands of the Medway Delta Sound gained international recognition, including The Milkshakes, The Prisoners (see also James Taylor Quartet) and The Dentists.\nOut of the Kent Institute of Art &amp; Design (KIAD), now the University for the Creative Arts (UCA) came the band known as Wang Chung. The vocalist and guitarist with Wang Chung, Jeremy Allan Ryder, who is better known as Jack Hues attended KIAD, as he musically helped to evolve Wang Chung with Nick Feldman. Alongside such individuals was Alan John Denman, who became a well established lecturer at KIAD, and who founded The Flying Circuits in April 1984, which became an urban theatre movement in Chatham and Gillingham in the Medway Towns, and within suburbs like Woolwich, Plumstead, Bexley and Orpington in Greater London. Many students from KIAD played various acting roles within The Flying Circuits, in the Medway Towns and Greater London. The scenes performed by The Flying Circuits were entirely based upon excerpts from the Electronic Town, a screenplay written by Alan Denman from January 1984 to October 1984, which concerned a futuristic science fiction dystopia. Alan Denman also helped to form The Medway Poets with Billy Childish, Robert Earl, Bill Lewis, Sexton Ming and Charles Thomson. The Medway Poets met regularly at the York Tavern &amp; Railway Inn, in Ordnance Street, Chatham, from October 1974 to August 1985, near KIAD at Fort Pitt in Rochester, and Chatham railway station. Chatham has always had a strong musical and creative arts heritage that has remained centred on local groups, many of whom were also part of the KIAD. Charles Thomson and Billy Childish went on to create the artistic movement known as Stuckism in 1999.\nThere was a resurgence in the live music scene in February 2001, with an initial focus on the Tap 'N' Tin venue at 24 Railway Street in Chatham. The essence of the original greatness of the Medway Delta Sound was revived by music and poetry evenings promoted by the Urban Fox Press of David Wise, which also published several books by poets and artists in the Medway Towns. In September 2008. the independent arts organisation Medway Eyes was founded, specialising in music and photography. It had promoted several arts exhibitions and gigs at The Barge, at 63 Layfield Road, in Gillingham (now closed) and the Nag's Head at 292 Rochester High Street, but disbanded in April 2013.\nThe Medway Poets were formed in August 1975 and disbanded in March 1982 having performed at the Kent Literature Festival and many others in South East England and on TV and Radio. They became a significant influence to writers in Chatham and elsewhere in the Medway Towns. From the core of this group the anti conceptual/pro painting movement of Remodernism came into being.\nRecent Medway artists of note include Kid Harpoon, Crybaby Special and The Monsters, Red Light, Underground Heroes, Tyrannosaurus Alan, Pete Molinari, Lupen Crook, Brigadier Ambrose, Stuart Turner and Theatre Royal.\nThe term \"chav\" is sometimes falsely said to be a local one, meaning \"Chatham Average\", but the word derives from the Romany word for youngster. Before the Chatham Dockyard was closed down on 31 March 1984, the cultural idea of the chav did not exist in the Medway Towns.\nThe Imperial Picture Palace opened on Chatham High Street in 1914. It was taken over by Associated British Cinemas in 1929, demolished and rebuilt on the same site in 1937, and demolished in 2003 after having been damaged by two fires. The site is now occupied by flats.\nLocal media.\nNewspapers.\nLocal newspapers for Chatham include \"Medway News\" and \"Medway Standard\", both published by Kent Regional News and Media; and the \"Medway Messenger\", published by the KM Group, whose registered address is in New Barnet, in Hertfordshire. The town also has free newspapers such as the \"Medway Extra\" (KM Group) and \"Your Medway\" (KOS Media).\nRadio.\nThe local commercial radio station for Chatham is KMFM Medway, owned by the KM Group. The Medway Towns are also served by a community radio station Radio Sunlight based in the Sunlight Centre at 105 Richmond Road, in Gillingham, near the River Medway. The area can also receive the county wide stations BBC Radio Kent, Heart South and Gold, as well as many radio stations in Essex and Greater London.\nTelevision.\nLocal news and television programmes are provided by BBC South East and ITV Meridian from the Bluebell Hill TV transmitter, supplemented by a low power relay transmitter in Chatham Town Centre that has the National Grid Reference (NGR) of TQ767675.\nNotable people.\nCharles Dickens lived in the town as a boy, both in The Brook and in Ordnance Terrace before Chatham railway station was built just opposite. He subsequently described it as the happiest period of his childhood, and eventually returned to the area in adulthood when he bought a house in nearby Gad's Hill. Medway features in his novels. He then moved to Rochester, a nearby town, also part of the Medway Towns.\nOthers who were born or who lived or live in Chatham:\nTwin towns.\nChatham is twinned with Valenciennes, France.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59900", "revid": "26074453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59900", "title": "College Park", "text": "College Park may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59901", "revid": "1175300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59901", "title": "Concord", "text": "Concord may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59902", "revid": "3131428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59902", "title": "Duluth (disambiguation)", "text": "Duluth, Minnesota is a city in the United States.\nDuluth or DuLuth may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59903", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59903", "title": "Elkton", "text": "Elkton may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "59904", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59904", "title": "Eureka", "text": "Eureka often refers to:\nEureka or Ureka may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59905", "revid": "1296713292", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59905", "title": "Fayetteville", "text": "Fayetteville commonly refers to:\nFayetteville may also refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "59906", "revid": "43249068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59906", "title": "Ernst &amp; Young", "text": "Multinational professional services network\nEY, previously known as Ernst &amp; Young, is a British multinational professional services network based in London, United Kingdom. Along with Deloitte, KPMG and PwC, it is one of the Big Four professional services firms. The EY network is composed of member firms of Ernst &amp; Young Global Limited, a UK company limited by guarantee.\nEY is one of the largest professional services networks in the world. It primarily provides assurance, tax, information technology services (including managed services in areas like Cybersecurity, Cloud, Digital Transformation and AI), consulting, and advisory services to its clients.\nErnst &amp; Young Global Limited operates as a network of member firms structured as separate legal entities. As of mid-2024, it employs approximately 393,000 people across more than 700 offices in over 150 countries and territories. The firm's current partnership was formed in 1989 by a merger of two accounting firms: Ernst &amp; Whinney and Arthur Young &amp; Co. It was named Ernst &amp; Young until a rebranding campaign officially changed its name to EY in 2013, although this initialism was already used informally prior to its sanctioning adoption.\nIn 2023, EY was the seventh-largest privately owned organization in the United States, and EY has for 25 years been continuously ranked on \"Fortune\" magazine's list of the 100 Best Companies to Work For, longer than any other accounting firm. The firm has, however, repeatedly come under scrutiny for systemic issues in their training, hiring, and work culture.\nHistory.\nEarly history and mergers.\nEY resulted from several mergers of ancestor firms over the last century and a half, the oldest of which was founded in 1849, in England, as Harding &amp; Pullein. That same year, this firm was joined by an accountant named Frederick Whinney, who, a decade later, became a partner. After his son joined the firm, it was later renamed Whinney, Smith &amp; Whinney, in 1894.\nIn 1903, the firm Ernst &amp; Ernst was founded in Cleveland, Ohio, by Alwin C. Ernst, and his brother, Theodore Ernst. In 1906, Arthur Young &amp; Co. was set up by a Scottish accountant, Arthur Young, in Chicago. Starting in 1924, these two American firms became allied with prominent British firms; Young with Broads Paterson &amp; Co.; and Ernst with the aforementioned Whinney Smith &amp; Whinney. The latter of these two mergers spawned Anglo-American partnership Ernst &amp; Whinney in 1979, then the fourth largest accountancy firm in the world.\nA decade later, in 1989, Ernst &amp; Whinney merged with the fifth largest firm globally at the time, Arthur Young &amp; Co., to create Ernst &amp; Young.\nLater developments.\nIn October 1997, Ernst &amp; Young announced plans to merge its global practices with professional services network KPMG, to create the largest professional services organization in the world. The announcement came on the heels of an announced merger between Price Waterhouse and Coopers &amp; Lybrand only a month earlier. These plans were soon abandoned in February 1998, due to several factors ranging from client opposition, antitrust issues, cost problems, and the anticipated difficulty of merging the two diverse firms and cultures. The merger between Price Waterhouse and Coopers &amp; Lybrand, however, went ahead as planned, creating PwC.\nErnst &amp; Young expanded its consulting practice heavily during the 1980s and 1990s. During this time, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and various members of the investment community, began to raise concerns about a potential conflict of interests. This conflict would be brought about by firms offering both consulting and auditing services simultaneously to overlapping clients, a common practice among the \"Big Five\". In May 2000, Ernst &amp; Young was the first of those firms to fully separate its consulting practices via a sale to the French IT services company Capgemini for $11\u00a0billion, creating the new company Capgemini Ernst &amp; Young, which was later renamed back to Capgemini.\nRecent history, re-branding and expansion.\nIn 2002, Ernst &amp; Young took on a large number of the clients previously working with Arthur Andersen following its collapse in connection with the Enron scandal, although it did not engage with any new Arthur Andersen clients from the United Kingdom, China, or the Netherlands. Four years later, in 2006, Ernst &amp; Young became the only member of the Big Four to have two member firms in the United States, with the inclusion of Mitchell &amp; Titus, LLP, the largest minority-owned accounting firm in the United States. Mitchell &amp; Titus ended its membership in the EY network effective October 30, 2015.\nIn April 2009, Reuters reported that Ernst &amp; Young, spurred by the global economic downturn, had launched a cost-saving initiative encouraging its staff in China to take 40 days of low-pay leave between the summer of 2009 and the summer of 2010. Those who participated got a prorated salary equal to 20% of a regular salary, plus the benefits of a full-time employee. The initiative applied to employees in Hong Kong, Macau and mainland China, where the firm's employees numbered 8,500 in total. In 2010, Ernst &amp; Young acquired Terco, the Brazilian member firm of Grant Thornton.\nIn 2013, the firm officially changed its brand from Ernst &amp; Young to EY, and christened the accompanying tagline: \"Building a better working world\".\nAlso in 2013, the Pope of the Roman Catholic Church hired EY to help review Vatican City State's finances and help \"verify and consult\" the institution's administration, including the museums, post office and tax-free department store. EY expanded further and acquired all of KPMG Denmark's operations including its 150 partners, 1,500 employees and 21 offices.\nIn 2014, EY acquired global strategy consulting firm The Parthenon Group, gaining 350 consultants in its then-Transaction Advisory Services practice so that it could provide in-house strategy consulting services to its clients. The business unit has since been rebranded as EY-Parthenon and is one of the most selective strategy consultancies worldwide.\nIn 2015, EY opened its first global Security Operations Centre in Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala in India, and coincidentally invested $20 million over 5 years to combat the increasing threat of cybercrimes.\nIn 2017 EY announced it was opening an executive support center in Tucson, Arizona, US, creating 125 new jobs. That same year, the company opened a Digital Security Operations Center, located in Muscat, Oman, to cover the EMEIA region as part of a $10 million investment.\nIn 2018, EY opened a $4.4 million professional services center in Louisville, Kentucky, US, creating 125 new jobs, and announced it would open an IT / tech hub in Nashville, TN, US, creating 600 regional jobs.\nIn November 2022, it was announced EY had acquired the Sydney-headquartered data and analytics specialists, Bridge Business Consulting.\nProject Everest.\nThe \"Wall Street Journal\" reported in May 2022 that the firm might split its accounting and advisory divisions into two new, separate businesses. The plan, referred to internally as \"Project Everest\" would involve the consulting business completing an initial public offering, the proceeds of which would be used to compensate partners at the new, separate auditing company. The firm's debt has proven to be an internal obstacle to the split. The debt is mostly owed to former partners of EY, taking the form of what the \"Wall Street Journal\" characterized as \"effectively an unfunded pension plan\". Would-be partners of the new accounting firm have expressed reservations as their descendant firm, the smaller of the new organizations, would presumably absorb most of the debt. On 5 September 2022, the firm announced that partners would vote on whether to split EY into two businesses. EY's member firms in China, Hong Kong, Macau, and Israel stated that they would not split. Rival firms such as KPMG and Deloitte have said they do not intend to imitate EY.\nIn March 2023, Julie Boland, head of EY US, stated in a webcast that the split would be temporarily paused amid internal debate over the proportioning of its tax service line among the proposed consulting and assurance spinoffs.\nThe firm cancelled Project Everest as the US portion of the firm withdrew its support for the split in April 2023. Preparing and planning for the split cost EY $600 million.\nIn 2024, EY announced an alliance between SAP Fioneer and EY ifb SE.\nGlobal structure.\nThe firm is organized geographically into three areas: Europe, Middle East, India and Africa; the Americas; and Asia-Pacific.\nIn 2018, the company underwent a transformation of some of its region borders, primarily the union of its CIS region (operating in the former Soviet Union) and the CEE region (Eastern Europe) to create the CESA block.\nServices.\nOver the course of its operations, EY has transformed its business model and diversified its pool of offered services. Over the course of the last decade EY has substantially altered its business approach to offer a more comprehensive scope of services. This is mainly attributed to an intensified competition in the existing market of professional services, and competition in new markets: investment banking and strategic consultancy. According to the latest published data, the company has the following four main service lines:\nLitigation and disputes.\nAudit practices.\nEY has been involved in many accounting scandals: Bank of Credit and Commerce International (1991), Informix Corporation (1996), Sybase (1997), Cendant (1998), One.Tel (2001), AOL (2002), HealthSouth Corporation (2003), Chiquita Brands International (2004), Lehman Brothers (2010), Sino-Forest Corporation (2011), Olympus Corporation (2011), Stagecoach Group (2017), Wirecard (2020), Luckin Coffee (2020) and NMC Health (2020).\nIn 2004, Ernst &amp; Young was criticized for forming a lucrative business arrangement with one of its audit clients, PeopleSoft, thus creating a conflict of interest. As a result, the firm was barred by the SEC from accepting any new publicly traded companies as audit clients for six months.\nIn April 2004, Equitable Life, a UK life assurance company, sued EY after nearly collapsing but abandoned the case in September 2005. EY described the case as \"a scandalous waste of time, money and resources for all concerned.\"\nIn 2009, EY, the former auditors of Sons of Gwalia, agreed to a $125m settlement over their role in the gold miner's collapse in 2004. Ferrier Hodgson, the company's administrator, had claimed EY was negligent over the accounting of gold and dollar hedging contracts. However, EY said that the proposed settlement was not an admission of any liability.\nFollowing allegations by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) that EY had committed accounting fraud in its work auditing the books of Bally Total Fitness, EY reached two settlements in 2008, including a fine of $8.5 million.\nEY Hong Kong resigned from the audit of Standard Water on when it emerged that although EY Hong Kong had signed off the audit, it had been effectively outsourced to the affiliate in mainland China, which had received 99.98% of the fee. This was important because shareholders have less confidence in mainland auditors and because audit papers on the mainland are subject to state secrecy laws and can be withheld from outside regulators. EY's quality and risk management leader (Greater China) even testified in the Court of First Instance that he was not sure whether there was a formal agreement covering the relationship between the two EY entities. The court case in 2013 came as US regulators were taking an interest in similar cases of accounting fraud in mainland China.\nIn September 2016, the US securities regulatory SEC fined EY US US$9.3 million for failures, including an auditor's romantic involvement with a client. Another partner on the team who was auditing a different public company became romantically involved with its chief accounting officer.\nIn October 2016, EY settled with the SEC because they were unable to detect financial statement fraud that was committed by the Weatherford tax department. Weatherford misstated their financial statements by manipulating the income tax line item in their financials. EY was Weatherford's independent auditors when the fraud was perpetrated.\nIn October 2016, Mozilla stopped accepting WebTrust audits from Ernst &amp; Young Hong Kong due to their failure \"to detect multiple issues they should have detected\" during their audits of WoSign.\nIn February 2017, in response to questions regarding misissued certificates, Symantec stated they would no longer accept WebTrust audits from E&amp;Y Korea and E&amp;Y Brazil due to deficiencies in these audits.\nAccording to \"The Wall Street Journal\", in 2019, EY had audited WeWork the office-space company that \"nearly collapsed after fumbling a planned initial public offering\".\nIn April 2020, a former partner and whistleblower was awarded $10.8 million for ethical misconduct by EY in a Dubai gold audit by the high court in London. EY appealed the decision, but then dropped the appeal in March 2021.\nIn 2020, EY failed to uncover $2 billion that was missing at Wirecard AG, a German fintech payment processing company. This resulted in a lawsuit filed against EY in June 2020. An investigation by the Bundestag revealed in April 2021 that EY's audits of defunct payments group Wirecard suffered from serious shortcomings over a period of years.\nEY also failed to identify $300 million in \"fabricated sales\" in their 2020 audit of the coffee chain Luckin Coffee and $5 billion in \"undisclosed debt\" at NMC Health and Finablr.\nIn August 2021, EY US agreed to pay US$10 million as part of a settlement with the SEC related to charges of auditor independence misconduct perpetrated by several of its partners to secure Sealed Air as a client.\nIn August 2021, UK accounting regulatory Financial Reporting Council (FRC) fined EY UK \u00a33.5 million (US$4.8 million) for failing to challenge financial statements in its 2017 audit of UK transport company, Stagecoach Group. In addition, the auditing engagement partner Mark Harvey was sanctioned and fined \u00a3100,000. EY's fine was subsequently cut to \u00a32.2 million for admitting to the failings, with Harvey's fine reduced to \u00a370,000 for the same reason.\nIn December 2021, EY filed a criminal complaint against unknown persons with Munich prosecutors relating to the alleged leak of a classified German parliamentary report relating to its role in the collapse of payments firm, Wirecard, to the German newspaper, Handelsblatt.\nIn April 2022 the administrators of NMC Health filed a $2.5 billion lawsuit against EY, alleging negligence during its work on NMC's accounts spanning a seven-year period.\nIn 2023, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board reported on four EY Canada audits conducted in 2022 and found that half had \"multiple deficiencies\".\nIn April 2023, the German Abschlusspr\u00fcferaufsichtsstelle (APAS) (the federal watchdog, responsible for the oversight on auditors) assessed, that EY has committed violations of duty on its Wirecard mandate and prohibited the company for two years to accept new audit mandates for companies at the German stock exchange.\nIn December 2024, a lawsuit was filed against EY accusing it of assisting the UAE-based Brooge Petroleum and Gas Investment Company FZE in defrauding investors during a 2019 special-purpose acquisition company (SPAC) merger. It alleges that Brooge fabricated financial data through fake invoices, customers and affiliated parties and forged 30-80% of its revenues between 2018 and 2020. EY allegedly supported Brooge\u2019s scheme by \u201cissuing unqualified audit opinions\u201d. The lawsuit was filed by a group of Boorge Energy shareholders, who accused EY of fraud and violations of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The plaintiffs were seeking damages, interest, and legal fees.\nIn April 2025, the company was fined \u00a34.9 million by the UK Financial Reporting Council for 'serious breaches in standards' in its audits of Thomas Cook, which collapsed in 2019.\nExam cheating by audit professionals.\nIn June 2022, the SEC fined the firm US$100 million \"for cheating by its audit professionals on exams required to obtain and maintain Certified Public Accountant (CPA) licenses, and for withholding evidence of this misconduct from the SEC's Enforcement Division during the Division's investigation of the matter\". EY admitted \"the facts underlying the SEC\u2019s charges\" and the penalty is a record imposed on a US audit firm. The Canadian Public Accountability Board has announced that it will investigate whether EY's Canadian arm was involved in similar practices.\nInvestment banking.\nIn 2009, in the Anglo Irish Bank hidden loans controversy, EY was criticised by politicians and the shareholders of Anglo Irish Bank for failing to detect large loans to Se\u00e1n FitzPatrick, its chairman, during its audits. The Irish Government had to subsequently take full ownership of the Bank at a cost of \u20ac28 billion. The Irish Chartered Accountants Regulatory Board appointed John Purcell to investigate. EY said it \"fundamentally disagrees with the decision to initiate a formal disciplinary process\" and that \"there has been no adverse finding made against EY in respect of the audit of Anglo Irish Bank.\"\nIn 2009, EY agreed to pay US$200m out of court to settle a negligence claim by the liquidators of Akai Holdings. Separately the firm was accused of falsifying and doctoring documents it presented to defend against the negligence claim by Akai's liquidators. In a separate lawsuit, a former EY senior partner from 1984 to 1991, Cristopher Ho, and his listed company, Grande Holdings, paid over US$100m to Akai creditors to settle Akai's liquidators' claim that Ho conspired with Ting of stripping assets from Akai. Police raided the Hong Kong office and arrested an EY partner who had been an audit manager on the Akai account from December 1997, although audit documents had been doctored dating back to 1994. Akai was said to be the firm's largest client for most of the 1990s from Hong Kong.\nThe EY partner for the Akai account between 1991 and 1999, David Sun Tak-kei, faced no charges and went on to become co-managing partner for EY China. A few months later EY settled a similar claim of up to HK$300m from the liquidators of Moulin Global Eyecare, an audit client of the Hong Kong affiliate between 2002 and 2004. The liquidators described the Moulin accounts as a \"morass of dodginess\".\nThe Valukas Report issued in 2010 charged that Lehman Brothers engaged in a practice known as repo 105 and that EY, Lehman's auditor, was aware of it. EY was accused of professional malpractice regarding the lack of disclosure of Lehman's repo 105 practice in Lehman's public filings. New York prosecutors announced in 2010 that they have sued the firm. David Goldfarb, a Lehman CFO who concocted the repo 105 balance sheet window dressing technique was a former senior partner of EY. EY said that its last audit of Lehman Brothers was for the fiscal year ending 30 November 2007 and that Lehman's financial statements were fairly presented in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. In March 2015, EY settled Lehman-related lawsuits with municipalities in New Jersey and California.\nIn 2014, tax arrangements negotiated by EY for The Walt Disney Company, Koch Industries, Skype, and other multinational corporations became public in the so-called \"Luxembourg Leaks\". The disclosure of these and other tax arrangements led to controversial discussions about tax avoidance.\nIn 2015, EY's member firm in Japan, Ernst &amp; Young ShinNihon, was fined \u00a5 (US$) for failing to spot irregularities since 2008 while auditing its client Toshiba, which was Japan's worst accounting scandal in years. The firm was also suspended from taking up new business for three months. An official from Japan's Financial Services Agency (FSA) described that \"there was a grave breach of duty\". The firm's CEO and chairman, Koichi Hanabusa stepped down the following month to take responsibility and monthly salaries for 19 employees were cut from 20 per cent to 50 per cent. In an unusual move, the FSA publicly named seven accountants involved in the audit who were accused of failing to exercise due caution and signing off on false financial documents. The FSA also said the \"firm\u2019s operations were deeply improper\". ShinNihon, at the time, was Japan's biggest accounting firm, with 3,500 certified accountants and 4,000 clients. ShinNihon audited about 960 listed companies in Japan, the most among the Big Four, as reported in 2015. ShinNihon had audited Toshiba for over 60 years and the firm had around 70 staff serving Toshiba before the accounting scandal broke.\nIn 2017, Ernst &amp; Young Baltic, member of the EY network, was accused of using the emission assumptions of highly polluting EURO II trucks (manufactured before 2001) to falsely increase the socio-economic benefits of the new railway for the period 2026\u20132055 by 3 billion euros in the Rail Baltica Cost-Benefit Analysis. The total mistakes amounted to more than 4 billion euros and constituted 20% of the total socio-economic benefit of the Rail Baltica. Correction of the mistakes made the project unfeasible. EY has refused to provide any comments to the media regarding the public accusations.\nEmployment culture.\nSexist training program.\nIn October 2019, \"HuffPost\" broke a story about a New Jersey \"Power-Presence-Purpose\" training seminar purportedly to empower female employees, but which was, as characterized by \"HuffPost\", \"full of out of touch advice\". Women were told to concentrate on their appearance, not to show too much skin, and not to speak too much. One participant said it was basically a \"women bashing\" exercise. \"You have to offer your thoughts in a benign way...You have to be the perfect Stepford wife... It felt like they were being turned into someone who is super-smiley, who never confronts anyone\" she said. In 2021, EY agreed to pay the state of New Jersey $100,000 and set up a $500,000 scholarship following its investigation of the program to resolve claims EY broke state law against discrimination.\nWorking rights.\nIn April 2021, EY's second-year auditor staff in their Barcelona office sent an email to their line managers to complain about the long hours that they had to work, which were sometimes reaching 84 working hours per week.\nElizabeth Broderick &amp; Co. Culture Review.\nIn July 2023, an independent culture review by the former Australian sex discrimination commissioner Elizabeth Broderick was released after being commissioned by EY following the suicide of an auditor in the Sydney office in August 2022. Over 4,500 participants from the Australian and New Zealand EY offices participated through online surveys, interviews, written submissions, and group listening sessions. The report revealed that 15% of EY employees have experienced instances of either bullying, sexual harassment, or racism. The report also detailed the long working hours, with approximately two in five employees considering quitting due to long work hours and 46% of respondents reporting that their health has been negatively affected due to the long hours. The culture review revealed that over 31% of EY employees worked over 51 hours per week routinely, and 11% of EY employees working over 61 hours per week routinely.\nIn April 2024, EY apologized for its workplace culture and said it has started a \"time-owed-in-lieu pilot\" and is \"making strong progress\" on other report recommendations.\nToxic work culture in India.\nAnna Sebastian Perayil, a 26-year-old chartered accountant, died in July 2024, four months after starting work at the Pune, India, EY office. Her family alleged that her death was due to stress caused by overwork, presenteeism and exhaustion. Her death led to nationwide outrage and debate on toxic work culture in India.\nShobha Karandlaje, the Minister of State for the Ministry of Labour and Employment, said in a post on X that her ministry has officially taken up the complaint. Other political leaders like the Maharashtra Deputy Chief Minister Ajit Pawar and Bharatiya Janata Party leader Rajeev Chandrasekhar, have expressed sadness and support for a probe.\nSponsorships.\nErnst &amp; Young is involved in many sponsorships, including its \"World Entrepreneur of the Year Award\" program, held in over 60 countries.\nThe awards are an annual award program sponsored by Ernst &amp; Young in recognition of entrepreneurship. \nFounded in 1986 in Milwaukee as a single award, the program now runs in all 50 U.S. states and in more than 60 countries.\nAt the country and territory levels, programs begin with nomination of entrepreneurs who demonstrate specific criteria. The award may be given to multiple individuals per year. For example, in the U.S. and other countries, there are multiple regional and category winners, spanning fields such as for retail and consumer products, technology, family business, energy, chemical and mining, food products and services, real estate, hospitality, and construction, financial services, digital media, and transformational ventures. However, in each country, only one company and its leader(s) are recognized as the overall award recipient.\nSince 1986, over 10,000 founders, CEOs, and business leaders have received awards.\nEntrepreneurial Winning Women.\nEntrepreneurial Winning Women is a global EY initiative that identifies women founders and supports them to help them scale. Launched in 2008, the program has expanded to 55 countries and graduated over 1,000 entrepreneurs.\nIn North America and Canada, eligibility focuses on founding CEOs who retain substantial ownership and lead privately held businesses.\nNotable alumnae include Sheri Jacobson (UK &amp; Ireland, class of 2018), Brianne West (Asia\u2013Pacific, class of 2020), Paula Fray (Africa, class of 2015), Jamie Kern Lima (North America, class of 2013) and Amy Buckner Chowdhry (North America, class of 2011).\nArt and media.\nEY UK sponsors exhibitions of works by famous artists, such as C\u00e9zanne, Picasso, Bonnard, Monet, Rodin and Renoir. The most recent of these was \"Maharaja: the Splendour of India's Royal Courts\" at the Victoria and Albert Museum.\nIn addition, EY sponsors the educational children's show \"Cyberchase\" on PBS Kids under the PBS Kids GO! television brand, in an effort to improve mathematics literacy in children.\nEY in the UK sponsors the ITEM club.\nEY in the UK has set up the National Equality Standard (NES), an initiative developed for business which sets clear equality, diversity and inclusion (EDI) criteria against which companies are assessed. The National Equality Standard (NES) is currently the only industry recognized national standard for EDI in the UK.\nEY in the UK has set up \"EY Foundation\", a new UK charity set up to support young people and entrepreneurs.\nSports.\nOn 8 September 2011, Rio 2016 made the announcement that EY would be an official sponsor of the \"2016 Summer Olympics\" to be held in Brazil, as the exclusive provider of professional services \u2013 consulting and auditing \u2013 for Rio 2016 organizing committee.\nEY was an Official Partner to the 2012 and the 2014 Ryder Cups, it partners with the British and Irish Lions., and it has a longstanding relationship with the 2011 Tour de France winner Cadel Evans.\nIn April 2019, EY announced a two-year-long collaboration with USA Rugby, where EY would act as their Official Principal Partner. The partnership was focusing on digital and technological transformations, as well as innovating and growing the game in the US, while specifically mentioning an overhaul of USA Rugby's diversity and inclusiveness program.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59907", "revid": "43611081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59907", "title": "Centreville", "text": ""}
{"id": "59908", "revid": "7957594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59908", "title": "Swindon", "text": "Town in Wiltshire, England\nSwindon () is a town in Wiltshire, England. At the time of the 2021 census, the population of the built-up area was 183,638, making it the largest settlement in the county. Located at the northeastern edge of the South West England region, Swindon lies on the M4 corridor, 84 miles (135 km) to the west of London and 36 miles (57 km) to the east of Bristol. The Cotswolds lie just to the town's north and the North Wessex Downs to its south.\nRecorded in the 1086 Domesday Book as \"Suindune\", the arrival of the Great Western Railway in 1843 transformed it from a small market town of 2,500 into a thriving railway hub that would become one of the largest railway engineering complexes in the world at its peak. This brought with it pioneering amenities such as the UK's first lending library and a 'cradle-to-grave' healthcare centre that was later used as a blueprint for the NHS. Swindon's railway heritage can be primarily seen today with the grade 2 listed Railway Village and STEAM Museum. The McArthurGlen Designer Outlet is housed in the renovated former works and the Brunel Shopping Centre is one of several places in Swindon that bear the name of the famous engineer generally acknowledged with bringing the railways to the town.\nDespite the subsequent decline and closure of its railway works, Swindon was one of the fastest growing towns in Europe post-war as its economy diversified, attracting large international companies, who made use of its burgeoning population and strategic transport links.\nMajor venues in the town include the Wyvern Theatre and the Mechanics' Institute. Lydiard Park has hosted festivals such as BBC Radio 1's Big Weekend, while the Swindon Mela, an all-day celebration of South Indian arts and culture, attracts up to 10,000 visitors a year. The ancient Ridgeway, known as Britain's oldest road, runs a few miles to Swindon's south, with Avebury, the largest megalithic stone circle in the world, and Uffington White Horse, Britain's oldest white horse figure, also nearby. Wiltshire's only professional football club, Swindon Town, have played in the Premier League in the 1993/94 season and won a major trophy, securing a famous giant-killing victory over Arsenal in the 1969 League Cup final. They currently play in League Two at the 15,000-seat County Ground in the town centre. Other sports in the town include Swindon Wildcats Ice Hockey and five-time British speedway champions the Swindon Robins.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe Anglo-Saxon settlement of Swindon sat in a defensible position atop a limestone hill. It is referred to in the 1086 Domesday Book as Suindune, believed to be derived from the Old English words \"swine\" and \"dun\" meaning \"pig hill\" or possibly Sweyn's hill, Sweyn being a Scandinavian name akin to Sven and English swain, meaning a young man.\nSwindon is recorded in the Domesday Book as a manor in the hundred of Blagrove, Wiltshire. It was one of the larger manors, recorded as having 27 households and a rent value of \u00a310 14s, which was divided among five landlords. Before the Battle of Hastings the Swindon estate was owned by an Anglo-Saxon thane called Leofgeat. After the Norman Conquest, Swindon was split into five holdings: the largest was held between Miles Crispin and Odin the Chamberlain, and the second by Wadard, a knight in the service of Odo of Bayeux, brother of the king. The manors of Westlecot, Walcot, Rodbourne, Moredon and Stratton are also listed; all are now part of Swindon.\nThe Goddard family were lord of the manor from the 16th century for many generations, living at the manor house, sometimes known as The Lawn.\nSwindon was a small market town, mainly for barter trade, until roughly 1848. This original market area is on top of the hill in central Swindon, now known as Old Town.\nThe Industrial Revolution was responsible for an acceleration of Swindon's growth. Construction of the Wilts and Berks Canal in 1810 and the North Wilts Canal in 1819 brought trade to the area, and Swindon's population started to grow.\nRailway town.\nBetween 1841 and 1842, Isambard Kingdom Brunel's Swindon Works was built for the repair and maintenance of locomotives on the Great Western Railway (GWR). The GWR built a small railway village to house some of its workers. The Museum of the Great Western Railway and English Heritage, including the English Heritage Archive, now occupy part of the old works. In the village were the GWR Medical Fund Clinic at Park House and its hospital, both on Faringdon Road, and the 1892 health centre in Milton Road, which housed clinics, a pharmacy, laundries, baths, Victorian Turkish baths and swimming pools, which were almost opposite.\nFrom 1871, GWR workers had a small amount deducted from their weekly pay and put into a healthcare fund; GWR doctors could prescribe them or their family members medicines or send them for medical treatment. In 1878 the fund began providing artificial limbs made by craftsmen from the carriage and wagon works, and nine years later opened its first dental surgery. In his first few months in post, the dentist extracted more than 2,000 teeth. From the opening in 1892 of the health centre, a doctor could also prescribe a haircut or even a bath. The cradle-to-grave extent of this service was later used as a blueprint for the NHS.\nThe Mechanics' Institute, formed in 1844, moved into a building that looked rather like a church and included a covered market on 1 May 1855. The New Swindon Improvement Company, a co-operative, raised the funds for this programme of self-improvement and paid the GWR \u00a340 a year for its new home on a site at the heart of the railway village. It was a groundbreaking organisation that transformed the railway's workforce into some of the country's best-educated manual workers.\nThe Mechanics' Institute had the UK's first lending library, put on a range of improving lectures, and arranged various other activities such as access to a theatre, ambulance classes and xylophone lessons. A former institute secretary formed the New Swindon Co-operative Society in 1853, which, after a schism in the society's membership, spawned the New Swindon Industrial Society, which ran a retail business from a stall in the market at the institute. The institute also nurtured pioneering trade unionists and encouraged local democracy.\nWhen tuberculosis hit the new town, the Mechanics' Institute persuaded the industrial pioneers of North Wiltshire to agree that the railway's former employees should continue to receive medical attention from the doctors of the GWR Medical Society Fund, which the institute had played a role in establishing and funding.\nIn 1874, a skeleton of the stegosaurian dinosaur \"Dacentrurus\" was excavated from Swindon Great Quarry.\nSwindon's other railway, the Swindon, Marlborough and Andover Railway, merged with the Swindon and Cheltenham Extension Railway to form the Midland &amp; South Western Junction Railway, which set out to join the London &amp; South Western Railway with the Midland Railway at Cheltenham. The Swindon, Marlborough &amp; Andover had planned to tunnel under the hill on which Swindon's Old Town stands but the money ran out and the railway ran into Swindon Town railway station, off Devizes Road in the Old Town, skirting the new town to the west, intersecting with the GWR at Rushey Platt and heading north for Cirencester, Cheltenham and the LMS, whose 'Midland Red' livery the M&amp;SWJR adopted.\nDuring the second half of the 19th century, Swindon New Town grew around the main line between London and Bristol. In 1900, the original market town, Old Swindon, merged with its new neighbour at the bottom of the hill to become a single town.\nOn 1 July 1923, the GWR took over the largely single-track M&amp;SWJR and the line northwards from Swindon Town was diverted to Swindon Junction station, leaving the Town station with only the line south to Andover and Salisbury. The last passenger trains on what had been the SM&amp;A ran on 10 September 1961, 80 years after the railway's first stretch opened.\nDuring the first half of the 20th century, the railway works was the town's largest employer and one of the biggest in the country, employing more than 14,500. Alfred Williams (1877\u20131930) wrote about his life as a hammerman at the works.\nThe works' decline started in 1960, when it rolled out \"Evening Star\", the last steam locomotive to be built in the UK. The works lost its locomotive-building role and took on rolling stock maintenance for British Rail. In the late 1970s, much of the works closed, and the rest followed in 1986.\nThe community centre in the railway village was originally the barracks accommodation for railway employees of the GWR. The building became the Railway Museum in the 1960s, until the opening of 'STEAM \u2013 Museum of the Great Western Railway' in the 2000s.\nModern period.\nThe Second World War saw an influx of new industries as part of the war effort; Vickers-Armstrong making aircraft at Stratton, and Plessey at Cheney Manor producing electrical components. By 1960, Plessey had become Swindon's biggest employer, with a predominantly female workforce.\nDavid Murray John, Swindon's town clerk from 1938 to 1974, is seen as a pioneering figure in Swindon's post-war regeneration: his last act before retirement was to sign the contract for Swindon's tallest building, which is now named after him. Murray John's successor was David Maxwell Kent, appointed by the Swindon/Highworth Joint Committee in 1973: he had worked closely with Murray John and continued similar policies for a further twenty years. The Greater London Council withdrew from the Town Development Agreement, and the local council continued the development on its own.\nThere was the problem of the Western Development and of Lydiard Park being in the new North Wiltshire district, but this was resolved by a boundary change to take in part of North Wiltshire. Another factor limiting local decision-making was the continuing role of Wiltshire County Council in the administration of Swindon. Together with like-minded councils, a campaign was launched to bring an updated form of county borough status to Swindon. This was successful in 1997 with the formation of Swindon Borough Council, covering the areas of the former Thamesdown and the former Highworth Rural District Council.\nIn February 2008, \"The Times\" named Swindon as one of \"The 20 best places to buy a property in Britain\". Only Warrington had a lower ratio of house prices to household income in 2007, with the average household income in Swindon among the highest in the country.\nIn October 2008, Swindon Council made a controversial move to ban fixed point speed cameras. The move was branded as reckless by some, but by November 2008 Portsmouth, Walsall, and Birmingham councils were also considering the move.\nIn 2001, construction began on Priory Vale, the third and final instalment in Swindon's 'Northern Expansion' project, which began with Abbey Meads and continued at St Andrew's Ridge. In 2002, the New Swindon Company was formed with the remit of regenerating the town centre, to improve Swindon's regional status. The main areas targeted were Union Square, The Promenade, The Hub, Swindon Central, North Star Village, The Campus, and the Public Realm.\nIn August 2019, a secondary school in the town was at the centre of a 'county lines' drug supply investigation by Wiltshire Police, with 40 pupils suspected of being involved in the supply of cannabis and cocaine, and girls as young as 14 being coerced into sexual activity in exchange for drugs.\nGeography.\nSwindon is a town in northeast Wiltshire, west-northwest of Reading and the same distance east-northeast of Bristol 'as the crow flies'. The town is also southwest of Oxford, south-southeast of Birmingham, west of London and east of Cardiff. Swindon town centre is also equidistant from the county boundaries of Berkshire and Gloucestershire, both being away. The border with Oxfordshire is slightly closer, being around away.\nSwindon is within a landlocked county and is a considerable distance from any coastline. The nearest section of coast on the English Channel is near Christchurch, due south. Meanwhile, the eastern limit of the Bristol Channel, just north of Weston-super-mare, lies to the west.\nThe landscape is dominated by the chalk hills of the Wiltshire Downs to the south and east. The Old Town stands on a hill of Purbeck and Portland stone; this was quarried from Roman times until the 1950s. The area that was known as New Swindon is made up of mostly Kimmeridge clay with outcrops of Corrallian clay in the areas of Penhill and Pinehurst. Oxford clay makes up the rest of the borough. The River Ray rises at Wroughton and forms much of the borough's western boundary, joining the Thames which defines the northern boundary, and the source of which is located in nearby Kemble, Gloucestershire. The River Cole and its tributaries flow northeastward from the town and form the northeastern boundary.\nClimate.\nSwindon has an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\" in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification), like the vast majority of the British Isles, with cool winters and warm summers. The nearest official weather station is RAF Lyneham, about west southwest of Swindon town centre. The weather station's elevation is in a rural setting, compared to the typical encountered around Swindon town centre, so it is likely marginally cooler throughout the year.\nThe absolute maximum is , recorded during August 1990. In an average year the warmest day should reach and 10.3 days should register a temperature of or above.\nThe absolute minimum is , recorded in January 1982, and in an average year 45.2 nights of air frost can be expected.\nSunshine, at 1,565 hours a year, is typical for inland parts of Southern England, although significantly higher than most areas further north.\nAnnual rainfall averages slightly under per year, with 123 days reporting over of rain.\nDemographics.\nEthnicity.\nThe population of the Borough of Swindon was historically ethnically homogeneous, White British, but is now becoming less homogeneous, with the largest ethnic group, White British, constituting 74.2% of the population in the 2021 census. This proportion has consistently declined in each modern census, down from 91.5% in the 2001 census.\nIn the 2021 census, the ethnic composition of the Borough of Swindon comprised: 81.5% White, 11.6% Asian, 2.6% Black, 2.8% Mixed, and 1.5% Other.\n \nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 census, the religious composition of the Borough of Swindon comprised: 46.6% Christian, 40.5% No religion, 2.7% Muslim, 2.5% Hindu, 0.7% Buddhist, 0.6% Sikh, 0.1% Jewish, 0.6% Other religion, and 5.6% Not stated.\nDemographic overview by area.\nThere are several definitions of the town for statistical purposes. The smallest extent is the former unparished area, now covered by the parishes of West Swindon, Central Swindon North, South Swindon, and Nythe, Eldene and Liden; thus it omits suburbs to the east and north, namely the parishes of Covingham, Stratton St Margaret and Haydon Wick. At the 2011 census, the population of the unparished area was 122,642. The 2011 census also recognised a Built Up Area Subdivision with a population of 182,441.\nAt the 2021 census, the only area covering most of the town was the Built Up Area, which had a population of 183,638. Excluded from this were the parts of Wichelstowe lying in Wroughton parish, the whole of Stratton St Margaret parish, and northern parts of St Andrews parish.\nSt Helena community.\nBy 2018, Swindon had a concentration of people originating from Saint Helena.\nPolish community.\nAfter the end of World War II, Polish refugees were temporarily housed in barracks at RAF Fairford, about to the north. Around 1950, some settled in Scotland and others in Swindon rather than stay in the barracks or hostels they were offered.\nThe 2001 UK Census found that most of the Polish-born people had stayed or returned after serving with British forces during World War II. Swindon and Nottingham were parts of this settlement. Data from that census showed that 566 Swindonians were Polish-born. Notes to those data read: \"The Polish Resettlement Act of 1947, which was designed to provide help and support to people who wished to settle here, covered about 190,000 people ... at the time Britain did not recognise many of the professional [qualifications] gained overseas ... [but] many did find work after the war; some went down the mines, some worked on the land or in steelworks. Housing was more of a problem, and many Poles were forced to live in barracks previously used for POWs ... The first generation took pains to ensure that their children grew up with a strong sense of Polish identity\".\nNHS planners devising services for senior citizens estimated in 1994 that 5% of Swindon's population were not 'ethnically British', and most of those were culturally Polish.\nThe town's Polish ex-servicemen's club, which had run a football team for 45 years, closed in 2012. Barman Jerzy Trojan blamed the decline of both club and team on the children and grandchildren of the original refugees losing their Polish identity.\nGoan community.\nSwindon has a large community of Goan people. Estimates for the total number of Goans in Swindon range from 8,000 to 25,000; in 1999 there were estimated to be only 40 Goan people in the town. In 2013, Swindon was reported to have the highest concentration of Goans anywhere in the world outside of Goa.\nThe Goan population is concentrated in Swindon's New Town area, around Manchester Road. Most of the Goan community are Goan Catholics and have Portuguese nationality due to their ancestry in Portuguese Goa. The Catholic community is served by Holy Rood Catholic Church in the town centre and St Peter's Church in West Swindon, and supported by the Goan Chaplaincy. Services are regularly carried out in Konkani. The Anglican St Luke's Church also carries out Mass in Konkani, believed to be the only Mass regularly carried out in this language in the Church of England.\nThe Goa Swindon Association supports members of the community. It is involved in promoting and introducing Goan culture, such as \"tiatrs\" (Konkani theatre), the annual Goan Summer Festival, and Konkani musical shows, among others.\nAmong the notable Goans based in Swindon is Imtiyaz Shaikh, who has served as Mayor of Swindon since 2024. He is a two-term Eastcott councillor on Swindon Borough Council.\nGovernance.\nThe local council was created in 1974 as the Borough of Thamesdown, out of the areas of Swindon Borough and Highworth Rural District. It was not initially called Swindon because the borough covers a larger area than the town; it was renamed the Borough of Swindon in 1997. The borough became a unitary authority on 1 April 1997, following a review by the Local Government Commission for England. The town is therefore no longer under the auspices of Wiltshire Council.\nCouncil elections are held in three out of every four years, with one-third of the seats up for election in each of those years; beginning in 2026, the whole council will be elected every four years. Labour gained control of the council from the Conservatives at the 2023 election, and increased their majority in 2024.\nSwindon is represented in the national parliament by two MPs. Heidi Alexander (Labour) was elected for the Swindon South seat in July 2024 with a 16% swing from the Conservatives. Will Stone, also Labour, represents Swindon North \u2013 which covers the whole of the north of the borough, including Blunsdon and Highworth \u2013 after a 19% swing at the same election. Prior to 1997 there was a single seat for Swindon, although much of what is now in Swindon was then part of the Devizes seat.\nPlaces of worship.\nThere are numerous places of worship in Swindon, some of which are listed buildings. Until 1845, the only church in Swindon was the Holy Rood Church, a Grade II listed building. That year, St Mark's Church was built. In 1851, Christ Church was built. Later in the year, the first Roman Catholic chapel was opened in the town and was also named Holy Rood. In 1866, Cambria Baptist Chapel was built. In the 1880s, Bath Road Methodist Chapel was built. In 1885, St Barnabas Church was built, followed by the Baptists Tabernacle (1886\u20131978). In 1907, St Augustine's Church in Even Swindon was built. Various churches and places of worship were built in the town by other denominations and faiths. Pattern Church was launched on Christmas 2018, on the site of the former Pattern Store.\nEconomy.\n Major employers in the town include BMW/Mini (formerly Pressed Steel Fisher) in Stratton, Dolby Labs, international engineering consultancy firm Halcrow, and retailer W H Smith's distribution centre and headquarters. Electronics company Intel, insurance and financial services companies such as Nationwide Building Society and Zurich Financial Services, the energy companies RWE Generation UK plc and Npower (a company of the Innogy group), the fleet management company Arval, pharmaceutical companies such as Canada's Patheon and the United States\u2013based Catalent Pharma Solutions and French medical supplies manufacturer Vygon (UK) have their UK divisions headquartered in the town. \nSwindon also has the head office of the National Trust and the head office of the UK Space Agency. Other employers include all of the national Research Councils, the British Computer Society, and TE Connectivity.\nFrom 1985 to 2021, Japanese car manufacturer Honda had its sole UK plant at South Marston, just outside Swindon. In March 2021, it was announced that logistics firm Panattoni would move to the former Honda site.\nSwindon was for a time a centre of excellence for 3G and 4G mobile telecommunications research and development for Motorola, Lucent Technologies (later Alcatel-Lucent), Nokia Siemens Networks and Cisco. The factory built in 1998 for Motorola's GSM division at Groundwell, north Swindon, has been described as \"striking and futuristic\".\nTransport.\nRailway.\nSwindon is an important railway town. Swindon railway station opened in 1842 as \"Swindon Junction\" and, until 1895, every train stopped for at least ten minutes to change locomotives. As a result, the station hosted the first recorded railway refreshment rooms.\nThe station is served by frequent inter-city trains to London Paddington eastbound, and westbound to Bristol Temple Meads, Cheltenham Spa and Cardiff Central, along the Great Western Main Line and Golden Valley line. There is also a local service to Westbury, via the Wessex Main Line. All services at Swindon are operated by Great Western Railway.\nOn 8 October 2019, GWR posted a modern speed record when an Intercity Express Train took 44 minutes to travel from Swindon to London Paddington.\nRoad.\nLocated at the junction of two Roman roads, the town has developed into a transport hub over the centuries. It is accessed by two junctions (15 and 16) on the M4 motorway.\nThe town's Magic Roundabout, at the junction of five roads, contains five mini-roundabouts and has a contra-rotational hub at its centre. It is built on the site of Swindon Wharf on the abandoned Wilts &amp; Berks Canal, near the County Ground. The official name was \"County Islands\", although it was known colloquially as the \"Magic Roundabout\" and the official name was changed to match its nickname.\nBus and coach.\nSwindon bus operators are Swindon's Bus Company (formerly Thamesdown) and Stagecoach West. Key routes link the town with Cheltenham, Chippenham, Cirencester, Devizes and Trowbridge. National Express coaches use the bus interchange at Fleming Way in the town centre.\nStagecoach's former bus depot on Eastcott Road was approved for development as a housing site in 2018.\nCycling.\nNational Cycle Network Route 45 runs through the town.\nTourism and recreation.\nEvents.\nAnnual events in Swindon include:\nShopping.\nFormer\nGreen spaces.\nPublic parks include Lydiard Country Park, Shaw Forest Country Park, The Lawns, Stanton Park, Queens Park, GWR Park, Town Gardens, Pembroke Gardens and Coate Water. Fishing for the Moon is a small urban sensory garden created in 1990 by Thamesdown Borough Council and renovated by South Swindon Parish Council in 2021. Its central feature is an artwork by Michael Farrell.\nMedia.\nOnline.\nSwindon has many online media outlets, with the largest being \"The Swindon Advertiser\". SwindonWeb was the first website dedicated to Swindon in 1997, followed by SwindonLink and The Swindonian, with many other sites now available, including Total Swindon and \"The Swindon Post\".\nPrint.\nNewspapers and magazines.\nSwindon has a daily newspaper, the \"Swindon Advertiser\", with daily circulation of about 4,000 with an estimated readership of 21,000. Other newspapers covering the area include Bristol's daily \"Western Daily Press\" and the \"Swindon Advertiser\"s weekly, the \"Gazette and Herald\"; the \"Wiltshire Ocelot\" (a free listings magazine), \"The Swindonian Monthly Magazine\" \"Swindon Star\", \"Hungry Monkeys\" (a comic), \"Stratton Outlook\", \"Frequency\" (an arts and cultural magazine), \"Great Swindon Magazine\", \"Swindon Business News\", \"Swindon Link\" and \"Highworth Link\".\nLiterature.\nSwindon is the setting for the \"Thursday Next\" series of novels by Jasper Fforde and \"The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time\" by Mark Haddon.\nRadio.\nThe first commercial radio station launched in Swindon was Wiltshire Radio in 1982, with BBC Wiltshire Sound launched in 1989. Wiltshire Radio later changed to GWR FM, then to Heart Wiltshire, and is now Heart West, broadcasting from studios in Bristol. An alternative commercial radio station, Brunel FM, was launched in 2006 and replaced in turn by Total Star Swindon, More Radio, Jack FM and Sam FM; the frequency is now used by Greatest Hits Radio Swindon. Another independent station called Swindon FM was also on the air between 2001 and 2006.\nSince 2008, the town has had its own 24-hour community radio station, Swindon 105.5, which was given the Queen's Award for Voluntary Service in 2014, the highest award which can be given to a voluntary group. In regard to the wider Wiltshire county, the public-sector station BBC Radio Wiltshire remains based in Swindon.\nTelevision.\nThe Swindon area is in the overlap between TV transmitters from two regions, Oxford (Thames Valley) and Mendip, supplemented by a local relay transmitter in the town (West of England). ITV regional news programmes come from ITV News Meridian (with offices at Abingdon) and ITV West Country (Bristol). On BBC One, the area is served by both South Today (from Southampton) and Points West (Bristol).\nBetween 1973 and 1982, the town had its own cable television channel called Swindon Viewpoint. This was a community television project run mainly by enthusiasts from studios in Victoria Hill, and later by Media Arts at the Town Hall Studios. It was followed by the more commercial Swindon's Local Channel, which included pay-per-view films. NTL (later Virgin Media) took over the channel's parent company, ComTel, and closed the station.\nEducation.\nThe borough of Swindon has many primary schools, 12 secondary schools, and two purpose-built sixth-form colleges. Three secondary schools also have sixth forms. There is one independent school, Maranatha Christian School at Sevenhampton.\nSecondary schools.\nThe secondary schools in the Borough of Swindon are:\nBradon Forest School (ages 11\u201318) is at Purton, near the west side of Swindon.\nFurther education.\nNew College and Swindon College cater for the town's further education and higher education requirements, mainly for 16 to 22-year-olds. Swindon College is one of the largest FE-HE colleges in southwestern England, with a purpose-built campus in North Star, Swindon.\nHigher education.\nSwindon is the UK's largest centre of population without its own university (by comparison, there are two universities in nearby Bath, which is half Swindon's size). In March 2008, a proposal was made by former Swindon MP, Anne Snelgrove, for a university-level institution to be established in the town within a decade, culminating in a future 'University of Swindon' (with some touting the future institution to be entitled 'The Murray John University, Swindon', after the town's most distinguished post-war civic leader).\nOxford Brookes University has had a campus in Swindon since 1999. The campus offers degrees in Adult Nursing and Operating Department Practice (ODP). The Joel Joffe Building opened in August 2016 and was officially opened in February 2017 by Lord Joel Joffe, a long-time Swindon resident and former human rights lawyer. From 1999 to 2016, the Ferndale Campus was based in north-central Swindon. The main OBU campus is about northeast of Swindon. The university also sponsors UTC Swindon, which opened in 2014 for students aged 14\u201319.\nBetween 2000 and 2008, the University of Bath had a campus in Walcot, east Swindon.\nThe Royal Agricultural University has its Cultural Heritage Institute in the former railway carriage works.\nSport.\nFootball.\nSwindon Town are based at the County Ground near the town centre. They play in League Two, the fourth-highest tier of the English football league system, after being relegated from League One in 2021. The affiliated club, Swindon Town Women, play in Division One South West of the FA Women's National League; their first team play home games outside the town at Fairford Town's Cinder Lane ground.\nThe town also has a non-league club, Swindon Supermarine, playing in the Premier South division of the Southern League at their South Marston ground. New College Swindon run a football academy for both sexes, usually alongside academic courses; until the summer of 2020 they fielded a football team, which played in Division One of the Hellenic League and was based at Supermarine's ground.\nRugby.\nSwindon has three rugby union teams, Swindon Rugby Football Club, Swindon College Old Boys Rugby Football Club, who play at Nationwide Pavillion[sic], and Supermarine Rugby Football Club.\nSwindon St George is a rugby league team playing in the West of England Rugby League. The kit consists of black and red shirts with black shorts and socks. It was founded in 2007.\nEnglish Rugby player Jonny May lived in Chiseldon and attended The Ridgeway School &amp; Sixth Form College located in Wroughton, both nearby villages to Swindon.\nIce hockey.\nThe Swindon Wildcats play in the second-tier English Premier Ice Hockey League. Since their inception in 1986, the Wildcats have played their home games at the 2,800-capacity Link Centre in West Swindon.\nMotor sports.\nSwindon Robins is a speedway team competing in the top national division, the SGB Premiership, where they were champions in the 2017 and 2019 seasons. The team was based at the Abbey Stadium, Blunsdon from 1949, but has not been able to race there since the end of the 2019 season.\nFoxhill motocross circuit is southeast of the town and has staged Grand Prix events.\nAthletics.\nSwindon has two athletics clubs affiliated to England Athletics, Swindon Harriers (running, track and field) and Swindon Striders (running). There is also a group called Swindon Shin Splints. Two Hash House Harrier running groups are centred on Swindon, North Wilts Hash House Harriers (who run every Sunday) and the Moonrakers Hash House Harriers (who run every other Wednesday evening). There is a parkrun held every Saturday at Lydiard Country Park.\nClimbing.\nSwindon Mountaineering Club is affiliated to the British Mountaineering Council and organises meets for walking, rock climbing and mountaineering in the UK and abroad. Members train on an indoor climbing wall at the Rockstar Climbing Centre in Swindon.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59909", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59909", "title": "Danzig Research Society", "text": "Scientific society (1743\u20131936)\nThe Naturforschende Gesellschaft in Danzig (translated Danzig Research Society, , ) was a scientific organization, founded in 1743 in Danzig (Gda\u0144sk), Poland, which continued in existence until 1936. The \"Societas Physicae Experimentalis\" (Experimental Physics Society) was one of the oldest research societies in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth and in Central and Eastern Europe.\nHistory.\nAlready in 1670, the physician Israel Conradi (1634\u20131715) had tried to organize a scientific society in the city, without success. Several others tried after him, until Daniel Gralath (1708\u20131767) finally succeeded. His father-in-law was Jacob Theodor Klein (1685\u20131759), a city secretary and also a very distinguished scientist, nicknamed \"Gedanensium Plinius\".\nAt the end of 1742, Gralath had gathered a group of learned men for his purpose, an \"Experimental Physics Society\" (Societas Physicae Experimentalis), one of the oldest research societies of its type. The first organizing meeting took place on 7 November 1742, the first scientific meeting was called on 2 January 1743. The aim of the Society was to practice and popularize science, among others through weekly public demonstrations of the most interesting experiments in physics. Often the effects of electricity were studied, with the help of the Leyden jar. Since 1746 these took place in the Great Hall of the Green Gate. Gralath also became a councilman and, in 1763, mayor of Danzig. The Society was also supported by Polish King Stanis\u0142aw August Poniatowski.\nKnown members were Nathanael Matthaeus von Wolf, Michael Christoph Hanow, Gottfried Lengnich, Johann Jacob Mascov, who wrote the \"Geschichte der Teutschen\", also Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit and the prince-bishop Adam Stanis\u0142aw Grabowski.\nThe sessions of the Society were also attended by many famous persons of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth like Great Lithuanian Hetman Micha\u0142 Kazimierz \"Rybe\u0144ko\" Radziwi\u0142\u0142, August Fryderyk Moszy\u0144ski, Joachim Chreptowicz.\nAfter the annexation of the city by Prussia in the Second Partition of Poland and during the Napoleonic Wars, the organization fell into such decline that in 1812 it was proposed to dissolve it, however, several members decided to continue its activity.\nIn 1840 Alexander von Humboldt accompanied Prussian King Frederick William IV on the way to K\u00f6nigsberg, and Humboldt received an honorary membership in the Society. Later, the society offered Humboldt stipends. The collections of the Society were displayed in the West-Prussian Provincial Museum located at the Green Gate.\nIn 1845 the society was located in a Renaissance-era building at the Mot\u0142awa, an arm of the Vistula River. The new seat housed research facilities, a small museum and a library, and was decorated with portraits of former prominent members of the organization, as well as a portrait of Nicolaus Copernicus, and a bust of Johannes Hevelius received as a gift from Polish King Stanis\u0142aw August Poniatowski in the 18th century. In 1866, an astronomical observatory was placed in its tower.\nAfter 200 years of existence, the society ceased to exist in 1936. The building and many priceless valuables were destroyed during the Soviet offensive in 1945, two years after the 200th anniversary.\nThe building at the Mot\u0142awa river was rebuilt after the war. It houses an Archaeological Museum today.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59910", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59910", "title": "Star Wars, Episode VI - Return of the Jedi", "text": ""}
{"id": "59911", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59911", "title": "Star Wars, Episode I - The Phantom Menace", "text": ""}
{"id": "59912", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59912", "title": "Star Wars, Episode V - The Empire Strikes Back", "text": ""}
{"id": "59913", "revid": "11526809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59913", "title": "The Lord of the Rings, The Fellowship Of The Ring", "text": ""}
{"id": "59914", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59914", "title": "Mission, Impossible", "text": ""}
{"id": "59916", "revid": "3126005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59916", "title": "Erysimum", "text": "Genus of flowering plants\nErysimum, or wallflower, is a genus of flowering plants in the cabbage family, Brassicaceae. It includes more than 150 species, both popular garden plants and many wild forms. \"Erysimum\" is characterised by star-shaped (and/or two-sided) trichomes growing from the stem, with yellow, red, pink or orange flowers and multiseeded seed pods.\nMorphology.\nWallflowers are annuals, herbaceous perennials or sub-shrubs. The perennial species are short-lived and in cultivation treated as biennials. Most species have stems erect, with a covering of bifid hairs, usually 25 \u00b1 53cm \u00d7 2\u20133mm in size. The leaves are narrow and fixed. The lower leaves are broad and round with backwardly directed lobes, 50\u201380mm \u00d7 0.5\u20133mm. Stem leaves are linear, entire, growing whitish with 2-fid hairs; 21\u201343mm \u00d7 1.5\u20132mm. Flower clusters grow at intervals on short equal stalks along the stem, with bright yellow to red or pink bilateral flowers. Flowering occurs during spring and summer. One species, \"Erysimum semperflorens\", native to Morocco and Algeria, has white flowers. The flowering part of the stem ranges from 4 to 7mm. There are four pouch-shaped sepals, light green, 5\u20137mm \u00d7 1.5\u20132mm.\nEtymology.\nThe genus name \"Erysimum\" is derived from the Ancient Greek \"erysimon\" (, \"Sisymbrium officinale\" or \"Sisymbrium polyceratium\u200a\", the hedgenettle), itself from the word \"eryo\" () meaning to drag or \"eryso\", a form of \"rhyomai\" (), meaning \"to ward off\" or \"to heal\" in reference to its medicinal properties.\nThe common name \"wallflower\" derives from the plant's ability to grow successfully in loose wall mortar.\nDistribution.\nWallflowers are native to temperate Eurasia, North Africa and Macaronesia, and North America south to Costa Rica. Many wallflowers are endemic to small areas, such as:\nCultivation.\nMost wallflower garden cultivars (e.g. \"Erysimum\" 'Chelsea Jacket') are derived from \"E. cheiri\" (often placed in \"Cheiranthus\"), from southern Europe. They are often attacked by fungal and bacterial disease, so they are best grown as biennials and discarded after flowering. They are also susceptible to clubroot, a disease of Brassicaceae. Growth is best in dry soils with very good drainage, and they are often grown successfully in loose wall mortar. There is a wide range of flower color in the warm spectrum, including white, yellow, orange, red, pink, maroon, purple and russet. The flowers, appearing in spring, usually have a strong, pleasant fragrance. Wallflowers are often associated in spring bedding schemes with tulips and forget-me-nots.\nThe cultivar 'Bowles's Mauve' has gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit. It can become a bushy evergreen perennial in milder locations. It is strongly scented and attractive to bees.\nEcology.\n\"Erysimum\" is found in a range of habitats across the northern hemisphere, and has developed diverse morphology and growth habits (herbaceous annual or perennial, and woody perennial). Different \"Erysimum\" species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths) species including the garden carpet (\"Xanthorhoe fluctuata\"). In addition, some species of weevils, like \"Ceutorhynchus chlorophanus\", live inside the fruits feeding on the developing seeds. Many species of beetles, bugs and grasshoppers eat the leaves and stalks. Some mammalian herbivores, for example mule deer (\"Odocoileus hemionus\") in North America, argali (\"Ovis ammon\") in Mongolia, red deer (\"Cervus elaphus\") in Central Europe, or Spanish ibex (\"Capra pyrenaica\") in the Iberian Peninsula, feed on wallflower flowering and fruiting stalks. \"Erysimum crepidifolium\" (pale wallflower) is toxic to some generalist vertebrate herbivores.\nMost wallflowers are pollinator-generalists, their flowers being visited by many different species of bees, bee flies, hoverflies, butterflies, beetles, and ants. However, there are some specialist species. For example, \"Erysimum scoparium\" is pollinated almost exclusively by \"Anthophora alluadii\".\nDefensive compounds.\nLike most Brassicaceae, species in the genus \"Erysimum\" produce glucosinolates as defensive compounds. However, unlike almost all other genera in the Brassicaceae, \"Erysimum\" also accumulates cardiac glycosides, another class of phytochemicals with an ecological importance in insect defense. Cardiac glycosides specifically function to prevent insect herbivory and/or oviposition by blocking ion channel function in muscle cells. These chemicals are toxic enough to deter generalist, and even some specialist insect herbivores. Cardiac glycoside production is widespread in \"Erysimum\", with at least 48 species in the genus containing these compounds. Accumulation of cardiac glycosides in \"Erysimum crepidifolium\", but not other tested species, is induced by treatment with jasmonic acid and methyl jasmonate, endogenous elicitors of chemical defenses in many plant species. Molecular phylogenetic analysis indicates that \"Erysimum\" diversification from other Brassicaceae species that do not produce cardiac glycosides began in the Pliocene (2.33\u20135.2 million years ago), suggesting relatively recent evolution of cardiac glycosides as a defensive trait in this genus.\nEscape from herbivory.\nThe evolution of novel chemical defenses in plants, such as cardenolides in the genus \"Erysimum\", is predicted to allow escape from herbivory by specialist herbivores and expansion into new ecological niches. The crucifer-feeding specialist \"Pieries rapae\" (white cabbage butterfly) is deterred from feeding and oviposition by cardenolides in \"Erysimum cheiranthoides.\" Similarly, \"Anthocharis cardamines\" (orange tip butterfly), which oviposits on almost all crucifer species, avoids \"E. cheiranthoides.\" \"Erysimum asperum\" (western wallflower) is resistant to feeding and oviposition of \"Pieris napi macdunnoughii\" (synonym \"Pieris marginalis\", margined white butterfly). Two crucifer-feeding beetles, \"Phaedon\" sp. and \"Phyllotreta\" sp., were deterred from feeding by cardenolides that were applied to their preferred food plants. Consistent with the hypothesis of enhanced speciation after escape from herbivory, phylogenetic studies involving 128 \"Erysimum\" species indicate diversification in Eurasia between 0.5 and 2 million years ago, and in North America between 0.7 and 1.65 million years ago.) This evolutionarily rapid expansion of the \"Erysimum\" genus has resulted in several hundred known species distributed throughout the northern hemisphere.\nEthnobotanical uses of \"Erysimum\".\n\"Erysimum\" species have a long history of use in traditional medicine. In \"Naturalis Historia\" by Pliny the Elder (c.\u200977), \"Erysimum\" is classified as a medicinal rather than a food plant. \"Erysimum cheiri\" is described as a medicinal herb in \"De Materia Medica\" by Pedanius Dioscorides (c.\u200970), which was the predominant European medical pharmacopeia for more than 1,500 years. Other medieval descriptions of medicinal herbs and their uses, including the \"Dispensatorium des Cordus\" by Valerius Cordus (1542), \"Bocks Kr\u00e4uterbuch\" by Hieronymus Bock (1577), and Tabernaemontanus' \"Neuw Kreuterbuch\" by Jacobus Theodorus Tabernaemontanus (1588), also discuss applications of \"E. cheiri\". In traditional Chinese medicine, \"Erysimum cheiranthoides\" has been used to treat heart disease and other ailments. Although medical uses of \"Erysimum\" became uncommon in Europe after the Middle Ages, \"Erysimum diffusum,\" as well as purified erysimin and erysimoside, have been applied more recently as Ukrainian ethnobotanical treatments.\nSelected species.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59917", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59917", "title": "Erysimum 'Chelsea Jacket'", "text": "Cultivar of wallflower\n\"Erysimum\" 'Chelsea Jacket' is a type of wallflower. It is a small, short-lived, perennial cultivar of \"Erysimum cheiri\" usually grown for its long-lasting and brightly coloured flowers.flowers. It is closely related to \"Cheiranthus\". This plant has been given an RHS Award of Garden Merit. Normal height is about 30\u00a0cm, prostrate habit.\nThe plant flourishes in full sun and well-drained soil and is fairly hardy. It flowers continually from late spring to late summer. Flowers start off yellow then fade through tangerine to purple, often with a succession of colours on the same flower head. Some claim that it can be seen changing colors from day to day.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59919", "revid": "1315461786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59919", "title": "Pheasant", "text": "Bird in family Phasianidae\nPheasants ( ) are birds of several genera within the family Phasianidae in the order Galliformes. Although they can be found all over the world in introduced (and captive) populations, the pheasant genera's native range is restricted to Eurasia. The classification \"pheasant\" is paraphyletic, as birds referred to as pheasants are included within both the subfamilies Phasianinae and Pavoninae, and in many cases are more closely related to smaller phasianids, grouse, and turkey (formerly classified in Perdicinae, Tetraoninae, and Meleagridinae) than to other pheasants.\nPheasants are characterised by strong sexual dimorphism, males being highly decorated with bright colours and adornments such as wattles. Males are usually larger than females and have longer tails. Males play no part in rearing the young. \nA pheasant's call or cry can be recognised by the fact it sounds like a rusty sink or valve being turned.\nPheasants eat mostly seeds, grains, roots, and berries, while in the summer they take advantage of insects, fresh green shoots, spiders, earthworms, and snails. However, as an introduced species, in the UK they are a threat to endangered native adders.\nThe best-known is the common pheasant, which is widespread throughout the world, in introduced feral populations and in farm operations. Various other pheasant species are popular in aviaries, such as the golden pheasant (\"Chrysolophus pictus\").\nEtymology.\nAccording to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", the word \"pheasant\" ultimately comes from Phasis, the ancient name of what is now called the Rioni River in Georgia.\nIt passed from Greek to Latin to French (spelled with an initial \"f\") then to English, appearing for the first time in English around 1299.\nSpecies in taxonomic order.\nThis list is ordered to show presumed relationships between species.\nPrevious classifications.\n\"Euplocamus\" and \"Gennceus\" are older names more or less corresponding to the current \"Lophura\".\nThese old genera were used for:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59920", "revid": "46849355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59920", "title": "Alfred Tarski", "text": "Polish\u2013American mathematician (1901\u20131983)\nAlfred Tarski (; ; born Alfred Teitelbaum; January 14, 1901 \u2013 October 26, 1983) was a Polish-American logician and mathematician. A prolific author best known for his work on model theory, metamathematics, and algebraic logic, he also contributed to abstract algebra, topology, geometry, measure theory, mathematical logic, set theory, type theory, and analytic philosophy.\nEducated in Poland at the University of Warsaw, and a member of the Lw\u00f3w\u2013Warsaw school of logic and the Warsaw school of mathematics, in 1939 he immigrated to the United States, where in 1945 he became a naturalized citizen. Tarski taught and carried out research in mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley, from 1942 until his death in 1983.\nHis biographers Anita Burdman Feferman and Solomon Feferman state that, \"Along with his contemporary, Kurt G\u00f6del, he changed the face of logic in the twentieth century, especially through his work on the concept of truth and the theory of models.\"\nLife.\nEarly life and education.\nAlfred Tarski was born Alfred Teitelbaum (Polish spelling: \"Tajtelbaum\") to Polish-Jewish parents in comfortable circumstances. He first showed mathematical ability in secondary school, at Warsaw's \"Szko\u0142a Mazowiecka\". Nevertheless in 1918 he entered the University of Warsaw intending to study biology.\nAfter Poland regained independence in 1918, Warsaw University came under the leadership of Jan \u0141ukasiewicz, Stanis\u0142aw Le\u015bniewski, and Wac\u0142aw Sierpi\u0144ski and quickly became a world-leading research institution in logic, foundational mathematics, and the philosophy of mathematics. Le\u015bniewski recognized Tarski's potential as a mathematician and encouraged him to abandon biology.\nTarski attended courses taught by \u0141ukasiewicz, Sierpi\u0144ski, Stefan Mazurkiewicz, and Tadeusz Kotarbi\u0144ski and in 1924 became the only person ever to complete a doctorate under Le\u015bniewski's supervision. His thesis, \"O wyrazie pierwotnym logistyki\" (\"On the Primitive Term of Logistic\"), was published in 1923.\nTarski and Le\u015bniewski soon grew cool to each other, mainly due to Le\u015bniewski's growing anti-semitism. In later life, however, Tarski expressed the warmest praise (which was reciprocated) for Kotarbi\u0144ski.\nIn 1923 Alfred Teitelbaum and his brother Wac\u0142aw changed their surname to \"Tarski\". The brothers also converted to Roman Catholicism, Poland's dominant religion: Alfred, even though he was an avowed atheist. \nCareer.\nAfter becoming the youngest person ever to complete a doctorate at Warsaw University, Tarski taught logic at the Polish Pedagogical Institute, mathematics and logic at the University, and served as \u0141ukasiewicz's assistant. Because these positions were poorly paid, from 1925 Tarski also taught mathematics at the Third Boys\u2019 Gymnasium (seondary school) of the Trade Union of Polish Secondary-School Teachers (later the Stefan \u017beromski Gymnasium). Before World War II it was not uncommon for European intellectuals of research caliber to teach secondary school. Until his departure for the United States in 1939, Tarski wrote several textbooks and many papers \u2013 a number of them ground-breaking \u2013 while supporting himself mainly by teaching secondary-school mathematics.\nIn 1929 Tarski married fellow teacher Maria Witkowska, a Catholic Pole who had served during the Polish\u2013Soviet War (1919\u20131921) as a courier for the Polish Army. They had two children: son Jan Tarski, who became a physicist; and daughter Ina, who married mathematician Andrzej Ehrenfeucht.\nTarski applied for a chair of philosophy at Lw\u00f3w University, but on Bertrand Russell's recommendation it was awarded to Leon Chwistek. In 1930 Tarski visited the University of Vienna, lectured to Karl Menger's colloquium, and met Kurt G\u00f6del. Thanks to a fellowship, he was able to return to Vienna during the first half of 1935 to work with Menger's research group. From Vienna he traveled to Paris to present his ideas on truth at the first meeting of the Unity of Science movement, an offshoot of the Vienna Circle.\nTarski's academic career in Poland was affected by his heritage. In 1937, when he applied for a chair at Pozna\u0144 University, the chair was abolished to avoid assigning it to Tarski \u2013 indisputably the strongest applicant \u2013 because he was Jewish.\nTarski's ties to the Unity of Science movement likely saved his life, because they resulted in his being invited to address the Unity of Science Congress held in September 1939 at Harvard University. He left Poland in August 1939, on the last ship to sail from Poland for the United States before the German and Soviet invasion of Poland and the outbreak of World War II. Tarski left reluctantly, because Le\u015bniewski had died a few months before, creating a vacancy which Tarski hoped to fill. Oblivious to the Nazi threat, he left his wife and children in Warsaw, not to see them again until 1946. During the war, nearly all his Jewish extended family were murdered by the German occupiers.\nIn the United States, Tarski held a number of temporary teaching and research positions: at Harvard University (1939), at City College of New York (1940), and thanks to a Guggenheim Fellowship, at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton (1942), where he again met G\u00f6del. In 1942 Tarski joined the mathematics department at the University of California, Berkeley, where he spent the rest of his career. In 1945 he became an American citizen. Although emeritus from 1968, he taught until 1973 and supervised Ph.D. candidates until his death. At Berkeley, Tarski acquired a reputation as an astounding and demanding teacher, as noted by many observers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His seminars at Berkeley quickly became famous in the world of mathematical logic. His students, many of whom became distinguished mathematicians, noted the awesome energy with which he would coax and cajole their best work out of them, always demanding the highest standards of clarity and precision.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tarski was extroverted, quick-witted, strong-willed, energetic, and sharp-tongued. He preferred his research to be collaborative \u2014 sometimes working all night with a colleague \u2014 and was very fastidious about priority.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A charismatic leader and teacher, known for his brilliantly precise yet suspenseful expository style, Tarski had intimidatingly high standards for students, but at the same time he could be very encouraging, and particularly so to women \u2014 in contrast to the general trend. Some students were frightened away, but a circle of disciples remained, many of whom became world-renowned leaders in the field.\nTarski supervised twenty-four Ph.D. dissertations, including those of \u2013 in chronological order \u2013 Andrzej Mostowski, Bjarni J\u00f3nsson, Julia Robinson, Robert Vaught, Solomon Feferman, Richard Montague, James Donald Monk, Haim Gaifman, Donald Pigozzi, and Roger Maddux, as well as Chen Chung Chang and Jerome Keisler, authors of \"Model Theory\" (1973), a classic in the field. He also strongly influenced the dissertations of Adolf Lindenbaum, Dana Scott, and Steven Givant.\nFive of Tarski's students were women, remarkably so, given that men were then the overwhelming majority of graduate students. He had extramarital affairs with at least two of the women. After he showed the work of another female student to a male colleague, the colleague published it himself, causing the woman to break off her graduate studies and later move to a different university.\nTarski lectured at University College, London (1950, 1966), the Institut Henri Poincar\u00e9 in Paris (1955), the Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science at Berkeley (1958\u201360), the University of California at Los Angeles (1967), and the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile (1974\u201375).\nAmong many distinctions garnered over his career, Tarski was elected to the United States National Academy of Sciences, the British Academy, and the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1958; and received honorary degrees from the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile in 1975, from Marseille's Paul C\u00e9zanne University in 1977, and from the University of Calgary, as well as a Berkeley Citation in 1981.\nTarski presided over the Association for Symbolic Logic, 1944\u201346, and the International Union for the History and Philosophy of Science, 1956\u201357; and was an honorary editor of \"Algebra Universalis\".\nWork in mathematics.\nTarski's mathematical interests were exceptionally broad. His collected papers run to about 2,500 pages, most of them on mathematics, not logic. For a concise survey of Tarski's mathematical and logical accomplishments by his former student Solomon Feferman, see \"Interludes I\u2013VI\" in Feferman and Feferman.\nTarski's first paper, published when he was 19 years old, was on set theory, a subject to which he returned throughout his life. In 1924, he and Stefan Banach proved that, if one accepts the Axiom of Choice, a ball can be cut into a finite number of pieces, and then reassembled into a ball of larger size, or alternatively it can be reassembled into two balls whose sizes each equal that of the original one. This result is now called the Banach\u2013Tarski paradox.\nIn \"A decision method for elementary algebra and geometry\", Tarski showed, by the method of quantifier elimination, that the first-order theory of the real numbers under addition and multiplication is decidable. (While this result appeared only in 1948, it dates back to 1930 and was mentioned in Tarski (1931).) This is a very curious result, because Alonzo Church proved in 1936 that Peano arithmetic (the theory of natural numbers) is \"not\" decidable. Peano arithmetic is also incomplete by G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem. In his 1953 \"Undecidable theories\", Tarski et al. showed that many mathematical systems, including lattice theory, abstract projective geometry, and closure algebras, are all undecidable. The theory of Abelian groups is decidable, but that of non-Abelian groups is not.\nWhile teaching at the Stefan \u017beromski Gimnazjum in the 1920s and 30s, Tarski often taught geometry. Using some ideas of Mario Pieri, in 1926 Tarski devised an original axiomatization for plane Euclidean geometry, one considerably more concise than Hilbert's. Tarski's axioms form a first-order theory devoid of set theory, whose individuals are points, and having only two primitive relations. In 1930, he proved this theory decidable because it can be mapped into another theory he had already proved decidable, namely his first-order theory of the real numbers.\nIn 1929 he showed that much of Euclidean solid geometry could be recast as a second-order theory whose individuals are \"spheres\" (a primitive notion), a single primitive binary relation \"is contained in\", and two axioms that, among other things, imply that containment partially orders the spheres. Relaxing the requirement that all individuals be spheres yields a formalization of mereology far easier to exposit than Lesniewski's variant. Near the end of his life, Tarski wrote a very long letter, published as Tarski and Givant (1999), summarizing his work on geometry.\n\"Cardinal Algebras\" studied algebras whose models include the arithmetic of cardinal numbers. \"Ordinal Algebras\" sets out an algebra for the additive theory of order types. Cardinal, but not ordinal, addition commutes.\nIn 1941, Tarski published an important paper on binary relations, which began the work on relation algebra and its metamathematics that occupied Tarski and his students for much of the balance of his life. While that exploration (and the closely related work of Roger Lyndon) uncovered some important limitations of relation algebra, Tarski also showed (Tarski and Givant 1987) that relation algebra can express most axiomatic set theory and Peano arithmetic. For an introduction to relation algebra, see Maddux (2006). In the late 1940s, Tarski and his students devised cylindric algebras, which are to first-order logic what the two-element Boolean algebra is to classical sentential logic. This work culminated in the two monographs by Tarski, Henkin, and Monk (1971, 1985).\nWork in logic.\nTarski's student, Robert Lawson Vaught, has ranked Tarski as one of the four greatest logicians of all time \u2014 along with Aristotle, Gottlob Frege, and Kurt G\u00f6del. However, Tarski often expressed great admiration for Charles Sanders Peirce, particularly for his pioneering work in the logic of relations.\nTarski produced axioms for \"logical consequence\" and worked on deductive systems, the algebra of logic, and the theory of definability. His semantic methods, which culminated in the model theory he and a number of his Berkeley students developed in the 1950s and 60s, radically transformed Hilbert's proof-theoretic metamathematics.\nAround 1930, Tarski developed an abstract theory of logical deductions that models some properties of logical calculi. Mathematically, what he described is just a finitary closure operator on a set (the set of \"sentences\"). In abstract algebraic logic, finitary closure operators are still studied under the name \"consequence operator\", which was coined by Tarski. The set \"S\" represents a set of sentences, a subset \"T\" of \"S\" a theory, and cl(\"T\") is the set of all sentences that follow from the theory. This abstract approach was applied to fuzzy logic (see Gerla 2000).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In [Tarski's] view, metamathematics became similar to any mathematical discipline. Not only can its concepts and results be mathematized, but they actually can be integrated into mathematics. ... Tarski destroyed the borderline between metamathematics and mathematics. He objected to restricting the role of metamathematics to the foundations of mathematics.\nTarski's 1936 article \"On the concept of logical consequence\" argued that the conclusion of an argument will follow logically from its premises if and only if every model of the premises is a model of the conclusion. In 1937, he published a paper presenting clearly his views on the nature and purpose of the deductive method, and the role of logic in scientific studies. His high school and undergraduate teaching on logic and axiomatics culminated in a classic short text, published first in Polish, then in German translation, and finally in a 1941 English translation as \"Introduction to Logic and to the Methodology of Deductive Sciences\".\nTarski's 1969 \"Truth and proof\" considered both G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems and Tarski's undefinability theorem, and mulled over their consequences for the axiomatic method in mathematics.\nTruth in formalized languages.\nIn 1933, Tarski published a very long paper in Polish, titled \"Poj\u0119cie prawdy w j\u0119zykach nauk dedukcyjnych\", \"Setting out a mathematical definition of truth for formal languages.\" The 1935 German translation was titled \"Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen\", \"The concept of truth in formalized languages\", sometimes shortened to \"Wahrheitsbegriff\". An English translation appeared in the 1956 first edition of the volume \"Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics\". This collection of papers from 1923 to 1938 is an event in 20th-century analytic philosophy, a contribution to symbolic logic, semantics, and the philosophy of language. For a brief discussion of its content, see Convention T (and also T-schema).\nA philosophical debate examines the extent to which Tarski's theory of truth for formalized languages can be seen as a correspondence theory of truth. The debate centers on how to read Tarski's condition of material adequacy for a true definition. That condition requires that the truth theory have the following as theorems for all sentences p of the language for which truth is being defined:\n \"p\" is true if and only if p.\nThe debate amounts to whether to read sentences of this form, such as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Snow is white\" is true if and only if snow is white\nas expressing merely a deflationary theory of truth or as embodying truth as a more substantial property (see Kirkham 1992).\nLogical consequence.\nIn 1936, Tarski published Polish and German versions of a lecture, \u201cOn the Concept of Following Logically\",\nhe had given the preceding year at the International Congress of Scientific Philosophy in Paris. A new English translation of this paper, Tarski (2002), highlights the many differences between the German and Polish versions of the paper and corrects a number of mistranslations in Tarski (1983).\nThis publication set out the modern model-theoretic definition of (semantic) logical consequence, or at least the basis for it. Whether Tarski's notion was entirely the modern one turns on whether he intended to admit models with varying domains (and in particular, models with domains of different cardinalities). This question is a matter of some debate in the philosophical literature. John Etchemendy stimulated much of the discussion about Tarski's treatment of varying domains.\nTarski ends by pointing out that his definition of logical consequence depends upon a division of terms into the logical and the extra-logical and he expresses some skepticism that any such objective division will be forthcoming. \"What are Logical Notions?\" can thus be viewed as continuing \"On the Concept of Logical Consequence\".\nLogical notions.\nTarski's \"What are Logical Notions?\" (Tarski 1986) is the published version of a talk that he gave originally in 1966 in London and later in 1973 in Buffalo; it was edited without his direct involvement by John Corcoran. It became the most cited paper in the journal \"History and Philosophy of Logic\".\nIn the talk, Tarski proposed demarcation of logical operations (which he calls \"notions\") from non-logical. The suggested criteria were derived from the Erlangen program of the 19th-century German mathematician Felix Klein. Mautner (in 1946), and possibly an article by the Portuguese mathematician Jos\u00e9 Sebasti\u00e3o e Silva, anticipated Tarski in applying the Erlangen Program to logic.\nThe Erlangen program classified the various types of geometry (Euclidean geometry, affine geometry, topology, etc.) by the type of one-one transformation of space onto itself that left the objects of that geometrical theory invariant. (A one-to-one transformation is a functional map of the space onto itself so that every point of the space is associated with or mapped to one other point of the space. So, \"rotate 30 degrees\" and \"magnify by a factor of 2\" are intuitive descriptions of simple uniform one-one transformations.) Continuous transformations give rise to the objects of topology, similarity transformations to those of Euclidean geometry, and so on.\nAs the range of permissible transformations becomes broader, the range of objects one is able to distinguish as preserved by the application of the transformations becomes narrower. Similarity transformations are fairly narrow (they preserve the relative distance between points) and thus allow us to distinguish relatively many things (e.g., equilateral triangles from non-equilateral triangles). Continuous transformations (which can intuitively be thought of as transformations which allow non-uniform stretching, compression, bending, and twisting, but no ripping or glueing) allow us to distinguish a polygon from an annulus (ring with a hole in the centre), but do not allow us to distinguish two polygons from each other.\nTarski's proposal was to demarcate the logical notions by considering all possible one-to-one transformations (automorphisms) of a domain onto itself. By domain is meant the universe of discourse of a model for the semantic theory of logic. If one identifies the truth value True with the domain set and the truth-value False with the empty set, then the following operations are counted as logical under the proposal:\nIn some ways the present proposal is the obverse of that of Lindenbaum and Tarski (1936), who proved that all the logical operations of Bertrand Russell's and Whitehead's \"Principia Mathematica\" are invariant under one-to-one transformations of the domain onto itself. The present proposal is also employed in Tarski and Givant (1987).\nSolomon Feferman and Vann McGee further discussed Tarski's proposal in work published after his death. Feferman (1999) raises problems for the proposal and suggests a cure: replacing Tarski's preservation by automorphisms with preservation by arbitrary homomorphisms. In essence, this suggestion circumvents the difficulty Tarski's proposal has in dealing with a sameness of logical operation across distinct domains of a given cardinality and across domains of distinct cardinalities. Feferman's proposal results in a radical restriction of logical terms as compared to Tarski's original proposal. In particular, it ends up counting as logical only those operators of standard first-order logic without identity.\nVann McGee (1996) provides a precise account of what operations are logical in the sense of Tarski's proposal in terms of expressibility in a language that extends first-order logic by allowing arbitrarily long conjunctions and disjunctions, and quantification over arbitrarily many variables. \"Arbitrarily\" includes a countable infinity.\nSelected publications.\nAnthologies and collections\nOriginal publications of Tarski\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59921", "revid": "165640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59921", "title": "Staging (rocketry)", "text": ""}
{"id": "59922", "revid": "11454304", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59922", "title": "Peter Scott", "text": "British ornithologist and conservationist (1909\u20131989)\nSir Peter Markham Scott (14 September 1909 \u2013 29 August 1989) was a British ornithologist, conservationist, painter, naval officer, broadcaster and sportsman. The only child of Antarctic explorer Robert Falcon Scott, he took an interest in observing and shooting wildfowl at a young age and later took to their breeding.\nHe established the Wildfowl &amp; Wetlands Trust in Slimbridge in 1946 and helped found the World Wide Fund for Nature, the logo of which he designed. He was a yachting enthusiast from an early age and took up gliding in mid-life. He was part of the UK team for the 1936 Summer Olympics and won a bronze medal in sailing a one-man dinghy. He was knighted in 1973 for his work in conservation of wild animals and was also a recipient of the WWF Gold Medal and the J. Paul Getty Wildlife Conservation Prize.\nEarly life.\nScott was born in London at 174, Buckingham Palace Road, the only child of Antarctic explorer Robert Falcon Scott and his wife, Kathleen (n\u00e9e Edith Agnes Kathleen Bruce), a sculptor. He was only two years old when his father died. Robert Scott, in a last letter to his wife, advised her to \"make the boy interested in natural history if you can; it is better than games.\" He was named after Sir Clements Markham, mentor of Scott's polar expeditions, and a godfather along with J. M. Barrie, creator of Peter Pan.\nKathleen Scott remarried in 1922. Her second husband, Hilton Young (later Lord Kennet), became stepfather to Peter. In 1923, Peter Scott's half-brother, Wayland Young, was born. Scott was educated at Oundle School and Trinity College, Cambridge, initially reading Natural Sciences but graduating in the History of Art in 1931. At Cambridge, he shared lodging with John Berry and the two shared many views.\nAs a student he was also an active member of the Cambridge University Cruising Club, sailing against Oxford in the 1929 and 1930 Varsity Matches. He studied art at the State Academy in Munich for a year followed by studies at the Royal Academy Schools, London. One of the few non-wildlife paintings that he produced during his career, \"Dinghies Racing on Lake Ontario\", is held by the Cambridge University Cruising Club.\nLike his mother, he displayed a strong artistic talent and he became known as a painter of wildlife, particularly birds; he had his first exhibition in London in 1933. His wealthy background allowed him to follow his interests in art, wildlife and many sports, including wildfowling, sailing, gliding and ice skating. He represented Great Britain and Northern Ireland at sailing at the 1936 Summer Olympics, winning a bronze medal in the O-Jolle monotype class. He also participated in the Prince of Wales Cup in 1938 during which he and his crew on the \"Thunder and Lightning\" dinghy designed a modified wearable harness (now known as a trapeze) that helped them win.\nMilitary service.\nDuring the Second World War, Scott served in the Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve. As a sub-lieutenant, during the failed evacuation of the 51st Highland Division he was the British naval officer sent ashore at Saint-Valery-en-Caux in the early hours of 11 June 1940 to evacuate some of the wounded. This was the last evacuation of British troops from the port area of St Valery that was not disrupted by enemy fire.\nThen he served in destroyers in the North Atlantic but later moved to commanding the First (and only) Squadron of Steam Gun Boats against German E-boats in the English Channel.\nScott is credited with designing the Western Approaches ship camouflage scheme, which disguised ship superstructures. In July 1940, he managed to get the destroyer HMS \"Broke\", in which he was serving, experimentally camouflaged, differently on the two sides. To starboard, the ship was painted blue-grey all over, but with white in naturally shadowed areas as countershading, following the ideas of Abbott Handerson Thayer from the First World War. To port, the ship was painted in \"bright pale colours\" to combine some disruption of shape with the ability to fade out during the night, again with shadowed areas painted white. However, he later wrote that compromise was fatal to camouflage, and that invisibility at night (by painting ships in white or other pale colours) had to be the sole objective. By May 1941, all ships in the Western Approaches (the North Atlantic) were ordered to be painted in Scott's camouflage scheme. The scheme was said to be so effective that several British ships including HMS \"Broke\" collided with each other. The effectiveness of Scott's and Thayer's ideas was demonstrated experimentally by the Leamington Camouflage Centre in 1941. Under a cloudy overcast sky, the tests showed that a white ship could approach six miles (9.6\u00a0km) closer than a black-painted ship before being seen.\nOn 8 July 1941, it was announced that Scott had been mentioned in despatches \"for good services in rescuing survivors from a burning Vessel\" in April 1941 while serving on HMS \"Broke\". On 2 October 1942, it was announced that he had again been mentioned in despatches \"for gallantry, daring and skill in the combined attack on Dieppe\". He was further mentioned in despatches on 28 September 1943 for an action in the English Channel on 26 July 1943. On 1 June 1943, he was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross (DSC) \"for skill and gallantry in action with enemy light forces\" for an action in the English Channel on 15 April 1943 while commanding H.M. Steam Gunboat \"Grey Goose\". In the \"London Gazette\" of 9 November 1943, he was awarded a Bar to the DSC for actions in the English Channel on the 4th and 27 September 1943 while commanding the First SGB Flotilla. He was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire in the Military Division (MBE) in the 1942 Birthday Honours.\nPostwar life.\nScott stood as a Conservative in the 1945 general election in Wembley North and narrowly failed to be elected. In 1946, he founded the organisation with which he was ever afterwards closely associated, the Severn Wildfowl Trust (now the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust) with its headquarters at Slimbridge in Gloucestershire. There, through a captive breeding programme, he saved the nene or Hawaiian goose from extinction in the 1950s. In the years that followed, he led ornithological expeditions worldwide, and became a television personality, popularising the study of wildfowl and wetlands.\nHis BBC natural history series, \"Look\", ran from 1955 to 1969 and made him a household name. It included the first BBC natural history film to be shown in colour, \"The Private Life of the Kingfisher\" (1968), which he narrated. He wrote and illustrated several books on the subject, including his autobiography, \"The Eye of the Wind\" (1961). In the 1950s, he also appeared regularly on BBC radio's \"Children's Hour\", in the series, \"Nature Parliament\".\nIn the early 1950s, his designs were used on a range of tableware, \"Wild Geese\", by Midwinter Pottery.\nHe was the subject of \"This Is Your Life\" in 1956 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews at the King's Theatre, Hammersmith, London.\nAs a member of the Species Survival Commission of the International Union for Conservation of Nature, he helped create the Red Data books, the group's lists of endangered species.\nScott was the founder President of the Society of Wildlife Artists and President of the Nature in Art Trust (a role in which his wife Philippa succeeded him). Scott tutored numerous artists including Paul Karslake.\nGliding champion and chairman.\nScott took up gliding in 1956 at the Bristol Gliding club, close to his Slimbridge site. He was able to buy his own glider and started to fly cross-country. This developed to competing in gliding competitions and he was British champion in 1963. \nHe also joined gliding committees (not normal for competition pilots) and became chairman of the British Gliding Association (BGA) for two years from 1968. He was also president of the Bristol &amp; Gloucestershire Gliding Club. \nHe was able to interest Prince Philip in gliding and the prince was guest of honour at a couple of British Gliding Championships.\nLater events.\nFrom 1973 to 1983, Scott was Chancellor of the University of Birmingham. In 1979, he was awarded an Honorary Degree (Doctor of Science) from the University of Bath.\nScott continued with his love of sailing, skippering the 12 Metre yacht \"Sovereign\" in the 1964 challenge for the America's Cup which was held by the United States. \"Sovereign\" suffered a whitewash 4\u20130 defeat in a one-sided competition where the American boat was of a noticeably faster design. From 1955 to 1969 he was the president of the International Yacht Racing Union (now World Sailing).\nHe was one of the founders of the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF, formerly called the World Wildlife Fund), and designed its panda logo. His pioneering work in conservation also contributed greatly to the shift in policy of the International Whaling Commission and signing of the Antarctic Treaty, the latter inspired by his visit to his father's base on Ross Island in Antarctica. In 1986 he received the WWF Gold Medal. In the same year he received the J. Paul Getty Wildlife Conservation Prize for his role as cofounder of WWF and his life-long contributions to saving endangered wildlife.\nScott was a long-time vice-president of the British Naturalists' Association, whose Peter Scott Memorial Award was instituted after his death, to commemorate his achievements.\nHe died of a heart attack on 29 August 1989 in Bristol, at age 79.\nDocumentaries.\nScott narrated \"Wild Wings\", a 1966 British short documentary film, produced by British Transport Films. In 1967, it won an Oscar for Best Short Subject at the 39th Academy Awards.\nIn August 1986, an ITV Special was transmitted by Central Independent Television (Production No.6407) on Scott entitled \"Interest the Boy in Nature\" featuring Konrad Lorenz, Prince Philip, David Attenborough and Gerald Durrell; written, produced and directed by Robin Brown.\nIn 1996 Scott's life and work in wildlife conservation was celebrated in a major BBC \"Natural World\" documentary, produced by Andrew Cooper and narrated by Sir David Attenborough. Filmed across three continents from Hawaii to the Russian arctic, \"In the Eye of the Wind\" was the BBC Natural History Unit's tribute to Scott and the organisation he founded, the Wildfowl and Wetland Trust, on its 50th anniversary.\nIn June 2004, Scott and Sir David Attenborough were jointly profiled in the second of a three-part BBC Two series, \"The Way We Went Wild\", about television wildlife presenters and were described as being largely responsible for the way that the British and much of the world view wildlife.\nScott's life was also the subject of a BBC Four documentary called \"Peter Scott \u2013 A Passion for Nature\" produced in 2006 by Available Light Productions (Bristol).\nLoch Ness Monster.\nIn 1962, he co-founded the Loch Ness Phenomena Investigation Bureau with Conservative MP David James, who had previously been Polar Adviser on the 1948 film \"Scott of the Antarctic\", based on his father's polar expedition. In 1975 Scott proposed the scientific name \"Nessiteras rhombopteryx\" for the Loch Ness Monster (based on a blurred underwater photograph of a supposed fin) so that it could be registered as an endangered species. The name was based on the Ancient Greek for \"monster of Ness with diamond-shaped fin\", but it was later pointed out by \"The Daily Telegraph\" to be an anagram of \"Monster hoax by Sir Peter S\". Robert H. Rines, who took two supposed pictures of the monster in the 1970s, responded by pointing out that the letters could also be read as an anagram for, \"Yes, both pix are monsters, R.\"\nPersonal life.\nScott married the novelist Elizabeth Jane Howard in 1942 and had a daughter, Nicola, born a year later. Howard left Scott in 1946 and they were divorced in 1951.\nIn 1951, Scott married his assistant, Philippa Talbot-Ponsonby, while on an expedition to Iceland in search of the breeding grounds of the pink-footed goose. A daughter, Dafila, was born later in the same year (\"dafila\" is the old scientific name for a pintail). She, too, became an artist, painting birds. A son, Falcon, was born in 1954.\nScott shared a nanny (Enid) with Nigel Hadow and his son Pen Hadow.\nCivilian honours.\nHaving been appointed a military MBE in the 1942 Birthday Honours, he was promoted to Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the Civil Division (CBE) in the 1953 Coronation Honours. Having been appointed a Knight Bachelor in the 1973 New Year Honours for services to conservation and the environment, he was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II during a ceremony at Buckingham Palace on 27 February 1973. In the 1987 Birthday Honours, he was appointed to the Order of the Companions of Honour as a Member (CH) \"for services to conservation\". In 1987 he was also elected Fellow of the Royal Society.\nLegacy.\nThe fish Scotts' wrasse \"Cirrhilabrus scottorum\" was named after Peter and Philippa Scott for their \u201cgreat contribution in nature conservation\".\nThe \"Peter Scott Walk\" passes the mouth of the River Nene and follows the old sea bank along The Wash, from Scott's lighthouse near Sutton Bridge in Lincolnshire to the ferry crossing at King's Lynn.\nThe \"Sir Peter Scott National Park\" is located in central Jamnagar, in Gujarat, India. Jamnagar also has a \"Sir Peter Scott Bird Hospital\". These institutions in Jamnagar were founded as a result of the friendship between Peter Scott and Jam Sahib, the Indian ruler of Jamnagar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59923", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59923", "title": "Mission, Impossible II", "text": ""}
{"id": "59924", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59924", "title": "Interpreter (communication)", "text": ""}
{"id": "59925", "revid": "29056135", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59925", "title": "J. F. C. Fuller", "text": "British Army general (1878\u20131966)\nMajor-General John Frederick Charles \"Boney\" Fuller (1 September 1878 \u2013 10 February 1966) was a senior British Army officer, a military historian and strategist, a fascist, and an occultist. \nDuring World War I, Fuller became a staff officer in the Tank Corps and helped plan the tank attack during the Battle of Cambrai. His Plan 1919 for a fully mechanised offensive against the German army was not implemented, due to the end of the war. \nAs a military theorist, Fuller was highly prolific and his ideas influenced army officers in Britain, Germany and the USA. He emphasised the potential of new weapons, especially tanks and aircraft, and was regarded as one of the progenitors of blitzkrieg.\nAfter retiring from the Army, Fuller became an admirer of Nazism, and a member of several fascist and pro-Nazi organisations including the British Union of Fascists and the Right Club. In 1940 he was involved in two coup plots against the British government. Despite this, unlike many other British fascists, he avoided internment, possibly due to his military connections.\nFuller was also interested in the occult, particularly magick and Thelema.\nEarly life.\nFuller was born in Chichester, West Sussex, the son of Alfred Fuller (1832\u20131927), an Anglican clergyman, and Selma Marie Philippine (1847-\n\u20131940), n\u00e9e de la Chevallerie, of French descent but raised in Germany. Alfred Fuller retired as rector of Itchenor and moved to Chichester, where his son was born. After moving to Lausanne with his parents as a boy, he returned to England at the age of 11 without them; three years later, at \"the somewhat advanced age of 14\", he began attending Malvern College and, later trained for an army career at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, from 1897 to 1898. His nickname of \"Boney\", which he was to retain, is said to have come either from an admiration for Napoleon Bonaparte, or from an imperious manner combined with military brilliance which resembled Napoleon's.\nMilitary career.\nPre-World War I.\nFuller was commissioned into the 1st Battalion of the Oxfordshire Light Infantry (the old 43rd Foot) on 3 August 1898. He served in the Second Boer War in South Africa from December 1899 to 1902, and was promoted to lieutenant on 24 February 1900 a couple of months after arriving there. In the spring of 1904 Fuller was sent with his unit to India, where he contracted typhoid fever in autumn of 1905; he returned to England the next year on sick-leave, where he met the woman he married in December 1906 \u2013 Margaretha \"Sonia\" Karnatzki, the daughter of a Warsaw doctor. Instead of returning to India, he was reassigned to Volunteer units in England, serving as adjutant to the 2nd South Middlesex Volunteers (amalgamated into the Kensingtons during the Haldane Reforms) and helping to form the new 10th Middlesex. Fuller later claimed that his position with the 10th Middlesex inspired him to study soldiering seriously. In 1913, he was accepted into the Staff College, Camberley, starting work there in January 1914.\nWorld War I.\nDuring the First World War, Fuller was a staff officer with the Home Forces and with VII Corps in France, and from 1916 in the Headquarters of the Machine-Gun Corps' Heavy Branch which was later to become the Tank Corps. In September 1917, he held discussions with the Minister of Munitions Winston Churchill at the Tank Corps Headquarters in Bermicourt. He helped plan the tank attack at the 20 November 1917 Battle of Cambrai and the tank operations for the autumn offensives of 1918. His Plan 1919 for a fully mechanised offensive against the German army was never implemented. After 1918, in January of which he was promoted to brevet lieutenant colonel, he held various leading positions, notably as a commander of an experimental brigade at Aldershot. He participated in the Allied Tank Committee in London in February 1918.\nWar Office and retirement.\nAfter the war Fuller, who in January 1919 was promoted to brevet colonel in recognition of \"valuable services rendered in connection with the War\", collaborated with his colleague B. H. Liddell Hart in developing new ideas for the mechanisation of \narmies, launching a crusade for the mechanisation and modernisation of the British Army. Chief instructor at the Staff College, Camberley from 1923, he served at the War Office as a GSO1 became military assistant to the chief of the Imperial General Staff in 1926. In what came to be known as the \"Tidworth Incident\", Fuller turned down the command of the Experimental Mechanized Force, which was formed on 27 August 1927. The appointment also carried responsibility for a regular infantry brigade and the garrison of Tidworth Camp on Salisbury Plain. Fuller believed he would be unable to devote himself to the Experimental Mechanized Force and the development of mechanized warfare techniques without extra staff to assist him with the additional extraneous duties, which the War Office refused to allocate. He was consulted on the development of warfare by Winston Churchill, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, in the summer of 1928. Fuller was promoted to major-general in 1930 and after refusing the command of the Second Class District of Bombay retired in December 1933 to devote himself entirely to writing.\nPolitical activism.\nPre-World War II.\nInvolvement with British fascism.\nImpatient with what he considered the inability of democracy to adopt military reforms and taking a \"very conventional soldier's view of politics\", Fuller became involved with Sir Oswald Mosley and the British fascist movement. He enlisted in the British Union of Fascists (BUF) in mid-1934. He sat on the party's Policy Directorate and was considered one of Mosley's closest allies. He had already lectured to the fascist-leaning New Britain Group in 1932. He also became a member of the clandestine far-right group the Nordic League by July 1939, a member of Lord Lymington's British Council against European Commitments (formed in September 1938) and of the Imperial Fascist League, as well as an editor of the \"New Pioneer\" (founded in December 1938), the monthly organ of English Array, a fascist group led by Lord Lymington. By March 1936 he was reported to claim that Mosley was an obstacle to fascism in Britain. His wife also became involved in BUF activities, attending Mosley's Earls Court Exhibition Centre in July 1939 and dinner meetings with Fuller's fellow far-right conspirators during the Phoney War.\nInvolvement with foreign fascism.\nAfter preparing a report on the party organisation of BUF in October 1934, Fuller travelled to Nazi Germany in January 1935 alongside Oswald Mosley's confidant William Edward David Allen on a mission to study the Nazi Party structure and was the only foreigner present at the first Nazi German armed manoeuvres. \nA rare Italophile within the BUF ranks after 1935 and a member of the British Union of Friends of Italy, he acted as the military correspondent for the \"Daily Mail\" from the Italian camp during the Italian invasion of Ethiopia (1935), comparing Mussolini's invading force to the crusaders and the Hussites. Following his return, he was quizzed about the war by Winston Churchill at a Buck's Club dinner in the company of B. H. Liddell Hart and Lord Trenchard. \nFuller also travelled to Spain in March 1937, October 1937 and April 1938; his coverage of the Civil War, published in several outlets, was written from an \"extremely pro-Nationalist\" perspective, according to a War Office report.\nFuller visited Nazi Germany regularly and came to know a number of the Nazi Party leaders. He frequently praised Adolf Hitler in his speeches and articles, once describing him as \"that realistic idealist who has awakened the common sense of the British people by setting out to create a new Germany\". He came to believe that the Nazis had created a \"scientific\" state. On 20 April 1939, Fuller was an honoured guest at Hitler's 50th birthday parade (attending \"with official disapproval\" along with Baron Brocket), watching as \"for three hours a completely mechanised and motorised army roared past the F\u00fchrer.\" Afterwards Hitler asked, \"I hope you were pleased with your children?\" Fuller replied, \"Your Excellency, they have grown up so quickly that I no longer recognise them.\"\nFuller's ideas on mechanised warfare continued to be influential in the lead-up to the Second World War, ironically less with his countrymen than with the Nazis, notably Heinz Guderian who spent his own money to have Fuller's \"Provisional Instructions for Tank and Armoured Car Training\" translated. In the 1930s, the German Army implemented tactics similar in many ways to Fuller's analysis, which became known as Blitzkrieg. Like Fuller, theorists of Blitzkrieg partly based their approach on the theory that areas of large enemy activity should be bypassed to be eventually surrounded and destroyed. Blitzkrieg-style tactics were used by several nations throughout the Second World War, predominantly by the Germans in the invasion of Poland (1939), Western Europe (1940), and the Soviet Union (1941). While Germany and to some degree the Western Allies adopted Blitzkrieg ideas, they were not much used by the Red Army, which developed its armored warfare doctrine based on deep operations, which were developed by Soviet military theorists Marshal M. N. Tukhachevsky et al. in the 1920s based on their experiences in the First World War and the Russian Civil War.\nWorld War II.\nPro-Nazi activities.\nAt one meeting of the Right Club, which had been set up in May 1939, Fuller declared the need for \"a bloody revolution\" in Britain and added \"I am ready to start one right away.\" He delivered a talk on \"The Hebrew Mysteries\" to the Nordic League in March 1939, and in mid-1939 was a speaker for The Link at its \"most violently pro-Nazi and anti-Semitic branch\" in Central London. Prior to the war, he was a regular guest at George Pitt-Rivers's estate in Hinton St Mary, worked closely with George Drummond, the \"madly pro-German and anti-Jew\" chairman of Drummonds Bank and president of the Northampton branch of The Link, and was known to the MI5 as an associate of Philip Tonstall Farrer (an ex-intelligence officer with Nazi links), the German prince Hans Heinrich XVII von Hochberg, and Archibald Maule Ramsay (the founder of the Right Club). \nHe continued to speak out in favour of a peaceful settlement with Germany. In July 1939, he was reported by the \"Evening Standard\" as the prospective BUF candidate at the 1940 general election. In October 1939, he conferred in private with Barry Domvile and Lancelot Lawton; a source described him on the occasion as \"very interesting but very bloodthirsty\". Between October 1939 and February 1940, he took part in a series of secret meetings held by the Marquess of Tavistock, a Hitler enthusiast, to discuss plans for collaboration with the Third Reich. \nPlots to overthrow the British government.\nIn a plot organized by John Beckett, Fuller was named as the Minister of Defence for a Quisling government. General Edmund Ironside had been implicated as a potential leader of the coup, with Fuller telling retired Admiral Barry Domvile, a fellow Nazi sympathizer, on 12 November 1939, that \"Ironside is with us.\" A fellow conspirator, Samuel Darwin-Fox, told an MI5 agent that:\"Italy would declare war almost immediately, that France would then give in and that Britain would follow before the end of the week. There would be a short civil war, the Government would leave first for Bristol and then for the Colonies, General Ironside would become dictator and after things had settled down Germany could do as she liked with Britain.\"\nFuller was a regular attendee and occasional speaker at Norman Hay and Lancelot Lawton's pro-Nazi Information and Policy group, which met weekly from January 1940; he left the final meeting on 23 May 1940 in alarm at the news of Captain Ramsay and Norah Elam's arrest by the new war cabinet under Defence Regulation 18B and explained to the \"Evening Standard\" that he had come for \"a lecture on egg farming\". He agreed with Mosley, Liddell Hart and David Lloyd George that it was in the interest of Britain and Europe to make a deal with Hitler after the Battle of France in the summer of 1940 (he later called Churchill, whom he had still admired in 1937, \"the greatest mountebank since Nero\"). In November 1940, he offered to take part in organising aid for the fascist detainees.\nAvoiding internment.\nFuller had been under suspicion for his Nazi sympathies for some time. In his war diaries (p.\u00a0201), Alan Brooke commented that \"the Director of Security called on him [in 1941] to discuss Boney Fuller and his Nazi activities\", but failed to persuade him Fuller \"had any unpatriotic intentions\". Although Fuller was not interned or arrested, he was the only officer of his rank not invited to return to service during the war. \nThere was some suspicion that he was not incarcerated in May 1940 along with other leading officials of the BUF because of his association with General Ironside and other senior officers. According to historian Brian Holden-Reid, the decision not to arrest him was made by Churchill himself. Mosley himself admitted to \"a little puzzlement\" as to why Fuller had not been imprisoned, but Fuller's wife claimed he knew too much to ever be arrested. Ironside had in fact tried to appoint Fuller as his deputy while serving as the Chief of the General Staff in September or October 1939, but the move was blocked by the War Secretary Leslie Hore-Belisha.\nFurther pro-Nazi activities.\nFuller resumed his pro-Nazi activities by 1942. In July 1942, B. H. Liddell Hart also renewed the friendship that had been severed by Fuller in 1937. Fuller joined the fascist Constitutional Research Association, founded in 1941 by Major Harry Edmonds, and participated in private lunches at the Charing Cross Hotel with its members, among them John Middleton Murry, Admiral Domvile, and the Earl of Portsmouth (the former Lord Lymington) by 1943 and as late as 1944. He became a leading officer of the British National Party, formed in 1942, and was a member of the National Front After Victory, organised at the end of the war by A. K. Chesterton. In December 1944, he attacked Winston Churchill's policy of unconditional surrender in the \"Sunday Pictorial\". His opposition to the Allied war doctrine was predicated on his fear of Soviet domination, and he postulated a World War III by 1944.\nPost-World War II.\nAfter the war, Fuller published most of his writings in the obscure US journal \"Ordnance\", produced by the American Ordnance Association, whose secretary Leo A. Codd was a devoted enthusiast of his work since the 1920s.\nIn 1949, during a meeting in Cairo with Abdul Rahman Hassan Azzam, the Secretary General of the Arab League, Robert Gordon-Canning tried to persuade him to accept Fuller's services as a lecturer with a view to inspiring new Arab campaigns against Israel. In 1951, Fuller was asked by the American journalist Harold Montgomery Belgion, a critic of the Nuremberg trials, to comment on Duke of Bedford's proposal for demilitarising Western Europe. In 1954, he expressed his conviction that it should be the British aim to \"blow up the Russian Imperialism internally\" in a letter to the retired Lieutenant General Giffard Le Quesne Martel.\nBy 1951, Fuller became a propagandist and supporter of the Munich-based Anti-Bolshevik Bloc of Nations, and he contributed to the crypto-fascist West German journal \"Nation Europa\" from 1951 to 1958. He later joined the League of Empire Loyalists, formed in 1954.\nHe spent his last years believing that the wrong side had won the Second World War. He most fully announced that thesis in the 1961 edition of \"The Reformation of War\". There, he announced his belief that Hitler was the saviour of the West against the Soviet Union and denounced Churchill and Roosevelt for being too stupid to see so. Fuller died in Falmouth, Cornwall, in 1966.\nMilitary theories.\nFuller was a vigorous, expressive, and opinionated writer of military history and of controversial predictions of the future of war, publishing \"On Future Warfare\" in 1928. He was heavily influenced by the late Victorian doctrine of Social Imperialism, which drew on Social Darwinism and proposed to stem imperial decline with order and efficiency. Seeing his teachings largely vindicated by the Second World War, he published \"Machine Warfare: An Enquiry into the Influence of Mechanics on the Art of War\" in 1942.\n\"The Foundations of the Science of War\" (1926).\nFuller is perhaps best known today for his \"Nine Principles of War\" which have formed the foundation of much of modern military theory since the 1930s, and which were originally derived from a convergence of Fuller's mystical and military interests. The Nine Principles went through several iterations; Fuller stated that \"the system evolved from six principles in 1912, rose to eight in 1915, to, virtually, nineteen in 1923, and then descended to nine in 1925\". For example, notice how his analysis of General Ulysses S. Grant was presented in 1929.\nThe United States Army modified Fuller's list and issued its first list of the principles of war in 1921, making it the basis of advanced training for officers into the 1990s, when it finally reconceptualised its training.\nThe Nine Principles of War.\nThe Nine Principles involve the uses of force (combat power). They have been expressed in various ways, but Fuller's 1925 arrangement is as follows:\nTriads and Trichotomies.\nCabalistic influences on his theories can be shown by his use of the \"Law of Threes\" throughout his work. Fuller did not believe the Principles stood alone as is thought today, but that they complemented and overlapped each other as part of a whole, forming the Law of Economy of Force.\nOrganisation of Force.\nThese Principles were further grouped into the categories of \"Control\" (command / co-operation), \"Pressure\" (attack / activity) and \"Resistance\" (protection / stability). The Principles of Control guides the dual Principles of Pressure and of Resistance, which in turn create the Principles of Control.\nThe Unity of the Principles of War.\nThey were also grouped into Cosmic (\"Spiritual\"), Mental (\"Mind / Thought / Reason\"), Moral (\"Soul / Sensations / Emotions\"), and Physical (\"Body / Musculature / Action\") Spheres, in which two Principles (like the double-edged point of an arrowhead) combine to create or manifest a third, which in turn guides the first and second Principles (like the fletches on an arrow's tail). Each Sphere leads to the creation of the next until it returns to the beginning and repeats the circular cycle with reassessments of the \"Object\" and \"Objective\" to redefine the uses of \"Force\". The Cosmic Sphere is seen as outside the other three Spheres, like the Heavens are outside the Realm of Man. They influence it indirectly in ways that cannot be controlled by the commander, but they are a factor in the use of Force. Force resides in the center of the pattern, as all of these elements revolve around it.\nThese Principles of War have been adopted and further refined by the military forces of several nations, most notably within NATO, and continue to be applied widely to modern strategic thinking. Recently they have also been applied to business tactics and hobby wargaming.\n\"Lectures on Field Service Regulations III\" (1932).\nFuller also had a knack for aphorisms, witness: \"To attack the nerves of an army, and through its nerves the will of its commander, is more profitable than battering to pieces the bodies of its men.\" His \"Lectures\" have attracted much attention over the course of decades, with one staff writer even going so far as to extend his vision of the tank as \"master-weapon\" to say that the helicopter not the tank would be the chief determinant of success on the battlefield from the late 20th century.\nThe book was carefully read by General Heinz Guderian of later Blitzkrieg fame and at the time Germany's foremost tank expert. The Soviet Army initially issued 30,000 copies of it and designated it as a table book for all Red Army officers. Later, the Soviets increased publication to 100,000 volumes. In Czechoslovakia, it became the standard reference for the teaching of mechanized warfare at their staff college. Ironically, in Britain only 500 copies were sold by 1935 while in the United States, the Infantry Journal received a copy at the time of publishing but failed to review it.\n\"Armament and History (1945)\".\nFuller also developed the idea of the \"Constant Tactical Factor\". This states that every improvement in warfare is checked by a counter-improvement, causing the advantage to shift back and forth between the offensive and the defensive. Fuller's firsthand experience in the First World War saw a shift from the defensive power of the machine gun to the offensive power of the tank.\nMagic and mysticism.\nFuller had an occultist side that oddly mixed with his military side. He was an early disciple of English poet and magician Aleister Crowley, and was very familiar with his and other forms of magick and mysticism. He befriended Crowley in 1906 and introduced Crowley's principal disciple Victor Neuburg to him in the same year. While serving in the First Oxfordshire Light Infantry he had entered and won a contest to write the best review of Crowley's poetic works, after which it turned out that he was the only entrant. This essay was later published in book form in 1907 as \"The Star in the West\". After this he became an enthusiastic supporter of Crowley, joining his magical order, the A\u2234A\u2234., within which he became a leading member, editing order documents and its journal, \"The Equinox\". During this period he wrote \"The Treasure House of Images\", edited early sections of Crowley's magical autobiography \"The Temple of Solomon the King\" and produced highly regarded paintings dealing with A\u2234A\u2234 teachings: these paintings have been used in recent years as the covers of the journal's revival, \"The Equinox, Volume IV\".\nAfter the April 1911 \"Jones vs. The Looking Glass\" case, in which a great deal was made of Aleister Crowley's bisexuality (although Crowley himself was not a party to the case), Fuller became worried that his association with Crowley might be a hindrance to his career. Crowley writes in chapter 67 of his book, \"The Confessions of Aleister Crowley\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n...to my breathless amazement he fired pointblank at my head a document in which he agreed to continue his co-operation on condition that I refrain from mentioning his name in public or private under penalty of paying him a hundred pounds for each such offence. I sat down and poured in a broadside at close quarters.\n\"My dear man,\" I said in effect, \"do recover your sense of proportion, to say nothing of your sense of humour. Your contribution, indeed! I can do in two days what takes you six months, and my real reason for ever printing your work at all is my friendship for you. I wanted to give you a leg up the literary ladder. I have taken endless pain to teach you the first principles of writing. When I met you, you were not so much as a fifth-rate journalist, and now you can write quite good prose with no more than my blue pencil through two out of every three adjectives, and five out of every six commas. Another three years with me and I will make you a master, but please don't think that either I or the Work depend on you, any more than J.P. Morgan depends on his favourite clerk.\"\nAfter this, contact between the two men faded rapidly. The front pages of the 1913 issues of the \"Equinox\" (Volume 1, nos. 9 and 10), which gave general directions to A\u2234A\u2234 members, included a notice on the subject of Fuller, who was described as a \"former Probationer\"; the notice disparaged Fuller's magical accomplishments and warned A\u2234A\u2234 members to accept no magical training from him. However, Fuller continued to be fascinated with occult subjects and in later years he would write about topics such as the Qabalah and yoga. During the mid-1940s, Charles Richard Cammell (author of \"Aleister Crowley: The Man, The Mage, The Poet\") met with Fuller and reported his views about Crowley: \"I have heard an eminent personage, General J.F.C. Fuller, a man famous in arms and letters, one who has known the greatest statesmen, warriors, dictators, of our age, declare solemnly that the most extraordinary genius he ever knew was Crowley.\" After the Second World War and Crowley's death, Fuller wrote a letter to Edward Noel FitzGerald stating: \"Crowley was a genuine avatar, but I don't think he knew it, but I do think he senses it in an emotional way.\" (17 September 1949)\nWorks.\nFuller was a prolific writer and published more than 45 books.\nBooks on Warfare\nBiography\nBooks on Occultism\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading\nExternal links.\nFor examples of the use of Fuller's campaign theories in the business world see:\nFor examples of Fuller's occult books and pamphlets see:\nFor examples of Fuller's fascist essays and pamphlets see:"}
{"id": "59926", "revid": "6488475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59926", "title": "Albert I of Belgium", "text": "King of the Belgians from 1909 to 1934\nAlbert I (8 April 1875 \u2013 17 February 1934) was King of the Belgians from 23 December 1909 until his death in 1934. He is popularly referred to as the Knight King (, ) or Soldier King (, ) in Belgium in reference to his role during World War I.\nAlbert was born in Brussels as the fifth child and second son of Prince Philippe, Count of Flanders, and Princess Marie of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, Albert succeeded his uncle Leopold II to the Belgian throne in 1909. He married Elisabeth of Bavaria, with whom he had three children.\nAlbert ruled during an eventful period in the history of Belgium, which included the period of World War I (1914\u20131918), when most of Belgium was occupied by German forces. Other crucial events of his reign included the adoption of the Treaty of Versailles in June 1919, the ruling of the Belgian Congo as an overseas possession of Belgium along with the League of Nations mandate of Ruanda-Urundi, the reconstruction of Belgium following the war, and the first five years of the Great Depression (1929\u20131934).\nAlbert died in a mountaineering accident in eastern Belgium in 1934, at the age of 58, and he was succeeded by his son Leopold III (r.\u20091934\u00a0\u2013\u00a01951).\nEarly life.\nAlbert L\u00e9opold Cl\u00e9ment Marie Meinrad was born 8 April 1875 in Brussels, the fifth child and second son of Prince Philippe, Count of Flanders, and his wife, Princess Marie of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen. Prince Philippe was the third (second surviving) son of Leopold I (r.\u20091831\u00a0\u2013\u00a01865), the first king of the Belgians, and his wife, Louise-Marie of France, and the younger brother of King Leopold II (r.\u20091865\u00a0\u2013\u00a01909). Princess Marie was a relative of Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany (r.\u20091888\u00a0\u2013\u00a01918), and a member of the non-reigning, Catholic branch of the Hohenzollern family. Albert grew up in the Palace of the Count of Flanders, initially as third in the line of succession to the Belgian throne as his reigning uncle Leopold II's son had already died. When, however, Albert's older brother, Prince Baudouin of Belgium, who had been subsequently prepared for the throne, also died young, Albert, at the age of 16, unexpectedly became second in line (after his father) to the Belgian Crown.\nRetiring and studious, Albert prepared himself strenuously for the task of kingship. In his youth, Albert was seriously concerned with the situation of the working classes in Belgium, and personally travelled around working-class districts incognito, to observe the living conditions of the people. Shortly before his accession to the throne in 1909, Albert undertook an extensive tour of the Belgian Congo, which had been annexed by Belgium in 1908, finding the country in poor condition. Upon his return to Belgium, he recommended reforms to protect the native population and further technological progress in the colony.\nMarriage.\nAlbert was married in Munich on 2 October 1900 to Elisabeth of Bavaria, a Wittelsbach princess whom he had met at a family funeral. The civil wedding was conducted by Friedrich Krafft Graf von Crailsheim in the Throne Hall, and the religious wedding was conducted by Cardinal von Stein, assisted by Jakob von T\u00fcrk, Confessionar of the King of Bavaria.\nBased on the letters written during their engagement and marriage (cited extensively in the memoirs of their daughter, Marie-Jos\u00e9) the young couple appear to have been deeply in love. The letters express a deep mutual affection based on a rare affinity of spirit. They also make clear that Albert and Elisabeth continually supported and encouraged each other in their challenging roles as king and queen. The spouses shared an intense commitment to their country and family and a keen interest in human progress of all kinds. Together, they cultivated the friendship of prominent scientists, artists, mathematicians, musicians, and philosophers, turning their court at Laeken into a kind of cultural salon.\nChildren.\nAlbert and Elisabeth had three children:\nAccession.\nFollowing the death of his uncle, Leopold II, Albert succeeded to the Belgian throne in December 1909, since Albert's own father had died in 1905. Previous Belgian kings had taken the royal accession oath only in French; Albert innovated by taking it in Dutch as well. He and his wife, Queen Elisabeth, were popular in Belgium due to their simple, unassuming lifestyle and their harmonious family life, which stood in marked contrast to the aloof, autocratic manner and the dissolute private life of Leopold II. An important aspect of the early years of Albert's reign was his institution of many reforms in the administration of the Belgian Congo, Belgium's only colonial possession.\nReligion.\nKing Albert was a devout Catholic. Many stories illustrate his deep and tender piety. For instance, when his former tutor General De Grunne, in his old age, entered the Benedictine monastery of Maredsous in Belgium, King Albert wrote a letter to him in which he spoke of the joy of giving oneself to God. He said: \"May you spend many years at Maredsous in the supreme comfort of soul that is given to natures touched by grace, by faith in God's infinite power and confidence in His goodness.\" To another friend, Lu Zhengxiang, a former prime minister of China who became a Catholic monk in Belgium, Albert wrote: \"Consecrating oneself wholly to the service of Our Lord gives, to those touched by grace, the peace of soul which is the supreme happiness here below.\" Albert used to tell his children: \"As you nourish your body, so you should nourish your soul.\" In an interesting meditation on what he viewed as the harm that would result if Christian ideals were abandoned in Belgium, he said: \"Every time society has distanced itself from the Gospel, which preached humility, fraternity, and peace, the people have been unhappy, because the pagan civilisation of ancient Rome, which they wanted to replace it with, is based only on pride and the abuse of force\" (Commemorative speech for the war dead of the Battle of the Yser, given by Dom Marie-Albert, Abbot of Orval Abbey, Belgium, in 1936).\nWorld War I.\nThe war inflicted great suffering on Belgium, which was subjected to a harsh German occupation. The King, fearing the destructive results of the war for Belgium and Europe and appalled by the huge casualty rates, worked through secret diplomatic channels for a negotiated peace between Germany and the Entente based on the \"no victors, no vanquished\" concept. He considered that such a resolution to the conflict would best protect the interests of Belgium and the future peace and stability of Europe. Neither Germany nor the Entente were favourable to the idea, tending instead to seek total victory, and Albert's attempts to further a negotiated peace were unsuccessful. At the end of the war, as commander of the Army Group Flanders, consisting of Belgian, British and French divisions, Albert led the final offensive of the war that liberated occupied Belgium. King Albert, Queen Elisabeth, and their children then reentered Brussels to a hero's welcome.\nThe King Albert I Memorial in Nieuwpoort is dedicated to King Albert and the Belgian troops during the Great War. There are also at least two memorials to Albert outside Belgium, to commemorate his role in the Great War: Nancy, France has a Boulevard Albert Ier and a statue of the King, and Le Havre, France has a Boulevard Albert Ier. Interestingly, the Nancy statue is marked \"Albert Ier\" even though, when it was erected in 1934 following his death earlier that year, he was the only King of the Belgians to have been called Albert.\nPost-war years.\nUpon his return to Brussels, King Albert made a speech in which he outlined the reforms he desired to see implemented in Belgium, including an improved military, universal suffrage and the establishment of a Flemish University in Ghent.\nTrip to the United States.\nFrom 23 September to 13 November 1919, King Albert, Queen Elisabeth of Bavaria, and their son Prince Leopold made an official visit to the United States. King Albert and his party arrived in New York City on 2 October. The party would then proceed to visit several sites in the Eastern United States including Boston and Niagara Falls, before heading to the Western United States. King Albert and his party arrived in California on 10 October. Upon arrival in Sacramento, the King awarded the Order of Leopold II to the engineer who was on board the King's special train. During his brief stay in Sacramento thousands came to see the Belgian royals, with mothers even holding out their babies for the King to kiss. During a visit of the historic Native American pueblo of Isleta Pueblo, New Mexico, King Albert decorated Father Anton Docher with Knight in the Order of Leopold II. Docher offered the King a turquoise cross mounted in silver made by the Tiwas Indians. Ten thousand people travelled to Isleta for this occasion. That same year he was elected an honorary member of the New York Society of the Cincinnati. \nIn New York, the King received a ticker tape parade in his honor. The visit was considered a success by the Belgian authorities.\nIntroduction of universal male suffrage.\nSince the Belgian general strike of 1893, plural votes had been granted to individual men based on their wealth, education, and age, but after the Belgian general strike of 1913 the promise had been made to have constitutional reform for \"one man, one vote\" universal suffrage but the German invasion of Belgium in August 1914 and the subsequent occupation delayed the implementation of the commission's proposal.\nIn 1918, King Albert forged a post-war \"Government of National Union\" made up of members of the three main parties in Belgium, the Catholics, the Liberals, and the Socialists and attempted to mediate between the parties in order to bring about \"one man, one vote\" universal suffrage for men. He succeeded in doing so.\nParis Peace Conference.\nThe Belgian Government sent the King to the Paris Peace Conference in April 1919, where he met with the leaders of France, Britain and the United States. He had four strategic goals:\nHe strongly advised against a harsh, restrictive treaty against Germany to prevent future German aggression. He also considered that the dethronement of the princes of Central Europe and, in particular, the dissolution of the Habsburg Empire would constitute a serious menace to peace and stability on the continent. The Allies considered Belgium to be the chief victim of the war, and it aroused enormous popular sympathy, but the King's advice played a small role in Paris.\nLater years.\nAlbert spent much of the remainder of his reign assisting in the postwar reconstruction of Belgium.\nIn 1920 Albert changed the family name from \"Saxe-Coburg-Gotha\" to \"House of Belgium\" (\"van Belgi\u00eb\", in Dutch; \"de Belgique\" in French) as a result of strong anti-German sentiment. This mirrored the British royal family's name-change to House of Windsor in 1917.\nAlbert was a committed conservationist and in 1925, influenced by the ideas of Carl E. Akeley, he founded Africa's first national park, now known as Virunga National Park, in what is now Democratic Republic of Congo.\nDeath.\nA passionate alpinist, King Albert I died in a mountaineering accident on 17 February 1934, while climbing alone on the Roche du Vieux Bon Dieu at Marche-les-Dames, in the Ardennes region of Belgium near Namur. His death shocked the world and he was deeply mourned, both in Belgium and abroad. Because King Albert was an expert climber, some questioned the official version of his death and suggested that the King was murdered (or even committed suicide) somewhere else and that his body had never been at Marche-les-Dames, or that it was deposited there. Several of those hypotheses with criminal motives were investigated by authorities, but doubts have remained ever since, being the subject of popular novels, books, and documentaries. Rumors of murder have been dismissed by most historians. There are two possible explanations for his death, according to the official juridical investigations: the first was that the king leaned against a boulder at the top of the mountain that became dislodged; the second that the pinnacle to which his rope was belayed broke, causing him to fall about . In 2016, DNA testing by geneticist Maarten Larmuseau and colleagues from the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven on bloodstained leaves that were collected in 1934 from Marche-les-Dames concluded that King Albert had died at that location.\nLike his predecessors Leopold I and Leopold II, King Albert is interred in the Royal Crypt at the Church of Our Lady of Laeken in Brussels.\nIn 1935, prominent Belgian author Emile Cammaerts published a widely acclaimed biography of King Albert I, titled \"Albert of Belgium: Defender of Right\". In 1993, a close climbing companion of the King, Walter Amstutz, founded the King Albert I Memorial Foundation, an association based in Switzerland and dedicated to honouring distinguished individuals in the mountaineering world.\nTo celebrate 175 years of the Belgian royal family and the 100th anniversary of his accession, Albert I was selected as the main motif of a high-value collectors' coin: the Belgian 12.5 euro Albert I commemorative coin, minted in 2008. The obverse shows a portrait of the King.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59928", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59928", "title": "130 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 130 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lentulus/Pulcher and Perperna (or, less frequently, year 624 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Fifth Year of Yuanguang. The denomination 130 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59930", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59930", "title": "133 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 133 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Scaevola and Frugi (or, less frequently, year 621 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Second Year of Yuanguang. The denomination 133 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59931", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59931", "title": "131 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 131 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Mucianus and Flaccus (or, less frequently, year 623 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Fourth Year of Yuanguang. The denomination 131 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59932", "revid": "1318575176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59932", "title": "128 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 128 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Octavius and Rufus (or, less frequently, year 626 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the First Year of Yuanshuo. The denomination 128 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArts and sciences.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59933", "revid": "1755837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59933", "title": "Charmander", "text": ""}
{"id": "59934", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59934", "title": "ECA", "text": "ECA, Eca or E\u00e7a may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59935", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59935", "title": "ESCAP", "text": ""}
{"id": "59937", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59937", "title": "136 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 136 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Philus and Serranus (or, less frequently, year 618 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Fifth Year of Jianyuan. The denomination 136 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nSpain.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59938", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59938", "title": "126 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 126 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lepidus and Orestes (or, less frequently, year 628 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Third Year of Yuanshuo. The denomination 126 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59940", "revid": "8367488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59940", "title": "Falconidae", "text": "Family of birds\nThe falcons and caracaras are around 65 species of diurnal birds of prey that make up the family Falconidae (representing all extant species in the order Falconiformes). The family likely originated in South America during the Paleocene and is divided into three subfamilies: Herpetotherinae, which includes the laughing falcon and forest falcons; Polyborinae, which includes the spot-winged falconet and the caracaras; and Falconinae, the falcons and kestrels (\"Falco\") and falconets (\"Microhierax\").\nDescription.\nFalcons and caracaras are small to medium-sized birds of prey, ranging in size from the black-thighed falconet, which can weigh as little as , to the gyrfalcon, which can weigh as much as . They have strongly hooked bills, sharply curved talons and excellent eyesight. The plumage is usually composed of browns, whites, chestnut, black and grey, often with barring of patterning. There is little difference in the plumage of males and females, although a few species have some sexual dimorphism in boldness of plumage.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe family has a cosmopolitan distribution across the world, absent only from the densest forests of central Africa, some remote oceanic islands, the high Arctic and Antarctica. Some species have exceptionally wide ranges, particularly the cosmopolitan peregrine falcon, which ranges from Greenland to Fiji and has the widest natural breeding distribution of any bird. Other species have more restricted distributions, particularly island endemics like the Mauritius kestrel. Most habitat types are occupied, from tundra to rainforest and deserts, although they are generally more birds of open country and even forest species tend to prefer broken forest and forest edges. Some species, mostly in the genus \"Falco\", are fully migratory, with some species summering in Eurasia and wintering entirely in Africa, other species may be partly migratory. The Amur falcon has one of the longest migrations, moving from East Asia to southern Africa.\nBehaviour.\nDiet and feeding.\nFalcons and caracaras are carnivores, feeding on birds, small mammals including bats, reptiles, insects and carrion. In popular imagination the falconids are fast flying predators, and while this is true of the genus \"Falco\" and some falconets, other species, particularly the caracaras, are more sedentary in their feeding. The forest falcons of the Neotropics are generalist forest hunters. Several species, particularly the true falcons, will stash food supplies in caches. They are solitary hunters and pairs guard territories, although they may form large flocks during migration. Some species are specialists, such as the laughing falcon, which specialises in snakes, and the red-throated caracara, which mainly feeds on the larvae of bees and wasps; others are more generalist in their diet.\nBreeding.\nThe falcons and caracaras are generally solitary breeders, although around 10% of species are colonial, for example the red-footed falcon. They are monogamous, although some caracaras may also employ alloparenting strategies, where younger birds help adults (usually their parents) in raising the next brood of chicks. Nests are generally not built (except by the caracaras), but are co opted from other birds, for example pygmy falcons nest in the nests of weavers, or on the ledges on cliffs. Around 2\u20134 eggs are laid, and mostly incubated by the female. Incubation times vary from species to species and are correlated with body size, lasting 28 days in smaller species and up to 35 days in larger species. Chicks fledge after 28\u201349 days, again varying with size.\nRelations with humans.\nFalcons and caracaras have a complicated relationship with humans. In ancient Egypt they were deified in the form of Horus, the sky and sun god who was the ancestor of the pharaohs. Caracaras also formed part of the legends of the Aztecs. Falcons were important in the (formerly often royal) sport of falconry. They have also been persecuted for their predation on game and farm animals, and that persecution has led to the extinction of at least one species, the Guadalupe caracara. Several insular species have declined dramatically, none more so than the Mauritius kestrel, which at one time numbered no more than four birds. Around five species of falcon are considered vulnerable to extinction by the IUCN, including the saker falcon.\nTaxonomy and systematics.\nThe family Falconidae was introduced by the English zoologist William Elford Leach in a guide to the contents of the British Museum published in 1819. The family is composed of three main branches: the falconets and true falcons, the caracaras, and the forest falcons. Differences exist between authorities in how these are grouped into subfamilies. Also, the placement of the laughing falcon (\"Herpetotheres\") and the spot-winged falconet (\"Spiziapteryx\") varies. One common approach uses two subfamilies Polyborinae and Falconinae. The first contains the caracaras, forest falcons, and laughing falcon. All species in this group are native to the Americas.\nThe composition of Falconidae is disputed, and Polyborninae is not featured in the American Ornithologists' Union checklists for North and South American birds that are produced by its Classification Committees (NACC and SACC). The Check-list of North American Birds considers the laughing falcon a true falcon (Falconinae) and replaces Polyborinae with Caracarinae and Micrasturinae. On the other hand, the Check-list of South American Birds classifies all caracaras as true falcons and puts the laughing falcon and forest falcons into the subfamily Herpetotherinae.\nFalconinae, in its traditional classification, contains the falcons, falconets, and pygmy falcons. Depending on the authority, Falconinae may also include the caracaras and/or the laughing falcon.\nPhylogeny.\nThe following cladogram is based on a comprehensive molecular phylogenetic study of the Falconidae by J\u00e9r\u00f4me Fuchs and collaborators that was published in 2015. The number of species is taken from the taxonomy published by AviList. Fuchs and collaborators recommended that the genus \"Daptrius\" should be expanded to include the genera \"Phalcoboenus\" and \"Milvago\" due to the shallow genetic divergence. This change has been adopted by the Clements Checklist and by AviList.\nList of genera.\nBelow is list of the subfamilies and genera of the Falconidae.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59941", "revid": "44487467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59941", "title": "Nyaya", "text": "One of six schools of Hindu philosophy\nNy\u0101ya (Sanskrit: \u0928\u094d\u092f\u093e\u092f\u0903, IAST: ny\u0101ya\u1e25), literally meaning \"justice\", \"rules\", \"method\" or \"judgment\", is one of the six orthodox (\u0100stika) schools of Hindu philosophy. Ny\u0101ya's most significant contributions to Indian philosophy were the systematic development of the theory of logic, methodology, and its treatises on epistemology.\nNy\u0101ya epistemology accepts four out of six \"pramanas\" as reliable means of gaining knowledge \u2013 \"pratyak\u1e63a\" (perception), \"anum\u0101\u1e47a\" (inference), \"upam\u0101na\" (comparison and analogy) and \"\u015babda\" (word, testimony of past or present reliable experts). In its metaphysics, Ny\u0101ya school is closer to the Vaisheshika school of Hinduism than others. It holds that human suffering results from mistakes/defects produced by activity under wrong knowledge (notions and ignorance). Moksha (liberation), it states, is gained through right knowledge. This premise led \"Ny\u0101ya\" to concern itself with epistemology, that is the reliable means to gain correct knowledge and to remove wrong notions. False knowledge is not merely ignorance to Naiyyayikas, it includes delusion. Correct knowledge is discovering and overcoming one's delusions, and understanding true nature of soul, self and reality.\nNaiyyayika scholars approached philosophy as a form of direct realism, stating that anything that really exists is in principle humanly knowable. To them, correct knowledge and understanding is different from simple, reflexive cognition; it requires \"Anuvyavasaya\" (\u0905\u0928\u0941\u0935\u094d\u092f\u0935\u0938\u093e\u092f, cross-examination of cognition, reflective cognition of what one thinks one knows). An influential collection of texts on logic and reason is the \"Ny\u0101ya S\u016btras\", attributed to Aksapada Gautama, variously estimated to have been composed between 6th-century BCE and 2nd-century CE.\n\"Ny\u0101ya\" school shares some of its methodology and human suffering foundations with Buddhism; however, a key difference between the two is that Buddhism believes that there is neither a soul nor self; \"Ny\u0101ya\" school like some other schools of Hinduism such as \"Dvaita\" and \"Vi\u015bi\u1e63\u1e6d\u0101dvaita\" believes that there is a soul and self, with liberation (\"mok\u1e63a\") as a state of removal of ignorance, wrong knowledge, the gain of correct knowledge, and unimpeded continuation of self.\nEtymology.\n\"Nyaya\" (\u0928\u094d\u092f\u093e\u092f) is a Sanskrit word which means justice, equality for all being, specially a collection of general or universal rules. In some contexts, it means model, axiom, plan, legal proceeding, judicial sentence, or judgment. Nyaya could also mean, \"that which shows the way\" tracing its Sanskrit etymology. In the theory of logic, and Indian texts discussing it, the term also refers to an argument consisting of an enthymeme or sometimes for any syllogism. In philosophical context, \"Nyaya\" encompasses propriety, logic and method.\nPanini, revered Sanskrit grammarian, derives the \"Nyaya\" from the root \"i\" which conveys the same meaning as \"gam\" \u2013 to go. \"Nyaya\" signifying logic is there etymologically identical with \"nigama\" the conclusion of a syllogism.\n\"Nyaya\" is related to several other concepts and words used in Indian philosophies: \"Hetu-vidya\" (science of causes), \"Anviksiki\" (science of inquiry, systematic philosophy), \"Pramana-sastra\" (epistemology, science of correct knowledge), \"Tattva-sastra\" (science of categories), \"Tarka-vidya\" (science of reasoning, innovation, synthesis), \"Vadartha\" (science of discussion) and \"Phakkika-sastra\" (science of uncovering sophism, fraud, error, finding fakes). Some of these subsume or deploy the tools of \"Nyaya\".\nDevelopment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNasadiya Sukta\nThen was not non-existent nor existent:\nthere was no realm of air, no sky beyond it.\nWhat covered in, and where? and what gave shelter?\nWas water there, unfathomed depth of water?\nWho really knows? Who will here proclaim it? \nWhence was it produced? Whence is this creation? \nThe gods came after this world's production,Who knows then whence it first came into being?\"\nRig Veda, \"Creation...10:129\u20131, 10:129\u20136\" \nThe historical development of Ny\u0101ya school is unclear, although \"Nasadiya\" hymns of Book 10 Chapter 129 of Rigveda recite its spiritual questions in logical propositions. In early centuries BCE, states Clooney, the early Ny\u0101ya scholars began compiling the science of rational, coherent inquiry and pursuit of knowledge.\nFoundational Text.\nAksapada Gautama composed the \"Ny\u0101ya S\u016btras\" (by 2nd century CE), a foundational text for Ny\u0101ya, that primarily discusses logic, methodology and epistemology. Gautama is also known as Aksapada and Dirghatapas. The names Gotama and Gautama points to the family to which he belonged while the names Aksapada and Dirghatapas refer respectively to his meditative habit and practice of long penance. The people of Mithila (modern Darbhanga in North Bihar) ascribe the foundation of Ny\u0101ya philosophy to Gautama, husband of Ahalya, and point out as the place of his birth a village named Gautamasthana where a fair is held every year on the 9th day of the lunar month of Chaitra (March\u2013April). It is situated 28 miles north-east of Darbhanga.\nCommentarial Tradition.\nConcepts in the foundational text, the Nyaya Sutras, were clarified through a tradition of commentaries. Commentaries were also a means to defend the philosophy from misinterpretations by scholars of other traditions.\nThe Ny\u0101ya scholars that followed refined, expanded, and applied the \"Nyaya Sutras\" to spiritual questions. While the early Nyaya scholars published little to no analysis on whether supernatural power or God exists, they did apply their insights into reason and reliable means to knowledge to the questions of nature of existence, spirituality, happiness and moksha. Later Ny\u0101ya scholars, such as Udayana, examined various arguments on theism and attempted to prove existence of God. Other Ny\u0101ya scholars offered arguments to disprove the existence of God.\nThe most important contribution made by the Ny\u0101ya school to Hindu thought has been its treatises on epistemology and system of logic that, subsequently, has been adopted by the majority of the other Indian schools.\nTextual sources.\nIn the \"Y\u0101j\u00f1avalkya Sm\u1e5bti\", Ny\u0101ya is mentioned as one of the fourteen principal branches of learning. The \"Matsya-Pur\u0101\u1e47a\" states that knowledge of Ny\u0101ya came from the mouth of Brahm\u0101. The \"Mah\u0101bh\u0101rata\" also mentions principles of Ny\u0101ya.\nThe earliest text of the Ny\u0101ya School is the ' of . The text is divided into five books, each having two sections. Vatsyayana's ' is a classic commentary on the '. Udyotakara's ' (6th century CE) is written to defend against the attacks made by Dign\u0101ga. 's ' (9th century CE) is the next major exposition of this school. Two other texts, ' and ' are also attributed to him. Udayana's (984 CE) ' is an important commentary on 's treatise. His ' is the first systematic account of theistic '. His other works include ', ' and '. Jayanta Bhatta's ' (10th century CE) is basically an independent work. Bhasarvajna's \"Nyayasara\" (10th century CE) is a survey of \"\" philosophy.\nThe later works on ' accepted the ' categories and 's ' (12th century CE) is a notable treatise of this syncretist school. 's ' (13th century CE) is another important work of this school.\n's ' (14th century CE) is the first major treatise of the new school of '. His son, 's ', though a commentary on Udayana's ', incorporated his father's views. Jayadeva wrote a commentary on ' known as ' (14th century CE). 's ' (16th century CE) is first great work of Navadvipa school of . 's ' and ' are the next important works of this school. 's ' (17th century CE) is also a notable work. The Commentaries on \"\" by Jagadish Tarkalankar (17th century CE) and Gadadhar Bhattacharya (17th century CE) are the last two notable works of this school.\n (17th century CE) tried to develop a consistent system by combining the ancient and the new schools, ' and ' and ' to develop the ' school. His ' and ' are the popular manuals of this school.\nMetaphysics.\nSixteen categories (\"pad\u0101rthas\").\nThe Ny\u0101ya metaphysics recognizes sixteen \"padarthas\" or categories and includes all six (or seven) categories of the Vaisheshika in the second one of them, called \"prameya\".\nThese sixteen categories are:\nAccording to Matthew Dasti and Stephen Phillips, it may be useful to interpret the word \"jnana\" as cognition rather than knowledge when studying the Ny\u0101ya system.\nThe self.\nNyaya posits that there exists a self distinct from the mind, which is distinct from the body. The self is a nonphysical substance and is not inherently conscious.\nThe mind (\"manas\") is postulated as a distinct entity because one can have two perceptions at the same time of the same object, through two different senses. \nTheory of causation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMetaphysics\nNyaya-Vaisheshika offers one of the most vigorous efforts at the construction of a substantialist, realist ontology that the world has ever seen. It provides an extended critique of event-ontologies and idealist metaphysics. (...) This ontology is Platonistic, realistic, but neither exclusively physicalistic nor phenomenalistic.\n \u2014 Karl Potter, The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies\nA \"cause\" is defined as an unconditional and invariable antecedent of an \"effect\" and an effect as an unconditional and invariable consequent of a cause. The same cause produces the same effect; and the same effect is produced by the same cause. The cause is \"not\" present in any hidden form whatsoever in its effect.\nNyaya recognizes three kinds of cause:\nThe following conditions should be met for something to be a cause:\nNyaya recognizes five kinds of accidental antecedents [Anyathasiddha]\nEpistemology.\nNy\u0101ya treatises on epistemology widely influenced other schools of Hinduism. In Nyaya philosophy, knowledge is a type of \"awareness event that is in accordance with its object by virtue of having been produced by a well-functioning epistemic instrument.\" \"Pram\u0101\u1e47a\", a Sanskrit word, literally is \"means of knowledge\". It encompasses one or more reliable and valid means by which human beings gain accurate, true knowledge. The focus of Pramana is how correct knowledge can be acquired, how one knows, how one doesn't, and to what extent knowledge pertinent about someone or something can be acquired. By definition, \"pram\u0101\u1e47as\" are factive i.e. they cannot produce false belief. So, while statements can be false, testimony cannot be false. \nNy\u0101ya scholars accepted four valid means (\"pram\u0101\u1e47a\") of obtaining valid knowledge (\"prameya\") \u2013\nThe Ny\u0101ya scholars, along with those from other schools of Hinduism, also developed a theory of error, to methodically establish means to identify errors and the process by which errors are made in human pursuit of knowledge. These include \"sa\u1e41\u015baya\" (problems, inconsistencies, doubts) and \"viparyaya\" (contrariness, errors) which can be corrected or resolved by a systematic process of \"tarka\" (reasoning, technique).\n\"Pratyaksha\" (perception).\n\"Pratyak\u1e63a\" (perception) occupies the foremost position in the \"Ny\u0101ya\" epistemology. Perception can be of two types, \"laukika\" (ordinary) and \"alaukika\" (extraordinary). Ordinary perception is defined by Ak\u1e63ap\u0101da Gautama in his \"Ny\u0101ya Sutra\" (I, i.4) as a 'non-erroneous cognition which is produced by the intercourse of sense-organs with the objects'.\nIndian texts identify four requirements for correct perception: \"Indriyarthasannikarsa\" (direct experience by one's sensory organ(s) with the object, whatever is being studied), \"Avyapadesya\" (non-verbal; correct perception is not through hearsay, according to ancient Indian scholars, where one's sensory organ relies on accepting or rejecting someone else's perception), \"Avyabhicara\" (does not wander; correct perception does not change, nor is it the result of deception because one's sensory organ or means of observation is drifting, defective, suspect) and \"Vyavasayatmaka\" (definite; correct perception excludes judgments of doubt, either because of one's failure to observe all the details, or because one is mixing inference with observation and observing what one wants to observe, or not observing what one does not want to observe).\nOrdinary perception to Ny\u0101ya scholars was based on direct experience of reality by eyes, ears, nose, touch and taste. Extraordinary perception included \"yogaja\" or \"pratibha\" (intuition), \"samanyalaksanapratyaksa\" (a form of induction from perceived specifics to a universal), and \"jnanalaksanapratyaksa\" (a form of perception of prior processes and previous states of a 'topic of study' by observing its current state).\nDeterminate and indeterminate perception.\nThe Naiyyayika maintains two modes or stages in perception. The first is called \"nirvikalpa\" (indeterminate), when one just perceives an object without being able to know its features, and the second \"savikalpa\" (determinate), when one is able to clearly know an object. All \"laukika\" and \"alaukika\" \"pratyakshas\" are \"savikalpa\", but it is necessarily preceded by an earlier stage when it is indeterminate. V\u0101ts\u0101yana says that if an object is perceived with its name we have determinate perception but if it is perceived without a name, we have indeterminate perception. Jayanta Bhatta says that indeterminate perception apprehends substance, qualities and actions and universals as separate and indistinct, without any association with any names, whereas determinate perception apprehends them all together with a name. There is yet another stage called \"Pratyabhij\u00f1\u0101\", when one is able to re-recognise something on the basis of memory.\n\"Anum\u0101na\" (inference).\n\"Anum\u0101na\" (inference) is one of the most important contributions of the Ny\u0101ya. It can be of two types: inference for oneself (\"Svarthanumana\", where one does not need any formal procedure, and at the most the last three of their 5 steps), and inference for others (\"Pararthanumana\", which requires a systematic methodology of 5 steps). Inference can also be classified into 3 types: \"Purvavat\" (inferring an unperceived effect from a perceived cause), \"Sheshavat\" (inferring an unperceived cause from a perceived effect) and \"Samanyatodrishta\" (when inference is not based on causation but on uniformity of co-existence). A detailed analysis of error is also given, explaining when anumana could be false.\nTheory of inference.\nThe methodology of inference involves a combination of induction and deduction by moving from particular to particular via generality. It has five steps, as in the example shown:\nIn Ny\u0101ya terminology for this example, the hill would be the \"paksha\" (minor term), the fire is the \"s\u0101dhya\" (major term), the smoke is \"hetu\", and the relationship between the smoke and the fire is \"vyapti\"(middle term).\nHetu further has five characteristics\nInference Fallacies (\"hetv\u0101bhasa\").\nThe fallacies in Anumana (\"hetv\u0101bhasa\") may occur due to the following\n\"Upam\u0101na\" (comparison, analogy).\n\"Upam\u0101na\" (\u0909\u092a\u092e\u093e\u0928) means comparison and analogy. \"Upam\u0101na\", states Lochtefeld, may be explained with the example of a traveller who has never visited lands or islands with endemic population of wildlife. They are told, by someone who has been there, that in those lands you see an animal that sort of looks like a cow, grazes like cow but is different from a cow in such and such way. Such use of analogy and comparison is, state the Indian epistemologists, a valid means of conditional knowledge, as it helps the traveller identify the new animal later. The subject of comparison is formally called \"upameyam\", the object of comparison is called \"upam\u0101nam\", while the attribute(s) are identified as \"s\u0101m\u0101nya\". Thus, explains Monier Williams, if a boy says \"her face is like the moon in charmingness\", \"her face\" is \"upameyam\", the moon is \"upam\u0101nam\", and charmingness is \"s\u0101m\u0101nya\". The 7th century text Bha\u1e6d\u1e6dik\u0101vya in verses 10.28 through 10.63 discusses many types of comparisons and analogies, identifying when this epistemic method is more useful and reliable, and when it is not. In various ancient and medieval texts of Hinduism, 32 types of \"Upam\u0101na\" and their value in epistemology are debated.\n\"\u015aabda\" (word, testimony).\n\"\u015aabda\" (\u0936\u092c\u094d\u0926) means relying on word, testimony of past or present reliable experts. Hiriyanna explains \"Sabda-pramana\" as a concept which means testimony of a reliable and trustworthy person (\"\u0101ptav\u0101kya\"). The schools of Hinduism which consider it epistemically valid suggest that a human being needs to know numerous facts, and with the limited time and energy available, he can learn only a fraction of those facts and truths directly. He must rely on others, his parent, family, friends, teachers, ancestors and kindred members of society to rapidly acquire and share knowledge and thereby enrich each other's lives. This means of gaining proper knowledge is either spoken or written, but through \"Sabda\" (words). The reliability of the source is important, and legitimate knowledge can only come from the \"Sabda\" of reliable sources. The disagreement between the schools of Hinduism has been on how to establish reliability. Some schools, such as Carvaka, state that this is never possible, and therefore \"Sabda\" is not a proper \"pramana\". Other schools debate means to establish reliability.\nTestimony can be of two types, \"Vaidika\" (Vedic), which are the words of the four sacred Vedas, and \"Laukika\", or words and writings of trustworthy human beings. \"Vaidika\" testimony is preferred over \"Laukika\" testimony. Laukika-sourced knowledge must be questioned and revised as more trustworthy knowledge becomes available.\nDirect Realism.\nIn Nyaya philosophy, direct realism asserts that our cognitions are informational states revealing external objects. According to Nyaya, the world consists of stable, three-dimensional objects, and their system of categories accurately mirrors reality's structure. Nyaya philosophy emphasizes the importance of universals, qualities, and relations in understanding the organization of the world. These foundational elements are believed to play essential roles in determining the phenomenological, causal, and logical organization of the world, playing a crucial role in the classification of objects.\nComparison with other schools of Hinduism.\nEach school of Hinduism has its own treatises on epistemology, with different number of \"Pramanas\". For example, compared to Ny\u0101ya school's four \"pramanas\", Carvaka school has just one (perception), while Advaita Vedanta school recognizes six means to reliable knowledge.\n\"Anyath\u0101khy\u0101tiv\u0101da\" or \"Vipar\u012btakhy\u0101tiv\u0101da\" (Theory of Error).\nAccording to the Naiy\u0101yikas, ordinary perception (where direct perception takes place) involves direct contact between sense organs and objects. In the case of illusory perception, the perceived object is not present in the locus of perception. To account for this, they propose the theory of \"presentation through revived memory\" (\"j\u00f1\u0101nalak\u1e63a\u1e47apraty\u0101satti\"), where qualities known from past experience are projected onto what is presently seen. Thus, in the nacre-silver illusion, the shell is qualified by \"silverness\", not as a mental construction or a non-existent entity, but as silver existing elsewhere, and the means by which it is perceived without coming into contact with the sense organs is through \"j\u00f1\u0101nalak\u1e63a\u1e47apraty\u0101satti.\"\nNaiy\u0101yikas invoke \"J\u00f1\u0101nalak\u1e63a\u1e47apraty\u0101satti\" to explain cases in which objects are perceived without direct contact between the senses and the object. Three examples of its application are commonly given:\nIn these examples, although there is no direct connection between the object and the sense organ, perception arises through the mediation of revived memory. For instance, the memory of sandalwood's fragrance is revived and projected onto the cognition of the sandalwood present at a distance. In the case of perceiving silver upon seeing nacre, the memory of silver influences the perception of nacre. The central idea is that past knowledge or experience can directly influence or shape present perception: the mind draws on revived memories and associates remembered qualities with the object being perceived to such an extent that it takes on the character of direct perception.\nOn God and liberation.\nEarly Naiyyayikas wrote very little about Ishvara (literally, the Supreme Soul). Evidence available suggests that early Ny\u0101ya scholars were non-theistic or atheists. Later, and over time, Ny\u0101ya scholars tried to apply some of their epistemological insights and methodology to the question: does God exist? Some offered arguments against and some in favor.\nArguments that God does not exist.\nIn Ny\u0101ya S\u016btra's Book 4, Chapter 1, verses 19\u201321, postulates God exists, states a consequence, then presents contrary evidence, and from contradiction concludes that the postulate must be invalid.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Lord is the cause, since we see that human action lacks results.\nThis is not so since, as a matter of fact, no result is accomplished without human action.\nSince this is efficacious, the reason lacks force.\u2014\u200a\nA literal interpretation of the three verses suggests that Ny\u0101ya school rejected the need for a God for the efficacy of human activity. Since human action and results do not require assumption or need of the existence of God, sutra IV.1.21 is seen as a criticism of the \"existence of God and theism postulate\". The context of the above verses includes various efficient causes. Ny\u0101ya S\u016btra verses IV.1.22 to IV.1.24, for example, examine the hypothesis that \"random chance\" explains the world, after these Indian scholars had rejected God as the efficient cause.\nArguments that God exists.\nIn \"Nyayakusumanjali,\" Udayana gives the following nine arguments to prove the existence of creative God and also refutes the existing objections and questions by atheistic systems of Carvaka, Mimamsa, Buddhists, Jains and Samkhya:\nNaiyyayikas characterize Ishvara as absent of \"adharma\", false knowledge, and error; and possessing \"dharma\", right knowledge, and equanimity. Additionally, Ishvara is omnipotent and acts in a way that is good for his creatures.\nLiberation.\nThe Naiyyayikas believe that the bondage of the world is due to false knowledge, which can be removed by constantly thinking of its opposite (\"pratipakshabhavana\"), namely, the true knowledge. The opening aphorism of the \"\" states that only the true knowledge leads to \"ni\u1e25\u015breyasa\" (liberation). However, the Ny\u0101ya school also maintains that God's grace is essential for obtaining true knowledge. Jayanta, in his \"Nyayamanjari\" describes salvation as a passive stage of the self in its natural purity, unassociated with pleasure, pain, knowledge and willingness.\nNy\u0101ya Influence on Buddhism.\nWhile initially distinct from Buddhism, Ny\u0101ya's rigorous approach to reasoning and epistemology profoundly influenced the development of Buddhist philosophy, particularly in the areas of logical analysis, epistemology, and the structure of doctrinal debates.\nNy\u0101ya and Buddhist Epistemology.\nThe influence of Ny\u0101ya on Buddhist epistemology is profound, especially in the development of the four major pram\u0101\u1e47a (valid means of knowledge). Below is a breakdown of how Buddhist thinkers integrated and adapted Ny\u0101ya concepts in their philosophical systems:\nNy\u0101ya and Buddhist Logic.\nAnother significant area of influence was in the domain of logic. Ny\u0101ya's formal system of inference (anum\u0101na) directly impacted Buddhist logic, especially in the works of scholars like Dharmak\u012brti. Ny\u0101ya's focus on hetu (reasoning or cause) and the structure of valid arguments was adopted and modified by Buddhists in their development of logical proofs (pram\u0101\u1e47a) to support doctrines like impermanence and non-self.\nIn the Pram\u0101\u1e47av\u0101rttika, Dharmak\u012brti reinterpreted Ny\u0101ya\u2019s logical tools to fit within Buddhist metaphysical views. For example, Ny\u0101ya\u2019s approach to inference was used to argue against essentialist doctrines by showing that all phenomena are dependent on causes and conditions (dependent origination), rather than existing inherently (svabh\u0101va). In M\u0101dhyamika philosophy, N\u0101g\u0101rjuna and \u015a\u0101ntideva also employed logic and dialectical reasoning, heavily influenced by Ny\u0101ya, to argue against Ny\u0101ya\u2019s own concept of an unchanging self.\nNy\u0101ya and Buddhist Debate Practices.\nThe formal practice of debate (\"yukti\") in Buddhist scholasticism, especially within monastic institutions, reflects the influence of Ny\u0101ya. The rigorous techniques of formal reasoning and logical debate in Ny\u0101ya were adopted by Buddhists to engage in systematic argumentation, not only with other philosophical schools but also within their own traditions.\nBuddhist monastic institutions, particularly in India, followed a debate structure built on Ny\u0101ya\u2019s epistemological principles, emphasizing the importance of valid reasoning and evidence in defending doctrinal views. These debates often centered around the \"validity of pram\u0101\u1e47as\" and the nature of reality (impermanence and non-self versus permanence and self). In Tibet and East Asia, these debates became central to the scholastic tradition and helped refine Buddhist thought over centuries.\nNy\u0101ya Influence in Later Buddhist Traditions.\nThe impact of Ny\u0101ya was not confined to early Indian Buddhist thinkers but continued to shape later Buddhist traditions. For example, Tibetan Buddhism developed sophisticated methods of debate and logic that were heavily influenced by Indian Ny\u0101ya. In the Gelug school, the \"Pram\u0101\u1e47a\" texts of Dharmak\u012brti became a central part of the curriculum, alongside Ny\u0101ya texts.\nIn addition, Zen Buddhism and Chan Buddhism also exhibited traces of logical techniques influenced by the early scholastics of India, where rational discourse was used to sharpen the practitioner's understanding of emptiness (\"\u015b\u016bnyat\u0101\") and impermanence.\nB.K. Matilal's Contributions to the Study of Ny\u0101ya and Buddhism.\nB.K. Matilal, a renowned scholar of Indian philosophy, was instrumental in highlighting the intellectual connections between Ny\u0101ya and Buddhist epistemology. In his work, Matilal emphasizes how Buddhist philosophers like Dharmak\u012brti incorporated and adapted Ny\u0101ya\u2019s logical frameworks to argue for impermanence and non-self. Matilal further discusses how Buddhists criticized Ny\u0101ya\u2019s essentialism, using formal logic and reasoning to refute Ny\u0101ya's claims about the permanence of the self and the inherent nature of things.\nMatilal\u2019s analysis of these philosophical interactions shows that, despite their doctrinal differences, Ny\u0101ya and Buddhism shared a common interest in developing systematic methods of reasoning and argumentation. His work underscores how both traditions engaged in a shared intellectual project of refining methods of knowledge acquisition and logical analysis, even as they differed on metaphysical views.\nTable of Ny\u0101ya Influence on Buddhist Thought.\nTo illustrate the extent of Ny\u0101ya\u2019s influence on Buddhist philosophy, the following table highlights key concepts adopted and adapted by Buddhist scholars:\nFurther Developments and Synthesis.\nIn addition to Dharmak\u012brti and N\u0101g\u0101rjuna, Buddhist thinkers like Vasubandhu and \u015a\u0101ntideva also utilized Ny\u0101ya-derived logic in their writings. Vasubandhu's work in the Abhidharma tradition integrated Ny\u0101ya\u2019s inference and perception frameworks to argue for emptiness and the illusion of permanence in all things.\nMoreover, Tibetan Buddhist scholars like Chandrakirti and Jamyang Zh\u00e9pa further developed these ideas, showing that the dialogue between Ny\u0101ya and Buddhism was not a one-way flow but rather an ongoing intellectual exchange that continued across centuries and geographical regions.\nCommentaries on the Nyaya-Sutra.\nNumerous commentaries have been written on Ny\u0101ya-Sutra since its composition. Some of these commentaries are available on https:// for reference. A few of the commentaries are mentioned below:\nDifferences from Western Philosophy.\n\"A priori\" knowledge.\nNyaya philosophy does not establish a category of \"a priori\" knowledge. This choice may be due to only considering \"de re\" knowledge, not \"de dicto\" knowledge.\nLogic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is significant that the name \"logic\" is etymologically connected with the Greek word \"logos\", which denotes both 'thought' and 'word' or 'discourse'. The significance of this etymological connection can be adequately appreciated if it is remembered that \"logic\", in its rise and development in the western world, particularly in Greece, was closely connected with \"rhetoric\". Thus the name \"logic\" is of a tell-tale character in its application to logic in the West; and it may be taken to indicate how, almost from its very rise, western logic found itself in the firm grip of formalism and how it took more than twenty centuries for the scientific method underlying Aristotle's \"Organon\" to be redeemed, brought into prominence and implemented in the \"Novum Organum\" of Francis Bacon (1561\u20131626). The term \"logic\" should not be taken to carry with it all these implications of European history when it is used in the phrase \"Indian logic\".\nThe essential features of logic in the Western tradition are well captured in the following statement by a famous logician Alonzo Church:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Logic is the systematic study of the structure of propositions and of the general conditions of valid inference by a method, which abstracts from the content or matter of the propositions and deals only with their logical form. This distinction between form and matter is made whenever we distinguish between the logical soundness or validity of a piece of reasoning and the truth of the premises from which it proceeds and in this sense is familiar from everyday usage. However, a precise statement of the distinction must be made with reference to a particular language or system of notation, a formalised language, which shall avoid the inexactness and systematically misleading irregularities of structure and expression that are found in ordinary (colloquial or literary) English and other natural languages and shall follow or reproduce the logical form.\nThus, the basic features of Western logic are: It deals with a study of \u2018propositions\u2019, specially their \u2018logical form\u2019 as abstracted from their \u2018content\u2019 or \u2018matter\u2019. It deals with \u2018general conditions of valid inference\u2019, wherein the truth or otherwise of the premises have no bearing on the \u2018logical soundness or validity\u2019 of an inference. It achieves this by taking recourse to a symbolic language that has little to do with natural languages. The main concern of Western logic, in its entire course of development, has been one of systematising patterns of mathematical reasoning, with the mathematical objects being thought of as existing either in an independent ideal world or in a formal domain. Indian logic however, does not deal with ideal entities, such as propositions, logical truth as distinguished from material truth, or with purely symbolic languages that apparently have nothing to do with natural languages.\nThe central concern of Indian logic as founded in \"ny\u0101ya\" is epistemology, or the theory of knowledge. Thus Indian logic is not concerned merely with making arguments in formal mathematics rigorous and precise, but attends to the much larger issue of providing rigour to the arguments encountered in natural sciences (including mathematics, which in Indian tradition has the attributes of a natural science and not that of a collection of context free formal statements), and in philosophical discourse. Inference in Indian logic is \u2018deductive and inductive\u2019, \u2018formal as well as material\u2019. In essence, it is the method of scientific enquiry. Indian \u2018formal logic\u2019 is thus not \u2018formal\u2019, in the sense generally understood: in Indian logic \u2018form\u2019 cannot be entirely separated from \u2018content\u2019. In fact, great care is exercised to exclude from logical discourse terms, which have no referential content. No statement, which is known to be false, is admitted as a premise in a valid argument. Thus, the \u2018method of indirect proof\u2019 (reductio ad absurdum) is not accepted as a valid method\u2212neither in Indian philosophy nor in Indian mathematics\u2212for proving the existence of an entity whose existence is not demonstrable (even in principle) by other (direct) means of proof.\nIndian logic does not make any attempt to develop a purely symbolic and content independent or \u2018formal language\u2019 as the vehicle of logical analysis. Instead, what Indian logic, especially in its later phase of \"Navya-Ny\u0101ya\" starting with the work of G\u0101nge\u015ba Up\u0101dhy\u0101ya of the 14th century, has developed is a technical language, which is based on the natural language Sanskrit, yet avoids \u2018inexactness\u2019 and \u2018misleading irregularities\u2019 by various technical devices. This technical language, being based on the natural language Sanskrit, inherits a certain natural structure and interpretation, and sensitivity to the context of enquiry. On the other hand, the symbolic formal systems of Western logic, though considerably influenced in their structure (say, in quantification, etc.) by the basic patterns discernible in European languages, are professedly purely symbolic, carrying no interpretation whatsoever\u2212such interpretations are supposed to be supplied separately in the specific context of the particular field of enquiry \u2018employing\u2019 the symbolic formal system.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59942", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59942", "title": "Real Academia Espanola", "text": ""}
{"id": "59944", "revid": "38516105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59944", "title": "Program counter", "text": "Register that stores where in a program a processor is executing\nA program counter (PC) is a register that stores where a computer program is being executed by a processor. It is also commonly called the instruction pointer (IP) in Intel x86 and Itanium microprocessors, and sometimes called the instruction address register (IAR), the instruction counter, or just part of the instruction sequencer.\nUsually, a PC stores a memory address to an instruction. Further, it usually is incremented after fetching an instruction, and therefore points to the next instruction to be executed. For a processor that increments before fetch, the PC points to the instruction being executed. In some processors, the PC points some distance beyond the current instruction. For instance, in the ARM7, the value of PC visible to the programmer points beyond the current instruction and beyond the delay slot. For modern processors, the location of execution in the program is complicated by instruction-level parallelism and out-of-order execution.\nBy default, a processor fetches instructions sequentially from memory, but a control transfer instruction changes the sequence by writing a value in the PC. A branch allows the next instruction to be fetched from elsewhere in memory. A function call not only branches but caches the value of the PC. A return restores the value in the PC to resume execution with the instruction following the call. A transfer that is conditional on the truth of some condition lets the computer follow a different sequence under different conditions.\nHardware implementation.\nIn a simple central processing unit (CPU), the PC is a digital counter (which is the origin of the term \"program counter\") that may be one of several hardware registers. The instruction cycle begins with a \"fetch\", in which the CPU places the value of the PC on the address bus to send it to the memory. The memory responds by sending the contents of that memory location on the data bus. (This is the stored-program computer model, in which a single memory space contains both executable instructions and ordinary data.) Following the fetch, the CPU proceeds to \"execution\", taking some action based on the memory contents that it obtained. At some point in this cycle, the PC will be modified so that the next instruction executed is a different one (typically, incremented so that the next instruction is the one starting at the memory address immediately following the last memory location of the current instruction).\nLike other processor registers, the PC may be a bank of binary latches, each one representing one bit of the value of the PC. The number of bits (the width of the PC) relates to the processor architecture. For instance, a \u201c32-bit\u201d CPU may use 32 bits to be able to address 232 units of memory. On some processors, the width of the program counter instead depends on the addressable memory; for example, some AVR microcontrollers have a PC which wraps around after 12 bits.\nIf the PC is a binary counter, it may increment when a pulse is applied to its COUNT UP input, or the CPU may compute some other value and load it into the PC by a pulse to its LOAD input.\nTo identify the current instruction, the PC may be combined with other registers that identify a segment or page. This approach permits a PC with fewer bits by assuming that most memory units of interest are within the current vicinity.\nConsequences in machine architecture.\nUse of a PC that normally increments assumes that what a computer does is execute a usually linear sequence of instructions. Such a PC is central to the von Neumann architecture. Thus programmers write a sequential control flow even for algorithms that do not have to be sequential. The resulting \u201cvon Neumann bottleneck\u201d led to research into parallel computing, including non-von Neumann or dataflow models that did not use a PC; for example, rather than specifying sequential steps, the high-level programmer might specify desired function and the low-level programmer might specify this using combinatory logic.\nThis research also led to ways to making conventional, PC-based, CPUs run faster, including:\nConsequences in high-level programming.\nModern high-level programming languages still follow the sequential-execution model and, indeed, a common way of identifying programming errors is with a \u201cprocedure execution\u201d in which the programmer's finger identifies the point of execution as a PC would. The high-level language is essentially the machine language of a virtual machine, too complex to be built as hardware but instead emulated or interpreted by software.\nHowever, new programming models transcend sequential-execution programming:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59945", "revid": "43583192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59945", "title": "History of logic", "text": "The history of logic deals with the study of the development of the science of valid inference (logic). Formal logics developed in ancient times in India, China, and Greece. Greek methods, particularly Aristotelian logic (or term logic) as found in the \"Organon\", found wide application and acceptance in Western science and mathematics for millennia. The Stoics, especially Chrysippus, began the development of predicate logic.\nChristian and Islamic philosophers such as Boethius (died 524), Avicenna (died 1037), Thomas Aquinas (died 1274) and William of Ockham (died 1347) further developed Aristotle's logic in the Middle Ages, reaching a high point in the mid-fourteenth century, with Jean Buridan. The period between the fourteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth century saw largely decline and neglect, and at least one historian of logic regards this time as barren. Empirical methods ruled the day, as evidenced by Sir Francis Bacon's \"Novum Organon\" of 1620.\nLogic revived in the mid-nineteenth century, at the beginning of a revolutionary period when the subject developed into a rigorous and formal discipline which took as its exemplar the exact method of proof used in mathematics, a hearkening back to the Greek tradition. The development of the modern \"symbolic\" or \"mathematical\" logic during this period by the likes of Boole, Frege, Russell, and Peano is the most significant in the two-thousand-year history of logic, and is arguably one of the most important and remarkable events in human intellectual history.\nProgress in mathematical logic in the first few decades of the twentieth century, particularly arising from the work of G\u00f6del and Tarski, had a significant impact on analytic philosophy and philosophical logic, particularly from the 1950s onwards, in subjects such as modal logic, temporal logic, deontic logic, and relevance logic.\nLogic in India.\nHindu logic.\nOrigin.\nThe Nasadiya Sukta of the \"Rigveda\" (RV 10.129) contains ontological speculation in terms of various logical divisions that were later recast formally as the four circles of \"catuskoti\": \"A\", \"not A\", \"A and 'not A'\", and \"not A and not not A\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nLogic began independently in ancient India and continued to develop to early modern times without any known influence from Greek logic.\nBefore Gautama.\nThough the origins in India of public debate (\"pari\u1e63ad\"), one form of rational inquiry, are not clear, we know that public debates were common in preclassical India, for they are frequently alluded to in various \"Upani\u1e63ads\" and in the early Buddhist literature. Public debate is not the only form of public deliberations in preclassical India. Assemblies (\"pari\u1e63ad\" or \"sabh\u0101\") of various sorts, comprising relevant experts, were regularly convened to deliberate on a variety of matters, including administrative, legal and religious matters.\nDattatreya.\nA philosopher named Dattatreya is stated in the Bhagavata Purana to have taught Anviksiki to Aiarka, Prahlada and others. It appears from the Markandeya purana that the Anviksiki-vidya expounded by him consisted of a mere disquisition on soul in accordance with the yoga philosophy. Dattatreya expounded the philosophical side of Anviksiki and not its logical aspect.\nMedhatithi Gautama.\nWhile the teachers mentioned before dealt with some particular topics of Anviksiki, the credit of founding the Anviksiki in its special sense of a science is to be attributed to Medhatithi Gautama (c. 6th century BC). Guatama founded the \"anviksiki\" school of logic. The \"Mahabharata\" (12.173.45), around the 5th century BC, refers to the \"anviksiki\" and \"tarka\" schools of logic.\nPanini.\n (c. 5th century BC) developed a form of logic (to which Boolean logic has some similarities) for his formulation of Sanskrit grammar. Logic is described by Chanakya (c. 350\u2013283 BC) in his \"Arthashastra\" as an independent field of inquiry.\nNyaya-Vaisheshika.\nTwo of the six Indian schools of thought deal with logic: Nyaya and Vaisheshika. The Ny\u0101ya S\u016btras of Aksapada Gautama (c. 2nd century AD) constitute the core texts of the Nyaya school, one of the six orthodox schools of Hindu philosophy. This realist school developed a rigid five-member schema of inference involving an initial premise, a reason, an example, an application, and a conclusion. The idealist Buddhist philosophy became the chief opponent to the Naiyayikas.\nJain logic.\nJains made its own unique contribution to this mainstream development of logic by also occupying itself with the basic epistemological issues, namely, with those concerning the nature of knowledge, how knowledge is derived, and in what way knowledge can be said to be reliable.\nThe Jains have doctrines of relativity used for logic and reasoning:\nThese concepts in Jain philosophy made important contributions to the thought, especially in the areas of skepticism and relativity. http://\nBuddhist logic.\nNagarjuna.\nNagarjuna (c. 150\u2013250 AD), the founder of the Madhyamaka (\"Middle Way\") developed an analysis known as the catu\u1e63ko\u1e6di (Sanskrit), a \"four-cornered\" system of argumentation that involves the systematic examination and rejection of each of the four possibilities of a proposition, \"P\":\nDignaga.\nHowever, Dign\u0101ga (c 480\u2013540 AD) is sometimes said to have developed a formal syllogism, and it was through him and his successor, Dharmakirti, that Buddhist logic reached its height; it is contested whether their analysis actually constitutes a formal syllogistic system. In particular, their analysis centered on the definition of an inference-warranting relation, \"vyapti\", also known as invariable concomitance or pervasion. To this end, a doctrine known as \"apoha\" or differentiation was developed. This involved what might be called inclusion and exclusion of defining properties.\nDign\u0101ga's famous \"wheel of reason\" (\"Hetucakra\") is a method of indicating when one thing (such as smoke) can be taken as an invariable sign of another thing (like fire), but the inference is often inductive and based on past observation. Matilal remarks that Dign\u0101ga's analysis is much like John Stuart Mill's Joint Method of Agreement and Difference, which is inductive.\nLogic in China.\nIn China, a contemporary of Confucius, Mozi, \"Master Mo\", is credited with founding the Mohist school, whose canons dealt with issues relating to valid inference and the conditions of correct conclusions. In particular, one of the schools that grew out of Mohism, the Logicians, are credited by some scholars for their early investigation of formal logic. Due to the harsh rule of Legalism in the subsequent Qin dynasty, this line of investigation disappeared in China until the introduction of Indian philosophy by Buddhists.\nLogic in the ancient Mediterranean.\nPrehistory of logic.\nValid reasoning has been employed in all periods of human history. However, logic studies the \"principles\" of valid reasoning, inference and demonstration. It is probable that the idea of demonstrating a conclusion first arose in connection with geometry, which originally meant the same as \"land measurement\". The ancient Egyptians discovered geometry, including the formula for the volume of a truncated pyramid. Ancient Babylon was also skilled in mathematics. Esagil-kin-apli's medical \"Diagnostic Handbook\" in the 11th century BC was based on a logical set of axioms and assumptions, while Babylonian astronomers in the 8th and 7th centuries BC employed an internal logic within their predictive planetary systems, an important contribution to the philosophy of science.\nAncient Greece before Aristotle.\nWhile the ancient Egyptians empirically discovered some truths of geometry, the great achievement of the ancient Greeks was to replace empirical methods by demonstrative proof. Both Thales and Pythagoras of the Pre-Socratic philosophers seemed aware of geometric methods.\nFragments of early proofs are preserved in the works of Plato and Aristotle, and the idea of a deductive system was probably known in the Pythagorean school and the Platonic Academy. The proofs of Euclid of Alexandria are a paradigm of Greek geometry. The three basic principles of geometry are as follows:\nFurther evidence that early Greek thinkers were concerned with the principles of reasoning is found in the fragment called \"dissoi logoi\", probably written at the beginning of the fourth century BC. This is part of a protracted debate about truth and falsity. In the case of the classical Greek city-states, interest in argumentation was also stimulated by the activities of the Rhetoricians or Orators and the Sophists, who used arguments to defend or attack a thesis, both in legal and political contexts.\nThales.\nIt is said Thales, most widely regarded as the first philosopher in the Greek tradition, measured the height of the pyramids by their shadows at the moment when his own shadow was equal to his height. Thales was said to have had a sacrifice in celebration of discovering Thales' theorem just as Pythagoras had the Pythagorean theorem.\nThales is the first known individual to use deductive reasoning applied to geometry, by deriving four corollaries to his theorem, and the first known individual to whom a mathematical discovery has been attributed. Indian and Babylonian mathematicians knew his theorem for special cases before he proved it. It is believed that Thales learned that an angle inscribed in a semicircle is a right angle during his travels to Babylon.\nPythagoras.\nBefore 520\u00a0BC, on one of his visits to Egypt or Greece, Pythagoras might have met the c.\u00a054 years older Thales. The systematic study of proof seems to have begun with the school of Pythagoras (i. e. the Pythagoreans) in the late sixth century BC. Indeed, the Pythagoreans, believing all was number, are the first philosophers to emphasize \"form\" rather than \"matter\".\nHeraclitus and Parmenides.\nThe writing of Heraclitus (c. 535 \u2013 c. 475 BC) was the first place where the word \"logos\" was given special attention in ancient Greek philosophy, Heraclitus held that everything changes and all was fire and conflicting opposites, seemingly unified only by this \"Logos\". He is known for his obscure sayings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This \"logos\" holds always but humans always prove unable to understand it, both before hearing it and when they have first heard it. For though all things come to be in accordance with this \"logos\", humans are like the inexperienced when they experience such words and deeds as I set out, distinguishing each in accordance with its nature and saying how it is. But other people fail to notice what they do when awake, just as they forget what they do while asleep.\u2014\u200a\nIn contrast to Heraclitus, Parmenides held that all is one and nothing changes. He may have been a dissident Pythagorean, disagreeing that One (a number) produced the many. \"X is not\" must always be false or meaningless. What exists can in no way not exist. Our sense perceptions with its noticing of generation and destruction are in grievous error. Instead of sense perception, Parmenides advocated \"logos\" as the means to Truth. He has been called the discoverer of logic,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For this view, that That Which Is Not exists, can never predominate. You must debar your thought from this way of search, nor let ordinary experience in its variety force you along this way, (namely, that of allowing) the eye, sightless as it is, and the ear, full of sound, and the tongue, to rule; but (you must) judge by means of the Reason (Logos) the much-contested proof which is expounded by me.\u2014\u200a\nZeno of Elea, a pupil of Parmenides, had the idea of a standard argument pattern found in the method of proof known as \"reductio ad absurdum\". This is the technique of drawing an obviously false (that is, \"absurd\") conclusion from an assumption, thus demonstrating that the assumption is false. Therefore, Zeno and his teacher are seen as the first to apply the art of logic. Plato's dialogue Parmenides portrays Zeno as claiming to have written a book defending the monism of Parmenides by demonstrating the absurd consequence of assuming that there is plurality. Zeno famously used this method to develop his paradoxes in his arguments against motion. Such \"dialectic\" reasoning later became popular. The members of this school were called \"dialecticians\" (from a Greek word meaning \"to discuss\").\nPlato.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let no one ignorant of geometry enter here.\u2014\u200a\nNone of the surviving works of the great fourth-century philosopher Plato (428\u2013347 BC) include any formal logic, but they include important contributions to the field of philosophical logic. Plato raises three questions:\nThe first question arises in the dialogue \"Theaetetus\", where Plato identifies thought or opinion with talk or discourse (\"logos\"). The second question is a result of Plato's theory of Forms. Forms are not things in the ordinary sense, nor strictly ideas in the mind, but they correspond to what philosophers later called universals, namely an abstract entity common to each set of things that have the same name. In both the \"Republic\" and the \"Sophist\", Plato suggests that the necessary connection between the assumptions of a valid argument and its conclusion corresponds to a necessary connection between \"forms\". The third question is about definition. Many of Plato's dialogues concern the search for a definition of some important concept (justice, truth, the Good), and it is likely that Plato was impressed by the importance of definition in mathematics. What underlies every definition is a Platonic Form, the common nature present in different particular things. Thus, a definition reflects the ultimate object of understanding, and is the foundation of all valid inference. This had a great influence on Plato's student Aristotle, in particular Aristotle's notion of the essence of a thing.\nAristotle.\nThe logic of Aristotle, and particularly his theory of the syllogism, has had an enormous influence in Western thought. Aristotle was the first logician to attempt a systematic analysis of logical syntax, of noun (or \"term\"), and of verb. He was the first \"formal logician\", in that he demonstrated the principles of reasoning by employing variables to show the underlying logical form of an argument. He sought relations of dependence which characterize necessary inference, and distinguished the validity of these relations, from the truth of the premises. He was the first to deal with the principles of contradiction and excluded middle in a systematic way. \nThe Organon.\nHis logical works, called the \"Organon\", are the earliest formal study of logic that have come down to modern times. Though it is difficult to determine the dates, the probable order of writing of Aristotle's logical works is:\nThese works are of outstanding importance in the history of logic. In the \"Categories\", he attempts to discern all the possible things to which a term can refer; this idea underpins his philosophical work \"Metaphysics\", which itself had a profound influence on Western thought.\nHe also developed a theory of non-formal logic (\"i.e.,\" the theory of fallacies), which is presented in \"Topics\" and \"Sophistical Refutations\".\n\"On Interpretation\" contains a comprehensive treatment of the notions of opposition and conversion; chapter 7 is at the origin of the square of opposition (or logical square); chapter 9 contains the beginning of modal logic.\nThe \"Prior Analytics\" contains his exposition of the \"syllogism\", where three important principles are applied for the first time in history: the use of variables, a purely formal treatment, and the use of an axiomatic system.\nStoics.\nThe other great school of Greek logic is that of the Stoics. Stoic logic traces its roots back to the late 5th century BC philosopher Euclid of Megara, a pupil of Socrates and slightly older contemporary of Plato, probably following in the tradition of Parmenides and Zeno. His pupils and successors were called \"Megarians\", or \"Eristics\", and later the \"Dialecticians\". The two most important dialecticians of the Megarian school were Diodorus Cronus and Philo, who were active in the late 4th century BC. \nThe Stoics adopted the Megarian logic and systemized it. The most important member of the school was Chrysippus (c. 278 \u2013 c. 206 BC), who was its third head, and who formalized much of Stoic doctrine. He is supposed to have written over 700 works, including at least 300 on logic, almost none of which survive. Unlike with Aristotle, we have no complete works by the Megarians or the early Stoics, and have to rely mostly on accounts (sometimes hostile) by later sources, including prominently Diogenes La\u00ebrtius, Sextus Empiricus, Galen, Aulus Gellius, Alexander of Aphrodisias, and Cicero.\nThree significant contributions of the Stoic school were (i) their account of modality, (ii) their theory of the Material conditional, and (iii) their account of meaning and truth.\n* Everything that is past is true and necessary.\n* The impossible does not follow from the possible.\n* What neither is nor will be is possible.\n Diodorus used the plausibility of the first two to prove that nothing is possible if it neither is nor will be true. Chrysippus, by contrast, denied the second premise and said that the impossible could follow from the possible.\n* If \"T0\", then \"T1\"\n* If \"F0\", then \"T0\"\n* If \"F0\", then \"F1\"\n The following conditional does not meet this requirement, and is therefore a false statement according to Philo:\n* If \"T0\", then \"F0\"\n Indeed, Sextus says \"According to [Philo], there are three ways in which a conditional may be true, and one in which it may be false.\" Philo's criterion of truth is what would now be called a truth-functional definition of \"if ... then\"; it is the definition used in modern logic.\nIn contrast, Diodorus allowed the validity of conditionals only when the antecedent clause could never lead to an untrue conclusion.\nMedieval logic.\nLogic in the Middle East.\nThe works of Al-Kindi, Al-Farabi, Avicenna, Al-Ghazali, Averroes and other Muslim logicians were based on Aristotelian logic and were important in communicating the ideas of the ancient world to the medieval West. Al-Farabi (Alfarabi) (873\u2013950) was an Aristotelian logician who discussed the topics of future contingents, the number and relation of the categories, the relation between logic and grammar, and non-Aristotelian forms of inference. Al-Farabi also considered the theories of conditional syllogisms and analogical inference, which were part of the Stoic tradition of logic rather than the Aristotelian.\nMaimonides (1138-1204) wrote a \"Treatise on Logic\" (Arabic: \"Maqala Fi-Sinat Al-Mantiq\"), referring to Al-Farabi as the \"second master\", the first being Aristotle.\nIbn Sina (Avicenna) (980\u20131037) was the founder of Avicennian logic, which replaced Aristotelian logic as the dominant system of logic in the Islamic world, and also had an important influence on Western medieval writers such as Albertus Magnus. Avicenna wrote on the hypothetical syllogism and on the propositional calculus, which were both part of the Stoic logical tradition. He developed an original \"temporally modalized\" syllogistic theory, involving temporal logic and modal logic. He also made use of inductive logic, such as the methods of agreement, difference, and concomitant variation which are critical to the scientific method. One of Avicenna's ideas had a particularly important influence on Western logicians such as William of Ockham: Avicenna's word for a meaning or notion (\"ma'na\"), was translated by the scholastic logicians as the Latin \"intentio\"; in medieval logic and epistemology, this is a sign in the mind that naturally represents a thing. This was crucial to the development of Ockham's conceptualism: A universal term (\"e.g.,\" \"man\") does not signify a thing existing in reality, but rather a sign in the mind (\"intentio in intellectu\") which represents many things in reality; Ockham cites Avicenna's commentary on \"Metaphysics\" V in support of this view.\nFakhr al-Din al-Razi (b. 1149) criticised Aristotle's \"first figure\" and formulated an early system of inductive logic, foreshadowing the system of inductive logic developed by John Stuart Mill (1806\u20131873). Al-Razi's work was seen by later Islamic scholars as marking a new direction for Islamic logic, towards a Post-Avicennian logic. This was further elaborated by his student Afdaladd\u00een al-Kh\u00fbnaj\u00ee (d. 1249), who developed a form of logic revolving around the subject matter of conceptions and assents. In response to this tradition, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (1201\u20131274) began a tradition of Neo-Avicennian logic which remained faithful to Avicenna's work and existed as an alternative to the more dominant Post-Avicennian school over the following centuries.\nThe Illuminationist school was founded by Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi (1155\u20131191), who developed the idea of \"decisive necessity\", which refers to the reduction of all modalities (necessity, possibility, contingency and impossibility) to the single mode of necessity. Ibn al-Nafis (1213\u20131288) wrote a book on Avicennian logic, which was a commentary of Avicenna's \"Al-Isharat\" (\"The Signs\") and \"Al-Hidayah\" (\"The Guidance\"). Ibn Taymiyyah (1263\u20131328), wrote the \"Ar-Radd 'ala al-Mantiqiyyin\", where he argued against the usefulness, though not the validity, of the syllogism and in favour of inductive reasoning. Ibn Taymiyyah also argued against the certainty of syllogistic arguments and in favour of analogy; his argument is that concepts founded on induction are themselves not certain but only probable, and thus a syllogism based on such concepts is no more certain than an argument based on analogy. He further claimed that induction itself is founded on a process of analogy. His model of analogical reasoning was based on that of juridical arguments. This model of analogy has been used in the recent work of John F. Sowa.\nThe \"Sharh al-takmil fi'l-mantiq\" written by Muhammad ibn Fayd Allah ibn Muhammad Amin al-Sharwani in the 15th century is the last major Arabic work on logic that has been studied. However, \"thousands upon thousands of pages\" on logic were written between the 14th and 19th centuries, though only a fraction of the texts written during this period have been studied by historians, hence little is known about the original work on Islamic logic produced during this later period.\nLogic in medieval Europe.\n\"Medieval logic\" (also known as \"Scholastic logic\") generally means the form of Aristotelian logic developed in medieval Europe throughout roughly the period 1200\u20131600. For centuries after Stoic logic had been formulated, it was the dominant system of logic in the classical world. When the study of logic resumed after the Dark Ages, the main source was the work of the Christian philosopher Boethius, who was familiar with some of Aristotle's logic, but almost none of the work of the Stoics. Until the twelfth century, the only works of Aristotle available in the West were the \"Categories\", \"On Interpretation\", and Boethius's translation of the Isagoge of Porphyry (a commentary on the Categories). These works were known as the \"Old Logic\" (\"Logica Vetus\" or \"Ars Vetus\"). An important work in this tradition was the \"Logica Ingredientibus\" of Peter Abelard (1079\u20131142). His direct influence was small, but his influence through pupils such as John of Salisbury was great, and his method of applying rigorous logical analysis to theology shaped the way that theological criticism developed in the period that followed. The proof for the principle of explosion, also known as the principle of Pseudo-Scotus, the law according to which any proposition can be proven from a contradiction (including its negation), was first given by the 12th century French logician William of Soissons.\nBy the early thirteenth century, the remaining works of Aristotle's \"Organon\", including the \"Prior Analytics\", \"Posterior Analytics\", and the \"Sophistical Refutations\" (collectively known as the \"Logica Nova\" or \"New Logic\"), had been recovered in the West. Logical work until then was mostly paraphrasis or commentary on the work of Aristotle. The period from the middle of the thirteenth to the middle of the fourteenth century was one of significant developments in logic, particularly in three areas which were original, with little foundation in the Aristotelian tradition that came before. These were:\nThe last great works in this tradition are the \"Logic\" of John Poinsot (1589\u20131644, known as John of St Thomas), the \"Metaphysical Disputations\" of Francisco Suarez (1548\u20131617), and the \"Logica Demonstrativa\" of Giovanni Girolamo Saccheri (1667\u20131733).\nTraditional logic.\nThe textbook tradition.\n\"Traditional logic\" generally means the textbook tradition that begins with Antoine Arnauld's and Pierre Nicole's \"Logic, or the Art of Thinking\", better known as the \"Port-Royal Logic\". Published in 1662, it was the most influential work on logic after Aristotle until the nineteenth century. The book presents a loosely Cartesian doctrine (that the proposition is a combining of ideas rather than terms, for example) within a framework that is broadly derived from Aristotelian and medieval term logic. Between 1664 and 1700, there were eight editions, and the book had considerable influence after that. The Port-Royal introduces the concepts of extension and intension. The account of propositions that Locke gives in the \"Essay\" is essentially that of the Port-Royal: \"Verbal propositions, which are words, [are] the signs of our ideas, put together or separated in affirmative or negative sentences. So that proposition consists in the putting together or separating these signs, according as the things which they stand for agree or disagree.\"\nDudley Fenner helped popularize Ramist logic, a reaction against Aristotle. Another influential work was the \"Novum Organum\" by Francis Bacon, published in 1620. The title translates as \"new instrument\". This is a reference to Aristotle's work known as the \"Organon\". In this work, Bacon rejects the syllogistic method of Aristotle in favor of an alternative procedure \"which by slow and faithful toil gathers information from things and brings it into understanding\". This method is known as inductive reasoning, a method which starts from empirical observation and proceeds to lower axioms or propositions; from these lower axioms, more general ones can be induced. For example, in finding the cause of a \"phenomenal nature\" such as heat, three lists should be constructed:\nThen, the \"form nature\" (or cause) of heat may be defined as that which is common to every situation of the presence list, and which is lacking from every situation of the absence list, and which varies by degree in every situation of the variability list.\nOther works in the textbook tradition include Isaac Watts's \"Logick: Or, the Right Use of Reason\" (1725), Richard Whately's \"Logic\" (1826), and John Stuart Mill's \"A System of Logic\" (1843). Although the latter was one of the last great works in the tradition, Mill's view that the foundations of logic lie in introspection influenced the view that logic is best understood as a branch of psychology, a view which dominated the next fifty years of its development, especially in Germany.\nLogic in Hegel's philosophy.\nG.W.F. Hegel indicated the importance of logic to his philosophical system when he condensed his extensive \"Science of Logic\" into a shorter work published in 1817 as the first volume of his \"Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences.\" The \"Shorter\" or \"Encyclopaedia\" \"Logic\", as it is often known, lays out a series of transitions which leads from the most empty and abstract of categories\u2014Hegel begins with \"Pure Being\" and \"Pure Nothing\"\u2014to the \"Absolute\", the category which contains and resolves all the categories which preceded it. Despite the title, Hegel's \"Logic\" is not really a contribution to the science of valid inference. Rather than deriving conclusions about concepts through valid inference from premises, Hegel seeks to show that thinking about one concept compels thinking about another concept (one cannot, he argues, possess the concept of \"Quality\" without the concept of \"Quantity\"); this compulsion is, supposedly, not a matter of individual psychology, because it arises almost organically from the content of the concepts themselves. His purpose is to show the rational structure of the \"Absolute\"\u2014indeed of rationality itself. The method by which thought is driven from one concept to its contrary, and then to further concepts, is known as the Hegelian dialectic.\nAlthough Hegel's \"Logic\" has had little impact on mainstream logical studies, its influence can be seen elsewhere:\nLogic and psychology.\nBetween the work of Mill and Frege stretched half a century during which logic was widely treated as a descriptive science, an empirical study of the structure of reasoning, and thus essentially as a branch of psychology. The German psychologist Wilhelm Wundt, for example, discussed deriving \"the logical from the psychological laws of thought\", emphasizing that \"psychological thinking is always the more comprehensive form of thinking.\" This view was widespread among German philosophers of the period:\nSuch was the dominant view of logic in the years following Mill's work. This psychological approach to logic was rejected by Gottlob Frege. It was also subjected to an extended and destructive critique by Edmund Husserl in the first volume of his \"Logical Investigations\" (1900), an assault which has been described as \"overwhelming\". Husserl argued forcefully that grounding logic in psychological observations implied that all logical truths remained unproven, and that skepticism and relativism were unavoidable consequences.\nSuch criticisms did not immediately extirpate what is called \"psychologism\". For example, the American philosopher Josiah Royce, while acknowledging the force of Husserl's critique, remained \"unable to doubt\" that progress in psychology would be accompanied by progress in logic, and vice versa.\nRise of modern logic.\nThe period between the fourteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth century had been largely one of decline and neglect, and is generally regarded as barren by historians of logic. The revival of logic occurred in the mid-nineteenth century, at the beginning of a revolutionary period where the subject developed into a rigorous and formalistic discipline whose exemplar was the exact method of proof used in mathematics. The development of the modern \"symbolic\" or \"mathematical\" logic during this period is the most significant in the 2000-year history of logic, and is arguably one of the most important and remarkable events in human intellectual history.\nA number of features distinguish modern logic from the old Aristotelian or traditional logic, the most important of which are as follows: Modern logic is fundamentally a \"calculus\" whose rules of operation are determined only by the \"shape\" and not by the \"meaning\" of the symbols it employs, as in mathematics. Many logicians were impressed by the \"success\" of mathematics, in that there had been no prolonged dispute about any truly mathematical result. C. S. Peirce noted that even though a mistake in the evaluation of a definite integral by Laplace led to an error concerning the moon's orbit that persisted for nearly 50 years, the mistake, once spotted, was corrected without any serious dispute. Peirce contrasted this with the disputation and uncertainty surrounding traditional logic, and especially reasoning in metaphysics. He argued that a truly \"exact\" logic would depend upon mathematical, i.e., \"diagrammatic\" or \"iconic\" thought. \"Those who follow such methods will ... escape all error except such as will be speedily corrected after it is once suspected\". Modern logic is also \"constructive\" rather than \"abstractive\"; i.e., rather than abstracting and formalising theorems derived from ordinary language (or from psychological intuitions about validity), it constructs theorems by formal methods, then looks for an interpretation in ordinary language. It is entirely symbolic, meaning that even the logical constants (which the medieval logicians called \"syncategoremata\") and the categoric terms are expressed in symbols.\nModern logic.\nThe development of modern logic falls into roughly five periods:\nEmbryonic period.\nThe idea that inference could be represented by a purely mechanical process is found as early as Raymond Llull, who proposed a (somewhat eccentric) method of drawing conclusions by a system of concentric rings. The work of logicians such as the Oxford Calculators led to a method of using letters instead of writing out logical calculations (\"calculationes\") in words, a method used, for instance, in the \"Logica magna\" by Paul of Venice. Three hundred years after Llull, the English philosopher and logician Thomas Hobbes suggested that all logic and reasoning could be reduced to the mathematical operations of addition and subtraction. The same idea is found in the work of Leibniz, who had read both Llull and Hobbes, and who argued that logic can be represented through a combinatorial process or calculus. But, like Llull and Hobbes, he failed to develop a detailed or comprehensive system, and his work on this topic was not published until long after his death. Leibniz says that ordinary languages are subject to \"countless ambiguities\" and are unsuited for a calculus, whose task is to expose mistakes in inference arising from the forms and structures of words; hence, he proposed to identify an alphabet of human thought comprising fundamental concepts which could be composed to express complex ideas, and create a \"calculus ratiocinator\" that would make all arguments \"as tangible as those of the Mathematicians, so that we can find our error at a glance, and when there are disputes among persons, we can simply say: Let us calculate.\"\nGergonne (1816) said that reasoning does not have to be about objects about which one has perfectly clear ideas, because algebraic operations can be carried out without having any idea of the meaning of the symbols involved. Bolzano anticipated a fundamental idea of modern proof theory when he defined logical consequence or \"deducibility\" in terms of variables:Hence I say that propositions formula_1, formula_2, formula_3... are \"deducible\" from propositions formula_4, formula_5, formula_6, formula_7... with respect to variable parts formula_8, formula_9..., if every class of ideas whose substitution for formula_8, formula_9... makes all of formula_4, formula_5, formula_6, formula_7... true, also makes all of formula_1, formula_2, formula_3... true. Occasionally, since it is customary, I shall say that propositions formula_1, formula_2, formula_3... \"follow\", or can be \"inferred\" or \"derived\", from formula_4, formula_5, formula_6, formula_7... Propositions formula_4, formula_5, formula_6, formula_7... I shall call the \"premises\", formula_1, formula_2, formula_3... the \"conclusions.\"This is now known as semantic validity.\nAlgebraic period.\nModern logic begins with what is known as the \"algebraic school\", originating with Boole and including Peirce, Jevons, Schr\u00f6der, and Venn. Their objective was to develop a calculus to formalise reasoning in the area of classes, propositions, and probabilities. The school begins with Boole's seminal work \"Mathematical Analysis of Logic\" which appeared in 1847, although De Morgan (1847) is its immediate precursor. The fundamental idea of Boole's system is that algebraic formulae can be used to express logical relations. This idea occurred to Boole in his teenage years, working as an usher in a private school in Lincoln, Lincolnshire. For example, let x and y stand for classes, let the symbol \"=\" signify that the classes have the same members, xy stand for the class containing all and only the members of x and y and so on. Boole calls these \"elective symbols\", i.e. symbols which select certain objects for consideration. An expression in which elective symbols are used is called an \"elective function\", and an equation of which the members are elective functions, is an \"elective equation\". The theory of elective functions and their \"development\" is essentially the modern idea of truth-functions and their expression in disjunctive normal form.\nBoole's system admits of two interpretations, in class logic, and propositional logic. Boole distinguished between \"primary propositions\" which are the subject of syllogistic theory, and \"secondary propositions\", which are the subject of propositional logic, and showed how under different \"interpretations\" the same algebraic system could represent both. An example of a primary proposition is \"All inhabitants are either Europeans or Asiatics.\" An example of a secondary proposition is \"Either all inhabitants are Europeans or they are all Asiatics.\" These are easily distinguished in modern predicate logic, where it is also possible to show that the first follows from the second, but it is a significant disadvantage that there is no way of representing this in the Boolean system.\nIn his \"Symbolic Logic\" (1881), John Venn used diagrams of overlapping areas to express Boolean relations between classes or truth-conditions of propositions. In 1869 Jevons realised that Boole's methods could be mechanised, and constructed a \"logical machine\" which he showed to the Royal Society the following year. In 1885 Allan Marquand proposed an electrical version of the machine that is still extant (https://).\nThe defects in Boole's system (such as the use of the letter \"v\" for existential propositions) were all remedied by his followers. Jevons published \"Pure Logic, or the Logic of Quality apart from Quantity\" in 1864, where he suggested a symbol to signify exclusive or, which allowed Boole's system to be greatly simplified. This was usefully exploited by Schr\u00f6der when he set out theorems in parallel columns in his \"Vorlesungen\" (1890\u20131905). Peirce (1880) showed how all the Boolean elective functions could be expressed by the use of a single primitive binary operation, \"neither ... nor ...\" and equally well \"not both ... and ...\", however, like many of Peirce's innovations, this remained unknown or unnoticed until Sheffer rediscovered it in 1913. Boole's early work also lacks the idea of the logical sum which originates in Peirce (1867), Schr\u00f6der (1877) and Jevons (1890), and the concept of inclusion, first suggested by Gergonne (1816) and clearly articulated by Peirce (1870).\nThe success of Boole's algebraic system suggested that all logic must be capable of algebraic representation, and there were attempts to express a logic of relations in such form, of which the most ambitious was Schr\u00f6der's monumental \"Vorlesungen \u00fcber die Algebra der Logik\" (\"Lectures on the Algebra of Logic\", vol iii 1895), although the original idea was again anticipated by Peirce.\nBoole's unwavering acceptance of Aristotle's logic is emphasized by the historian of logic John Corcoran in an accessible introduction to \"Laws of Thought.\" Corcoran also wrote a point-by-point comparison of \"Prior Analytics\" and \"Laws of Thought\". According to Corcoran, Boole fully accepted and endorsed Aristotle's logic. Boole's goals were \"to go under, over, and beyond\" Aristotle's logic by 1) providing it with mathematical foundations involving equations, 2) extending the class of problems it could treat\u2014from assessing validity to solving equations\u2014and 3) expanding the range of applications it could handle\u2014e.g. from propositions having only two terms to those having arbitrarily many.\nMore specifically, Boole agreed with what Aristotle said; Boole's 'disagreements', if they might be called that, concern what Aristotle did not say. \nFirst, in the realm of foundations, Boole reduced the four propositional forms of Aristotelian logic to formulas in the form of equations\u2014by itself a revolutionary idea. \nSecond, in the realm of logic's problems, Boole's addition of equation solving to logic\u2014another revolutionary idea\u2014involved Boole's doctrine that Aristotle's rules of inference (the \"perfect syllogisms\") must be supplemented by rules for equation solving. \nThird, in the realm of applications, Boole's system could handle multi-term propositions and arguments whereas Aristotle could handle only two-termed subject-predicate propositions and arguments. For example, Aristotle's system could not deduce \"No quadrangle that is a square is a rectangle that is a rhombus\" from \"No square that is a quadrangle is a rhombus that is a rectangle\" or from \"No rhombus that is a rectangle is a square that is a quadrangle\".\nLogicist period.\nAfter Boole, the next great advances were made by the German mathematician Gottlob Frege. Frege's objective was the program of Logicism, i.e. demonstrating that arithmetic is identical with logic. Frege went much further than any of his predecessors in his rigorous and formal approach to logic, and his calculus or Begriffsschrift is important. Frege also tried to show that the concept of number can be defined by purely logical means, so that (if he was right) logic includes arithmetic and all branches of mathematics that are reducible to arithmetic. He was not the first writer to suggest this. In his pioneering work (The Foundations of Arithmetic), sections 15\u201317, he acknowledges the efforts of Leibniz, J. S. Mill as well as Jevons, citing the latter's claim that \"algebra is a highly developed logic, and number but logical discrimination.\"\nFrege's first work, the \"Begriffsschrift\" (\"concept script\") is a rigorously axiomatised system of propositional logic, relying on just two connectives (negational and conditional), two rules of inference (\"modus ponens\" and substitution), and six axioms. Frege referred to the \"completeness\" of this system, but was unable to prove this. The most significant innovation, however, was his explanation of the quantifier in terms of mathematical functions. Traditional logic regards the sentence \"Caesar is a man\" as of fundamentally the same form as \"all men are mortal.\" Sentences with a proper name subject were regarded as universal in character, interpretable as \"every Caesar is a man\". At the outset Frege abandons the traditional \"concepts \"subject\" and \"predicate\"\", replacing them with \"argument\" and \"function\" respectively, which he believes \"will stand the test of time\". He goes on to say that it is \"easy to see how regarding a content as a function of an argument leads to the formation of concepts. Furthermore, the demonstration of the connection between the meanings of the words \"if, and, not, or, there is, some, all,\" and so forth, deserves attention\". Frege argued that the quantifier expression \"all men\" does not have the same logical or semantic form as \"all men\", and that the universal proposition \"every A is B\" is a complex proposition involving two \"functions\", namely ' \u2013 is A' and ' \u2013 is B' such that whatever satisfies the first, also satisfies the second. In modern notation, this would be expressed as\n formula_33\nIn English, \"for all x, if Ax then Bx\". Thus only singular propositions are of subject-predicate form, and they are irreducibly singular, i.e. not reducible to a general proposition. Universal and particular propositions, by contrast, are not of simple subject-predicate form at all. If \"all mammals\" were the logical subject of the sentence \"all mammals are land-dwellers\", then to negate the whole sentence we would have to negate the predicate to give \"all mammals are \"not\" land-dwellers\". But this is not the case. This functional analysis of ordinary-language sentences later had a great impact on philosophy and linguistics.\nThis means that in Frege's calculus, Boole's \"primary\" propositions can be represented in a different way from \"secondary\" propositions. \"All inhabitants are either men or women\" is\n formula_34\nwhereas \"All the inhabitants are men or all the inhabitants are women\" is\n formula_35\nAs Frege remarked in a critique of Boole's calculus:\n \"The real difference is that I avoid [the Boolean] division into two parts ... and give a homogeneous presentation of the lot. In Boole the two parts run alongside one another, so that one is like the mirror image of the other, but for that very reason stands in no organic relation to it.\"\nAs well as providing a unified and comprehensive system of logic, Frege's calculus also resolved the ancient problem of multiple generality. The ambiguity of \"every girl kissed a boy\" is difficult to express in traditional logic, but Frege's logic resolves this through the different scope of the quantifiers. Thus\nformula_36\nmeans that to every girl there corresponds some boy (any one will do) who the girl kissed. But\nformula_37\nmeans that there is some particular boy whom every girl kissed. Without this device, the project of logicism would have been doubtful or impossible. Using it, Frege provided a definition of the ancestral relation, of the many-to-one relation, and of mathematical induction.\nThis period overlaps with the work of what is known as the \"mathematical school\", which included Dedekind, Pasch, Peano, Hilbert, Zermelo, Huntington, Veblen and Heyting. Their objective was the axiomatisation of branches of mathematics like geometry, arithmetic, analysis and set theory. Most notable was Hilbert's Program, which sought to ground all of mathematics to a finite set of axioms, proving its consistency by \"finitistic\" means and providing a procedure which would decide the truth or falsity of any mathematical statement. The standard axiomatization of the natural numbers is named the Peano axioms eponymously. Peano maintained a clear distinction between mathematical and logical symbols. While unaware of Frege's work, he independently recreated his logical apparatus based on the work of Boole and Schr\u00f6der.\nThe logicist project received a near-fatal setback with the discovery of a paradox in 1901 by Bertrand Russell. This proved Frege's naive set theory led to a contradiction. Frege's theory contained the axiom that for any formal criterion, there is a set of all objects that meet the criterion. Russell showed that a set containing exactly the sets that are not members of themselves would contradict its own definition (if it is not a member of itself, it is a member of itself, and if it is a member of itself, it is not). This contradiction is now known as Russell's paradox. One important method of resolving this paradox was proposed by Ernst Zermelo. Zermelo set theory was the first axiomatic set theory. It was developed into the now-canonical Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory (ZF). Russell's paradox symbolically is as follows:\nformula_38\nThe monumental Principia Mathematica, a three-volume work on the foundations of mathematics, written by Russell and Alfred North Whitehead and published 1910\u20131913 also included an attempt to resolve the paradox, by means of an elaborate system of types: a set of elements is of a different type than is each of its elements (set is not the element; one element is not the set) and one cannot speak of the \"set of all sets\". The \"Principia\" was an attempt to derive all mathematical truths from a well-defined set of axioms and inference rules in symbolic logic.\nMetamathematical period.\nThe names of G\u00f6del and Tarski dominate the 1930s, a crucial period in the development of metamathematics\u2014the study of mathematics using mathematical methods to produce metatheories, or mathematical theories about other mathematical theories. Early investigations into metamathematics had been driven by Hilbert's program. Work on metamathematics culminated in the work of G\u00f6del, who in 1929 showed that a given first-order sentence is deducible if and only if it is logically valid\u2014i.e. it is true in every structure for its language. This is known as G\u00f6del's completeness theorem. A year later, he proved two important theorems, which showed Hibert's program to be unattainable in its original form. The first is that no consistent system of axioms whose theorems can be listed by an effective procedure such as an algorithm or computer program is capable of proving all facts about the natural numbers. For any such system, there will always be statements about the natural numbers that are true, but that are unprovable within the system. The second is that if such a system is also capable of proving certain basic facts about the natural numbers, then the system cannot prove the consistency of the system itself. These two results are known as G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems, or simply \"G\u00f6del's Theorem\". Later in the decade, G\u00f6del developed the concept of set-theoretic constructibility, as part of his proof that the axiom of choice and the continuum hypothesis are consistent with Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory.\nIn proof theory, Gerhard Gentzen developed natural deduction and the sequent calculus. The former attempts to model logical reasoning as it 'naturally' occurs in practice and is most easily applied to intuitionistic logic, while the latter was devised to clarify the derivation of logical proofs in any formal system. Since Gentzen's work, natural deduction and sequent calculi have been widely applied in the fields of proof theory, mathematical logic and computer science. Gentzen also proved normalization and cut-elimination theorems for intuitionistic and classical logic which could be used to reduce logical proofs to a normal form.\nAlfred Tarski, a pupil of \u0141ukasiewicz, is best known for his definition of truth and logical consequence, and the semantic concept of logical satisfaction. In 1933, he published (in Polish) \"The concept of truth in formalized languages\", in which he proposed his semantic theory of truth: a sentence such as \"snow is white\" is true if and only if snow is white. Tarski's theory separated the metalanguage, which makes the statement about truth, from the object language, which contains the sentence whose truth is being asserted, and gave a correspondence (the T-schema) between phrases in the object language and elements of an interpretation. Tarski's approach to the difficult idea of explaining truth has been enduringly influential in logic and philosophy, especially in the development of model theory. Tarski also produced important work on the methodology of deductive systems, and on fundamental principles such as completeness, decidability, consistency and definability. According to Anita Feferman, Tarski \"changed the face of logic in the twentieth century\".\nAlonzo Church and Alan Turing proposed formal models of computability, giving independent negative solutions to Hilbert's \"Entscheidungsproblem\" in 1936 and 1937, respectively. The \"Entscheidungsproblem\" asked for a procedure that, given any formal mathematical statement, would algorithmically determine whether the statement is true. Church and Turing proved there is no such procedure; Turing's paper introduced the halting problem as a key example of a mathematical problem without an algorithmic solution.\nChurch's system for computation developed into the modern \u03bb-calculus, while the Turing machine became a standard model for a general-purpose computing device. It was soon shown that many other proposed models of computation were equivalent in power to those proposed by Church and Turing. These results led to the Church\u2013Turing thesis that any deterministic algorithm that can be carried out by a human can be carried out by a Turing machine. Church proved additional undecidability results, showing that both Peano arithmetic and first-order logic are undecidable. Later work by Emil Post and Stephen Cole Kleene in the 1940s extended the scope of computability theory and introduced the concept of degrees of unsolvability.\nThe results of the first few decades of the twentieth century also had an impact upon analytic philosophy and philosophical logic, particularly from the 1950s onwards, in subjects such as modal logic, temporal logic, deontic logic, and relevance logic.\nLogic after WWII.\nAfter World War II, mathematical logic branched into four inter-related but separate areas of research: model theory, proof theory, computability theory, and set theory.\nIn set theory, the method of forcing revolutionized the field by providing a robust method for constructing models and obtaining independence results. Paul Cohen introduced this method in 1963 to prove the independence of the continuum hypothesis and the axiom of choice from Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory. His technique, which was simplified and extended soon after its introduction, has since been applied to many other problems in all areas of mathematical logic.\nComputability theory had its roots in the work of Turing, Church, Kleene, and Post in the 1930s and 40s. It developed into a study of abstract computability, which became known as recursion theory. The priority method, discovered independently by Albert Muchnik and Richard Friedberg in the 1950s, led to major advances in the understanding of the degrees of unsolvability and related structures. Research into higher-order computability theory demonstrated its connections to set theory. The fields of constructive analysis and computable analysis were developed to study the effective content of classical mathematical theorems; these in turn inspired the program of reverse mathematics. A separate branch of computability theory, computational complexity theory, was also characterized in logical terms as a result of investigations into descriptive complexity.\nModel theory applies the methods of mathematical logic to study models of particular mathematical theories. Alfred Tarski published much pioneering work in the field, which is named after a series of papers he published under the title \"Contributions to the theory of models\". In the 1960s, Abraham Robinson used model-theoretic techniques to develop calculus and analysis based on infinitesimals, a problem that first had been proposed by Leibniz. \nIn proof theory, the relationship between classical mathematics and intuitionistic mathematics was clarified via tools such as the realizability method invented by Georg Kreisel and G\u00f6del's \"Dialectica\" interpretation. This work inspired the contemporary area of proof mining. The Curry\u2013Howard correspondence emerged as a deep analogy between logic and computation, including a correspondence between systems of natural deduction and typed lambda calculi used in computer science. As a result, research into this class of formal systems began to address both logical and computational aspects; this area of research came to be known as modern type theory. Advances were also made in ordinal analysis and the study of independence results in arithmetic such as the Paris\u2013Harrington theorem.\nThis was also a period, particularly in the 1950s and afterwards, when the ideas of mathematical logic begin to influence philosophical thinking. For example, tense logic is a formalised system for representing, and reasoning about, propositions qualified in terms of time. The philosopher Arthur Prior played a significant role in its development in the 1960s. Modal logics extend the scope of formal logic to include the elements of modality (for example, possibility and necessity). The ideas of Saul Kripke, particularly about possible worlds, and the formal system now called Kripke semantics have had a profound impact on analytic philosophy. His best known and most influential work is \"Naming and Necessity\" (1980). Deontic logics are closely related to modal logics: they attempt to capture the logical features of obligation, permission and related concepts. Although some basic novelties syncretizing mathematical and philosophical logic were shown by Bolzano in the early 1800s, it was Ernst Mally, a pupil of Alexius Meinong, who was to propose the first formal deontic system in his \"Grundgesetze des Sollens\", based on the syntax of Whitehead's and Russell's propositional calculus.\nAnother logical system founded after World War II was fuzzy logic by Azerbaijani mathematician Lotfi Asker Zadeh in 1965.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59948", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59948", "title": "Virus (biological)", "text": ""}
{"id": "59949", "revid": "50625881", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59949", "title": "Anglo-Catholicism", "text": "Anglicanism that emphasises its Catholic heritage\nAnglo-Catholicism comprises beliefs and practices that emphasise the Catholic heritage, especially pre-Reformation roots, of the Church of England and other churches within Anglicanism. Anglo-Catholicism claims to restore liturgical and devotional expressions of church life that reflect the ancient practices of the early and medieval church.\nThe term was coined in the early 19th century, although movements emphasising the Catholic heritage of Anglicanism already existed. Particularly influential in the history of Anglo-Catholicism were the Caroline Divines of the 17th century, the Jacobite Nonjuring schism of the 17th and 18th centuries, and the Oxford Movement, which began at the University of Oxford in 1833 and ushered in a period of Anglican history known as the \"Catholic Revival\".\nHistory.\nThe historic Anglican formularies, developed under the influence of Thomas Cranmer, include the \"Thirty-nine Articles of Religion\" and \"The Books of Homilies\", both of which reflect the Reformed theology of the Protestant Reformation in England. The Book of Common Prayer was shaped by Cranmer as well and this became the standard liturgical text of Anglicanism for the coming centuries.\nFollowing the passing of the Act of Supremacy and Henry VIII's break with the Roman Catholic Church, the Church of England continued to adhere to most traditional Catholic teachings and did not initially make any other major alterations to doctrine. In 1536, the \"Ten Articles\" were published and constitute the first official Anglican articles of faith. The articles for the most part concurred with the teachings of the church in England as they had been prior to the English Reformation and defended, among other things, the Real Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, the sacrament of Confession, the honouring and invocation of Christian saints, and prayer for the dead. Belief in purgatory was made non-essential. \nIn 1537, this was followed by the \"Institution of the Christian Man\", also called \"The Bishops' Book\", a combined effort by numerous Anglican clergy and theologians which\u2014though not strongly Protestant in its inclinations\u2014showed a slight move towards Reformed positions. \"The Bishops' Book\" was unpopular with conservative sections of the church and quickly grew to be disliked by Henry VIII as well. \nIn 1539, the \"Six Articles\" moved away from all Reformed ideas and strongly affirmed Catholic positions regarding matters such as transubstantiation and Mass for the dead. The \"King's Book\", the official article of religion written by Henry in 1543, likewise expressed Catholic sacramental theology and encouraged prayer for the dead.\nA major shift in the development of Anglican doctrine came in the reign of Henry's son, Edward VI, who repealed the \"Six Articles\" and under whose rule the Church of England became more identifiably Protestant. Though the church's practices and approach to the sacraments became strongly influenced by those of continental reformers, it nevertheless retained episcopal church structure. The Church of England was then briefly reunited with the Roman Catholic Church under Mary I, before separating again under Elizabeth I. The Elizabethan Religious Settlement was an attempt to end the religious divisions among Christians in England, and is often seen as an important event in Anglican history, ultimately laying the foundations for the concept of \"via media\" in Anglicanism.\nThe nature of early Anglicanism was to be of great importance to the Anglo-Catholics of the 19th century, who would argue that their beliefs and practices were common during this period and were inoffensive to the earliest members of the Church of England.\nConformist views.\nIn the early history of Anglicanism, various clerics documented the elaborate liturgy celebrated in the Lutheran Churches to advance the same in the Church of England. In \"Two dialogues, or conferences Concerning kneeling in the very act of receiving the sacramental bread and wine, in the Supper of the Lord\", Anglican cleric Thomas Rogers referenced the Mass of the Lutheran Churches to defend the liturgy of the Book of Common Prayer, assembled by the reformer Thomas Cranmer: \"For all the Churches in Basel, Saxony, Denmark, and many in Germany, by the orders of their several Churches at the Communion, as well as we in England, do kneel.\"\nDuring the Stuart Restoration, Anglican cleric John Durel appealed to the Lutheran liturgy for the presence of ceremony in the Church of England:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As for the public Worship of God, they have all of them set Forms of Prayer, not one excepted, some differing from ours, some being in a manner the same. They observe Holy days; they have set Times for fasting; they have very magnificent and stately Buildings very richly adorned for their Churches. They sing not only Psalms, but many Hymns and spiritual songs, whereof some were anciently used in the Church, and some are of Luther's own making: And they sing them with Organs and other instruments of Music. They sing Anthems in the same manner that we do. In many places they wear Surplices and other Church-Ornaments. They use the Cross in Baptism; they receive the Communion kneeling. In fine, they have Conformity with us in all Rites of Divine Worship, and yet in all these no Idolatry nor Superstition, according to the judgement of the French Reformed Churches (Section I.3).\nIn 1715, Sir William Dawes, 3rd Baronet noted that the \"Lutheran religion...[goes] much farther; and are not only more abundant in their Ceremonies, but in the Pomp and Splendor of their Churches where Images and Pictures of Saints and Holy Men are expos'd to publick View on purpose to excite the frequenters of those Sacred Places to the Imitation of their Examples.\"\nCaroline Divines.\nThe Caroline Divines were a group of influential Anglican theologians active in the 17th century who opposed Calvinism, Lutheranism, and Puritanism and stressed the importance of apostolic succession, episcopal polity, and the sacraments. The Caroline Divines also favoured elaborate liturgy (in some cases favouring the liturgy of the pre-Reformation church) and aesthetics. Their influence saw a revival in the use of images and statues in churches. The leaders of the Anglo-Catholic revival in the 19th century would draw heavily from the works of the Caroline Divines.\nOxford Movement.\nThe modern Anglo-Catholic movement began with the Oxford Movement in the Victorian era, sometimes termed \"Tractarianism\". In the early 19th century, various factors caused misgivings among English church people, including the decline of church life and the spread of unconventional practices in the Church of England. The British government's action in 1833 of beginning a reduction in the number of Church of Ireland bishoprics and archbishoprics inspired a sermon from John Keble in the University Church in Oxford on the subject of \"National Apostasy\". This sermon marked the inception of what became known as the Oxford Movement.\nThe principal objective of the Oxford Movement was the defence of the Church of England as a divinely founded institution, of the doctrine of apostolic succession, and of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" as a \"rule of faith\". The key idea was that Anglicanism was not a Protestant denomination but a branch of the historical Christian Church, along with the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches. It was argued that Anglicanism had preserved the historical apostolic succession of priests and bishops, and thus the Catholic sacraments. These ideas were promoted in a series of ninety \"Tracts for the Times\", but were rejected both by the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches.\nThe principal leaders of the Oxford Movement were John Keble, John Henry Newman, and Edward Bouverie Pusey. The movement gained influential support, but it was also attacked by some bishops of the church and by the latitudinarians within the University of Oxford, who believed in conforming to official Church of England practices but who felt that matters of doctrine, liturgical practice, and ecclesiastical organisation were of relatively little importance. Within the Oxford Movement, there gradually arose a much smaller group which tended towards submission to the supremacy of the Roman Catholic Church.\nIn 1845, the university censured a tract entitled \"Ideal of a Christian Church\" and its author, the pro-Roman Catholic theologian W. G. Ward, on which basis was imputed the moniker \"Ideal Ward\". In 1850, evangelical cleric George Cornelius Gorham had victory in a celebrated legal action against church authorities. Consequently, some Anglicans of Anglo-Catholic churchmanship were received into the Roman Catholic Church, while others, such as Mark Pattison, embraced Latitudinarian Anglicanism, and yet others, such as James Anthony Froude, became skeptics. \nThe majority of adherents of the movement remained in the Church of England and, despite hostility in the press and in government, the movement spread. Its liturgical practices were influential, as were its social achievements (including its slum settlements) and its revival of male and female monasticism within Anglicanism.\nRecent developments.\nSince at least the 1970s, Anglo-Catholicism has been dividing into two distinct camps, along a fault line which can perhaps be traced back to Bishop Charles Gore's work in the 19th century.\nThe Oxford Movement had been inspired in the first place by a rejection of liberalism and latitudinarianism in favour of the traditional faith of the \"Church Catholic\", defined by the teachings of the Church Fathers and the common doctrines of the historical Eastern and Western Christian traditions.\nBecause of the emphasis on upholding traditions, until the 1970s most Anglo-Catholics rejected liberalising development such as the conferral of holy orders on women. Present-day \"traditionalist\" Anglo-Catholics seek to maintain tradition and to keep Anglican doctrine in line with that of the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches. They often ally themselves with conservative evangelical Anglicans to defend traditional teachings on sexual morality and women's roles in the Church. The main organisation in the Church of England that opposes the ordination of women, Forward in Faith, is largely composed of Anglo-Catholics.\nGore's work, however, bearing the mark of liberal Protestant higher criticism, paved the way for an alternative form of Anglo-Catholicism influenced by liberal theology. Thus in recent years, many Anglo-Catholics have accepted the ordination of women, the use of inclusive language in Bible translations and the liturgy, and progressive attitudes towards homosexuality and the blessing of same sex unions. Such Anglicans often refer to themselves as \"Liberal Catholics\". This more \"progressive\" style of Anglo-Catholicism is represented by Affirming Catholicism and the Society of Catholic Priests, although, unlike Forward in Faith, this organisation is not as visible with the laity.\nA third strand of Anglican Catholicism criticises elements of both liberalism and conservatism, drawing instead on the 20th-century Catholic \"Nouvelle Th\u00e9ologie\", especially Henri de Lubac. This movement rejected the dominance of Thomism and Neo-Scholasticism in Catholic theology and advocated instead for a \"return to the sources\" of the Christian faith \u2013 scripture and the writings of the Church Fathers \u2013, while remaining open to dialogue with the contemporary world on issues of theology. John Milbank and others within this strand have been instrumental in the creation of the ecumenical (though predominantly Anglican and Roman Catholic) movement known as radical orthodoxy.\nSince the 1970s, some traditionalist Anglo-Catholics have left official Anglicanism to form \"continuing Anglican churches\" whereas others have left Anglicanism altogether for the Roman Catholic or Eastern Orthodox churches, in the belief that liberal doctrinal changes in the Anglican churches have gone too far.\nPersonal ordinariates.\nIn late 2009, in response to requests from various groups of Anglicans around the world who were dissatisfied with liberalising movements within the Anglican Communion, Pope Benedict XVI issued the apostolic constitution \"Anglicanorum Coetibus\". This document invites groups of traditionalist Anglicans to form what are termed \"personal ordinariates\" under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Holy See of the Catholic Church in Rome, while preserving elements of the liturgical, musical, theological and other aspects of their Anglican patrimony. \nUnder these terms, regional groupings of Anglican Catholics may apply for reception by the Holy See under the jurisdiction of an \"ordinary\" (i.e. a bishop or priest) appointed by Rome to oversee the community. While being in a country or region which is part of the Latin Church of the Roman Catholic Church, these ordinaries will nonetheless retain aspects of the Anglican patrimony, such as married priests and traditional English choral music and liturgy. Because apostolic constitutions are the highest level of papal legislation and are not time-limited, the invitation is open into the indefinite future.\nThe first personal ordinariate, the Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham, was established on 15 January 2011 in the United Kingdom. The second Anglican ordinariate, known as the Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter, was established on 1 January 2012 in the United States. The already existing Anglican Use parishes in the United States, which have existed since the 1980s, formed a portion of the first American personal ordinariate. \nThese parishes were already in communion with Rome and use modified Anglican liturgies approved by the Holy See. They were joined by other groups and parishes of Episcopalians and some other Anglicans. A third Anglican ordinariate, known as the Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of the Southern Cross, was established on 15 June 2012 in Australia. The \"\"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" is the authoritative expression of the Catholic faith professed by members\" of the personal ordinariates.\nPractices and beliefs.\nTheology.\nHistorically, Anglo-Catholics have valued \"highly the tradition of the early, undivided Church, they saw its authority as co-extensive with Scripture. They re-emphasised the Church's institutional history and form. Anglo-Catholicism was emotionally intense, and yet drawn to aspects of the pre-Reformation Church, including the revival of religious orders, the reintroduction of the language and symbolism of the eucharistic sacrifice,\" and \"the revival of private confession. Its spirituality was Evangelical, but High Church in content and form.\" \nAt the same time, Anglo-Catholics held that \"the Roman Catholic has corrupted the original ritualism; and she [the Anglican Church] claims that the ritualism which she presents is a revival in purity of the original ritualism of the Catholic Church.\" The spirituality of Anglo-Catholics is drawn largely from the teachings of the early church, in addition to the Caroline Divines. \nIn 1572, Archbishop of Canterbury Matthew Parker published \"De Antiquitate Britannic\u00e6 Ecclesi\u00e6\", which traced the roots of the Anglican Church, arguing \"that the early British Church differed from Roman Catholicism in key points and thus provided an alternative model for patristic Christianity,\" a view repeated by many Anglo-Catholics such as Charles Chapman Grafton, Bishop of the Diocese of Fond du Lac. In addition, Anglo-Catholics hold that the Anglican churches have maintained \"catholicity and apostolicity.\" In the same vein, Anglo-Catholics emphasise the doctrines of apostolic succession and the threefold order, holding that these were retained by the Anglican Church after it went through the English Reformation.\nIn agreement with the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches, Anglo-Catholics\u2014along with Old-Catholics and Lutherans\u2014generally appeal to the \"canon\" (or rule) of St Vincent of Lerins: \"What everywhere, what always, and what by all has been believed, that is truly and properly Catholic.\"\nThe Anglican Thirty-nine Articles make distinctions between Anglican and Catholic understandings of doctrine; in the eyes of Anglo-Catholics, the Thirty-nine Articles are catholic, containing statements that profess the universal faith of the early church. As the Articles were intentionally written in such a way as to be open to a range of interpretations, Anglo-Catholics have defended their practices and beliefs as being consistent with the Thirty-nine Articles, for example in Newman's Tract 90 of 1841. Since the late 20th century, Anglo-Catholic thought related to the Thirty-nine Articles has included the New Perspective on Paul.\nAnglo-Catholic priests often hear private confessions and anoint the sick, regarding these practices as sacraments. Anglo-Catholics also offer prayers for the departed and the intercession of the saints; C. S. Lewis, often considered an Anglo-Catholic in his theological sensibilities, writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Of course I pray for the dead. The action is so spontaneous, so all but inevitable, that only the most compulsive theological case against it would deter me. And I hardly know how the rest of my prayers would survive if those for the dead were forbidden. At our age, the majority of those we love best are dead. What sort of intercourse with God could I have if what I love best were unmentionable to Him?\u2014\u200a\nAnglicans of Anglo-Catholic churchmanship also believe in the real objective presence of Christ in the Eucharist and understand the way He is manifest in the sacrament to be a mystery of faith. Like the Eastern Orthodox and Lutherans, Anglo-Catholics, with the exception of the minority of Anglican Papalists, reject the Catholic doctrines of the papal supremacy and papal infallibility, with Walter Herbert Stowe, an Anglo-Catholic cleric, explaining the Anglican position on these issues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; However, Anglo-Catholics share with Catholics a belief in the sacramental nature of the priesthood and in the sacrificial character of the Mass. A minority of Anglo-Catholics also encourage priestly celibacy. Most Anglo-Catholics, due to the silence of the Thirty-Nine Articles on the issue, encourage devotion to the Virgin Mary, but not all Anglo-Catholics adhere to a high doctrine of Mariology; in England, her title of Our Lady of Walsingham is popular.\nLiturgical practices.\nAnglo-Catholics are often identified by their liturgical practices and ornaments. These have traditionally been characterised by the \"six points\" of the later Catholic Revival's eucharistic practice:\nMany other traditional Catholic practices are observed within Anglo-Catholicism, including eucharistic adoration. Some of these Anglo-Catholic \"innovations\" have since been accepted by broad church Anglicans, if not by Evangelical or low church Anglicans.\nVarious liturgical strands exist within Anglo-Catholicism:\nPreferences for Elizabethan English and modern English texts vary within the movement.\nIn the United States, a group of Anglo-Catholics at the Episcopal Church of the Good Shepherd (Rosemont, Pennsylvania) published, under the rubrics of the 1979 Book of Common Prayer, the \"Anglican Service Book\" as \"a traditional-language adaptation of the 1979 Book of Common Prayer together with the Psalter or Psalms of David and additional devotions.\" This book is based on the 1979 Book of Common Prayer but includes offices and devotions in the traditional language of the 1928 Prayer Book that are not in the 1979 edition. The book also draws from sources such as the Anglican Missal.\nIn many Anglo-Catholic churches, clergy are referred to as \"Father\", and in places where the priestly ministry of women is accepted, as \"Mother\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59950", "revid": "122189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59950", "title": "Domain name server", "text": ""}
{"id": "59952", "revid": "5808672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59952", "title": "Thirty-nine Articles", "text": "Anglican doctrinal statement\nThe Thirty-nine Articles of Religion (commonly abbreviated as the Thirty-nine Articles or the XXXIX Articles), finalised in 1571, are the historically defining statements of doctrines and practices of the Church of England with respect to the controversies of the English Reformation. The Thirty-nine Articles form part of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" used by the Church of England, and feature in parts of the worldwide Anglican Communion (including the Episcopal Church), as well as by denominations outside of the Anglican Communion that identify with the Anglican tradition (see Continuing Anglican movement).\nWhen Henry VIII broke with the Catholic Church and was excommunicated, he began the reform of the Church of England, which would be headed by the monarch (himself), rather than the pope. At this point, he needed to determine what its doctrines and practices would be in relation to the Church of Rome and the new Protestant movements in continental Europe. A series of defining documents were written and replaced over a period of thirty years as the doctrinal and political situation changed from the excommunication of Henry VIII in 1533, to the excommunication of Elizabeth\u00a0I in 1570. These positions began with the Ten Articles in 1536, and concluded with the finalisation of the Thirty-nine articles in 1571. The Thirty-nine articles ultimately served to define the doctrine of the Church of England as it related to Calvinist doctrine and Catholic practice.\nThe articles went through at least five major revisions prior to their finalisation in 1571. The first attempt was the Ten Articles in 1536, which showed some slightly Protestant leanings \u2013 the result of an English desire for a political alliance with the German Lutheran princes. The next revision was the Six Articles in 1539 which swung away from all reformed positions, and then the \"King's Book\" in 1543, which re-established most of the earlier Catholic doctrines. During the reign of Edward VI, Henry VIII's son, the Forty-two Articles were written under the direction of Archbishop Thomas Cranmer in 1552. It was in this document that Calvinist thought reached the zenith of its influence in the English Church. These articles were never put into action, owing to Edward VI's death and the reversion of the English Church to Catholicism under Henry VIII's elder daughter, Mary\u00a0I.\nFinally, upon the coronation of Elizabeth\u00a0I and the re-establishment of the Church of England as separate from the Catholic Church, the Thirty-nine Articles of Religion were initiated by the Convocation of 1563, under the direction of Matthew Parker, the Archbishop of Canterbury. \nThe Thirty-nine Articles were finalised in 1571, and incorporated into the \"Book of Common Prayer\". Although not the end of the struggle between Catholic and Protestant monarchs and citizens, the book helped to standardise the English language, and was to have a lasting effect on religion in the United Kingdom and elsewhere through its wide use.\nPredecessors.\nTen Articles (1536).\nThe Church of England's break with Rome inaugurated a period of doctrinal confusion and controversy as both conservative and reforming clergy attempted to shape the church's direction, the former as \"Catholicism without the Pope\" and the latter as Protestant. In an attempt \"to establish Christian quietness and unity\", the Ten Articles were adopted by clerical Convocation in July 1536 as the English Church's first post-papal doctrinal statement. The Ten Articles were crafted as a rushed interim compromise between conservatives and reformers. Historians have variously described it as a victory for Lutheranism and a success for Catholic resistance. Its provisions have also been described as \"confusing\".\nThe first five articles dealt with doctrines that were \"commanded expressly by God, and are necessary to our salvation\", while the last five articles dealt with \"laudable ceremonies used in the Church\". This division reflects how the Articles originated from two different discussions earlier in the year. The first five articles were based on the Wittenberg Articles negotiated between English ambassadors Edward Foxe, Nicholas Heath and Robert Barnes and German Lutheran theologians, including Martin Luther and Philip Melanchthon. This doctrinal statement was itself based on the Augsburg Confession of 1530.\nThe five principal doctrines were the Bible and ecumenical creeds, baptism, penance, the Eucharist and justification. The core doctrine in the Ten Articles was justification by faith. Justification \u2013 which was defined as remission of sin and accepting into God's favour \u2013 was through \"the only mercy and grace of the Father, promised freely unto us for his Son\u2019s sake Jesus Christ, and the merits of his blood and passion\". Good works would follow, not precede, justification. However, the Lutheran influence was diluted with qualifications. Justification was attained \"by contrition and faith joined with charity\". In other words, good works were \"necessarily required to the attaining of everlasting life\".\nTo the disappointment of conservatives, only three of the traditional seven sacraments were even mentioned (baptism, the Eucharist and penance). The Articles affirm the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist, stating that \"under the form and figure of bread and wine ... is verily, substantially and really contained the very self-same body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ\". This definition was acceptable to those who held to transubstantiation or sacramental union, but it clearly condemned sacramentarianism. More controversially for the reformers, the Articles maintained penance as a sacrament and the priest's authority to grant divine absolution in confession.\nArticles six to ten focused on secondary issues. Significantly, purgatory, which had been a central concern of medieval religion, was placed in the non-essential articles. On the question of its existence, the Ten Articles were ambiguous. They stated, \"the place where [departed souls] be, the name thereof, and kind of pains there\" was \"uncertain by scripture\". Prayer for the dead and masses for the dead were permitted as arguably relieving the pain of departed souls in purgatory.\nThe Articles also defended the use of a number of Catholic rituals and practices opposed by Protestants, such as kissing the cross on Good Friday, while mildly criticising popular abuses and excesses. The use of religious images was permitted but people were to be taught not to kneel before them or make offerings to them. Prayer to Mary, mother of Jesus, and all the other saints was permitted as long as superstition was avoided.\nIn summary, the Ten Articles asserted:\n\"Bishops' Book\" (1537).\nThe failure of the Ten Articles to settle doctrinal controversy led Thomas Cromwell, the King's vicegerent in spirituals, to convene a national synod of bishops and high-ranking clergy for further theological discussion in February 1537. This synod produced a book called \"The Institution of the Christian Man\" (popularly called \"The Bishops' Book\"), the word \"institution\" being synonymous with \"instruction\". \"The Bishops' Book\" preserved the semi-Lutheranism of the Ten Articles, and the articles on justification, purgatory, and the sacraments of baptism, the Eucharist and penance were incorporated unchanged into the new book.\nWhen the synod met, conservatives were still angry that four of the traditional seven sacraments (confirmation, marriage, holy orders and extreme unction) had been excluded from the Ten Articles. John Stokesley argued for all seven, while Thomas Cranmer only acknowledged baptism and the Eucharist. The others divided along party lines. The conservatives were at a disadvantage because they found it necessary to appeal to sacred tradition, which violated Cromwell's instructions that all arguments refer to scripture.\nIn the end, the missing sacraments were restored but placed in a separate section to emphasize \"a difference in dignity and necessity.\" Only baptism, the Eucharist and penance were \"instituted of Christ, to be as certain instruments or remedies necessary for our salvation\". Confirmation was declared to have been introduced by the early Church in imitation of what they had read about the practice of the Apostles.\nThe \"Bishops' Book\" also included expositions on the creed, the Ten Commandments, the Lord's Prayer and Hail Mary. These were greatly influenced by William Marshall's primer (an English-language book of hours) of 1535, which itself was influenced by Luther's writings. Following Marshall, \"The Bishops' Book\" rejected the traditional Catholic numbering of the Ten Commandments, in which the prohibition on making and worshiping graven images was part of the first commandment, \"Thou shalt have no other gods before me\". In agreement with the Eastern Orthodox and Huldrych Zwingli's church at Zurich, the authors of the \"Bishops' Book\" adopted the Jewish tradition of separating these commandments. While allowing images of Christ and the saints, the exposition on the second commandment taught against representations of God the Father and criticised those who \"be more ready with their substance to deck dead images gorgeously and gloriously, than with the same to help poor Christian people, the quick and lively images of God\". Such teachings encouraged iconoclasm, which would become a feature of the English Reformation.\nThe list of the 46 divines as they appear in the \"Bishop's Book\" included all of the bishops, eight archdeacons and 17 other Doctors of Divinity, some of whom were later involved with translating the Bible and compiling the \"Book of Common Prayer\":\nThomas Cranmer \u2013\nEdward Lee \u2013\nJohn Stokesley \u2013\nCuthbert Tunstall \u2013\nStephen Gardiner \u2013\nRobert Aldrich \u2013\nJohn Voysey \u2013\nJohn Longland \u2013\nJohn Clerk \u2013\nRowland Lee \u2013\nThomas Goodrich \u2013\nNicholas Shaxton \u2013\nJohn Bird \u2013\nEdward Foxe \u2013\nHugh Latimer \u2013\nJohn Hilsey \u2013\nRichard Sampson \u2013\nWilliam Repps \u2013\nWilliam Barlowe \u2013\nRobert Partew \u2013\nRobert Holgate \u2013\nRichard Wolman \u2013\nWilliam Knight \u2013\nJohn Bell \u2013\nEdmond Bonner \u2013\nWilliam Skip \u2013\nNicholas Heath \u2013\nCuthbert Marshal \u2013\nRichard Curren \u2013\nWilliam Cliffe \u2013\nWilliam Downes \u2013\nRobert Oking \u2013\nRalph Bradford \u2013\nRichard Smyth \u2013\nSimon Matthew \u2013\nJohn Pryn \u2013\nWilliam Buckmaster \u2013\nWilliam May \u2013\nNicholas Wotton \u2013\nRichard Cox \u2013\nJohn Edmunds \u2013\nThomas Robertson \u2013\nJohn Baker \u2013\nThomas Barett \u2013\nJohn Hase \u2013\nJohn Tyson\nIn August 1537, it was presented to the King who ordered that parts should be read from the pulpit every Sunday and feast day. Nevertheless, the King was not entirely satisfied and took it upon himself to make a revised \"Bishops' Book\", which, among other proposed changes, weakened the original's emphasis on justification by faith. This revised version was never published. Because the \"Bishops' Book\" was never authorised by the Crown or Convocation, the Ten Articles remained the official doctrinal standard of the Church of England.\nSix Articles (1539).\nFearful of diplomatic isolation and a Catholic alliance, Henry VIII continued his outreach to the Lutheran Schmalkaldic League. \nIn May 1538, three Lutheran theologians from Germany \u2013 Franz Burchard, vice-chancellor of Saxony; Georg von Boineburg, doctor of law; and Friedrich Myconius, superintendent of the church in Gotha \u2013 arrived in London and held conferences with English bishops and clergy at the archbishop's Lambeth Palace through September.\nThe Germans presented, as a basis of agreement, a number of articles based on the Lutheran Confession of Augsburg. Bishops Tunstall, Stokesley and others were not won over by these Protestant arguments and did everything they could to avoid agreement. They were willing to separate from Rome, but their plan was to unite with the Greek Church and not with the Protestants on the continent. The bishops also refused to eliminate what the Germans considered abuses (e.g. private masses for the dead, compulsory clerical celibacy, and withholding communion wine from the laity) allowed by the English Church. Stokesley considered these customs to be essential because the Greek Church practised them. As the King was unwilling to break with these practices, the Germans had all left England by 1 October.\nMeanwhile, England was in religious turmoil. Impatient Protestants took it upon themselves to further reform \u2013 some priests said mass in English rather than Latin and married without authorisation (Archbishop Cranmer was himself secretly married). Protestants themselves were divided between establishment reformers who held Lutheran beliefs upholding the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist and radicals who held Anabaptist and Sacramentarian views denying real presence. In May 1539, a new Parliament met, and Lord Chancellor Audley told the House of Lords that the King desired religious uniformity. A committee of four conservative and four reformist bishops was appointed to examine and determine doctrine. On 16 May, the Duke of Norfolk noted that the committee had not agreed on anything and proposed that the Lords examine six controversial doctrinal questions that became the basis of the Six Articles:\nOver the next month, these questions were argued in Parliament and Convocation with the active participation of the King. The final product was an affirmation of traditional teachings on all but the sixth question. Communion in one kind, compulsory clerical celibacy, vows of chastity and votive masses were a legitimate form. Protestants achieved a minor victory on auricular confession, which was declared \"expedient and necessary to be retained\" but not required by divine law. In addition, although the real presence was affirmed in traditional terminology, the word \"transubstantiation\" itself did not appear in the final version.\nThe Act of Six Articles became law in June 1539, which, unlike the Ten Articles, gave the Six Articles statutory authority. Harsh penalties were attached to violations of the Articles. Denial of transubstantiation was punished by burning without an opportunity to recant. Denial of any of the other articles was punished by hanging or life imprisonment. Married priests had until 12 July to put away their wives, which was likely a concession granted to give Archbishop Cranmer time to move his wife and children outside of England. After the act's passage, bishops Latimer and Shaxton, outspoken opponents of the measure, were forced to resign their dioceses. The Act of Six Articles was repealed by the Treason Act 1547 (1 Edw. 6. c. 12) during the reign of Henry's son, Edward VI.\n\"King's Book\" (1543).\nWhen Parliament re-convened in April 1540, a committee was formed to revise the \"Bishops' Book\", which Henry VIII had never liked. The committee's membership included both traditionalists and reformers, but the former held the majority. Convocation began discussing the revised text in April 1543. The \"King's Book\", or \"The Necessary Doctrine and Erudition for Any Christian Man\" to use its formal title, was more traditional than the 1537 version and incorporated many of the King's own revisions. It was approved by a special meeting of the nobility on 6 May and differed from the \"Bishop's Book\" in having been issued under the King's authority. It was also statutorily enforced by the Act for the Advancement of True Religion. Because of its royal authorisation, the \"King's Book\" officially replaced the Ten Articles as the official doctrinal statement of the Church of England.\nSignificantly, the doctrine of justification by faith \"alone\" was totally rejected. Cranmer tried to save the doctrine by arguing that while true faith was accompanied by good works (in other words, faith was not \"alone\") it was only faith that justified. However, Henry would not be persuaded, and the text was amended to read that faith justified \"neither only nor alone\". It also stated that each person had free will to be \"a worker ... in the attaining of his own justification\". The \"King's Book\" also endorsed traditional views of the mass, transubstantiation, confession, and Church ceremonies. The traditional seven sacraments were all included without any distinction in importance made between them. It was taught that the second commandment did not forbid images but only \"godly honour\" being given to them. Looking at images of Christ and the saints \"provoked, kindled and stirred to yield thanks to Our Lord\".\nThe one area in which the \"King's Book\" moved away from traditional teaching was on prayer for the dead and purgatory. It taught that no one could know whether prayers or masses for the dead benefited an individual soul, and it was better to offer prayers for \"the universal congregation of Christian people, quick and dead\". People were encouraged to \"abstain from the name of purgatory, and no more dispute or reason thereof\". Presumably, the hostility towards purgatory derived from its connection to papal authority. The King's own behavior sent mixed signals. In 1540, he allowed offerings for the souls of deceased Knights of the Garter to be spent on works of charity instead of masses. At the same time, however, he required the new cathedral foundations to pray for the soul of Queen Jane. Perhaps because of the uncertainty surrounding this doctrine, bequests in wills for chantries, obits and masses fell by half what they had been in the 1520s.\nForty-two Articles (1553).\nHenry VIII was succeeded by his son, Edward VI, in 1547. During Edward's reign, the Church of England adopted a stronger Protestant identity. The \"Book of Common Prayer\" of 1549 authorised a reformed liturgy, and the 1552 \"Book of Common Prayer\" was even more explicitly Protestant. To make the English Church fully Protestant, Cranmer also envisioned a reform of canon law and the creation of a concise doctrinal statement, which would become the Forty-two Articles. Work on a doctrinal statement was delayed by Cranmer's efforts to forge a doctrinal consensus among the various Protestant churches to counter the work of the Catholic Council of Trent. When this proved impossible, Cranmer turned his attention to defining what the Church of England believed.\nIn late 1552 the first edition of the confession was produced in the form of the Forty-Five Articles that Cranmer submitted for comment and revision, and which were approved by Parliament in June of 1553 by which time their number had been reduced to the Forty-two Articles which were drafted by Cranmer and a small group of fellow Protestants. The title page claimed that the articles were approved by Convocation when in reality they were never discussed or adopted by the clerical body. They were also never approved by Parliament. The articles were issued by Royal Mandate on 19 June 1553. All clergy, schoolmasters and members of the universities were required to subscribe to them. The theology of the articles has been described by some as a \"restrained\" Calvinism. Others point to a much stronger Lutheran influence.\nDevelopment.\nEdward died in 1553. With the coronation of Mary\u00a0I and the reunion of the Church of England with the Catholic Church, the articles were never enforced. However, after Mary's death, they became the basis of the Thirty-nine Articles. In 1563, Convocation met under Archbishop Parker to revise the articles. Convocation passed only 39 of the 42, and Elizabeth reduced the number to 38 by throwing out Article 29 to avoid offending her subjects with Catholic leanings. In 1571, despite the opposition of Bishop Edmund Gheast, Article 29 was re-inserted, declaring that the wicked do not eat the Body of Christ. This was done following the queen's excommunication by the Pope Pius\u00a0V in 1570. That act destroyed any hope of reconciliation with Rome and it was no longer necessary to fear that Article 29 would offend Catholic sensibilities. The Articles, increased to Thirty-nine, were ratified by the Queen, and the bishops and clergy were required to assent. \nContent.\nThe Thirty-nine Articles were intended to establish, in basic terms, the faith and practice of the Church of England. While not designed to be a creed or complete statement of the Christian faith, the articles explain the doctrinal position of the Church of England in relation to Calvinism, as well as Catholicism and Anabaptism. According to historian Anthony Milton, \"the Thirty-Nine Articles were certainly broadly consistent with the Reformed consensus in doctrinal matters\".\nThe Thirty-nine Articles can be divided into eight sections based on their content:\nArticles 1\u20135: The Doctrine of God:\nThe first five articles articulate the doctrine of God, the Holy Trinity and the incarnation of Jesus Christ. This is a departure from other doctrinal statements of the 16th and 17th centuries such as the Helvetic Confessions and the Westminster Confession, which begin with the doctrine of revelation and Holy Scripture as the source of knowledge about God.\nArticles 6\u20138: Scripture and the Creeds:\nThese articles state that Holy Scripture contains everything necessary for salvation, so that no one can be required to believe any doctrine that cannot be proved on the basis of biblical teaching. The articles acknowledge the authority of the Apostles' Creed, the Nicene Creed and the Athanasian Creed because they express Scriptural teaching. It states that the Apocrypha is not part of Scripture. While not a basis of doctrine, the Apocrypha continues to be read by the church for moral instruction and examples for holy living.\nArticles 9\u201318: Sin and Salvation:\nThese articles discuss the doctrines of original sin and justification by faith (salvation is a gift received through faith in Christ). They reject the medieval Catholic teachings on works of supererogation and that performing good works can make a person worthy to receive justification (congruous merit). They also reject the radical Protestant teaching that a person could be free from sin in this life. The articles address the doctrine of predestination\u2014that \"Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God\". Double predestination, the belief that God has also predestined some people to reprobation, is not endorsed by the articles. \nArticles 19\u201321: The Church and its Authority:\nThese articles explain the nature and authority of the visible church. They state that the church, under Scripture, has authority over matters of faith and order. General councils of the church can only be called with the permission of the civil authority. It is possible for church councils to reach the wrong decisions, so they should only be followed if their actions align with Scripture.\nArticles 22\u201324: Errors to be avoided in the Church:\nThese articles condemn the Catholic teachings on purgatory, indulgences, the use of religious images and the invocation of saints. In addition, the Catholic practice of using Latin as a liturgical language is disapproved of in favour of the vernacular. The articles state that no person should preach publicly or administer the sacraments unless they are called and authorised by legitimate church authority. This was meant to counter the radical Protestant belief that a Christian could preach and act as a minister on his own initiative in defiance of church authorities.\nArticles 25\u201331: The Sacraments: \nThese articles explain the Church of England's sacramental theology. According to the articles, sacraments are signs of divine grace which God works invisibly but effectively in people's lives. Through sacraments, God creates and strengthens the faith of believers. The radical Protestant belief that sacraments are only outward signs of a person's faith is denied by the articles. While the Catholic Church claimed seven sacraments, the articles recognise only two: baptism and the Lord's Supper. The five rites called sacraments by Catholics are identified in the articles as either corrupted imitations of the Apostles (confirmation, penance and extreme unction) or as \"states of life allowed in the Scriptures\" (holy orders and marriage).\nRegeneration (or the gift of new life), membership in the church, forgiveness of sins and adoption as children of God are all received through baptism. The articles state that infant baptism is \"most agreeable with the institution of Christ\" and should continue to be practised in the church. In the Lord's Supper, participants become partakers of the body and blood of Christ and receive the spiritual benefits of Christ's death on the cross. According to the articles, this partaking should not be understood in terms of the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation, which is condemned as \"repugnant to the plain words of Scripture\". Instead, the articles declare that there is no change in the substance of the bread and wine. Rather, participants are fed the body of Christ by the Holy Spirit and through faith. The articles declare that \"The offering of Christ once made is the perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world\". This was meant as a repudiation of the popular medieval idea that the Mass was a sacrifice in which Christ was offered for the forgiveness of sins for the living and the dead in purgatory.\nArticles 32\u201336: The Discipline of the Church:\nThe articles defend the practice of clerical marriage and the church's power of excommunication. It states that traditions and ceremonies in the church may vary by time and place; national churches can alter or abolish traditions created by human authority. The \"First and Second Book of Homilies\" are said to contain correct doctrine and should be read in church. The articles also defend the ordination rites contained in the 1549 and 1552 Ordinals.\nArticles 37\u201339: Christians and Civil Society:\nThe articles affirm the role of the monarch as the Supreme Governor of the Church of England. It rejects all claims to the Pope's jurisdiction in England. It defends the state's right to use capital punishment and declares that Christians may serve in the military. It rejects the Anabaptist teaching that the property of Christians should be held in common, but it does explain that Christians should give alms to the poor and needy. It also defends the morality of oath-taking for civic purposes.\nLater history.\nDuring the reign of Elizabeth I, a \"Calvinist consensus\" developed within the church regarding the doctrines of salvation. Article 17 only endorsed election to salvation and was silent on whether God predestined people for reprobation; however, most of the bishops and leading churchmen believed in double predestination. When an Arminian minority emerged to challenge this consensus, Archbishop Whitgift issued the Lambeth Articles in 1595. These did not replace the Thirty-nine Articles but were meant to officially align Article 17 to Calvinist theology. The Queen was unwilling to alter her religious settlement and refused to assent to these new articles. \nThe Thirty-nine Articles are printed in the 1662 \"Book of Common Prayer\" and other Anglican prayer books. The Test Act 1672 made adherence to the Articles a requirement for holding civil office in England until its repeal in 1828. Students at Oxford University were still expected to sign up to them until the passing of the Oxford University Act 1854.\nIn the Church of England, only clergy (and until the 19th century members of Oxford and Cambridge Universities) are required to subscribe to the Articles. Starting in 1865, clergy affirmed that the doctrine contained in the Articles and the \"Book of Common Prayer\" was agreeable to Scripture and that they would not preach in contradiction to it. Since 1975, clergy are required to acknowledge the Articles as one of the historic formularies of the Church of England that bear witness to the faith revealed in Scripture and contained in the creeds. The Church of Ireland has a similar declaration for its clergy, while some other churches of the Anglican Communion make no such requirement. The US Episcopal Church never required subscription to the Articles.\nThe influence of the Articles on Anglican thought, doctrine and practice has been profound. The Articles are the confession of faith of the Anglican tradition. In Anglican discourse, the Articles are regularly cited and interpreted to clarify doctrine and practice. An important concrete manifestation of this is the Chicago\u2013Lambeth Quadrilateral, which incorporates Articles VI, VIII, XXV, and XXXVI in its broad articulation of fundamental Anglican identity. In other circumstances they delineate the parameters of acceptable belief and practice in proscriptive fashion. The Articles continue to be invoked today in the Anglican Church. For example, in the ongoing debate over homosexual activity and the concomitant controversies over episcopal authority, Articles VI, XX, XXIII, XXVI, and XXXIV are regularly cited by those of various opinions.\nEach of the 44 member churches in the Anglican Communion is, however, free to adopt and authorise its own official documents, and the Articles are not officially normative in all Anglican Churches (neither is the Athanasian Creed). The only doctrinal documents agreed upon in the Anglican Communion are the Apostles' Creed, the Nicene Creed of AD\u00a0325, and the Chicago\u2013Lambeth Quadrilateral. Beside these documents, authorised liturgical formularies, such as Prayer Book and Ordinal, are normative. The several provincial editions of Prayer Books (and authorised alternative liturgies) are, however, not identical, although they share a greater or smaller amount of family resemblance. No specific edition of the Prayer Book is therefore binding for the entire Communion.\nA revised version was adopted in 1801 by the US Episcopal Church which deleted the Athanasian Creed. Earlier, John Wesley, founder of the Methodists, adapted the Thirty-nine Articles for use by American Methodists in the 18th century. The resulting Articles of Religion remain an official doctrinal statement of the United Methodist Church.\nInterpretation.\nAccording to theologian Henry Chadwick, the articles are a revealing window into the ethos and character of Anglicanism, in particular in the way the document works to navigate a \"via media\" (Latin: middle path or middle way) between the beliefs and practices of the Catholic Church on the one hand, and those of the Lutheran and Reformed churches on the other hand, thus giving the Church of England a unique middle-of-the-road position. The \"via media\" was expressed so adroitly in the Articles that some Anglican scholars have labelled their content as an early example of the idea that the doctrine of Anglicanism is one of \"Reformed Catholicism\".\nIn 1628 Charles\u00a0I prefixed a royal declaration to the articles, which demands a literal interpretation of them, threatening discipline for academics or churchmen teaching any personal interpretations or encouraging debate about them. It states: \"no man hereafter shall either print or preach, to draw the Article aside any way, but shall submit to it in the plain and Full meaning thereof: and shall not put his own sense or comment to be the meaning of the Article, but shall take it in the literal and grammatical sense.\"\nHowever, what the Articles truly mean has been a matter of debate in the Church since before they were issued. The evangelical wing of the Church has claimed to take the Articles at face value, and to regard them as of utmost importance. In 2003, evangelical Anglican clergyman Chris Pierce wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Thirty-Nine Articles define the biblically derived summations of precise Christian doctrine. The Thirty-Nine Articles are more than minimally assented to; they are believed wholeheartedly. In earlier times English and Irish evangelicals would have read Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Ussher, and Ryle and would unreservedly agree with Dean Litton's assessment that (quoted by Dean Paul Zahl, in his work 'The Protestant Face of Anglicanism'), 'The Anglican Church, if she is to be judged by the statements of the Articles, must be ranked among the Protestant Churches of Europe.' \nThis view has never been held by the whole church. In 1643, Archbishop of Armagh John Bramhall laid out a broader view of the Articles:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Some of them are the very same that are contained in the Creed; some others of them are practical truths, which come not within the proper list of points or articles to be believed; lastly, some of them are pious opinions or inferior truths, which are proposed by the Church of England to all her sons, as not to be opposed; not as essentials of Faith necessary to be believed by all Christians \"necessitate medii,\" under pain of damnation.\nThis divergence of opinion became overt during the Oxford Movement of the 19th century. The stipulations of Articles XXV and XXVIII were regularly invoked by evangelicals to oppose the reintroduction of certain beliefs, customs, and acts of piety with respect to the sacraments. In response, John Henry Newman's Tract 90 attempted to show that the 39 Articles could be read according to an Anglo-Catholic interpretation.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59953", "revid": "48535054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59953", "title": "Van Allen radiation belt", "text": "Zone of energetic charged particles around the planet Earth\nThe Van Allen radiation belt is a zone of energetic charged particles, most of which originate from the solar wind, that are captured by and held around a planet by that planet's magnetosphere. Earth has two such belts, and sometimes others may be temporarily created. The belts are named after James Van Allen, who published an article describing the belts in 1958. \nEarth's two main belts extend from an altitude of about above the surface, in which region radiation levels vary. The belts are in the inner region of Earth's magnetic field. They trap energetic electrons and protons. Other nuclei, such as alpha particles, are less prevalent. Most of the particles that form the belts are thought to come from the solar wind while others arrive as cosmic rays. By trapping the solar wind, the magnetic field deflects those energetic particles and protects the atmosphere from destruction.\nThe belts endanger satellites, which must have their sensitive components protected with adequate shielding if they spend significant time near that zone. Apollo astronauts going through the Van Allen belts received a very low and harmless dose of radiation.\nIn 2013, the Van Allen Probes detected a transient, third radiation belt, which persisted for four weeks.\nDiscovery.\nKristian Birkeland, Carl St\u00f8rmer, Nicholas Christofilos, and Enrico Medi had investigated the possibility of trapped charged particles in 1895, forming a theoretical basis for the formation of radiation belts. The second Soviet satellite Sputnik 2 which had detectors designed by Sergei Vernov, followed by the US satellites Explorer\u00a01 and Explorer\u00a03, confirmed the existence of the belt in early 1958, later named after James Van Allen from the University of Iowa. The trapped radiation was first mapped by Explorer\u00a04, Pioneer\u00a03, and Luna\u00a01.\nThe term \"Van Allen belts\" refers specifically to the radiation belts surrounding Earth; however, similar radiation belts have been discovered around other planets. The Sun does not support long-term radiation belts, as it lacks a stable, global dipole field. The Earth's atmosphere limits the belts' particles to regions above 200\u20131,000\u00a0km, (124\u2013620 miles) while the belts do not extend past 8 Earth radii \"RE\". The belts are confined to a volume which extends about 65\u00b0 on either side of the celestial equator.\nProject Argus.\nIn 1958 the US detonated low yield nuclear bombs at an altitude of 300 miles, producing a temporary increase in the electron content of the radiation belts. The tests, dubbed Project Argus, were designed to test the Christofilos effect, the idea that nuclear explosions in space would release sufficient electrons trapped in the Earth's magnetic field to disable the warheads on intercontinental ballistic missiles. The project was discontinued due to the treaty banning atmospheric testing and the fear that additional radiation could prevent the Apollo moon mission.\nResearch.\nThe NASA Van Allen Probes mission aims at understanding (to the point of predictability) how populations of relativistic electrons and ions in space form or change in response to changes in solar activity and the solar wind.\nNASA Institute for Advanced Concepts\u2013funded studies have proposed magnetic scoops to collect antimatter that naturally occurs in the Van Allen belts of Earth, although only about 10 micrograms of antiprotons are estimated to exist in the entire belt.\nThe Van Allen Probes mission successfully launched on August 30, 2012. The primary mission was scheduled to last two years with expendables expected to last four. The probes were deactivated in 2019 after running out of fuel and are expected to deorbit during the 2030s. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center manages the Living With a Star program\u2014of which the Van Allen Probes were a project, along with Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO). The Applied Physics Laboratory was responsible for the implementation and instrument management for the Van Allen Probes.\nRadiation belts exist around other planets and moons in the Solar System that have magnetic fields powerful and stable enough to sustain them. Radiation belts have been detected at Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune through in-situ observations, such as by the \"Galileo\" and \"Juno\" spacecraft at Jupiter, \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" at Saturn, and fly-bys from the Voyager program and Pioneer program. Observations of radio emissions from highly energetic particles that are trapped in a planets magnetic field have also been used to remotely detect radiation belts, including at Jupiter and at the ultracool dwarf LSR J1835+3259. It is possible that Mercury may be able to trap charged particles in its magnetic field, although its highly dynamic magnetosphere (which varies on the order of minutes ) may not be able to sustain stable radiation belts. Venus and Mars do not have radiation belts, as their magnetospheric configurations do not trap energetic charged particles in orbit around the planet.\nGeomagnetic storms can cause electron density to increase or decrease relatively quickly (i.e., approximately one day or less). Longer-timescale processes determine the overall configuration of the belts. After electron injection increases electron density, electron density is often observed to decay exponentially. Those decay time constants are called \"lifetimes.\" Measurements from the Van Allen Probe B's Magnetic Electron Ion Spectrometer (MagEIS) show long electron lifetimes (i.e., longer than 100 days) in the inner belt; short electron lifetimes of around one or two days are observed in the \"slot\" between the belts; and energy-dependent electron lifetimes of roughly five to 20 days are found in the outer belt.\nInner belt.\nThe inner Van Allen Belt extends typically from an altitude of 0.2 to 2 Earth radii (L values of 1.2 to 3) or to above the Earth. In certain cases, when solar activity is stronger or in geographical areas such as the South Atlantic Anomaly, the inner boundary may decline to roughly 200 km above the Earth's surface. The inner belt contains high concentrations of electrons in the range of hundreds of keV and energetic protons with energies exceeding 100 MeV\u2014trapped by the relatively strong magnetic fields in the region (as compared to the outer belt).\nIt is thought that proton energies exceeding 50 MeV in the lower belts at lower altitudes are the result of the beta decay of neutrons created by cosmic ray collisions with nuclei of the upper atmosphere. The source of lower energy protons is believed to be proton diffusion, due to changes in the magnetic field during geomagnetic storms.\nDue to the slight offset of the belts from Earth's geometric center, the inner Van Allen belt makes its closest approach to the surface at the South Atlantic Anomaly.\nIn March 2014, a pattern resembling \"zebra stripes\" was observed in the radiation belts by the Radiation Belt Storm Probes Ion Composition Experiment (RBSPICE) onboard Van Allen Probes. The initial theory proposed in 2014 was that\u2014due to the tilt in Earth's magnetic field axis\u2014the planet's rotation generated an oscillating, weak electric field that permeates through the entire inner radiation belt. A 2016 study instead concluded that the zebra stripes were an imprint of ionospheric winds on radiation belts.\nOuter belt.\nThe outer belt consists mainly of high-energy (0.1\u201310\u00a0MeV) electrons trapped by the Earth's magnetosphere. It is more variable than the inner belt, as it is more easily influenced by solar activity. It is almost toroidal in shape, beginning at an altitude of 3 Earth radii and extending to 10 Earth radii (\"RE\")\u2014 above the Earth's surface. Its greatest intensity is usually around 4 to 5 \"RE\". The outer electron radiation belt is mostly produced by inward radial diffusion and local acceleration due to transfer of energy from whistler-mode plasma waves to radiation belt electrons. Radiation belt electrons are also constantly removed by collisions with Earth's atmosphere, losses to the magnetopause, and their outward radial diffusion. The gyroradii of energetic protons would be large enough to bring them into contact with the Earth's atmosphere. Within this belt, the electrons have a high flux and at the outer edge (close to the magnetopause), where geomagnetic field lines open into the geomagnetic \"tail\", the flux of energetic electrons can drop to the low interplanetary levels within about \u2014a decrease by a factor of 1,000.\nIn 2014, it was discovered that the inner edge of the outer belt is characterized by a very sharp transition, below which highly relativistic electrons (&gt; 5MeV) cannot penetrate. The reason for this shield-like behavior is not well understood.\nThe trapped particle population of the outer belt is varied, containing electrons and various ions. Most of the ions are in the form of energetic protons, but a certain percentage are alpha particles and O+ oxygen ions\u2014similar to those in the ionosphere but much more energetic. This mixture of ions suggests that ring current particles probably originate from more than one source.\nThe outer belt is larger than the inner belt, and its particle population fluctuates widely. Energetic (radiation) particle fluxes can increase and decrease dramatically in response to geomagnetic storms, which are themselves triggered by magnetic field and plasma disturbances produced by the Sun. The increases are due to storm-related injections and acceleration of particles from the tail of the magnetosphere. Another cause of variability of the outer belt particle populations is the wave-particle interactions with various plasma waves in a broad range of frequencies.\nOn February 28, 2013, a third radiation belt\u2014consisting of high-energy ultrarelativistic charged particles\u2014was reported to be discovered. In a news conference by NASA's Van Allen Probe team, it was stated that this third belt is a product of coronal mass ejection from the Sun. It has been represented as a separate creation which splits the Outer Belt, like a knife, on its outer side, and exists separately as a storage container of particles for a month's time, before merging once again with the Outer Belt.\nThe unusual stability of this third, transient belt has been explained as due to a 'trapping' by the Earth's magnetic field of ultrarelativistic particles as they are lost from the second, traditional outer belt. While the outer zone, which forms and disappears over a day, is highly variable due to interactions with the atmosphere, the ultrarelativistic particles of the third belt are thought not to scatter into the atmosphere, as they are too energetic to interact with atmospheric waves at low latitudes. This absence of scattering and the trapping allows them to persist for a long time, finally only being destroyed by an unusual event, such as the shock wave from the Sun.\nFlux values.\nIn the belts the flux of particles varies substantially with position, energy, and solar activity. \nMeasured fluxes of protons with enough energy (&gt;20MeV) to penetrate 0.25mm of aluminum range up to 100,000 per cm2 per sec. Electron over 1.5MeV can penetrate that thickness of aluminum and their flux ranges up to a million particles per square centimeter per second.\nThe proton belts contain protons with kinetic energies ranging from about 100\u00a0keV, which can penetrate 0.6\u00a0\u03bcm of lead, to over 400\u00a0MeV, which can penetrate 143\u00a0mm of lead.\nRadiation levels in the belts would be dangerous to humans if they were exposed for an extended period of time. The Apollo missions minimised hazards for astronauts by sending spacecraft at high speeds through the thinner areas of the upper belts, bypassing inner belts completely, except for the Apollo 14 mission where the spacecraft traveled through the heart of the trapped radiation belts.\nAntimatter confinement.\nIn 2011, a study confirmed earlier speculation that the Van Allen belt could confine antiparticles. The Payload for Antimatter Matter Exploration and Light-nuclei Astrophysics (PAMELA) experiment detected levels of antiprotons orders of magnitude higher than are expected from normal particle decays while passing through the South Atlantic Anomaly. This suggests the Van Allen belts confine a significant flux of antiprotons produced by the interaction of the Earth's upper atmosphere with cosmic rays. The energy of the antiprotons has been measured in the range from 60 to 750 MeV.\nThe very high energy released in antimatter annihilation has led to proposals to harness these antiprotons for spacecraft propulsion. The concept relies on the development of antimatter collectors and containers.\nImplications for space travel.\nSpacecraft travelling beyond low Earth orbit enter the zone of radiation of the Van Allen belts. Beyond the belts, they face additional hazards from cosmic rays and solar particle events. A region between the inner and outer Van Allen belts lies at 2 to 4 Earth radii and is sometimes referred to as the \"safe zone\".\nSolar cells, integrated circuits, and sensors can be damaged by radiation. Geomagnetic storms occasionally damage electronic components on spacecraft. Miniaturization and digitization of electronics and logic circuits have made satellites more vulnerable to radiation, as the total electric charge in these circuits is now small enough so as to be comparable with the charge of incoming ions. Electronics on satellites must be hardened against radiation to operate reliably. The Chandra Space Telescope, has its sensors turned off when passing through the Van Allen belts. The INTEGRAL space telescope was placed in an orbit designed to avoid time within the belts.\nThe Apollo missions marked the first event where humans traveled through the Van Allen belts, which was one of several radiation hazards known by mission planners. The astronauts had low exposure in the Van Allen belts due to the short period of time spent flying through them.\nCauses.\nIt is generally understood that the inner and outer Van Allen belts result from different processes. The inner belt is mainly composed of energetic protons produced from the decay of neutrons, which are themselves the result of cosmic ray collisions in the upper atmosphere. The outer Van Allen belt consists mainly of electrons. They are injected from the geomagnetic tail following geomagnetic storms, and are subsequently energized through wave-particle interactions.\nIn the inner belt, particles that originate from the Sun are trapped in the Earth's magnetic field. Particles spiral along the magnetic lines of flux as they move \"latitudinally\" along those lines. As particles move toward the poles, the magnetic field line density increases, and their \"latitudinal\" velocity is slowed and can be reversed, deflecting the particles back towards the equatorial region, causing them to bounce back and forth between the Earth's poles. In addition to both spiralling around and moving along the flux lines, the electrons drift slowly in an eastward direction, while the protons drift westward.\nThe gap between the inner and outer Van Allen belts is sometimes called the \"safe zone\" or \"safe slot\", and is the location of medium Earth orbits. The gap is caused by the VLF radio waves, which scatter particles in pitch angle, which adds new ions to the atmosphere. Solar outbursts can also dump particles into the gap, but those drain out in a matter of days. The VLF radio waves were previously thought to be generated by turbulence in the radiation belts, but recent work by J.L. Green of the Goddard Space Flight Center compared maps of lightning activity collected by the Microlab 1 spacecraft with data on radio waves in the radiation-belt gap from the IMAGE spacecraft; the results suggest that the radio waves are actually generated by lightning within Earth's atmosphere. The generated radio waves strike the ionosphere at the correct angle to pass through only at high latitudes, where the lower ends of the gap approach the upper atmosphere. These results are still being debated in the scientific community.\nProposed removal.\nDraining the charged particles from the Van Allen belts would open up new orbits for satellites and make travel safer for astronauts. Draining radiation belts around other planets has also been proposed, for example, before exploring Europa, which orbits within Jupiter's radiation belt. Since the radiation belts are part of a complex system, it is unknown if there could be unintended consequences to removing these radiation belts.\nOne concept proposed to drain and remove the radiation fields of the Van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth is known as High Voltage Orbiting Long Tether, or HiVOLT, a concept proposed by Russian physicist V. V. Danilov and further refined by Robert P. Hoyt and Robert L. Forward. Another proposal for draining the Van Allen belts involves beaming very-low-frequency (VLF) radio waves from the ground into the Van Allen belts.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59955", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59955", "title": "Trojan Horse", "text": "Wooden horse in Greek mythology\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn Greek mythology, the Trojan Horse () was a wooden horse said to have been used by the Greeks during the Trojan War to enter the city of Troy and win the war. The Trojan Horse is not mentioned in Homer's \"Iliad\", with the poem ending before the war is concluded, and it is only briefly mentioned in the \"Odyssey\". It is described at length in the \"Aeneid\", in which Virgil recounts how, after a fruitless ten-year siege, the Greeks constructed a huge wooden horse at the behest of Odysseus, and hid a select force of men inside, including Odysseus himself. The Greeks pretended to sail away, and the Trojans pulled the horse into their city as a victory trophy. That night, the Greek force crept out of the horse and opened the gates for the rest of the Greek army, which had sailed back under the cover of darkness. The Greeks entered and destroyed the city, ending the war.\nMetaphorically, a \"Trojan horse\" has come to mean any trick or stratagem that causes a target to invite a foe into a securely protected bastion or place. A malicious computer program that tricks users into willingly running it is also called a \"Trojan horse\" or simply a \"Trojan\".\nThe main ancient source for the story still extant is the \"Aeneid\" of Virgil, a Latin epic poem from the time of Augustus. The story featured heavily in the \"Little Iliad\" and the \"Sack of Troy\", both part of the Epic Cycle, but these have only survived in fragments and epitomes. As Odysseus was the chief architect of the Trojan Horse, it is also referred to in Homer's \"Odyssey\".\nIn the Greek tradition, the horse is called the \"wooden horse\" ( in Homeric/Ionic Greek (\"Odyssey\" 8.512); , in Attic Greek). In Dictys Cretensis' account, the idea of the Trojan Horse's construction comes from Helenus, who prophesies that the Greeks must dedicate a wooden horse to Athena.\nWarriors in the horse.\nThirty of the Achaeans' best warriors hid in the Trojan horse's womb and two spies in its mouth. Other sources give different numbers: The \"Bibliotheca\" 50; Tzetzes 23; and Quintus Smyrnaeus gives the names of 30, but says there were more. In late tradition, the number was standardized at 40. Their names follow:\nLiterary accounts.\nAccording to Quintus Smyrnaeus, Odysseus thought of building a great wooden horse (the horse being the emblem of Troy), hiding an elite force inside, and fooling the Trojans into wheeling the horse into the city as a trophy. Under the leadership of Epeius, the Greeks built the wooden horse in three days. Odysseus's plan called for one man to remain outside the horse; he would act as though the Greeks had abandoned him, leaving the horse as a gift for the Trojans. An inscription was engraved on the horse reading: \"For their return home, the Greeks dedicate this offering to Athena\". Then they burned their tents and left to Tenedos by night. Greek soldier Sinon was \"abandoned\" and was to signal to the Greeks by lighting a beacon.\nIn Virgil's poem, Sinon, the only volunteer for the role, successfully convinces the Trojans that he has been left behind and that the Greeks are gone. Sinon tells the Trojans that the Horse is an offering to the goddess Athena, meant to atone for the previous desecration of her temple at Troy by the Greeks and ensure a safe journey home for the Greek fleet. Sinon tells the Trojans that the Horse was built to be too large for them to take it into their city and gain the favor of Athena for themselves.\nWhile questioning Sinon, the Trojan priest Laoco\u00f6n guesses the plot and warns the Trojans, in Virgil's famous line \"Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes\" (\"I fear Greeks, even those bearing gifts\"), Danai (acc \"Danaos\") or Danaans (Homer's name for the Greeks) being the ones who had built the Trojan Horse. However, the god Poseidon sends two sea serpents to strangle him and his sons Antiphantes and Thymbraeus before any Trojan heeds his warning. According to Apollodorus, the two serpents were sent by Apollo, whom Laoco\u00f6n had insulted by sleeping with his wife in front of the \"divine image\". In the \"Odyssey\", Homer says that Helen also guesses the plot and tries to trick and uncover the Greek soldiers inside the horse by imitating the voices of their wives, and Anticlus attempts to answer, but Odysseus shuts his mouth with his hand. King Priam's daughter Cassandra, the soothsayer of Troy, insists that the horse will be the downfall of the city and its royal family. She too is ignored, hence their doom and loss of the war.\nThis incident is mentioned in the \"Odyssey\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe most detailed and most familiar version is in Virgil's \"Aeneid\", Book II (trans. A. S. Kline).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBook II includes Laoco\u00f6n saying: \"\" (\"Do not trust the horse, Trojans! Whatever it is, I fear the Danaans [Greeks], even those bearing gifts.\")\nWell before Virgil, the story is also alluded to in Greek classical literature. In Euripides' play \"Trojan Women\", written in 415 BC, the god Poseidon proclaims: \"For, from his home beneath Parnassus, Phocian Epeus, aided by the craft of Pallas, framed a horse to bear within its womb an armed host, and sent it within the battlements, fraught with death; whence in days to come men shall tell of 'the wooden horse,' with its hidden load of warriors.\"\nFactual explanations.\nIt has been speculated that the story of the Trojan Horse resulted from later poets creatively misunderstanding an actual historical use of a siege engine at Troy. Animal names are often used for military machinery, as with the Roman onager and various Bronze Age Assyrian siege engines which were often covered with dampened horse hides to protect against flaming arrows. Pausanias, who lived in the 2nd century AD, wrote in his book \"Description of Greece\", \"That the work of Epeius was a contrivance to make a breach in the Trojan wall is known to everybody who does not attribute utter silliness to the Phrygians\"; by the Phrygians, he meant the Trojans.\nSome authors have suggested that the gift might also have been a ship, with warriors hidden inside. It has been noted that the terms used to put men in the horse are those used by ancient Greek authors to describe the embarkation of men on a ship and that there are analogies between the building of ships by Paris at the beginning of the Trojan saga and the building of the horse at the end; ships are called \"sea-horses\" once in the \"Odyssey\". This view has recently gained support from naval archaeology: ancient text and images show that a Phoenician merchant ship type decorated with a horse head, called \"hippos\" ('horse') by Greeks, became very diffuse in the Levant area around the beginning of the 1st millennium BC and was used to trade precious metals and sometimes to pay tribute after the end of a war. That has caused the suggestion that the original story viewed the Greek soldiers hiding inside the hull of such a vessel, possibly disguised as a tribute, and that the term was later misunderstood in the oral transmission of the story, the origin to the Trojan horse myth.\nShips with a horsehead decoration, perhaps cult ships, are also represented in artifacts of the Minoan/Mycenaean era; the image on a seal found in the palace of Knossos, dated around 1200 BC, which depicts a ship with oarsmen and a superimposed horse figure, originally interpreted as a representation of horse transport by sea, may in fact be related to this kind of vessel, and even be considered as the first (pre-literary) representation of the Trojan Horse episode.\nA more speculative theory, originally proposed by Fritz Schachermeyr, is that the Trojan Horse is a metaphor for a destructive earthquake that damaged the walls of Troy and allowed the Greeks inside. In his theory, the horse represents Poseidon, who as well as being god of the sea was also god of horses and earthquakes. The theory is supported by the fact that archaeological digs have found that Troy VI was heavily damaged in an earthquake but is hard to square with the mythological claim that Poseidon himself built the walls of Troy in the first place.\nAncient representations.\nPictorial representations of the Trojan Horse earlier than, or contemporary to, the first literary appearances of the episode can help clarify what was the meaning of the story as perceived by its contemporary audience. There are few ancient (before 480 BC) depictions of the Trojan Horse surviving. The earliest is on a Boeotian fibula dating from about 700 BC. Other early depictions are found on two relief pithoi from the Greek islands Mykonos and Tinos, both generally dated between 675 and 650 BC. The one from Mykonos (see figure at the top of this article) is known as the Mykonos vase. Historian Michael Wood dates the Mykonos vase to the eighth century BC, before the written accounts attributed by tradition to Homer, and posits this as evidence that the story of the Trojan Horse existed before those accounts were written. Other archaic representations of the Trojan horse are found on a Corinthian aryballos dating back to 560 BC (see figure), on a vase fragment to 540 BC (see figure), and on an Etruscan carnelian scarab. An Attic red-figure fragment from a kalyx-krater dated to around 400 BC depicts the scene where the Greeks are climbing down the Trojan Horse, represented by the wooden hatch door.\nModern metaphorical use.\nThe term \"Trojan horse\" is used metaphorically to mean any trick or strategy that causes a target to invite a foe into a securely protected place; or to deceive by appearance, hiding malevolent intent in an outwardly benign exterior; to subvert from within using deceptive means.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59957", "revid": "1225062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59957", "title": "Smart card", "text": "Pocket-sized card with authentication circuitry\nA smart card (SC), chip card, or integrated circuit card (ICC or IC card), is a card used to control access to a resource. It is typically a plastic credit card-sized card with an embedded integrated circuit (IC) chip. Many smart cards include a pattern of metal contacts to electrically connect to the internal chip. Others are contactless, and some are both. Smart cards can provide personal identification, authentication, data storage, and application processing. Applications include identification, financial, public transit, computer security, schools, and healthcare. Smart cards may provide strong security authentication for single sign-on (SSO) within organizations. Numerous nations have deployed smart cards throughout their populations.\nThe universal integrated circuit card (UICC) for mobile phones, installed as pluggable SIM card or embedded eSIM, is also a type of smart card. As of 2015[ [update]], 10.5billion smart card IC chips are manufactured annually, including 5.44billion SIM card IC chips.\nHistory.\nThe basis for the smart card is the silicon integrated circuit (IC) chip. It was invented by Robert Noyce at Fairchild Semiconductor in 1959. The invention of the silicon integrated circuit led to the idea of incorporating it onto a plastic card in the late 1960s.\nInvention.\nThe idea of incorporating an integrated circuit chip onto a plastic card was first introduced by the German engineer Helmut Gr\u00f6ttrup. In February 1967, Gr\u00f6ttrup filed the patents DE1574074 and DE1574075 in West Germany for a tamper-proof identification switch based on a semiconductor device and described contactless communication via inductive coupling. Its primary use was intended to provide individual copy-protected keys for releasing the tapping process at unmanned gas stations. In September 1968, Gr\u00f6ttrup, together with J\u00fcrgen Dethloff as an investor, filed further patents for this identification switch, first in Austria and in 1969 as subsequent applications in the United States, Great Britain, West Germany and other countries.\nIndependently, Kunitaka Arimura of the Arimura Technology Institute in Japan developed a similar idea of incorporating an integrated circuit onto a plastic card, and filed a smart card patent in March 1970. The following year, Paul Castrucci of IBM filed an American patent titled \"Information Card\" in May 1971.\nIn 1974 Roland Moreno patented a secured memory card later dubbed the \"smart card\". In 1976, J\u00fcrgen Dethloff introduced the known element (called \"the secret\") to identify gate user as of USP 4105156.\nIn 1977, Michel Ugon from Honeywell Bull invented the first microprocessor smart card with two chips: one microprocessor and one memory, and in 1978, he patented the self-programmable one-chip microcomputer (SPOM) that defines the necessary architecture to program the chip. Three years later, Motorola used this patent in its \"CP8\". At that time, Bull had 1,200 patents related to smart cards. In 2001, Bull sold its CP8 division together with its patents to Schlumberger, who subsequently combined its own internal smart card department and CP8 to create Axalto. In 2006, Axalto and Gemplus, at the time the world's top two smart-card manufacturers, merged and became Gemalto. In 2008, Dexa Systems spun off from Schlumberger and acquired Enterprise Security Services business, which included the smart-card solutions division responsible for deploying the first large-scale smart-card management systems based on public key infrastructure (PKI).\nThe first mass use of the cards was as a telephone card for payment in French payphones, starting in 1983.\nCarte bleue.\nAfter the T\u00e9l\u00e9carte, microchips were integrated into all French \"Carte Bleue\" debit cards in 1992. Customers inserted the card into the merchant's point-of-sale (POS) terminal, then typed the personal identification number (PIN), before the transaction was accepted. Only very limited transactions (such as paying small highway tolls) are processed without a PIN.\nSmart-card-based \"electronic purse\" systems store funds on the card, so that readers do not need network connectivity. They entered European service in the mid-1990s. They have been common in Germany (Geldkarte), Austria (Quick Wertkarte), Belgium (Proton), France (Moneo), the Netherlands (Chipknip Chipper (decommissioned in 2015)), Switzerland (\"Cash\"), Norway (\"Mondex\"), Spain (\"Monedero 4B\"), Sweden (\"Cash\", decommissioned in 2004), Finland (\"Avant\"), UK (\"Mondex\"), Denmark (\"Danm\u00f8nt\") and Portugal (\"Porta-moedas Multibanco\").\nPrivate electronic purse systems have also been deployed such as the Marines corps (USMC) at Parris Island allowing small amount payments at the cafeteria.\nSince the 1990s, smart cards have been the subscriber identity modules (SIMs) used in GSM mobile-phone equipment. Mobile phones are widely used across the world, so smart cards have become very common.\nEMV.\nEuropay MasterCard Visa (EMV)-compliant cards and equipment are widespread with the deployment led by European countries. The United States started later deploying the EMV technology in 2014, with the deployment still in progress in 2019. Typically, a country's national payment association, in coordination with MasterCard International, Visa International, American Express and Japan Credit Bureau (JCB), jointly plan and implement EMV systems.\nHistorically, in 1993 several international payment companies agreed to develop smart-card specifications for debit and credit cards. The original brands were MasterCard, Visa, and Europay. The first version of the EMV system was released in 1994. In 1998 the specifications became stable.\nEMVCo maintains these specifications. EMVco's purpose is to assure the various financial institutions and retailers that the specifications retain backward compatibility with the 1998 version. EMVco upgraded the specifications in 2000 and 2004.\nEMV compliant cards were first accepted into Malaysia in 2005 and later into United States in 2014. MasterCard was the first company that was allowed to use the technology in the United States. The United States has felt pushed to use the technology because of the increase in identity theft. The credit card information stolen from Target in late 2013 was one of the largest indicators that American credit card information is not safe. Target made the decision on 30 April 2014 that it would try to implement the smart chip technology to protect itself from future credit card identity theft.\nBefore 2014, the consensus in America was that there were enough security measures to avoid credit card theft and that the smart chip was not necessary. The cost of the smart chip technology was significant, which was why most of the corporations did not want to pay for it in the United States. The debate finally ended when Target sent out a notice stating unauthorized access to magnetic strips costing Target over 300 million dollars along with the increasing cost of online credit theft was enough for the United States to invest in the technology. The adaptation of EMV's increased significantly in 2015 \nDevelopment of contactless systems.\n\"Contactless\" smart cards do not require physical contact between a card and reader. They are becoming more popular for payment and ticketing. Typical uses include mass transit and motorway tolls. Visa and MasterCard implemented a version deployed in 2004\u20132006 in the U.S., with Visa's current offering called Visa Contactless. Most contactless fare collection systems are incompatible, though the MIFARE Standard card from NXP Semiconductors has a considerable market share in the US and Europe.\nUse of \"Contactless\" smart cards in transport has also grown through the use of low cost chips NXP Mifare Ultralight and paper/card/PET rather than PVC. This has reduced media cost so it can be used for low cost tickets and short term transport passes (up to 1 year typically). The cost is typically 10% that of a PVC smart card with larger memory. They are distributed through vending machines, ticket offices and agents. Use of paper/PET is less harmful to the environment than traditional PVC cards.\nSmart cards are also being introduced for identification and entitlement by regional, national, and international organizations. These uses include citizen cards, drivers\u2019 licenses, and patient cards. In Malaysia, the compulsory national ID MyKad enables eight applications and has 18 million users. Contactless smart cards are part of ICAO biometric passports to enhance security for international travel.\nComplex smart cards.\nComplex Cards are smart cards that conform to the ISO/IEC 7810 standard and include components in addition to those found in traditional single chip smart cards. Complex Cards were invented by Cyril Lalo and Philippe Guillaud in 1999 when they designed a chip smart card with additional components, building upon the initial concept consisting of using audio frequencies to transmit data patented by Alain Bernard. The first Complex Card prototype was developed collaboratively by Cyril Lalo and Philippe Guillaud, who were working at AudioSmartCard at the time, and Henri Boccia and Philippe Patrice, who were working at Gemplus. It was ISO 7810-compliant and included a battery, a piezoelectric buzzer, a button, and delivered audio functions, all within a 0.84mm thickness card.\nThe Complex Card pilot, developed by AudioSmartCard, was launched in 2002 by Cr\u00e9dit Lyonnais, a French financial institution. This pilot featured acoustic tones as a means of authentication. Although Complex Cards were developed since the inception of the smart card industry, they only reached maturity after 2010.\nComplex Cards can accommodate various peripherals including:\nWhile first generation Complex Cards were battery powered, the second generation is battery-free and receives power through the usual card connector and/or induction .\nSound, generated by a buzzer, was the preferred means of communication for the first projects involving Complex Cards. Later, with the progress of displays, visual communication is now present in almost all Complex Cards.\nFunctionalities.\nComplex Cards support all communication protocols present on regular smart cards: contact, thanks to a contact pad as defined ISO/IEC 7816 standard, contactless following the ISO/IEC 14443 standard, and magstripe.\nDevelopers of Complex Cards target several needs when developing them: \nOne time password.\nA Complex Card can be used to compute a cryptographic value, such as a One-time password. The One-Time Password is generated by a cryptoprocessor encapsulated in the card. To implement this function, the crypto processor must be initialized with a seed value, which enables the identification of the OTPs respective of each card. The hash of seed value has to be stored securely within the card to prevent unauthorized prediction of the generated OTPs.\nOne-Time Passwords generation is based either on incremental values (event based) or on a real time clock (time based). Using clock-based One-Time Password generation requires the Complex Card to be equipped with a Real-time clock.\nComplex Cards used to generate One Time Password have been developed for: \nAccount information.\nA Complex Card with buttons can display the balance of one or multiple account(s) linked to the card. Typically, either one button is used to display the balance in the case of a single account card or, in the case of a card linked to multiple accounts, a combination of buttons is used to select a specific account's balance.\nFor additional security, features such as requiring the user to enter an identification or a security value such as a PIN can be added to a Complex Card.\nComplex Cards used to provide account information have been developed for: \nThe latest generation of battery free, button free, Complex Cards can display a balance or other kind of information without requiring any input from the card holder. The information is updated during the use of the card. For instance, in a transit card, key information such as the monetary value balance, the number of remaining trips or the expiry date of a transit pass can be displayed.\nTransaction security.\nA Complex Card being deployed as a payment card can be equipped with capability to provide transaction security. Typically, online payments are made secure thanks to the Card Security Code (CSC), also known as card verification code (CVC2), or card verification value (CVV2). The card security code (CSC) is a 3 or 4 digits number printed on a credit or debit card, used as a security feature for card-not-present (CNP) payment card transactions to reduce the incidence of fraud.\nThe Card Security Code (CSC) is to be given to the merchant by the cardholder to complete a card-not-present transaction. The CSC is transmitted along with other transaction data and verified by the card issuer. The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) prohibits the storage of the CSC by the merchant or any stakeholder in the payment chain. Although designed to be a security feature, the static CSC is susceptible to fraud as it can easily be memorized by a shop attendant, who could then use it for fraudulent online transactions or sale on the dark web. \nThis vulnerability has led the industry to develop a Dynamic Card Security Code (DCSC) that can be changed at certain time intervals, or after each contact or contactless EMV transaction. This Dynamic CSC brings significantly better security than a static CSC.\nThe first generation of Dynamic CSC cards, developed by NagraID Security required a battery, a quartz and Real Time Clock (RTC) embedded within the card to power the computation of a new Dynamic CSC, after expiration of the programmed period.\nThe second generation of Dynamic CSC cards, developed by Ellipse World, Inc., does not require any battery, quartz, or RTC to compute and display the new dynamic code. Instead, the card obtains its power either through the usual card connector or by induction during every EMV transaction from the Point of Sales (POS) terminal or Automated Teller Machine (ATM) to compute a new DCSC.\nThe Dynamic CSC, also called dynamic cryptogram, is marketed by several companies, under different brand names: \nThe advantage of the Dynamic Card Security Code (DCSC) is that new information is transmitted with the payment transactions, thus making it useless for a potential fraudster to memorize or store it. A transaction with a Dynamic Card Security Code is carried out exactly the same way, with the same processes and use of parameters as a transaction with a static code in a card-not-present transaction. Upgrading to a DCSC allows cardholders and merchants to continue their payment habits and processes undisturbed.\nUser authentication.\nComplex Cards can be equipped with biometric sensors allowing for stronger user authentication. In the typical use case, fingerprint sensors are integrated into a payment card to bring a higher level of user authentication than a PIN.\nTo implement user authentication using a fingerprint enabled smart card, the user has to authenticate himself/herself to the card by means of the fingerprint before starting a payment transaction.\nSeveral companies offer cards with fingerprint sensors, including: \nComponents.\nComplex Cards can incorporate a wide variety of components. The choice of components drives functionality, influences cost, power supply needs, and manufacturing complexity.\nButtons.\nDepending on Complex Card types, buttons have been added to allow an easy interaction between the user and the card. Typically, these buttons are used to:\nWhile separate keys have been used on prototypes in the early days, capacitive keyboards are the most popular solution now, thanks to technology developments by AudioSmartCard International SA.\nThe interaction with a capacitive keyboard requires constant power, therefore a battery and a mechanical button are required to activate the card.\nBuzzer.\nThe first Complex Cards were equipped with a buzzer that made it possible to broadcast sound. This feature was generally used over the phone to send identification data such as an identifier and one-time passwords (OTPs). Technologies used for sound transmission include DTMF (dual-tone multi-frequency signaling) or FSK (frequency-shift keying).\nCompanies that offered cards with buzzers include: \nDisplay.\nDisplaying data is an essential part of Complex Card functionalities. Depending on the information that needs to be shown, displays can be digital or alphanumeric and of varying lengths. Displays can be located either on the front or back of the card. A front display is the most common solution for showing information such as a One-Time Password or an electronic purse balance. A rear display is more often used for showing a Dynamic Card Security Code (DCSC).\nDisplays can be made using two technologies: \nCryptoprocessor.\nIf a Complex smart Card is dedicated to making cryptographic computations (such as generating a one-time password) it may require a secure cryptoprocessor.\nPower supply.\nAs Complex Cards contain more components than traditional smart cards, their power consumption must be carefully monitored.\nFirst generation Complex Cards require a power supply even in standby mode. As such, product designers generally included a battery in their design. Incorporating a battery creates an additional burden in terms of complexity, cost, space and flexibility in an already dense design. Including a battery in a Complex Card increases the complexity of the manufacturing process as a battery cannot be hot laminated.\nSecond generation Complex Cards feature a battery-free design. These cards harvest the necessary power from external sources; for example when the card interacts in a contact or contactless fashion with a payment system or an NFC-enabled smartphone. The use of a bistable display in the card design ensures that the screen remains legible even when the Complex Card is unconnected to the power source.\nManufacturing.\nComplex Card manufacturing methods are inherited from the smart card industry and from the electronics mounting industry. As Complex Cards incorporate several components while having to remain within 0.8\u00a0mm thickness and be flexible, and to comply with the ISO/IEC 7810, ISO/IEC 7811 and ISO/IEC 7816 standards, renders their manufacture more complex than standard smart cards.\nOne of the most popular manufacturing processes in the smart card industry is lamination. This process involves laminating an inlay between two card faces. The inlay contains the needed electronic components with an antenna printed on an inert support.\nTypically battery-powered Complex Cards require a cold lamination manufacturing process. This process impacts the manufacturing lead time and the whole cost of such a Complex Card.\nSecond generation, battery-free Complex Cards can be manufactured by existing hot lamination process. This automated process, inherited from traditional smart card manufacturing, enables the production of Complex Cards in large quantities while keeping costs under control, a necessity for the evolution from a niche to a mass market.\nCard life cycle.\nAs with standard smart cards, Complex Cards go through a lifecycle comprising the following steps: \nAs Complex Cards bring more functionalities than standard smart cards and, due to their complexity, their personalization can take longer or require more inputs. Having Complex Cards that can be personalized by the same machines and the same processes as regular smart cards allows them to be integrated more easily in existing manufacturing chains and applications.\nFirst generation, battery-operated Complex Cards require specific recycling processes, mandated by different regulatory bodies. Additionally, keeping battery-operated Complex Cards in inventory for extended periods of time may reduce their performance due to battery ageing.\nSecond-generation battery-free technology ensures operation during the entire lifetime of the card and eliminates self-discharge, providing extended shelf life, and is more eco-friendly.\nHistory and major players.\nSince the inception of smart cards, innovators have been trying to add extra features. As technologies have matured and have been industrialized, several smart card industry players have been involved in Complex Cards.\nThe Complex Card concept began in 1999 when Cyril Lalo and Philippe Guillaud, its inventors, first designed a smart card with additional components. The first prototype was developed collaboratively by Cyril Lalo, who was the CEO of AudioSmartCard at the time, and Henri Boccia and Philippe Patrice, from Gemplus. The prototype included a button and audio functions on a 0.84mm thick ISO 7810-compliant card .\nSince then, Complex Cards have been mass-deployed primarily by NagraID Security.\nAudioSmartCard.\nAudioSmartCard International SA was instrumental in developing the first Complex Card that included a battery, a piezoelectric buzzer, a button, and audio functions all on a 0.84mm thick, ISO 7810-compatible card.\nAudioSmartCard was founded in 1993 and specialized in the development and marketing of acoustic tokens incorporating security features. These acoustic tokens exchanged data in the form of sounds transmitted over a phone line. In 1999, AudioSmartCard transitioned to a new leadership under Cyril Lalo and Philippe Guillaud, who also became major shareholders. They made AudioSmartCard evolve towards the smart card world. In 2003 Prosodie, a subsidiary of Capgemini, joined the shareholders of AudioSmartCard.\nAudioSmartCard was renamed nCryptone, in 2004.\nCardLab Innovation.\nCardLab Innovation, incorporated in 2006 in Herlev, Denmark, specializes in Complex Cards that include a switch, a biometric reader, an RFID jammer, and one or more magstripes. The company works with manufacturing partners in China and Thailand and owns a card lamination factory in Thailand.\nCoin.\nCoin was a US-based startup founded in 2012 by Kanishk Parashar. It developed a Complex Card capable of storing the data of several credit and debit cards. The card prototype was equipped with a display and a button that enabled the user to switch between different cards. In 2015, the original Coin card concept evolved into Coin 2.0 adding contactless communication to its original magstripe emulation.\nCoin was acquired by Fitbit in May 2016 and all Coin activities were discontinued in February 2017.\nEllipse World, Inc..\nEllipse World, Inc. was founded in 2017 by Cyril Lalo and S\u00e9bastien Pochic, both recognized experts in Complex Card technology. Ellipse World, Inc. specializes in battery-free Complex Card technology.\nThe Ellipse patented technologies enable smart card manufacturers to use their existing dual interface payment card manufacturing process and supply chain to build battery-free, second generation Complex Cards with display capabilities. Thanks to this ease of integration, smart card vendors are able to address banking, transit and prepaid cards markets.\nEMue Technologies.\nEMue Technologies, headquartered in Melbourne, Australia, designed and developed authentication solutions for the financial services industry from 2009 to 2015. The company's flagship product, developed in collaboration with Cyril Lalo and Philippe Guillaud, was the eMue Card, a Visa CodeSure credit card with an embedded keypad, a display and a microprocessor.\nFeitian Technologies.\nFeitian Technologies, a China-based company created in 1998, provides cyber security products and solutions. The company offers security solutions based on smart cards as well as other authentication devices. These include Complex Cards, that incorporate a display, a keypad or a fingerprint sensor.\nFingerprint Cards.\nFingerprint Cards AB (or Fingerprints) is a Swedish company specializing in biometric solutions. The company sells biometric sensors and has recently introduced payment cards incorporating a fingerprint sensor such as the Zwipe card, a biometric dual-interface payment card using an integrated sensor from Fingerprints.\nGiesecke+Devrient.\nGiesecke &amp; Devrient, also known as G+D, is a German company headquartered in Munich that provides banknotes, security printing, smart cards and cash handling systems. Its smart card portfolio includes display cards, OTP cards, as well as cards displaying a Dynamic CSC.\nGemalto.\nGemalto, a division of Thales Group, is a major player in the secure transaction industry. \nThe company's Complex Card portfolio includes cards with a display or a fingerprint sensor. These cards may display an OTP or a Dynamic CSC.\nIdemia.\nIDEMIA is the product of the 2017 merger of Oberthur Technologies and Morpho. The combined company has positioned itself as a global provider of financial cards, SIM cards, biometric devices as well as public and private identity solutions. Due to Oberthur's acquisition of NagraID Security in 2014, Idemia's Complex Card offerings include the F.CODE biometric payment card that includes a fingerprint sensor, and its battery-powered Motion Code card that displays a Dynamic CSC.\nIdex.\nIDEX Biometrics ASA, incorporated in Norway, specializes in fingerprint identification technologies for personal authentication. The company offers fingerprint sensors and modules that are ready to be embedded into cards.\nInnovative Card Technologies.\nFounded in 2002, by Alan Finkelstein, Innovative Card Technologies developed and commercialized enhancements for the smart card market. The company acquired the display card assets of nCryptone in 2006. Innovative Card Technologies has ceased its activities.\nNagraID.\nNagra ID, now known as NID, was a wholly owned subsidiary of the Kudelski Group until 2014. NID can trace its history with Complex Cards back to 2003 when it collaborated on development with nCryptone. Nagra ID was instrumental in developing the cold lamination process for Complex Cards manufacturing.\nNagra ID manufactures Complex Cards that can include a battery, buttons, displays or other electronic components.\nNagraID Security.\nNagra ID Security began in 2008 as a spinoff of Nagra ID to focus on Complex Card development and manufacturing. The company was owned by Kudelski Group (50%), Cyril Lalo (25%) and Philippe Guillaud (25%).\nNagraID Security quickly became a leading player in the adoption of Complex Cards due, in large part, to its development of MotionCode cards that featured a small display to enable a Card Security Code (CVV2).\nNagraID Security was the first Complex Cards manufacturer to develop a mass market for payment display cards. Their customers included: \nNagraID Security also delivered One-Time Password cards to companies including: \nIn 2014, NagraID Security was sold to Oberthur Technologies (now IDEMIA).\nnCryptone.\nnCryptone emerged in 2004 from the renaming of AudioSmartCard. nCryptone was headed by Cyril Lalo and Philippe Guillaud and developed technologies around authentication servers and devices.\nnCryptone display card assets were acquired by Innovative Card Technologies in 2006.\nOberthur Technologies, now Idemia.\nOberthur Technologies, now IDEMIA, is one of the major players in the secure transactions industry. It acquired the business of NagraID Security in 2014. Oberthur then merged with Morpho and the combined entity was renamed Idemia in 2017.\nMajor references in the Complex Cards business include: \nPlastc.\nSet up in 2009, Plastc announced a single card that could digitally hold the data of up to 20 credit or debit cards. The company succeeded in raising US$9\u00a0million through preorders but failed to deliver any product. Plastc was then acquired in 2017 by Edge Mobile Payments, a Santa Cruz-based Fintech company. The Plastc project continues as the Edge card, a dynamic payment card that consolidates several payment cards in one device. The card is equipped with a battery and an ePaper screen and can store data from up to 50 credit, debit, loyalty and gift cards.\nStratos.\nStratos was created in 2012 in Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. In 2015, Stratos developed the Stratos Bluetooth Connected Card, which was designed to integrate up to three credit and debit card in a single card format and featured a smartphone app used to manage the card. Due to its Lithium ion thin film battery, the Stratos card was equipped with LEDs and communicated in contactless mode and in Bluetooth low Energy.\nIn 2017 Stratos was acquired by CardLab Innovation, a company headquartered in Herlev, Denmark.\nSwyp.\nSWYP was the brand name of a card developed by Qvivr, a company incorporated in 2014 in Fremont, California. SWYP was introduced in 2015 and dubbed the world's first smart wallet. SWYP was a metal card with the ability to combine over 25 credit, debit, gift and loyalty cards. The card worked in conjunction with a smartphone app used to manage the cards. The Swyp card included a battery, a button and a matrix display that showed which card was in use. The company registered users in its beta testing program, but the product never shipped on a commercial scale.\nQvivr raised US$5\u00a0million in January 2017 and went out of business in November 2017.\nBusinesses.\nComplex Cards have been adopted by numerous financial institutions worldwide. They may include different functionalities such as payment cards (credit, debit, prepaid), One-time password, mass-transit, and dynamic Card Security Code (CVV2).\nComplex Card technology is used by numerous financial institutions including: \nDesign.\nA smart card may have the following generic characteristics:\nSince April 2009, a Japanese company has manufactured reusable financial smart cards made from paper.\nInternal structure.\nData structures.\nAs mentioned above, data on a smart card may be stored in a file system (FS). In smart card file systems, the root directory is called the \"master file\" (\"MF\"), subdirectories are called \"dedicated files\" (\"DF\"), and ordinary files are called \"elementary files\" (\"EF\").\nLogical layout.\nThe file system mentioned above is stored on an EEPROM (storage or memory) within the smartcard. In addition to the EEPROM, other components may be present, depending upon the kind of smartcard. Most smartcards have one of three logical layouts:\nIn cards with microprocessors, the microprocessor sits inline between the reader and the other components. The operating system that runs on the microprocessor mediates the reader's access to those components to prevent unauthorized access.\nPhysical interfaces.\nContact smart cards.\nContact smart cards have a contact area of approximately , comprising several gold-plated contact pads. These pads provide electrical connectivity when inserted into a reader, which is used as a communications medium between the smart card and a host (e.g., a computer, a point of sale terminal) or a mobile telephone. Cards do not contain batteries; power is supplied by the card reader.\nThe ISO/IEC 7810 and ISO/IEC 7816 series of standards define:\nBecause the chips in financial cards are the same as those used in subscriber identity modules (SIMs) in mobile phones, programmed differently and embedded in a different piece of PVC, chip manufacturers are building to the more demanding GSM/3G standards. So, for example, although the EMV standard allows a chip card to draw 50\u00a0mA from its terminal, cards are normally well below the telephone industry's 6\u00a0mA limit. This allows smaller and cheaper financial card terminals.\nCommunication protocols for contact smart cards include T=0 (character-level transmission protocol, defined in ISO/IEC 7816-3) and T=1 (block-level transmission protocol, defined in ISO/IEC 7816-3).\nContactless smart cards.\n\"Contactless smart cards\" communicate with readers under protocols defined in the ISO/IEC 14443 standard. They support data rates of 106\u2013848\u00a0kbit/s. These cards require only proximity to an antenna to communicate.\nLike smart cards with contacts, contactless cards do not have an internal power source. Instead, they use a loop antenna coil to capture some of the incident radio-frequency interrogation signal, rectify it, and use it to power the card's electronics. Contactless smart media can be made with PVC, paper/card and PET finish to meet different performance, cost and durability requirements.\nAPDU transmission by a contactless interface is defined in ISO/IEC 14443-4.\nHybrids.\nHybrid cards implement contactless and contact interfaces on a single card with unconnected chips including dedicated modules/storage and processing.\nDual-interface cards implement contactless and contact interfaces on a single chip with some shared storage and processing. An example is Porto's multi-application transport card, called Andante, which uses a chip with both contact and contactless (ISO/IEC 14443 Type B) interfaces. Numerous payment cards worldwide are based on hybrid card technology allowing them to communicate in contactless as well as contact modes.\nUSB.\nThe CCID (Chip Card Interface Device) is a USB protocol that allows a smart card to be interfaced to a computer using a card reader which has a standard USB interface. This allows the smart card to be used as a security token for authentication and data encryption such as Bitlocker. A typical CCID is a USB dongle and may contain a SIM.\nLogical interfaces.\nReader side.\nDifferent smart cards implement one or more reader-side protocols. Common protocols here include CT-API and PC/SC.\nApplication side.\nSmartcard operating systems may provide application programming interfaces (APIs) so that developers can write programs (\"applications\") to run on the smartcard. Some such APIs, such as Java Card, allow programs to be uploaded to the card without replacing the card's entire operating system.\nApplications.\nFinancial.\nSmart cards serve as credit or ATM cards, fuel cards, mobile phone SIMs, authorization cards for pay television, household utility pre-payment cards, high-security identification and access badges, and public transport and public phone payment cards.\nSmart cards may also be used as electronic wallets. The smart card chip can be \"loaded\" with funds to pay parking meters, vending machines or merchants. Cryptographic protocols protect the exchange of money between the smart card and the machine. No connection to a bank is needed. The holder of the card may use it even if not the owner. Examples are Mondex (1993), Proton, Geldkarte, Chipknip and Moneo. The German Geldkarte is also used to validate customer age at vending machines for cigarettes.\nThese are the best known payment cards (classic plastic card):\nRoll-outs started in 2005 in the U.S. Asia and Europe followed in 2006. Contactless (non-PIN) transactions cover a payment range of ~$5\u201350. There is an ISO/IEC 14443 PayPass implementation. Some, but not all, PayPass implementations conform to EMV.\nNon-EMV cards work like magnetic stripe cards. This is common in the U.S. (PayPass Magstripe and Visa MSD). The cards do not hold or maintain the account balance. All payment passes without a PIN, usually in off-line mode. The security of such a transaction is no greater than with a magnetic stripe card transaction.\nEMV cards can have either contact or contactless interfaces. They work as if they were a normal EMV card with a contact interface. Via the contactless interface they work somewhat differently, in that the card commands enabled improved features such as lower power and shorter transaction times. EMV standards include provisions for contact and contactless communications. Typically modern payment cards are based on hybrid card technology and support both contact and contactless communication modes.\nSIM.\nThe subscriber identity modules used in mobile-phone systems are reduced-size smart cards, using otherwise identical technologies.\nIdentification.\nSmart-cards can authenticate identity. Sometimes they employ a public key infrastructure (PKI). The card stores an encrypted digital certificate issued from the PKI provider along with other relevant information. Examples include the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) Common Access Card (CAC), and other cards used by other governments for their citizens. If they include biometric identification data, cards can provide superior two- or three-factor authentication.\nSmart cards are not always privacy-enhancing, because the subject may carry incriminating information on the card. Contactless smart cards that can be read from within a wallet or even a garment simplify authentication; however, criminals may access data from these cards.\nCryptographic smart cards are often used for single sign-on. Most advanced smart cards include specialized cryptographic hardware that uses algorithms such as RSA and Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA). Today's cryptographic smart cards generate key pairs on board, to avoid the risk from having more than one copy of the key (since by design there usually isn't a way to extract private keys from a smart card). Such smart cards are mainly used for digital signatures and secure identification.\nThe most common way to access cryptographic smart card functions on a computer is to use a vendor-provided PKCS#11 library. On Microsoft Windows the Cryptographic Service Provider (CSP) API is also supported.\nThe most widely used cryptographic algorithms in smart cards (excluding the GSM so-called \"crypto algorithm\") are Triple DES and RSA. The key set is usually loaded (DES) or generated (RSA) on the card at the personalization stage.\nSome of these smart cards are also made to support the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) standard for Personal Identity Verification, FIPS 201.\nTurkey implemented the first smart card driver's license system in 1987. Turkey had a high level of road accidents and decided to develop and use digital tachograph devices on heavy vehicles, instead of the existing mechanical ones, to reduce speed violations. Since 1987, the professional driver's licenses in Turkey have been issued as smart cards. A professional driver is required to insert his driver's license into a digital tachograph before starting to drive. The tachograph unit records speed violations for each driver and gives a printed report. The driving hours for each driver are also being monitored and reported. In 1990 the European Union conducted a feasibility study through BEVAC Consulting Engineers, titled \"Feasibility study with respect to a European electronic drivers license (based on a smart-card) on behalf of Directorate General VII\". In this study, chapter seven describes Turkey's experience.\nArgentina's Mendoza province began using smart card driver's licenses in 1995. Mendoza also had a high level of road accidents, driving offenses, and a poor record of recovering fines. Smart licenses hold up-to-date records of driving offenses and unpaid fines. They also store personal information, license type and number, and a photograph. Emergency medical information such as blood type, allergies, and biometrics (fingerprints) can be stored on the chip if the card holder wishes. The Argentina government anticipates that this system will help to collect more than $10\u00a0million per year in fines.\nIn 1999 Gujarat was the first Indian state to introduce a smart card license system. As of 2005, it has issued 5 million smart card driving licenses to its people.\nIn 2002, the Estonian government started to issue smart cards named ID Kaart as primary identification for citizens to replace the usual passport in domestic and EU use. As of 2010 about 1 million smart cards have been issued (total population is about 1.3\u00a0million) and they are widely used in internet banking, buying public transport tickets, authorization on various websites etc.\nBy the start of 2009, the entire population of Belgium was issued eID cards that are used for identification. These cards contain two certificates: one for authentication and one for signature. This signature is legally enforceable. More and more services in Belgium use eID for authorization.\nSpain started issuing national ID cards (DNI) in the form of smart cards in 2006 and gradually replaced all the older ones with smart cards. The idea was that many or most bureaucratic acts could be done online but it was a failure because the Administration did not adapt and still mostly requires paper documents and personal presence.\nOn 14 August 2012, the ID cards in Pakistan were replaced. The Smart Card is a third generation chip-based identity document that is produced according to international standards and requirements. The card has over 36 physical security features and has the latest encryption codes. This smart card replaced the NICOP (the ID card for overseas Pakistani).\nSmart cards may identify emergency responders and their skills. Cards like these allow first responders to bypass organizational paperwork and focus more time on the emergency resolution. In 2004, The Smart Card Alliance expressed the needs: \"to enhance security, increase government efficiency, reduce identity fraud, and protect personal privacy by establishing a mandatory, Government-wide standard for secure and reliable forms of identification\". emergency response personnel can carry these cards to be positively identified in emergency situations. WidePoint Corporation, a smart card provider to FEMA, produces cards that contain additional personal information, such as medical records and skill sets.\nIn 2007, the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) proposed a new standard defining V1.0 of the Smart Card Web Server (SCWS), an HTTP server embedded in a SIM card intended for a smartphone user. The non-profit trade association SIMalliance has been promoting the development and adoption of SCWS. SIMalliance states that SCWS offers end-users a familiar, OS-independent, browser-based interface to secure, personal SIM data. As of mid-2010, SIMalliance had not reported widespread industry acceptance of SCWS.&lt;ref name=\"http://www.simalliance.org/en?t=/documentManager/sfdoc.file.supply&amp;fileID=1279268442341\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The OMA has been maintaining the standard, approving V1.1 of the standard in May 2009, and V1.2 was expected to be approved in October 2012.\nSmart cards are also used to identify user accounts on arcade machines.\nPublic transit.\nSmart cards, used as transit passes, and integrated ticketing are used by many public transit operators. Card users may also make small purchases using the cards. Some operators offer points for usage, exchanged at retailers or for other benefits. Examples include Singapore's CEPAS, Malaysia's Touch 'n Go, Ontario's Presto card, Hong Kong's Octopus card, Tokyo's Suica and PASMO cards, London's Oyster card, Ireland's Leap Card, Brussels' MoBIB, Qu\u00e9bec's Opus card, Boston's CharlieCard, San Francisco's Clipper card, Washington, D.C.'s SmarTrip, Auckland's AT Hop, Brisbane's go card, Perth's SmartRider, Sydney's Opal card and Victoria's myki. However, these present a privacy risk because they allow the mass transit operator (and the government) to track an individual's movement. In Finland, for example, the Data Protection Ombudsman prohibited the transport operator Helsinki Metropolitan Area Council (YTV) from collecting such information, despite YTV's argument that the card owner has the right to a list of trips paid with the card. Earlier, such information was used in the investigation of the Myyrmanni bombing.\nThe UK's Department for Transport mandated smart cards to administer travel entitlements for elderly and disabled residents. These schemes let residents use the cards for more than just bus passes. They can also be used for taxi and other concessionary transport. One example is the \"Smartcare go\" scheme provided by Ecebs. The UK systems use the ITSO Ltd specification. Other schemes in the UK include period travel passes, carnets of tickets or day passes and stored value which can be used to pay for journeys. Other concessions for school pupils, students and job seekers are also supported. These are mostly based on the ITSO Ltd specification.\nMany smart transport schemes include the use of low cost smart tickets for simple journeys, day passes and visitor passes. Examples include Glasgow SPT subway. These smart tickets are made of paper or PET which is thinner than a PVC smart card e.g. Confidex smart media. The smart tickets can be supplied pre-printed and over-printed or printed on demand.\nIn Sweden, as of 2018\u201319, the old SL Access smart card system has started to be phased out and replaced by smart phone apps. The phone apps have less cost, at least for the transit operators who don't need any electronic equipment (the riders provide that). The riders are able buy tickets anywhere and don't need to load money onto smart cards. New NFC smart cards are still in use for foreseeable future (as of 2024).\nVideo games.\nIn Japanese amusement arcades, contactless smart cards (usually referred to as \"IC cards\") are used by game manufacturers as a method for players to access in-game features (both online like Konami E-Amusement and Sega ALL.Net and offline) and as a memory support to save game progress. Depending on a case by case scenario, the machines can use a game-specific card or a \"universal\" one usable on multiple machines from the same manufacturer/publisher. Amongst the most widely used there are Banapassport by Bandai Namco, E-amusement pass by Konami, Aime by Sega and Nesica by Taito.\nIn 2018, in an effort to make arcade game IC cards more user friendly, Konami, Bandai Namco and Sega have agreed on a unified system of cards named \"Amusement IC\". Thanks to this agreement, the three companies are now using a unified card reader in their arcade cabinets, so that players are able to use their card, no matter if a Banapassport, an e-Amusement Pass or an Aime, with hardware and ID services of all three manufacturers. A common logo for \"Amusement IC\" cards has been created, and this is now displayed on compatible cards from all three companies. In January 2019, Taito announced that their Nesica card was also joining the \"Amusement IC\" agreement with the other three companies.\nComputer security.\nSmart cards can be used as a security token.\nMozilla's Firefox web browser can use smart cards to store certificates for use in secure web browsing.\nSome disk encryption systems, such as VeraCrypt and Microsoft's BitLocker, can use smart cards to securely hold encryption keys, and also to add another layer of encryption to critical parts of the secured disk.\nGnuPG, the well known encryption suite, also supports storing keys in a smart card.\nSmart cards are also used for single sign-on to log on to computers.\nSchools.\nSmart cards are being provided to students at some schools and colleges. Uses include:\nHealthcare.\nSmart health cards can improve the security and privacy of patient information, provide a secure carrier for portable medical records, reduce health care fraud, support new processes for portable medical records, provide secure access to emergency medical information, enable compliance with government initiatives (e.g., organ donation) and mandates, and provide the platform to implement other applications as needed by the health care organization.\nOther uses.\nSmart cards are widely used to encrypt digital television streams. VideoGuard is a specific example of how smart card security worked.\nMultiple-use systems.\nThe Malaysian government promotes MyKad as a single system for all smart-card applications. MyKad started as identity cards carried by all citizens and resident non-citizens. Available applications now include identity, travel documents, drivers license, health information, an electronic wallet, ATM bank-card, public toll-road and transit payments, and public key encryption infrastructure. The personal information inside the MYKAD card can be read using special APDU commands.\nSecurity.\nSmart cards have been advertised as suitable for personal identification tasks, because they are engineered to be tamper resistant. The chip usually implements some cryptographic algorithm. There are, however, several methods for recovering some of the algorithm's internal state.\nDifferential power analysis involves measuring the precise time and electric current required for certain encryption or decryption operations. This can deduce the on-chip private key used by public key algorithms such as RSA. Some implementations of symmetric ciphers can be vulnerable to timing or power attacks as well.\nSmart cards can be physically disassembled by using acid, abrasives, solvents, or some other technique to obtain unrestricted access to the on-board microprocessor. Although such techniques may involve a risk of permanent damage to the chip, they permit much more detailed information (e.g., photomicrographs of encryption hardware) to be extracted.\nBenefits.\nThe benefits of smart cards are directly related to the volume of information and applications that are programmed for use on a card. A single contact/contactless smart card can be programmed with multiple banking credentials, medical entitlement, driver's license/public transport entitlement, loyalty programs and club memberships to name just a few. Multi-factor and proximity authentication can and has been embedded into smart cards to increase the security of all services on the card. For example, a smart card can be programmed to only allow a contactless transaction if it is also within range of another device like a uniquely paired mobile phone. This can significantly increase the security of the smart card.\nGovernments and regional authorities save money because of improved security, better data and reduced processing costs. These savings help reduce public budgets or enhance public services. There are many examples in the UK, many using a common open LASSeO specification.\nIndividuals have better security and more convenience with using smart cards that perform multiple services. For example, they only need to replace one card if their wallet is lost or stolen. The data storage on a card can reduce duplication, and even provide emergency medical information.\nAdvantages.\nThe first main advantage of smart cards is their flexibility. Smart cards have multiple functions which simultaneously can be an ID, a credit card, a stored-value cash card, and a repository of personal information such as telephone numbers or medical history. The card can be easily replaced if lost, and, the requirement for a PIN (or other form of security) provides additional security from unauthorised access to information by others. At the first attempt to use it illegally, the card would be deactivated by the card reader itself.\nThe second main advantage is security. Smart cards can be electronic key rings, giving the bearer ability to access information and physical places without need for online connections. They are encryption devices, so that the user can encrypt and decrypt information without relying on unknown, and therefore potentially untrustworthy, appliances such as ATMs. Smart cards are very flexible in providing authentication at different level of the bearer and the counterpart. Finally, with the information about the user that smart cards can provide to the other parties, they are useful devices for customizing products and services.\nOther general benefits of smart cards are:\nSmart cards and electronic commerce.\nSmart cards can be used in electronic commerce, over the Internet, though the business model used in current electronic commerce applications still cannot use the full feature set of the electronic medium. An advantage of smart cards for electronic commerce is their use customize services. For example, for the service supplier to deliver the customized service, the user may need to provide each supplier with their profile, a boring and time-consuming activity. A smart card can contain a non-encrypted profile of the bearer, so that the user can get customized services even without previous contacts with the supplier.\nDisadvantages.\nThe plastic or paper card in which the chip is embedded is fairly flexible. The larger the chip, the higher the probability that normal use could damage it. Cards are often carried in wallets or pockets, a harsh environment for a chip and antenna in contactless cards. PVC cards can crack or break if bent/flexed excessively. However, for large banking systems, failure-management costs can be more than offset by fraud reduction.\nThe production, use and disposal of PVC plastic is known to be more harmful to the environment than other plastics. Alternative materials including chlorine free plastics and paper are available for some smart applications.\nIf the account holder's computer hosts malware, the smart card security model may be broken. Malware can override the communication (both input via keyboard and output via application screen) between the user and the application. Man-in-the-browser malware (e.g., the Trojan Silentbanker) could modify a transaction, unnoticed by the user. Banks like Fortis and Belfius in Belgium and Rabobank (\"\") in the Netherlands combine a smart card with an unconnected card reader to avoid this problem. The customer enters a challenge received from the bank's website, a PIN and the transaction amount into the reader. The reader returns an 8-digit signature. This signature is manually entered into the personal computer and verified by the bank, preventing point-of-sale-malware from changing the transaction amount.\nSmart cards have also been the targets of security attacks. These attacks range from physical invasion of the card's electronics, to non-invasive attacks that exploit weaknesses in the card's software or hardware. The usual goal is to expose private encryption keys and then read and manipulate secure data such as funds. Once an attacker develops a non-invasive attack for a particular smart card model, he or she is typically able to perform the attack on other cards of that model in seconds, often using equipment that can be disguised as a normal smart card reader. While manufacturers may develop new card models with additional information security, it may be costly or inconvenient for users to upgrade vulnerable systems. Tamper-evident and audit features in a smart card system help manage the risks of compromised cards.\nAnother problem is the lack of standards for functionality and security. To address this problem, the Berlin Group launched the ERIDANE Project to propose \"a new functional and security framework for smart-card based Point of Interaction (POI) equipment\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59958", "revid": "13974845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59958", "title": "Power series", "text": "Infinite sum of monomials\nIn mathematics, a power series (in one variable) is an infinite series of the form\nformula_1\nwhere \"formula_2\" represents the coefficient of the \"n\"th term and \"c\" is a constant called the \"center\" of the series. Power series are useful in mathematical analysis, where they arise as Taylor series of infinitely differentiable functions. In fact, Borel's theorem implies that every power series is the Taylor series of some smooth function.\nIn many situations, the center \"c\" is equal to zero, for instance for Maclaurin series. In such cases, the power series takes the simpler form\nformula_3\nThe partial sums of a power series are polynomials, the partial sums of the Taylor series of an analytic function are a sequence of converging polynomial approximations to the function at the center, and a converging power series can be seen as a kind of generalized polynomial with infinitely many terms. Conversely, every polynomial is a power series with only finitely many non-zero terms.\nBeyond their role in mathematical analysis, power series also occur in combinatorics as generating functions (a kind of formal power series) and in electronic engineering (under the name of the Z-transform). The familiar decimal notation for real numbers can also be viewed as an example of a power series, with integer coefficients, but with the argument \"x\" fixed at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204410. In number theory, the concept of \"p\"-adic numbers is also closely related to that of a power series.\nExamples.\nPolynomial.\nEvery polynomial of degree d can be expressed as a power series around any center \"c\", where all terms of degree higher than d have a coefficient of zero. For instance, the polynomial formula_4 can be written as a power series around the center formula_5 as\nformula_6\nor around the center formula_7 as\nformula_8\nOne can view power series as being like \"polynomials of infinite degree\", although power series are not polynomials in the strict sense.\nGeometric series, exponential function and sine.\nThe geometric series formula\nformula_9\nwhich is valid for formula_10, is one of the most important examples of a power series, as are the exponential function formula\nformula_11\nand the sine formula\nformula_12\nvalid for all real \"x\". These power series are examples of Taylor series (or, more specifically, of Maclaurin series).\nOn the set of exponents.\nNegative powers are not permitted in an ordinary power series; for instance, formula_13 is not considered a power series (although it is a Laurent series). Similarly, fractional powers such as formula_14 are not permitted; fractional powers arise in Puiseux series. The coefficients formula_15 must not depend on thus for instance formula_16 is not a power series.\nRadius of convergence.\nA power series formula_17 is convergent for some values of \"x\", which always include \"x\" = \"c\", since, for this value of \"x\", the series reduces to its first term &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. \nThe series may diverge for other values of x, possibly all of them. If \"c\" is not the only value of convergence, then there is always a number \"r\" with 0 &lt; \"r\" \u2264 \u221e such that the series converges if and diverges if . The number \"r\" is called the radius of convergence of the power series; in general it is given as\nformula_18\nor, equivalently,\nformula_19\nThis is the Cauchy\u2013Hadamard theorem; see limit superior and limit inferior for an explanation of the notation. The relation\nformula_20\nis also satisfied, if this limit exists.\nThe set of the complex numbers such that is called the disc of convergence of the series. The series converges absolutely inside its disc of convergence and it converges uniformly on every compact subset of the disc of convergence.\nFor |\"x\" \u2013 \"c\"| = \"r\", there is no general statement on the convergence of the series. However, Abel's theorem states that if the series is convergent for some value z such that |\"z\" \u2013 \"c\"| = \"r\", then the sum of the series for \"x\" = \"z\" is the limit of the sum of the series for \"x\" = \"c\" + \"t\" (\"z\" \u2013 \"c\") where t is a real variable less than that tends to .\nOperations on power series.\nAddition and subtraction.\nWhen two functions \"f\" and \"g\" are decomposed into power series around the same center \"c\", the power series of the sum or difference of the functions can be obtained by termwise addition and subtraction. That is, if\nformula_21 and formula_22\nthen\nformula_23\nThe sum of two power series will have a radius of convergence of at least the smaller of the two radii of convergence of the two series, but possibly larger than either of the two. For instance it is not true that if two power series formula_24 and formula_25 have the same radius of convergence, then formula_26 also has this radius of convergence: if formula_27 and formula_28, for instance, then both series have the same radius of convergence of 1, but the series formula_29 has a radius of convergence of 3.\nMultiplication and division.\nWith the same definitions for formula_30 and formula_31, the power series of the product and quotient of the functions can be obtained as follows:\nformula_32\nThe sequence formula_33 is known as the Cauchy product of the sequences formula_2 and formula_35.\nFor division, if one defines the sequence formula_36 by\nformula_37\nthen \nformula_38\nand one can solve recursively for the terms formula_36 by comparing coefficients.\nSolving the corresponding equations yields the formulae based on determinants of certain matrices of the coefficients of formula_30 and formula_31\nformula_42\nformula_43\nDifferentiation and integration.\nOnce a function formula_30 is given as a power series as above, it is differentiable on the interior of the domain of convergence. It can be differentiated and integrated by treating every term separately since both differentiation and integration are linear transformations of functions:\nformula_45\nBoth of these series have the same radius of convergence as the original series.\nAnalytic functions.\nA function \"f\" defined on some open subset \"U\" of R or C is called analytic if it is locally given by a convergent power series. This means that every \"a\" \u2208 \"U\" has an open neighborhood \"V\" \u2286 \"U\", such that there exists a power series with center \"a\" that converges to \"f\"(\"x\") for every \"x\" \u2208 \"V\".\nEvery power series with a positive radius of convergence is analytic on the interior of its region of convergence. All holomorphic functions are complex-analytic. Sums and products of analytic functions are analytic, as are quotients as long as the denominator is non-zero.\nIf a function is analytic, then it is infinitely differentiable, but in the real case the converse is not generally true. For an analytic function, the coefficients \"a\"\"n\" can be computed as\nformula_46\nwhere formula_47 denotes the \"n\"th derivative of \"f\" at \"c\", and formula_48. This means that every analytic function is locally represented by its Taylor series.\nThe global form of an analytic function is completely determined by its local behavior in the following sense: if \"f\" and \"g\" are two analytic functions defined on the same connected open set \"U\", and if there exists an element \"c\" \u2208 \"U\" such that \"f\"(\"n\")(\"c\") = \"g\"(\"n\")(\"c\") for all \"n\" \u2265 0, then \"f\"(\"x\") = \"g\"(\"x\") for all \"x\" \u2208 \"U\".\nIf a power series with radius of convergence \"r\" is given, one can consider analytic continuations of the series, that is, analytic functions \"f\" which are defined on larger sets than {\"x\"} and agree with the given power series on this set. The number \"r\" is maximal in the following sense: there always exists a complex number x with |\"x\" \u2212 \"c\"| = \"r\" such that no analytic continuation of the series can be defined at x.\nThe power series expansion of the inverse function of an analytic function can be determined using the Lagrange inversion theorem.\nBehavior near the boundary.\nThe sum of a power series with a positive radius of convergence is an analytic function at every point in the interior of the disc of convergence. However, different behavior can occur at points on the boundary of that disc. For example:\nGenerating series.\nIt is common to associate to any sequence of numbers &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; its generating series\nformula_65\nor its exponential generating series\nformula_66\nWhen the radius of convergence is positive, the series defines an analytic function. Generating series and the analytic functions that they define are a powerful tool for studying numerical series and their asymptotic behavior. This is used, in particular, in analytic combinatorics, where the whole power of complex analysis is used for getting accurate estimates of the number of combinatorial structures of a given type as a function of their size.\nFormal power series.\nIn abstract algebra, one attempts to capture the essence of power series without being restricted to the fields of real and complex numbers, and without the need to talk about convergence. This leads to the concept of formal power series, a concept of great utility in algebraic combinatorics.\nPower series in several variables.\nAn extension of the theory is necessary for the purposes of multivariable calculus. A power series is here defined to be an infinite series of the form\nformula_67\nwhere \"j\" = (\"j\"1, \u2026, \"j\"\"n\") is a vector of natural numbers, the coefficients \"a\"(\"j\"1, \u2026, \"j\"\"n\") are usually real or complex numbers, and the center \"c\" = (\"c\"1, \u2026, \"c\"\"n\") and argument \"x\" = (\"x\"1, \u2026, \"x\"\"n\") are usually real or complex vectors. The symbol formula_68 is the product symbol, denoting multiplication. In the more convenient multi-index notation this can be written\nformula_69\nwhere formula_70 is the set of natural numbers, and so formula_71 is the set of ordered \"n\"-tuples of natural numbers.\nThe theory of such series is trickier than for single-variable series, with more complicated regions of convergence. For instance, the power series formula_72 is absolutely convergent in the set formula_73 between two hyperbolas. (This is an example of a \"log-convex set\", in the sense that the set of points formula_74, where formula_75 lies in the above region, is a convex set. More generally, one can show that when c=0, the interior of the region of absolute convergence is always a log-convex set in this sense.) On the other hand, in the interior of this region of convergence one may differentiate and integrate under the series sign, just as one may with ordinary power series.\nOrder of a power series.\nLet \u03b1 be a multi-index for a power series \"f\"(\"x\"1, \"x\"2, \u2026, \"x\"\"n\"). The order of the power series \"f\" is defined to be the least value formula_76 such that there is \"a\"\"\u03b1\" \u2260 0 with formula_77, or formula_78 if \"f\" \u2261 0. In particular, for a power series \"f\"(\"x\") in a single variable \"x\", the order of \"f\" is the smallest power of \"x\" with a nonzero coefficient. This definition readily extends to Laurent series.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59959", "revid": "12033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59959", "title": "ISO/IEC 7816", "text": "Standard for smart cards\nISO/IEC 7816 is an international standard related to electronic identification cards with contacts, especially smart cards, and more recently, contactless mobile devices, managed jointly by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).\nIt is developed by ISO/IEC JTC 1 (Joint Technical Committee 1) / SC 17 (Subcommittee 17).\nThe following describes the different parts of this standard.\n \"Note: abstracts and dates, when present, are mere quotations from the ISO website, and are neither guaranteed at the time of edition nor in the future\".\n7816-1: Cards with contacts \u2014 Physical characteristics.\nCreated in 1987, updated in 1998, amended in 2003, updated in 2011.\nThis part describes the physical characteristics of the card, primarily by reference to ISO/IEC 7810 \"Identification cards \u2014 Physical characteristics\", but also with other characteristics such as mechanical strength.\n7816-2: Cards with contacts \u2014 Dimensions and location of the contacts.\nCreated in 1988, updated in 1999, amended in 2004, updated in 2007. The standard defines an eight (or six) pin interface; the first pin is located at the bottom-right corner for the image given. Pins 4 and 8 are occasionally omitted.\n7816-3: Cards with contacts \u2014 Electrical interface and transmission protocols.\nCreated in 1989, amended in 1992 (addition of the T=1 protocol), amended in 1994 (revision of Protocol Type Selection), updated in 1997 (including addition of 3\u00a0volt operation), amended in 2002 (including addition of 1.8\u00a0volt operation), last updated in 2006 (including removal of Vpp).\n7816-4: Organization, security and commands for interchange.\nThis part describes the smart card APDU protocol used by many smart card and contactless devices, like EMV payment cards, and forms the basis of CCID protocol for security token devices. Many devices operate within the proprietary part of the protocol, using the standardized part for establishing the initial communication before switching to application specific exchange of data.\nCreated in 1995, updated in 2005, 2013 and 2020. Amended in 2023.\nAccording to its abstract, it specifies:\nIt does not cover the internal implementation within the card or the outside world.\nISO/IEC 7816-4:2020 is independent of the physical interface technology, and applies equally to contact cards, proximity cards and vicinity cards.\n7816-5: Registration of application providers.\nCreated in 1995, updated in 2004. This part is maintained by Danish Standards.\nAccording to its abstract, ISO/IEC 7816-5 defines how to use an application identifier to ascertain the presence of and/or perform the retrieval of an application in a card.\nISO/IEC 7816-5:2004 shows how to grant the uniqueness of application identifiers through the international registration of a part of this identifier, and defines\n7816-6: Interindustry data elements for interchange.\nCreated in 1996, updated in 2004, amended in 2006, updated in 2016 and 2023. This part is maintained by Deutsches Institut f\u00fcr Normung (DIN).\nAccording to its abstract, it specifies the Data Elements (DEs) used for interindustry interchange based on integrated circuit cards (ICCs) both with contacts and without contacts. It gives the identifier, name, description, format, coding and layout of each DE and defines the means of retrieval of DEs from the card.\n7816-7: Interindustry commands for Structured Card Query Language (SCQL).\nCreated in 1999.\n7816-8: Commands and mechanisms for security operations.\nCreated in 1995, updated in 2004, 2016, 2019, and 2021.\nAccording to its abstract, it specifies interindustry commands for integrated circuit cards (either with contacts or without contacts) that may be used for cryptographic operations. These commands are complementary to and based on the commands listed in ISO/IEC 7816-4.\nAnnexes are provided that give examples of operations related to digital signatures, certificates and the import and export of asymmetric keys.\nThe choice and conditions of use of cryptographic mechanisms may affect card exportability. The evaluation of the suitability of algorithms and protocols is outside the scope of ISO/IEC 7816-8.\n7816-9: Commands for card management.\nCreated in 1995, updated in 2004, updated in 2017.\nAccording to its abstract, it specifies interindustry commands for integrated circuit cards (both with contacts and without contacts) for card and file management, e.g. file creation and deletion. These commands cover the entire life cycle of the card and therefore some commands may be used before the card has been issued to the cardholder or after the card has expired.\nAn annex is provided that shows how to control the loading of data (secure download) into the card, by means of verifying the access rights of the loading entity and protection of the transmitted data with secure messaging. The loaded data may contain, for example, code, keys and applets.\n7816-10: Electronic signals and answer to reset for synchronous cards.\nCreated in 1999.\nThis part specifies the power, signal structures, and the structure for the answer to reset between an integrated circuit card(s) with synchronous transmission and an interface device such as a terminal.\n7816-11 Personal verification through biometric methods.\nCreated in 2004, updated in 2017.\nThis part of ISO/IEC 7816 specifies security-related interindustry commands to be used for personal verification through biometric methods in integrated circuit cards. It also defines the data structure and data access methods for use of the card as a carrier of the biometric reference and/or as the device to perform the verification of the cardholder\u2019s biometric probe (on-card biometric comparison). Identification of persons using biometric methods is outside the scope of this standard.\n7816-12 Cards with contacts \u2014 USB electrical interface and operating procedures.\nCreated in 2005.\nAccording to its abstract, it specifies the operating conditions of an integrated circuit card that provides a USB interface. An integrated circuit card with a USB interface is named USB-ICC.\nISO/IEC 7816-12:2005 specifies:\nISO/IEC 7816-12:2005 provides two protocols for control transfers. This is to support the protocol T=0 (version A) or to use the transfer on APDU level (version B). ISO/IEC 7816-12:2005 provides the state diagrams for the USB-ICC for each of the transfers (bulk transfers, control transfers version A and version B). Examples of possible sequences which the USB-ICC must be able to handle are given in an informative annex.\nThe USB CCID device class defines a standard for communicating with ISO/IEC 7816 smart cards over USB.\n7816-13: Commands for application management in multi-application environment.\nThis part specifies commands for application management in a multi-application environment.\n7816-15: Cryptographic information application.\nCreated in 2004 (based on PKCS #15 v1.1 with the non IC relevant parts removed), amended in 2004, 2007, 2008, updated in 2016.\nAccording to its abstract, it specifies a card application. This application contains information on cryptographic functionality. Further, ISO/IEC 7816-15:2016 defines a common syntax (in ASN.1) and format for the cryptographic information and mechanisms to share this information whenever appropriate.\nISO/IEC 7816-15:2016 supports the following capabilities:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59961", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59961", "title": "Ra'anana", "text": "City in Israel\nRa'anana () is an affluent city in the southern Sharon Plain of the Central District of Israel. It was founded in 1922 as an American-Jewish settlement, c.1\u00a0km south of the village of Tabsur, where an important World War I battle had taken place four years previously.\nBordered by Kfar Saba and Hod HaSharon on the east and Herzliya on the southwest, it had a population of 83,145 in 2023. While the majority of its residents are Israeli-born Jews, a large part of the population consists of Jewish immigrants from the Americas, Europe and South Africa.\nRa'anana's industrial park is home to global and local start-up companies. It was designated a \"Green City\" by the World Health Organization in 2005.\nHistory.\nBefore the 20th century, the location of Ra'anana formed part of the Forest of Sharon, a hallmark of the region's historical landscape. It was an open woodland dominated by Mount Tabor Oak (Quercus ithaburensis), which extended from Kfar Yona in the north to Ra\u2019anana in the south. The local Arab inhabitants traditionally used the area for pasture, firewood and intermittent cultivation. The intensification of settlement and agriculture in the coastal plain during the 19th century led to deforestation and subsequent environmental degradation known from Hebrew sources.\nIn 1912, the Company for Jewish Settlement in Israel formed the \"Ahuza A \u2013 New York\" group to purchase land in Palestine for agricultural settlement. World War I delayed their plans, but in 1921, it was decided to establish a settlement. On April 2, 1922, two wagons left the corner of Lilienblum and Herzl Streets in Tel Aviv carrying four \"Ahuza\" members, three laborers and two armed watchmen. After a five-hour journey, they unloaded their baggage at the place destined to become Ra'anana.\nIn its early days, the settlement was called \"Ahuza A \u2013 New York.\" The Arabs of the region called it \"Little America\" as most of its residents were English speakers and came from New York. Later it was renamed \"Ra'anania\" and finally the founding settlers chose \"Ra'anana\" as its official name.\nThe settlement was built along a main street, Ahuza Street, and six other streets, three to the north of Ahuza Street and three to the south. Between 1925 and 1927, the Community House, which would house a variety of public institutions, including the secretariat, clinic, synagogue, meeting place for local committee meetings, assembly hall, culture room, school, kindergarten, and post office, was built. According to a census conducted in 1931 by the British Mandate authorities, Ra'anana had a population of 615 inhabitants in 182 houses.\nIn 1936, it was given local council status. By 1948, the year of Israel's formation, Ra'anana was a town of 3,000 residents. In April of that year, the Israeli military depopulated the nearby Palestinian Arab village of Tabsur. The city expanded over its ruins. This had grown to 5,900 in 1949.\nBy the late 1960s, Raanana had a population of 8,500 spanning an area of .\nRa\u2019anana car-ramming attack.\nThe Ra\u2019anana car-ramming attack was an attack against civilians in Israel that occurred on 15 January 2024 in Ra'anana. The police arrested two Palestinian men from Bani Na'im in connection with carrying out the attack.\nThe attack began when one of the perpetrators stabbed a woman and took possession of her car. They then began ramming pedestrians with the vehicle, eventually losing control and crashing. The perpetrators took control of another vehicle and continued the attack until finally being stopped.\nOne individual was killed and 17 injured.\nDemographics.\nRa'anana's population consists mainly of native-born Israelis, but about 22% of the city's residents are immigrants to Israel (Ra'anana is ranked second in immigrant absorption in Israel, after Netanya). It is home to a large number of immigrants from English-speaking countries, a significant number of immigrants from Latin America, mainly Argentina, and also absorbed large numbers of immigrants from the former Soviet Union. In recent years the number of French immigrants is also on the rise. \nThough the majority of Ra'anana residents are secular, there is a sizeable religious community, mainly consisting of Modern Orthodox Jews, many of whom are immigrants from the US, UK, South Africa and France. The religious community generally lives on the north side and the secular community on the southern side. There are nearly 100 synagogues in Ra'anana, ranging from small minyanim to large edifices, and including a wide range of traditions, including Reform, Sefaradi, Ashkenazi, Yemenite, Afghani and Libyan synagogues. Many of these synagogues cater to specific immigrant groups. There is also a small Hasidic community of Clevelander Hasidim, led by the Clevelander Rebbe of Ra'anana, Rabbi Yitzchok Rosenbaum. The orthodox chief rabbi of the city is Rabbi Yitzhak Peretz.\nIndustry and commerce.\nRa'anana has an industrial zone in the north of the city, which is home to Renanim shopping mall and many high-tech companies, including Emblaze, Hewlett-Packard, NICE Systems, SAP, NCR Corporation (formerly Retalix), Comverse, Red Hat, Waze (prior to Google acquisition), Texas Instruments, Arm Holdings and ZoomInfo. In addition, Microsoft's head office in Israel and Amdocs are located in an office complex at the eastern edge of the city, close to Ra'anana Junction, where Highway 4 meets Ahuza Street, Ra'anana's main boulevard. Ahuza Street runs through the city from east to west and is lined with shops, restaurants and a cultural center.\nEducation.\nRa'anana has 12 elementary schools, 10 middle schools and 8 high-schools.\nEducational programs for gifted students start in the third grade. A program for the encouragement of girls to study technological subjects has been developed as well as a technology-focused leadership development and information management program, the first of its kind in Israel. The program, created in conjunction with \"Ness Technologies\", uses advanced technology as a catalyst for developing skills.\nRa'anana has developed supplementary education programs for the afternoon and evening hours, which meet the needs of thousands of children, aged 5\u201318. These programs foster creativity, promote social involvement and cultivate leadership skills. The supplementary education projects include over 20 \"Batei Talmid\" citywide extracurricular programs, an afternoon daycare program, and music, dance, art and science centers. Other programs include summer camps and summer activities, university for youth, dance troupes, the Children's Parliament, an acting school, a school for the performing arts, and gifted children programs, that serve as a model for many other cities.\nRa'anana is home to the Open University of Israel and Ra'anana College.\nParks and museums.\nRa'anana Park is the largest urban park in the Sharon region. It offers walking and bike paths, sports fields, a zoo and children's petting corner and a lake in a clover shape reminiscent of Ra'anana's coat of arms. There are two fountains in the lake and pedestrians can cross over it on the bridge. The lake is surrounded by special gardens, including the Seven Species garden, and shaded walking paths. There is also a restaurant and a small art gallery. The Founders Museum presents the story of Ra'anana's original settlers, from the arrival of the Ahuza Alef-New York Association until Ra'anana achieved local council status in 1936.\nRa'anana Park Amphitheatre has been the venue for musical acts such as A-ha, Backstreet Boys, Evanescence, Alice Cooper, Lauryn Hill, Tori Amos, Chick Corea, Ian Anderson, Ziggy Marley, The Cranberries, The Stranglers, Seal, Brian Wilson, Regina Spektor, Blondie and Pet Shop Boys.\nHospitals and medical facilities.\nRa'anana is home to the Loewenstein Hospital Rehabilitation Center. Loewenstein was established in 1958 and is the only rehabilitation hospital operated by Clalit Health Services, Israel's largest health care provider. Its current multi-floor building is situated in a large gardened area and accommodates 240 rehabilitative beds for short and long-term hospital care.\nAs a national rehabilitative center, patients are admitted from all parts of the country, all health funds, from the Ministry of Defense, the Ministry of Health, and general hospitals and clinics, both from Israel and overseas.\nThe Loewenstein campus also hosts other Clalit services such as a child development center and a clinic for alternative holistic treatments partially subsidized by Clalit's insurance plan.\nTransportation.\nThe town is served by Ra'anana South railway station and Ra'anana West railway station.\nSports.\nThe main soccer club of the city is Hapoel Ra'anana. In basketball, the city is represented by Maccabi Ra'anana who play in the National League.\nThe Ra'anana Roosters are the local rugby team, and the area is a center of rugby union in Israel, with Rugby Israel being based there.\nWith a large population of American expatriates, the Ra'anana Express are an inaugural team in the Israel Baseball League.\nSister cities.\nRa'anana has sister city agreements with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59962", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59962", "title": "Discrete cosine transform", "text": "Technique used in signal processing and data compression\nA discrete cosine transform (DCT) expresses a finite sequence of data points in terms of a sum of cosine functions oscillating at different frequencies. The DCT, first proposed by Nasir Ahmed in 1972, is a widely used transformation technique in signal processing and data compression. It is used in most digital media, including digital images (such as JPEG and HEIF), digital video (such as MPEG and H.26x), digital audio (such as Dolby Digital, MP3 and AAC), digital television (such as SDTV, HDTV and VOD), digital radio (such as AAC+ and DAB+), and speech coding (such as AAC-LD, Siren and Opus). DCTs are also important to numerous other applications in science and engineering, such as digital signal processing, telecommunication devices, reducing network bandwidth usage, and spectral methods for the numerical solution of partial differential equations.\nA DCT is a Fourier-related transform similar to the discrete Fourier transform (DFT), but using only real numbers. The DCTs are generally related to Fourier series coefficients of a periodically and symmetrically extended sequence whereas DFTs are related to Fourier series coefficients of only periodically extended sequences. DCTs are equivalent to DFTs of roughly twice the length, operating on real data with even symmetry (since the Fourier transform of a real and even function is real and even), whereas in some variants the input or output data are shifted by half a sample.\nThere are eight standard DCT variants, of which four are common.\nThe most common variant of discrete cosine transform is the type-II DCT, which is often called simply \"the DCT\". This was the original DCT as first proposed by Ahmed. Its inverse, the type-III DCT, is correspondingly often called simply \"the inverse DCT\" or \"the IDCT\". Two related transforms are the discrete sine transform (DST), which is equivalent to a DFT of real and odd functions, and the modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT), which is based on a DCT of overlapping data. Multidimensional DCTs (MD DCTs) are developed to extend the concept of DCT to multidimensional signals. A variety of fast algorithms have been developed to reduce the computational complexity of implementing DCT. One of these is the integer DCT (IntDCT), an integer approximation of the standard DCT, used in several ISO/IEC and ITU-T international standards.\nDCT compression, also known as block compression, compresses data in sets of discrete DCT blocks. DCT blocks sizes including 8x8 pixels for the standard DCT, and varied integer DCT sizes between 4x4 and 32x32 pixels. The DCT has a strong \"energy compaction\" property, capable of achieving high quality at high data compression ratios. However, blocky compression artifacts can appear when heavy DCT compression is applied.\nHistory.\nThe DCT was first conceived by Nasir Ahmed while working at Kansas State University. The concept was proposed to the National Science Foundation in 1972. The DCT was originally intended for image compression. Ahmed developed a practical DCT algorithm with his PhD students T. Raj Natarajan and K. R. Rao at the University of Texas at Arlington in 1973. They presented their results in a January 1974 paper, titled \"Discrete Cosine Transform\". It described what is now called the type-II DCT (DCT-II),https:// as well as the type-III inverse DCT (IDCT).\nSince its introduction in 1974, there has been significant research on the DCT. In 1977, Wen-Hsiung Chen published a paper with C. Harrison Smith and Stanley C. Fralick presenting a fast DCT algorithm. Further developments include a 1978 paper by M. J. Narasimha and A. M. Peterson, and a 1984 paper by B. G. Lee. These research papers, along with the original 1974 Ahmed paper and the 1977 Chen paper, were cited by the Joint Photographic Experts Group as the basis for JPEG's lossy image compression algorithm in 1992.\nThe discrete sine transform (DST) was derived from the DCT, by replacing the Neumann condition at \"x=0\" with a Dirichlet condition. The DST was described in the 1974 DCT paper by Ahmed, Natarajan and Rao. A type-I DST (DST-I) was later described by Anil K. Jain in 1976, and a type-II DST (DST-II) was then described by H.B. Kekra and J.K. Solanka in 1978.\nIn 1975, John A. Roese and Guner S. Robinson adapted the DCT for inter-frame motion-compensated video coding. They experimented with the DCT and the fast Fourier transform (FFT), developing inter-frame hybrid coders for both, and found that the DCT is the most efficient due to its reduced complexity, capable of compressing image data down to 0.25-bit per pixel for a videotelephone scene with image quality comparable to an intra-frame coder requiring 2-bit per pixel. In 1979, Anil K. Jain and Jaswant R. Jain further developed motion-compensated DCT video compression, also called block motion compensation. This led to Chen developing a practical video compression algorithm, called motion-compensated DCT or adaptive scene coding, in 1981. Motion-compensated DCT later became the standard coding technique for video compression from the late 1980s onwards.\nA DCT variant, the modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT), was developed by John P. Princen, A.W. Johnson and Alan B. Bradley at the University of Surrey in 1987, following earlier work by Princen and Bradley in 1986. The MDCT is used in most modern audio compression formats, such as Dolby Digital (AC-3), MP3 (which uses a hybrid DCT-FFT algorithm), Advanced Audio Coding (AAC), and Vorbis (Ogg).\nNasir Ahmed also developed a lossless DCT algorithm with Giridhar Mandyam and Neeraj Magotra at the University of New Mexico in 1995. This allows the DCT technique to be used for lossless compression of images. It is a modification of the original DCT algorithm, and incorporates elements of inverse DCT and delta modulation. It is a more effective lossless compression algorithm than entropy coding. Lossless DCT is also known as LDCT.\nApplications.\nThe DCT is the most widely used transformation technique in signal processing, and by far the most widely used linear transform in data compression. Uncompressed digital media as well as lossless compression have high memory and bandwidth requirements, which is significantly reduced by the DCT lossy compression technique, capable of achieving data compression ratios from 8:1 to 14:1 for near-studio-quality, up to 100:1 for acceptable-quality content. DCT compression standards are used in digital media technologies, such as digital images, digital photos, digital video, streaming media, digital television, streaming television, video on demand (VOD), digital cinema, high-definition video (HD video), and high-definition television (HDTV).\nThe DCT, and in particular the DCT-II, is often used in signal and image processing, especially for lossy compression, because it has a strong \"energy compaction\" property. In typical applications, most of the signal information tends to be concentrated in a few low-frequency components of the DCT. For strongly correlated Markov processes, the DCT can approach the compaction efficiency of the Karhunen-Lo\u00e8ve transform (which is optimal in the decorrelation sense). As explained below, this stems from the boundary conditions implicit in the cosine functions.\nDCTs are widely employed in solving partial differential equations by spectral methods, where the different variants of the DCT correspond to slightly different even and odd boundary conditions at the two ends of the array.\nDCTs are closely related to Chebyshev polynomials, and fast DCT algorithms (below) are used in Chebyshev approximation of arbitrary functions by series of Chebyshev polynomials, for example in Clenshaw\u2013Curtis quadrature.\nGeneral applications.\nThe DCT is widely used in many applications, which include the following.\nVisual media standards.\nThe DCT-II is an important image compression technique. It is used in image compression standards such as JPEG, and video compression standards such as H.26x, MJPEG, MPEG, DV, Theora and Daala. There, the two-dimensional DCT-II of formula_1 blocks are computed and the results are quantized and entropy coded. In this case, formula_2 is typically 8 and the DCT-II formula is applied to each row and column of the block. The result is an 8\u00a0\u00d7 8 transform coefficient array in which the formula_3 element (top-left) is the DC (zero-frequency) component and entries with increasing vertical and horizontal index values represent higher vertical and horizontal spatial frequencies.\nThe integer DCT, an integer approximation of the DCT, is used in Advanced Video Coding (AVC), introduced in 2003, and High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC), introduced in 2013. The integer DCT is also used in the High Efficiency Image Format (HEIF), which uses a subset of the HEVC video coding format for coding still images. AVC uses 4\u00a0x 4 and 8\u00a0x 8 blocks. HEVC and HEIF use varied block sizes between 4\u00a0x 4 and 32\u00a0x 32 pixels. As of 2019[ [update]], AVC is by far the most commonly used format for the recording, compression and distribution of video content, used by 91% of video developers, followed by HEVC which is used by 43% of developers.\nMultidimensional DCT.\nMultidimensional DCTs (MD DCTs) have several applications, mainly 3-D DCTs such as the 3-D DCT-II, which has several new applications like Hyperspectral Imaging coding systems, variable temporal length 3-D DCT coding, video coding algorithms, adaptive video coding and 3-D Compression. Due to enhancement in the hardware, software and introduction of several fast algorithms, the necessity of using MD DCTs is rapidly increasing. DCT-IV has gained popularity for its applications in fast implementation of real-valued polyphase filtering banks, lapped orthogonal transform and cosine-modulated wavelet bases.\nDigital signal processing.\nDCT plays an important role in digital signal processing specifically data compression. The DCT is widely implemented in digital signal processors (DSP), as well as digital signal processing software. Many companies have developed DSPs based on DCT technology. DCTs are widely used for applications such as encoding, decoding, video, audio, multiplexing, control signals, signaling, and analog-to-digital conversion. DCTs are also commonly used for high-definition television (HDTV) encoder/decoder chips.\nCompression artifacts.\nA common issue with DCT compression in digital media are blocky compression artifacts, caused by DCT blocks. In a DCT algorithm, an image (or frame in an image sequence) is divided into square blocks which are processed independently from each other, then the DCT blocks is taken within each block and the resulting DCT coefficients are quantized. This process can cause blocking artifacts, primarily at high data compression ratios. This can also cause the mosquito noise effect, commonly found in digital video.\nDCT blocks are often used in glitch art. The artist Rosa Menkman makes use of DCT-based compression artifacts in her glitch art, particularly the DCT blocks found in most digital media formats such as JPEG digital images and MP3 audio. Another example is \"Jpegs\" by German photographer Thomas Ruff, which uses intentional JPEG artifacts as the basis of the picture's style.\nInformal overview.\nLike any Fourier-related transform, DCTs express a function or a signal in terms of a sum of sinusoids with different frequencies and amplitudes. Like the DFT, a DCT operates on a function at a finite number of discrete data points. The obvious distinction between a DCT and a DFT is that the former uses only cosine functions, while the latter uses both cosines and sines (in the form of complex exponentials). However, this visible difference is merely a consequence of a deeper distinction: a DCT implies different boundary conditions from the DFT or other related transforms.\nThe Fourier-related transforms that operate on a function over a finite domain, such as the DFT or DCT or a Fourier series, can be thought of as implicitly defining an \"extension\" of that function outside the domain. That is, once you write a function formula_4 as a sum of sinusoids, you can evaluate that sum at any formula_5, even for formula_5 where the original formula_4 was not specified. The DFT, like the Fourier series, implies a periodic extension of the original function. A DCT, like a cosine transform, implies an even extension of the original function.\nHowever, because DCTs operate on \"finite\", \"discrete\" sequences, two issues arise that do not apply for the continuous cosine transform. First, one has to specify whether the function is even or odd at \"both\" the left and right boundaries of the domain (i.e. the min-\"n\" and max-\"n\" boundaries in the definitions below, respectively). Second, one has to specify around \"what point\" the function is even or odd. In particular, consider a sequence \"abcd\" of four equally spaced data points, and say that we specify an even \"left\" boundary. There are two sensible possibilities: either the data are even about the sample \"a\", in which case the even extension is \"dcbabcd\", or the data are even about the point \"halfway\" between \"a\" and the previous point, in which case the even extension is \"dcbaabcd\" (\"a\" is repeated).\nEach boundary can be either even or odd (2 choices per boundary) and can be symmetric about a data point or the point halfway between two data points (2 choices per boundary), for a total of 2 \u00d7 2 \u00d7 2 \u00d7 2 = 16 possibilities. These choices lead to all the standard variations of DCTs and also discrete sine transforms (DSTs). Half of these possibilities, those where the \"left\" boundary is even, correspond to the 8 types of DCT; the other half are the 8 types of DST.\nThese different boundary conditions strongly affect the applications of the transform and lead to uniquely useful properties for the various DCT types. Most directly, when using Fourier-related transforms to solve partial differential equations by spectral methods, the boundary conditions are directly specified as a part of the problem being solved. Or, for the MDCT (based on the type-IV DCT), the boundary conditions are intimately involved in the MDCT's critical property of time-domain aliasing cancellation. In a more subtle fashion, the boundary conditions are responsible for the \"energy compactification\" properties that make DCTs useful for image and audio compression, because the boundaries affect the rate of convergence of any Fourier-like series.\nIn particular, it is well known that any discontinuities in a function reduce the rate of convergence of the Fourier series so that more sinusoids are needed to represent the function with a given accuracy. The same principle governs the usefulness of the DFT and other transforms for signal compression; the smoother a function is, the fewer terms in its DFT or DCT are required to represent it accurately, and the more it can be compressed. However, the implicit periodicity of the DFT means that discontinuities usually occur at the boundaries: any random segment of a signal is unlikely to have the same value at both the left and right boundaries. In contrast, a DCT where \"both\" boundaries are even \"always\" yields a continuous extension at the boundaries (although the slope is generally discontinuous). This is why DCTs, and in particular DCTs of types I, II, V, and VI (the types that have two even boundaries) generally perform better for signal compression than DFTs and DSTs. In practice, a type-II DCT is usually preferred for such applications, in part for reasons of computational convenience.\nFormal definition.\nFormally, the discrete cosine transform is a linear, invertible function formula_8 (where formula_9 denotes the set of real numbers), or equivalently an invertible N \u00d7 N square matrix. There are several variants of the DCT with slightly modified definitions. The N real numbers formula_10 are transformed into the N real numbers formula_11 according to one of the formulas:\nformula_12\nDCT-I.\nSome authors further multiply the formula_13 and formula_14 terms by formula_15 and correspondingly multiply the formula_16 and formula_17 terms by formula_18 which, if one further multiplies by an overall scale factor of formula_19, makes the DCT-I matrix orthogonal but breaks the direct correspondence with a real-even DFT.\nThe DCT-I is exactly equivalent (up to an overall scale factor of 2), to a DFT of formula_20 real numbers with even symmetry. For example, a DCT-I of formula_21 real numbers formula_22 is exactly equivalent to a DFT of eight real numbers formula_23 (even symmetry), divided by two. (In contrast, DCT types II-IV involve a half-sample shift in the equivalent DFT.)\nNote, however, that the DCT-I is not defined for formula_2 less than 2, while all other DCT types are defined for any positive formula_2.\nThus, the DCT-I corresponds to the boundary conditions: formula_26 is even around formula_27 and even around formula_28; similarly for formula_29.\nformula_30\nDCT-II.\nThe DCT-II is probably the most commonly used form, and is often simply referred to as the \"DCT\".\nThis transform is exactly equivalent (up to an overall scale factor of 2) to a DFT of formula_31 real inputs of even symmetry, where the even-indexed elements are zero. That is, it is half of the DFT of the formula_31 inputs formula_33 where formula_34, formula_35 for formula_36, formula_37, and formula_38 for formula_39. DCT-II transformation is also possible using formula_40 signal followed by a multiplication by half shift. This is demonstrated by Makhoul.\nSome authors further multiply the formula_16 term by formula_42 and multiply the rest of the matrix by an overall scale factor of formula_43 (see below for the corresponding change in DCT-III). This makes the DCT-II matrix orthogonal, but breaks the direct correspondence with a real-even DFT of half-shifted input. This is the normalization used by Matlab. In many applications, such as JPEG, the scaling is arbitrary because scale factors can be combined with a subsequent computational step (e.g. the quantization step in JPEG), and a scaling can be chosen that allows the DCT to be computed with fewer multiplications.\nThe DCT-II implies the boundary conditions: formula_26 is even around formula_45 and even around formula_46; formula_47 is even around formula_48 and odd around formula_49.\nformula_50\nDCT-III.\nBecause it is the inverse of DCT-II up to a scale factor (see below), this form is sometimes simply referred to as the inverse DCT (IDCT).\nSome authors divide the formula_51 term by formula_52 instead of by 2 (resulting in an overall formula_53 term) and multiply the resulting matrix by an overall scale factor of formula_54 (see above for the corresponding change in DCT-II), so that the DCT-II and DCT-III are transposes of one another. This makes the DCT-III matrix orthogonal, but breaks the direct correspondence with a real-even DFT of half-shifted output.\nThe DCT-III implies the boundary conditions: formula_26 is even around formula_27 and odd around formula_57 formula_29 is even around formula_59 and even around formula_60\nformula_61\nDCT-IV.\nThe DCT-IV matrix becomes orthogonal (and thus, being clearly symmetric, its own inverse) if one further multiplies by an overall scale factor of formula_62\nA variant of the DCT-IV, where data from different transforms are \"overlapped\", is called the modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT).\nThe DCT-IV implies the boundary conditions: formula_26 is even around formula_45 and odd around formula_65; similarly for formula_29.\nDCT V-VIII.\nDCTs of types I\u2013IV treat both boundaries consistently regarding the point of symmetry: they are even or odd around either a data point for both boundaries or halfway between two data points for both boundaries. By contrast, DCTs of types V-VIII imply boundaries that are even or odd around a data point for one boundary and halfway between two data points for the other boundary.\nIn other words, DCT types I\u2013IV are equivalent to real-even DFTs of even order (regardless of whether formula_2 is even or odd), since the corresponding DFT is of length formula_68 (for DCT-I) or formula_69 (for DCT-II and III) or formula_70 (for DCT-IV). The four additional types of discrete cosine transform correspond essentially to real-even DFTs of logically odd order, which have factors of formula_71 in the denominators of the cosine arguments.\nHowever, these variants seem to be rarely used in practice. One reason, perhaps, is that FFT algorithms for odd-length DFTs are generally more complicated than FFT algorithms for even-length DFTs (e.g., the simplest radix-2 algorithms are only for even lengths), and this increased intricacy carries over to the DCTs as described below. Not that the trivial real-even array, a length-one DFT (odd length) of a single number formula_72, corresponds to a DCT-V of length formula_73.\nInverse transforms.\nUsing the normalization conventions above, the inverse of DCT-I is DCT-I multiplied by 2/(\"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01). The inverse of DCT-IV is DCT-IV multiplied by 2/\"N\". The inverse of DCT-II is DCT-III multiplied by 2/\"N\" and vice versa.\nLike for the DFT, the normalization factor in front of these transform definitions is merely a convention and differs between treatments. For example, some authors multiply the transforms by formula_74 so that the inverse does not require any additional multiplicative factor. Combined with appropriate factors of \u221a2 (see above), this can be used to make the transform matrix orthogonal.\nMultidimensional DCTs.\nMultidimensional variants of the various DCT types follow straightforwardly from the one-dimensional definitions: they are simply a separable product (equivalently, a composition) of DCTs along each dimension.\nM-D DCT-II.\nFor example, a two-dimensional DCT-II of an image or a matrix is simply the one-dimensional DCT-II, from above, performed along the rows and then along the columns (or vice versa). The inverse of a multi-dimensional DCT is just a separable product of the inverses of the corresponding one-dimensional DCTs (see above), e.g., the one-dimensional inverses applied along one dimension at a time in a row-column algorithm.\nThe 2D DCT-II is given by the formula (omitting normalization and other scale factors, as above)\nformula_75\nThe \"3-D DCT-II\" is only the extension of \"2-D DCT-II\" in three-dimensional space and mathematically can be calculated by the formula\nformula_76\nThe inverse of 3-D DCT-II is 3-D DCT-III and can be computed from the formula\nformula_77\nTechnically, computing a two-, three- (or -multi) dimensional DCT by sequences of one-dimensional DCTs along each dimension is known as a \"row-column\" algorithm. As with multidimensional FFT algorithms, however, there exist other methods to compute the same thing while performing the computations in a different order (i.e., interleaving or combining the algorithms for the different dimensions). Owing to the rapid growth in the applications based on the 3-D DCT, several fast algorithms have been developed for the computation of 3-D DCT-II. Vector-Radix algorithms are applied for computing M-D DCT to reduce the computational complexity and to increase the computational speed. Vector-Radix Decimation in Frequency (VR DIF) is an example of an algorithm to compute a 3-D DCT-II efficiently.\n3-D DCT-II VR DIF.\nIn order to apply the VR DIF algorithm the input data is to be formulated and rearranged as follows. The transform size \"N \u00d7 N \u00d7 N\" is assumed to be\u00a02.\nformula_78\nwhere formula_79\nThe figure to the adjacent shows the four stages that are involved in calculating 3-D DCT-II using VR DIF algorithm. The first stage is the 3-D reordering using the index mapping illustrated by the above equations. The second stage is the butterfly calculation. Each butterfly calculates eight points together as shown in the figure just below, where formula_80.\nThe original 3-D DCT-II now can be written as\nformula_81\nwhere formula_82\nIf the even and the odd parts of formula_83 and formula_84 and are considered, the general formula for the calculation of the 3-D DCT-II can be expressed as \nformula_85\nwhere\n formula_86\n formula_87\n formula_88\n formula_89\n formula_90\nArithmetic complexity.\nThe whole 3-D DCT calculation needs formula_91 stages, and each stage involves formula_92 butterflies. The whole 3-D DCT requires formula_93 butterflies to be computed. Each butterfly requires seven real multiplications (including trivial multiplications) and 24\u00a0real additions (including trivial additions). Therefore, the total number of real multiplications needed for this stage is formula_94 and the total number of real additions i.e. including the post-additions (recursive additions) which can be calculated directly after the butterfly stage or after the bit-reverse stage are given by formula_95\nThe conventional method to calculate MD-DCT-II is using a Row-Column-Frame (RCF) approach which is computationally complex and less productive on most advanced recent hardware platforms. The number of multiplications required to compute VR DIF Algorithm when compared to RCF algorithm are quite a few in number. The number of Multiplications and additions involved in RCF approach are given by formula_96 and formula_97 respectively. From Table 1, it can be seen that the total number\nof multiplications associated with the 3-D DCT VR algorithm is less than that associated with the RCF approach by more than 40%. In addition, the RCF approach involves matrix transpose and more indexing and data swapping than the new VR algorithm. This makes the 3-D DCT VR algorithm more efficient and better suited for 3-D applications that involve the 3-D DCT-II such as video compression and other 3-D image processing applications.\nThe main consideration in choosing a fast algorithm is to avoid computational and structural complexities. As the technology of computers and DSPs advances, the execution time of arithmetic operations (multiplications and additions) is becoming very fast, and regular computational structure becomes the most important factor. Therefore, although the above proposed 3-D VR algorithm does not achieve the theoretical lower bound on the number of multiplications, it has a simpler computational structure as compared to other 3-D DCT algorithms. It can be implemented in place using a single butterfly and possesses the properties of the Cooley\u2013Tukey FFT algorithm in 3-D. Hence, the 3-D VR presents a good choice for reducing arithmetic operations in the calculation of the 3-D DCT-II, while keeping the simple structure that characterize butterfly-style Cooley\u2013Tukey FFT algorithms.\nThe image to the right shows a combination of horizontal and vertical frequencies for an 8 \u00d7 8 formula_98 two-dimensional DCT. Each step from left to right and top to bottom is an increase in frequency by 1/2 cycle.\nFor example, moving right one from the top-left square yields a half-cycle increase in the horizontal frequency. Another move to the right yields two half-cycles. A move down yields two half-cycles horizontally and a half-cycle vertically. The source data ( 8\u00d78 ) is transformed to a linear combination of these 64\u00a0frequency squares.\nMD-DCT-IV.\nThe M-D DCT-IV is just an extension of 1-D DCT-IV on to M\u00a0dimensional domain. The 2-D DCT-IV of a matrix or an image is given by\nformula_99\n for formula_100 and formula_101\nWe can compute the MD DCT-IV using the regular row-column method or we can use the polynomial transform method for the fast and efficient computation. The main idea of this algorithm is to use the Polynomial Transform to convert the multidimensional DCT into a series of 1-D DCTs directly. MD DCT-IV also has several applications in various fields.\nComputation.\nAlthough the direct application of these formulas would require formula_102 operations, it is possible to compute the same thing with only formula_103 complexity by factorizing the computation similarly to the fast Fourier transform (FFT). One can also compute DCTs via FFTs combined with formula_104 pre- and post-processing steps. In general, formula_105 methods to compute DCTs are known as fast cosine transform (FCT) algorithms.\nThe most efficient algorithms, in principle, are usually those that are specialized directly for the DCT, as opposed to using an ordinary FFT plus formula_106 extra operations (see below for an exception). However, even \"specialized\" DCT algorithms (including all of those that achieve the lowest known arithmetic counts, at least for power-of-two sizes) are typically closely related to FFT algorithms \u2013 since DCTs are essentially DFTs of real-even data, one can design a fast DCT algorithm by taking an FFT and eliminating the redundant operations due to this symmetry. This can even be done automatically . Algorithms based on the Cooley\u2013Tukey FFT algorithm are most common, but any other FFT algorithm is also applicable. For example, the Winograd FFT algorithm leads to minimal-multiplication algorithms for the DFT, albeit generally at the cost of more additions, and a similar algorithm was proposed by for the DCT. Because the algorithms for DFTs, DCTs, and similar transforms are all so closely related, any improvement in algorithms for one transform will theoretically lead to immediate gains for the other transforms as well .\nWhile DCT algorithms that employ an unmodified FFT often have some theoretical overhead compared to the best specialized DCT algorithms, the former also have a distinct advantage: Highly optimized FFT programs are widely available. Thus, in practice, it is often easier to obtain high performance for general lengths N with FFT-based algorithms.\nSpecialized DCT algorithms, on the other hand, see widespread use for transforms of small, fixed sizes such as the 8 \u00d7 8 DCT-II used in JPEG compression, or the small DCTs (or MDCTs) typically used in audio compression. (Reduced code size may also be a reason to use a specialized DCT for embedded-device applications.)\nIn fact, even the DCT algorithms using an ordinary FFT are sometimes equivalent to pruning the redundant operations from a larger FFT of real-symmetric data, and they can even be optimal from the perspective of arithmetic counts. For example, a type-II DCT is equivalent to a DFT of size formula_107 with real-even symmetry whose even-indexed elements are zero. One of the most common methods for computing this via an FFT (e.g. the method used in FFTPACK and FFTW) was described by and , and this method in hindsight can be seen as one step of a radix-4 decimation-in-time Cooley\u2013Tukey algorithm applied to the \"logical\" real-even DFT corresponding to the DCT-II.\nBecause the even-indexed elements are zero, this radix-4 step is exactly the same as a split-radix step. If the subsequent size formula_108 real-data FFT is also performed by a real-data split-radix algorithm (as in ), then the resulting algorithm actually matches what was long the lowest published arithmetic count for the power-of-two DCT-II (formula_109 real-arithmetic operations).\nA recent reduction in the operation count to formula_110 also uses a real-data FFT. So, there is nothing intrinsically bad about computing the DCT via an FFT from an arithmetic perspective \u2013 it is sometimes merely a question of whether the corresponding FFT algorithm is optimal. (As a practical matter, the function-call overhead in invoking a separate FFT routine might be significant for small formula_111 but this is an implementation rather than an algorithmic question since it can be solved by unrolling or inlining.)\nExample of IDCT.\nConsider this grayscale image of capital letter A.\nEach basis function is multiplied by its coefficient and then this product is added to the final image.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59964", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59964", "title": "Senufo people", "text": "West African ethnic group\nThe Senufo people, also known as Siena, Senefo, Sene, Senoufo, and Sy\u00e9namb\u00e9l\u00e9, are a West African ethnolinguistic group. They consist of diverse subgroups living in a region spanning the northern Ivory Coast, the southeastern Mali and the western Burkina Faso. One sub-group, the Nafana, is found in north-western Ghana.\nThe Senufo people are predominantly animists, with some who are Muslims. They are regionally famous for their handicrafts, many of which feature their cultural themes and religious beliefs.\nDemographics and languages.\nIn the 1980s, estimates placed the total ethnic group population of Senufo people somewhere between 1.5 and 2.7 million. A 2013 estimate places the total over 3 million, with majority of them living in Ivory Coast in places such as Katiola, and some 0.8 million in southeastern Mali. Their highest population densities are found in the land between the Black Volta river, Bagoe River and Bani River.\nTheir kinship organization is matrilineal. Typically, the Senufo people are studied in three large subgroups that have been relatively isolated. The northern Senufo are called \"Supide or Kenedougou\", found near Odienne, and who helped found an important kingdom of West Africa and challenged Muslim missionaries and traders. The southern Senufo are the largest group, numbering over 2 million, who allowed Muslim traders to settle within their communities in the 18th century who actively proselytized, and about 20% of the southern Senufo are Muslims. The third group is very small and isolated from both northern and southern Senufo. Some sociologists such as the French scholar Holas mentions fifteen identifiable sub-groups of Senufo people, with thirty dialects and four castes scattered between them.\nThe term \"Senufo\" refers to a linguistic group comprising roughly thirty related dialects within the larger Gur language family. It belongs to the Gur-branch of the Niger-Congo language family, and consists of four distinct languages namely Palaka(also spelt Kpalaga), Djimini(also spelt Dyimini), and Senari in C\u00f4te d'Ivoire and Suppire( also spelt Supyire) in Mali, as well as Karaboro in Burkina Faso. Within each group, numerous subdivisions use their own names for the people and language; the name Senufo is of external origin. Palaka separated from the main Senufo stock well before the 14th century ad; at about that time, with the founding of the town of Kong as a Bambara trade-route station, the rest of the population began migrations to the south, west, and north, resulting in the present divisions.The Senufo speaking people range from 800,000 to one million and live in agricultural based communities predominately located in the C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, West Africa, Africa.\nKorhogo, an ancient town in northern Ivory Coast dating from the 13th century, is linked to the Senufo people. This separation of languages and sub-ethnic groups may be linked to the 14th-century migrations with its founding along with the Bambara trade-route.\nHistory.\nThe Senufo people emerged as a group sometime within the 15th or 16th century. They were a significant part of the 17th to 19th-century K\u00e9n\u00e9dougou Kingdom (literally \"country of the plain\") with the capital of Sikasso. This region saw many wars including the rule of Daoula Ba Traor\u00e9, a cruel despot who reigned between 1840 and 1877. The Islamisation of the Senufo people began during this historical period of the K\u00e9n\u00e9dougou Kingdom, but it was the kings &amp; chiefs who converted, while the general Senufo population refused. Daoula Ba Traor\u00e9 attempted to convert his kingdom to Islam, destroying many villages within the kingdom such as Guiembe and Nielle in 1875 because they resisted his views. The K\u00e9n\u00e9dougou dynastic rulers attacked their neighbors as well, such as the Zarma people and they in turn counterattacked many times between 1883 and 1898.\nThe pre-colonial wars and violence led to their migration into Burkina Faso in regions that became towns such as Tiembara in Kiembara Department. The K\u00e9n\u00e9dougou kingdom and the Traor\u00e9 dynasty were dissolved in 1898 with the arrival of French colonial rule.\nSlavery.\nThe Senufo people were both victims of and perpetrators of slavery as they victimized other ethnic groups by enslavement. They themselves bought and sold slaves to Muslim merchants, Asante people and Baoul\u00e9 people. As refugees from other West African ethnic groups escaped wars, states Paul Lovejoy, some of them moved into the Senufo lands, seized their lands and enslaved them.\nThe largest demand for slaves initially came from the markets of Sudan, and for a long time, slave trading was one an important economic activity across the Sahel and West Africa, states Martin Klein. Sikasso and Bobo-Dioulasso were important sources of slaves captured who were then moved to Timbuktu and Banamba on their way to the Sudanese and Mauritanian slave markets.\nThose enslaved in Senufo lands worked the land, herds and served within the home. Their owner and his dependents also had the right to have sexual intercourse with female domestic slaves. The children of a female slave inherited her slave status.\nSociety and culture.\nThe Senufo are predominantly an agricultural people cultivating corn, millet, yams, and peanut. Senufo villages consist of small mud-brick homes. In the rainy southern communities of Senufo, thatched roofs are common, while flat roofs are prevalent in dry desert-like north. The Senufo is a patriarchal extended family society, where arranged typically cousin marriage and polygyny has been fairly common, however, succession and property inheritance has been matrilineal.\nAs agriculturalists, they cultivate a wide variety of crops, including cotton and cash crops for the international market. As musicians, they are world renowned, playing a multitude of instruments from: wind instruments (Aerophones), stringed instruments (Chordaphones) and percussive instruments (Membranophones). Senufo communities use a caste system, each division known as a Katioula. In this system the farmers, known as Fo no, and the artisans at the opposite ends of the spectrum. The term artisan encompasses different individual castes within Senufo society including blacksmiths (Kule), carvers (Kpeene), brasscutters (Tyeli), potterers, and leather workers, whose lives revolve around the roles, responsibilities, and structures inhabited by the individual class. Training to become an artisan takes about seven or eight years; commencing with an apprenticeship where the trainees create objects not associated with the religion of the Senufo, then culminating with an initiation process where they obtain the ability to create ritual object.\nRegionally, the Senufo are famous as musicians and superb carvers of wood sculpture, masks, and figurines. The Senufo people have specialized their art and handicraft work by subgroups, wherein the art is learnt within this group, passed from one generation to the next. The \"Kulubele\" specialize as woodcarvers, the \"Fonombele\" specialize in blacksmith and basketry work, the \"Kpeembele\" specialize in brass casting, the \"Djelebele\" are renowned for leatherwork, the \"Tchedumbele\" are masters of gunsmith work, while \"Numu\" specialize in smithing and weaving. Outside the artisan subgroups, the Senufo people have hunters, musicians, grave-diggers, diviners, and healers who are called the \"Fejembele\". Among these various subgroups, the leatherworkers or \"Djelebele\" are the ones who have most adopted Islam, although those who convert retain many of their animist practices.\nTraditionally, the Senufo people have been a socially stratified society, similar to many West African ethnic groups having castes. These endogamous divisions are locally called \"Katioula\", and one of the strata in this division includes slaves and descendants of slaves. According to Dolores Richter, the caste systems in Africa found among Senufo people features \"hierarchical ranking including despised lower castes, occupational specificity, ritual complementarity, endogamy, hereditary membership, residential isolation, and the political superiority of farmers over artisan castes\".\nThe Senufo people usually fall within four societies in their culture: Poro, Sandogo, Wambele, or Tyekpa. While all the societies fill particular roles in the governance and education of the Senufo people, the Poro and Sandogo. Spirituality and divination are divided between these two gender-imperative societies with women falling under the Sando or Sandogo society, and men falling under the Poro society with the exception of men who are members of those of the women because of their mother. These societies are the two that create the majority of commissioned Seunfo art.\nTypically, the Senufo villages are independent of each other, and each has a male secret society called \"Poro\" with elaborate initiation rituals in a patch of forest they consider as sacred. The initiation rituals involve masks, figurines, and ritual equipment that the Senufo people carve and have perfected. The secrecy has helped the Senufo people to preserve their culture in the times of wars and political pressure. Senufo wear specially-crafted brass jewelry, such as those mimicking wildlife. \"\"The main function of Poro is to guarantee a good relationship between the living world and the ancestors. Nerejao is an ancestress who is recognized as the true head of the Poro society. Divination, which is governed by the Sandogo society, is also an important part of Senufo religion. Although Sandogo is usually considered a women's society, men who are called to the profession and inherit through the matrilineal line are permitted to become diviners.\"\"\nThe \"Sandogo\" are women diviners among the Senufo people. They have their own rituals and secret order. In addition, the Senufo people have \"Wambele\" and \"Typka\", who perform sorcery and rituals.\nWithin Senufo culture, the female form is held above all others in terms of beauty and aesthetics and caryatid figures are seen with various cultural connotations. This is tied into the worship of the spirit, \"Ancient Mother\", or the spirit, \"mother\", Maleeo, who is revered as the guiding entity by all Poro society initiates and members. The goddess Maleeo has a partner, the god Kolocolo, who is seen as the identifying deity of the Sandogo, who granted the people marriage and this particular type of lineage to allow communication from humanity and the spirit world. Caryatid figures are seen as representations of the role of women as spiritual mediators and the Sandogo use them in ceremonies as symbols of this bilateral celestial discourse. Likewise, in the case of the Poro, there are writings about caryatid figures being used in ceremonies where they are brought out to commemorate advancement in the age-grade cycle, as well as being used to raise funds by initiates of the society. Calved figures were used in a tyekpa funeral ceremony as dance sculpture, held upon the head of the dancers while the ceremony takes place.\nThe traditional Senufo religion is a type of animism. This Senufo belief includes ancestral and nature spirits, who may be contacted. They believe in a Supreme Being, who is viewed in a dual female-male: an Ancient Mother, \"Maleeo\" or \"Katieleo\", and a male Creator God, \"Kolotyolo\" or \"Koulotiolo\".\nInfluence.\nThe art of Senufo people inspired twentieth-century European artists such as Pablo Picasso and Fernand L\u00e9ger. The cubism and masks found in Senufo pieces were a significant influence for Pablo Picasso's African period.\nThe term \"Senufo\" has become a category to art collectors and scholars, a symbolism for the artistic traditions of West Africa, starting with the early twentieth century. Old pieces of Senufo art are found in many leading museums of the world.\nCorn\u00e9lius Yao Azaglo August, a photographer, created a photographical journal of Senufo people from 1955 onward.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59967", "revid": "93143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59967", "title": "Central Gur languages", "text": ""}
{"id": "59969", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59969", "title": "140 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \n140 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Sapiens and Caepio (or, less frequently, year 614 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the First Year of Jianyuan. The denomination 140 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nJudea.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59970", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59970", "title": "139 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 139 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Piso and Laenas (or, less frequently, year 615 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Second Year of Jianyuan. The denomination 139 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nAstronomy.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59971", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59971", "title": "138 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 138 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Serapio and Callaicus (or, less frequently, year 616 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Third Year of Jianyuan. The denomination 138 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArts and sciences.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59972", "revid": "1067043361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59972", "title": "137 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 137 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Porcina and Mancinus (or, less frequently, year 617 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Fourth Year of Jianyuan. The denomination 137 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59973", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59973", "title": "127 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 127 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Ravilla and Cinna (or, less frequently, year 627 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Second Year of Yuanshuo. The denomination 127 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59974", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59974", "title": "123 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 123 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Balearicus and Flamininus (or, less frequently, year 631 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Sixth Year of Yuanshuo. The denomination 123 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n* During the second expedition, the force under Su Jian and Zhao Xin is surrounded and almost entirely destroyed by the army of Yizhixie Chanyu. Zhao Xin defects to the Chanyu.\n* For these two campaigns, Emperor Wu of Han orders Wei Qing to make his eighteen-year-old nephew Huo Qubing the commander of a force of 800 cavalry. Raiding deep into enemy territory, Huo's force kills or captures a Xiongnu Prime Minister and a Household Administrator, kills the Marquis of Jiruo (an elder relative of Yizhixie Chanyu), and captures the Chanyu's uncle Luogubi.\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59975", "revid": "7506477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59975", "title": "143 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 143 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Pulcher and Macedonicus (or, less frequently, year 611 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 143 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59976", "revid": "2273576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59976", "title": "Diptera", "text": ""}
{"id": "59977", "revid": "27089876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59977", "title": "145 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 145 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aemilianus and Mancinus (or, less frequently, year 609 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 145 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nAstronomy.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59978", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59978", "title": "125 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 125 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Hypsaeus and Flaccus (or, less frequently, year 629 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Fourth Year of Yuanshuo. The denomination 125 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59979", "revid": "49317977", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59979", "title": "Roman surface", "text": "Self-intersecting, highly symmetrical mapping of the real projective plane into 3D space\nIn mathematics, the Roman surface or Steiner surface is a self-intersecting mapping of the real projective plane into three-dimensional space, with an unusually high degree of symmetry. This mapping is not an immersion of the projective plane; however, the figure resulting from removing six singular points is one. Its name arises because it was discovered by Jakob Steiner when he was in Rome in 1844.\nThe simplest construction is as the image of a sphere centered at the origin under the map formula_1 This gives an implicit formula of\nformula_2\nAlso, taking a parametrization of the sphere in terms of longitude (\u03b8) and latitude (\u03c6), gives parametric equations for the Roman surface as follows:\nformula_3\nformula_4\nformula_5\nThe origin is a triple point, and each of the xy-, yz-, and xz-planes are tangential to the surface there. The other places of self-intersection are double points, defining segments along each coordinate axis which terminate in six pinch points. The entire surface has tetrahedral symmetry. It is a particular type (called type 1) of Steiner surface, that is, a 3-dimensional linear projection of the Veronese surface.\nDerivation of implicit formula.\nFor simplicity we consider only the case \"r\" = 1. Given the sphere defined by the points (\"x\", \"y\", \"z\") such that\nformula_6\nwe apply to these points the transformation \"T\" defined by formula_7 say.\nBut then we have\nformula_8\nand so formula_9 as desired.\nConversely, suppose we are given (\"U\", \"V\", \"W\") satisfying\n(*) formula_10\nWe prove that there exists (\"x\",\"y\",\"z\") such that\n(**) formula_6\nfor which formula_12\nwith one exception: In case 3.b. below, we show this cannot be proved.\n1. In the case where none of \"U\", \"V\", \"W\" is 0, we can set\nformula_13\nIt is easy to use (*) to confirm that (**) holds for \"x\", \"y\", \"z\" defined this way.\n2. Suppose that \"W\" is 0. From (*) this implies formula_14\nand hence at least one of \"U\", \"V\" must be 0 also. This shows that is it impossible for exactly one of \"U\", \"V\", \"W\" to be 0.\n3. Suppose that exactly two of \"U\", \"V\", \"W\" are 0. Without loss of generality we assume\n(***)formula_15\nIt follows that formula_16\na. In the subcase where\nformula_20\nif we determine \"x\" and \"y\" by\nformula_21\nand formula_22\nthis ensures that (*) holds. It is easy to verify that formula_23\nand hence choosing the signs of \"x\" and \"y\" appropriately will guarantee formula_24\nSince also formula_25\nthis shows that this subcase leads to the desired converse.\nb. In this remaining subcase of the case 3., we have formula_26\nSince formula_27\nit is easy to check that formula_28\nand thus in this case, where formula_29\nthere is no (\"x\", \"y\", \"z\") satisfying formula_30\nHence the solutions (\"U\", 0, 0) of the equation (*) with formula_31\nand likewise, (0, \"V\", 0) with formula_32\nand (0, 0, \"W\") with formula_33\n(each of which is a noncompact portion of a coordinate axis, in two pieces) do not correspond to any point on the Roman surface.\n4. If (\"U\", \"V\", \"W\") is the point (0, 0, 0), then if any two of \"x\", \"y\", \"z\" are zero and the third one has absolute value 1, clearly formula_34 as desired.\nThis covers all possible cases.\nDerivation of parametric equations.\nLet a sphere have radius \"r\", longitude \"\u03c6\", and latitude \"\u03b8\". Then its parametric equations are\nformula_35\nformula_36\nformula_37\nThen, applying transformation \"T\" to all the points on this sphere yields\nformula_38\nformula_39\nformula_40\nwhich are the points on the Roman surface. Let \"\u03c6\" range from 0 to 2\u03c0, and let \"\u03b8\" range from 0 to \"\u03c0/2\".\nRelation to the real projective plane.\nThe sphere, before being transformed, is not homeomorphic to the real projective plane, \"RP2\". But the sphere centered at the origin has this property, that if point \"(x,y,z)\" belongs to the sphere, then so does the antipodal point \"(-x,-y,-z)\" and these two points are different: they lie on opposite sides of the center of the sphere.\nThe transformation \"T\" converts both of these antipodal points into the same point,\nformula_41\nformula_42\nSince this is true of all points of S2, then it is clear that the Roman surface is a continuous image of a \"sphere modulo antipodes\". Because some distinct pairs of antipodes are all taken to identical points in the Roman surface, it is not homeomorphic to \"RP2\", but is instead a quotient of the real projective plane \"RP2 = S2 / (x~-x)\". Furthermore, the map T (above) from S2 to this quotient has the special property that it is locally injective away from six pairs of antipodal points. Or from RP2 the resulting map making this an immersion of RP2 \u2014 minus six points \u2014 into 3-space.\nStructure of the Roman surface.\nThe Roman surface has four bulbous \"lobes\", each one on a different corner of a tetrahedron.\nA Roman surface can be constructed by splicing together three hyperbolic paraboloids and then smoothing out the edges as necessary so that it will fit a desired shape (e.g. parametrization).\nLet there be these three hyperbolic paraboloids:\nThese three hyperbolic paraboloids intersect externally along the six edges of a tetrahedron and internally along the three axes. The internal intersections are loci of double points. The three loci of double points: \"x\" = 0, \"y\" = 0, and \"z\" = 0, intersect at a triple point at the origin.\nFor example, given \"x\" = \"yz\" and \"y\" = \"zx\", the second paraboloid is equivalent to \"x\" = \"y\"/\"z\". Then\nformula_43\nand either \"y\" = 0 or \"z\"2 = 1 so that \"z\" = \u00b11. Their two external intersections are\nLikewise, the other external intersections are\nLet us see the pieces being put together. Join the paraboloids \"y\" = \"xz\" and \"x\" = \"yz\". The result is shown in Figure 1.\nThe paraboloid \"y = x z\" is shown in blue and orange. The paraboloid \"x = y z\" is shown in cyan and purple. In the image the paraboloids are seen to intersect along the \"z = 0\" axis. If the paraboloids are extended, they should also be seen to intersect along the lines\nThe two paraboloids together look like a pair of orchids joined back-to-back.\nNow run the third hyperbolic paraboloid, \"z\" = \"xy\", through them. The result is shown in Figure 2.\nOn the west-southwest and east-northeast directions in Figure 2 there are a pair of openings. These openings are lobes and need to be closed up. When the openings are closed up, the result is the Roman surface shown in Figure 3.\nA pair of lobes can be seen in the West and East directions of Figure 3. Another pair of lobes are hidden underneath the third (\"z\" = \"xy\") paraboloid and lie in the North and South directions.\nIf the three intersecting hyperbolic paraboloids are drawn far enough that they intersect along the edges of a tetrahedron, then the result is as shown in Figure 4.\nOne of the lobes is seen frontally\u2014head on\u2014in Figure 4. The lobe can be seen to be one of the four corners of the tetrahedron.\nIf the continuous surface in Figure 4 has its sharp edges rounded out\u2014smoothed out\u2014then the result is the Roman surface in Figure 5.\nOne of the lobes of the Roman surface is seen frontally in Figure 5, and its bulbous \u2013 balloon-like\u2014shape is evident.\nIf the surface in Figure 5 is turned around 180 degrees and then turned upside down, the result is as shown in Figure 6.\nFigure 6 shows three lobes seen sideways. Between each pair of lobes there is a locus of double points corresponding to a coordinate axis. The three loci intersect at a triple point at the origin. The fourth lobe is hidden and points in the direction directly opposite from the viewer. The Roman surface shown at the top of this article also has three lobes in sideways view.\nOne-sidedness.\nThe Roman surface is non-orientable, i.e. one-sided. This is not quite obvious. To see this, look again at Figure 3.\nImagine an ant on top of the \"third\" hyperbolic paraboloid, \"z = x y\". Let this ant move North. As it moves, it will pass through the other two paraboloids, like a ghost passing through a wall. These other paraboloids only seem like obstacles due to the self-intersecting nature of the immersion. Let the ant ignore all double and triple points and pass right through them. So the ant moves to the North and falls off the edge of the world, so to speak. It now finds itself on the northern lobe, hidden underneath the third paraboloid of Figure 3. The ant is standing upside-down, on the \"outside\" of the Roman surface.\nLet the ant move towards the Southwest. It will climb a slope (upside-down) until it finds itself \"inside\" the Western lobe. Now let the ant move in a Southeastern direction along the inside of the Western lobe towards the \"z = 0\" axis, always above the \"x-y\" plane. As soon as it passes through the \"z = 0\" axis the ant will be on the \"outside\" of the Eastern lobe, standing rightside-up.\nThen let it move Northwards, over \"the hill\", then towards the Northwest so that it starts sliding down towards the \"x = 0\" axis. As soon as the ant crosses this axis it will find itself \"inside\" the Northern lobe, standing right side up. Now let the ant walk towards the North. It will climb up the wall, then along the \"roof\" of the Northern lobe. The ant is back on the third hyperbolic paraboloid, but this time under it and standing upside-down. (Compare with Klein bottle.)\nDouble, triple, and pinching points.\nThe Roman surface has four \"lobes\". The boundaries of each lobe are a set of three lines of double points. Between each pair of lobes there is a line of double points. The surface has a total of three lines of double points, which lie (in the parametrization given earlier) on the coordinate axes. The three lines of double points intersect at a triple point which lies on the origin. The triple point cuts the lines of double points into a pair of half-lines, and each half-line lies between a pair of lobes. One might expect from the preceding statements that there could be up to eight lobes, one in each octant of space which has been divided by the coordinate planes. But the lobes occupy alternating octants: four octants are empty and four are occupied by lobes.\nIf the Roman surface were to be inscribed inside the tetrahedron with least possible volume, one would find that each edge of the tetrahedron is tangent to the Roman surface at a point, and that each of these six points happens to be a \"Whitney singularity\". These singularities, or pinching points, all lie at the edges of the three lines of double points, and they are defined by this property: that there is no plane tangent to any surface at the singularity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59980", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59980", "title": "142 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 142 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Calvus and Servilianus (or, less frequently, year 612 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 142 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nJudea.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59981", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59981", "title": "144 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 144 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Galba and Cotta (or, less frequently, year 610 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 144 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nParthia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59982", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59982", "title": "147 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 147 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Aemilianus and Drusus (or, less frequently, year 607 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 147 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59983", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59983", "title": "148 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 148 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Magnus and Caesoninus (or, less frequently, year 606 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 148 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59984", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59984", "title": "151 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 151 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lucullus and Albinus (or, less frequently, year 603 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 151 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nIndia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59985", "revid": "48282891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59985", "title": "152 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 152 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Marcellus and Flaccus (or, less frequently, year 602 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 152 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nSeleucid Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59986", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59986", "title": "122 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 122 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Ahenobarbus and Fannius (or, less frequently, year 632 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the First Year of Yuanshou. The denomination 122 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59987", "revid": "42475358", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59987", "title": "124 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 124 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Longinus and Calvinus (or, less frequently, year 630 \"Ab urbe condita\") and the Fifth Year of Yuanshuo. The denomination 124 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nChina.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59988", "revid": "50243886", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59988", "title": "Aconitum", "text": "Genus of flowering plants in the buttercup family Ranunculaceae\nAconitum (), also known as aconite, monkshood, wolfsbane, leopard's bane, devil's helmet, or blue rocket, is a genus of over 250 species of flowering plants belonging to the family Ranunculaceae. These herbaceous, frequently toxic perennial plants are chiefly native to the mountainous parts of the Northern Hemisphere in North America, Europe, and Asia, growing in the moisture-retentive but well-draining soils of mountain meadows.\nMost \"Aconitum\" species are extremely poisonous and must be handled very carefully. Several \"Aconitum\" hybrids, such as the Arendsii form of \"Aconitum carmichaelii\", have won gardening awards\u2014such as the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit. Some are used by florists.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"aconitum\" comes from the Greek word , which may derive from the Greek \"akon\" for dart or javelin, the tips of which were poisoned with the substance, or from \"akonae\", because of the rocky ground on which the plant was thought to grow. The Greek name \"lycoctonum\", which translates literally to \"wolf's bane\", is thought to indicate the use of its juice to poison arrows or baits used to kill wolves. The English name monkshood refers to the cylindrical helmet, called the galea, distinguishing the flower.\nDescription.\nThe dark green leaves of \"Aconitum\" species lack stipules. They are palmate or deeply palmately lobed with five to seven segments. Each segment again is trilobed with coarse sharp teeth. The leaves have a spiral (alternate) arrangement. The lower leaves have long petioles.\nThe tall, erect stem is crowned by racemes of large blue, purple, white, yellow, or pink zygomorphic flowers with numerous stamens. They are distinguishable by having one of the five petaloid sepals (the posterior one), called the galea, in the form of a cylindrical helmet, hence the English name monkshood. Two to 10 petals are present. The two upper petals are large and are placed under the hood of the calyx and are supported on long stalks. They have a hollow spur at their apex, containing the nectar. The other petals are small and scale-like or nonforming. The three to five carpels are partially fused at the base.\nThe fruit is an aggregate of follicles, a follicle being a dry, many-seeded structure.\nUnlike with many species from genera (and their hybrids) in \"Ranunculaceae\" (and the related \"Papaveroideae\" subfamily), there are no double-flowered forms.\nColor range.\nA medium to dark semi-saturated blue-purple is the typical flower color for \"Aconitum\" species. \"Aconitum\" species tend to be variable enough in form and color in the wild to cause debate and confusion among experts when it comes to species classification boundaries. The overall color range of the genus is rather limited, although the palette has been extended a small amount with hybridization. In the wild, some \"Aconitum\" blue-purple shades can be very dark. In cultivation the shades do not reach this level of depth.\nAside from blue-purple\u2014white, very pale greenish-white, creamy white, and pale greenish-yellow are also somewhat common in nature. Wine red (or red-purple) occurs in a hybrid of the climber \"Aconitum hemsleyanum\". There is a pale semi-saturated pink produced by cultivation as well as bicolor hybrids (e.g. white centers with blue-purple edges). Purplish shades range from very dark blue-purple to a very pale lavender that is quite greyish. The latter occurs in the \"Stainless Steel\" hybrid.\nNeutral blue (rather than purplish or greenish), greenish-blue, and intense blues, available in some related \"Delphinium\" plants\u2014particularly \"Delphinium grandiflorum\"\u2014do not occur in this genus. \"Aconitum\" plants that have purplish-blue flowers are often inaccurately referred to as having blue flowers, even though the purple tone dominates. If there are species with true (neutral) blue or greenish-blue flowers they are rare and do not occur in cultivation. Also unlike the genus \"Delphinium\", there are no bright red nor intense pink \"Aconitum\" flowers, as none known are pollinated by hummingbirds. There are no orange-flowered varieties nor any that are green. \"Aconitum\" is typically more intense in color than \"Helleborus\" but less intense than \"Delphinium\". There are no blackish flowers in \"Aconitum\", unlike with \"Helleborus\".\nMonkshood (\"Aconitum napellus\") produces light indigo-blue flowers, while Wolf's Bane (\"Aconitum vulparia\") produces whitish or straw-yellow flowers.\nHorticultural trade morphology.\nThe lack of double-flowered forms in the horticultural trade stands in contrast with the other genera of \"Ranunculaceae\" used regularly in gardens. This includes one major genus that is known solely by most gardeners for a double-flowered form of one species\u2014\"Ranunculus asiaticus\", known colloquially in the trade as \"Ranunculus\". The Ranunculus genus contains approximately 500 species. One other species of Ranunculus has seen minor use in gardens, the 'Flore Pleno' (doubled) form of \"Ranunculus acris\". Doubled forms of \"Consolida\" and \"Delphinium\" dominate the horticultural trade while single forms of \"Anemone\", \"Aquilegia\", \"Clematis\", \"Helleborus\", \"Pulsatilla\"\u2014and the related \"Papaver\"\u2014retain some popularity. No doubled forms of \"Aconitum\" are known.\nEcology.\n\"Aconitum\" species have been recorded as food plant of the caterpillars of several moths. The yellow tiger moth \"Arctia flavia\", and the purple-shaded gem \"Euchalcia variabilis\" are at home on \"A.\u00a0vulparia\". The engrailed \"Ectropis crepuscularia\", yellow-tail \"Euproctis similis\", mouse moth \"Amphipyra tragopoginis\", pease blossom \"Periphanes delphinii\", and \"Mniotype bathensis\", have been observed feeding on \"A.\u00a0napellus\". The purple-lined sallow \"Pyrrhia exprimens\", and \"Blepharita amica\" were found eating from \"A.\u00a0septentrionale\". The dot moth \"Melanchra persicariae\" occurs both on \"A.\u00a0septentrionale\" and \"A.\u00a0intermedium\". The golden plusia \"Polychrysia moneta\" is hosted by \"A.\u00a0vulparia\", \"A.\u00a0napellus\", \"A.\u00a0septentrionale\", and \"A.\u00a0intermedium\". Other moths associated with \"Aconitum\" species include the wormwood pug \"Eupithecia absinthiata\", satyr pug \"E. satyrata\", \"Aterpia charpentierana\", and \"A.\u00a0corticana\". It is also the primary food source for the Old World bumblebees \"Bombus consobrinus\" and \"Bombus gerstaeckeri\".\nAconitum flowers are pollinated by long-tongued bumblebees. Bumblebees have the strength to open the flowers and reach the single nectary at the top of the flower on its inside. Some short-tongued bees will bore holes into the tops of the flowers to steal nectar. However, alkaloids in the nectar function as a deterrent for species unsuited to pollination. The effect is greater in certain species, such as \"Aconitum napellus\", than in others, such as \"Aconitum lycoctonum\". Unlike the species with blue-purple flowers such as \"A.\u00a0napellus\", \"A.\u00a0lycoctonum\"\u2014which has off-white to pale yellow flowers, has been found to be a nectar source for butterflies. This is likely due to the nectary flowers of the latter being more easily reachable by the butterflies; however, the differing alkaloid character of the two plants may also play a significant role or be the primary influence.\nCultivation.\nThe species typically utilized by gardeners fare well in well-drained evenly moist \"humus-rich\" garden soils like many in the related Helleborus and Delphinium genera, and can grow in the partial shade. Species not used in gardens tend to require more exacting conditions (e.g. \"Aconitum noveboracense\"). Most \"Aconitum\" species prefer to have their roots cool and moist, with the majority of the leaves exposed to sun, like the related \"Clematis\". \"Aconitum\" species can be propagated by divisions of the root or by seeds, with care taken to avoid leaving pieces of the root where livestock might be poisoned. All parts of these plants should be handled while wearing protective disposable gloves. \"Aconitum\" plants are typically much longer-lived than the closely related delphinium plants, putting less energy into floral reproduction. As a result, they are not described as being \"heavy feeders\" (needing a higher quantity of fertilizer versus most other flowering plants)\u2014unlike gardeners' delphiniums. As with most in the \"Ranunculaceae\" and \"Papaveraceae\" families, they dislike root disturbance. As with most in Ranunculaceae, seeds that are not planted soon after harvesting should be stored moist-packed in vermiculite to avoid dormancy and viability issues. The German seed company Jelitto offers \"Gold Nugget\" seeds that are advertised as utilizing a coating that enables the seed to germinate immediately, bypassing the double dormancy defect (from a typical gardener's point of view) \"Aconitum\"\u2014and many other species in Ranunculaceae genera\u2014use as a reproductive strategy. By contrast, seeds that are not immediately planted or moist-packed are described as perhaps taking as long as two years to germinate, being prone to very erratic germination (in terms of time required per seed), and comparatively quick seed viability loss (e.g. \"Adonis\"). These issues are typical for many species in Ranunculaceae, such as \"Pulsatilla\" (pasqueflower).\nAward-winning hybrids.\nIn the UK, the following have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit:\nToxicology.\nMonkshood and other members of the genus \"Aconitum\" contain substantial amounts of the highly toxic aconitine and related alkaloids, especially in their roots and tubers. As little as 2\u00a0mg of aconitine or 1 g of plant may cause death from respiratory paralysis or heart failure.\nAconitine is a potent neurotoxin and cardiotoxin that causes persistent depolarization of neuronal sodium channels in tetrodotoxin-sensitive tissues. The influx of sodium through these channels and the delay in their repolarization increases their excitability and may lead to diarrhea, convulsions, ventricular arrhythmia, and death.\nMarked symptoms may appear almost immediately, usually not later than one hour, and \"with large doses death is almost instantaneous\". Death usually occurs within two to six hours in fatal poisoning (20 to 40\u00a0ml of tincture may prove fatal). The initial signs are gastrointestinal, including nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. This is followed by a sensation of burning, tingling, and numbness in the mouth and face, and of burning in the abdomen. In severe poisonings, pronounced motor weakness occurs and cutaneous sensations of tingling and numbness spread to the limbs. Cardiovascular features include hypotension, sinus bradycardia, and ventricular arrhythmias. Other features may include sweating, dizziness, difficulty in breathing, headache, and confusion. The main causes of death are ventricular arrhythmias and asystole, or paralysis of the heart or respiratory center. The only \"post mortem\" signs are those of asphyxia.\nTreatment of poisoning is mainly supportive. All patients require close monitoring of blood pressure and cardiac rhythm. Gastrointestinal decontamination with activated charcoal can be used if given within one hour of ingestion. The major physiological antidote is atropine, which is used to treat bradycardia. Other drugs used for ventricular arrhythmia include lidocaine, amiodarone, bretylium, flecainide, procainamide, and mexiletine. Cardiopulmonary bypass is used if symptoms are refractory to treatment with these drugs. Successful use of charcoal hemoperfusion has been claimed in patients with severe aconitine poisoning.\nMild toxicity (headache, nausea and palpitations) as well as severe toxicity may be experienced from skin contact. Paraesthesia, including tingling and feelings of coldness in the face and extremities, is common in reports of toxicity.\nUses.\nFolk medicine.\nAconite was described in Greek and Roman folk medicine by Theophrastus, Dioscorides, and Pliny the Elder, Folk medicinal use of \"Aconitum\" species is practiced in some parts of Slovenia.\n\"Aconitum chasmanthum\" is listed as critically endangered, \"Aconitum heterophyllum\" as endangered, and \"Aconitum violaceum\" as vulnerable due to overcollection for use as an herbal medicine.\nA producer of Yunnan Baiyao, a traditional Chinese medicine remedy, has disclosed the remedy contains aconite.\nAs a poison.\nThe roots of \"A. ferox\" supply the Nepalese poison called \"bikh\", \"bish\", or \"nabee\". It contains large quantities of the alkaloid pseudaconitine, which is a deadly poison. The root of \"A. luridum\", of the Himalaya, is said to be as poisonous as that of \"A. ferox\" or \"A. napellus\".\nSeveral species of \"Aconitum\" have been used as arrow poisons. The Minaro in Ladakh use \"A. napellus\" on their arrows to hunt ibex, while the Ainu in Japan used a species of \"Aconitum\" to hunt bear as did the Matagi hunters of the same region before their adoption of firearms. The Chinese also used \"Aconitum\" poisons both for hunting and for warfare. \"Aconitum\" poisons were used by the Aleuts of Alaska's Aleutian Islands for hunting whales. Usually, one man in a kayak armed with a poison-tipped lance would hunt the whale, paralyzing it with the poison and causing it to drown. \"Aconitum\" tipped arrows are also described in the Rig Veda.\nIt has, albeit rarely, been hypothesized that Socrates was executed via an extract from an \"Aconitum\" species, such as \"Aconitum napellus\", rather than via hemlock, \"Conium maculatum\". \"Aconitum\" was commonly used by the ancient Greeks as an arrow poison but can be used for other forms of poisoning. It has been hypothesized that Alexander the Great and Ptolemy XIV Philopator were murdered via aconite.\nIn a review of Alisha Rankin's \"The Poison Trials\", Alison Abbott, writing in\"Nature\", reports Rankin's proposal of 1524 as the first human trial with a control arm, indicating the book's description of a 16th century source presenting Pope Clement VII poisoning a pair of prisoners with aconite-laced marzipan, testing an antidote on one that survived, leaving the untreated prisoner to suffer a painful death.\nIn April 2021, the president of Kyrgyzstan, Sadyr Japarov, promoted aconite root as a treatment for COVID-19. Subsequently, at least four people were admitted to hospital suffering from poisoning. Facebook had previously removed the President's posts advocating use of the substance, saying \"We've removed this post as we do not allow anyone, including elected officials, to share misinformation that could lead to imminent physical harm or spread false claims about how to cure or prevent COVID-19\".\nTaxonomy.\nGenetic analysis suggests that \"Aconitum\" as it was delineated before the 21st century is nested within \"Delphinium\" \"sensu lato\", that also includes \"Aconitella\", \"Consolida\", \"Delphinium staphisagria\", \"D.\u00a0requini\", and \"D.\u00a0pictum\". Further genetic analysis has shown that the only species of the subgenus \"\"Aconitum (Gymnaconitum)\"\", \"\"A.\u00a0gymnandrum\"\", is sister to the group that consists of \"Delphinium (Delphinium)\", \"Delphinium (Delphinastrum)\", and \"\"Consolida\"\" plus \"\"Aconitella\"\". To make \"Aconitum\" monophyletic, \"\"A.\u00a0gymnandrum\"\" has now been reassigned to a new genus, \"Gymnaconitum\". To make \"Delphinium\" monophyletic, the new genus \"Staphisagria\" was erected containing \"S.\u00a0staphisagria\", \"S.\u00a0requini\", and \"S.\u00a0pictum\".\nSelected species.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPhylogeny.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn literature and popular culture.\nAconite and wolfsbane have been understood to be poisonous from ancient times, and are frequently represented as such in literature. In Greek mythology, the goddess Hecate is said to have invented aconite, which Athena used to transform Arachne into a spider. Medea is also said to have attempted to poison Theseus with a cup of wine poisoned with wolf's bane.\nIn the poem \"Metamorphoses\", Ovid tells of the herb coming from the slavering mouth of Cerberus, the three-headed dog that guarded the gates of Hades. In his Natural History, Pliny the Elder supports the legend that aconite came from the saliva of the dog Cerberus when Hercules dragged him from the underworld. As the veterinary historian John Blaisdell has noted, symptoms of aconite poisoning in humans bear similarity to those of rabies: frothy saliva, impaired vision, vertigo, and finally, coma; thus, ancient Greeks could have believed that this poison, mythically born of Cerberus's lips, was literally the same as found inside the mouth of a rabid dog.\nIn popular culture.\nEarly examples.\nAs a well-known poison from ancient times, aconite (including as wolfsbane, in its various spellings) often found place in historical fiction. In \"I, Claudius\", Livia, wife of Augustus, was portrayed discussing the merits, antidotes, and use of aconite with a poisoner. It is the poison used by a murderer in the third of the Cadfael Chronicles, \"Monk's Hood\" by Ellis Peters, published in 1980 and set in 1138 in Shrewsbury, England. \nThe ky\u014dgen (traditional Japanese comedy) play , which is well-known and frequently taught in Japan, is centered on dried aconite root used for traditional Chinese medicine. Taken from Shasekishu, a 13th-century anthology collected by Muj\u016b, the story describes servants who decide that the dried aconite root is really sugar, and suffer unpleasant though nonlethal symptoms after eating it.\nIn the 16th century, Shakespeare, writing in \"Henry IV Part II\" Act 4 Scene 4, refers to aconite, alongside rash gunpowder, working as strongly as the \"venom of suggestion\" to break up close relationships.\n20th century and later.\nAn overdose of aconite was the method by which Rudolph Bloom, father of Leopold Bloom in James Joyce's \"Ulysses\", died by suicide.\nIn the 1931 classic horror film \"Dracula\" starring Bela Lugosi as Count Dracula and Helen Chandler as Mina Seward, reference is made to wolf's bane (\"aconitum\"); towards the end of the film, \"Van Helsing holds up a sprig of wolf's bane\". Van Helsing educates the nurse protecting Mina from Count Dracula to place sprigs of wolf's bane around Mina's neck for protection, instructing that wolf's bane, a plant that grows in Central Europe, is used by those dwelling there to protect themselves against vampires.\nIn the 1941 film \"The Wolf Man\" starring Lon Chaney Jr. and Claude Rains, the following poem is recited several times:Even a man who is pure in heart and says his prayers by night, may become a wolf when the wolf-bane blooms and the autumn moon is bright. In the 1943 French novel \"Our Lady of the Flowers\", the boy Culafroy eats \"Napel aconite\", so that the \"Renaissance would take possession of the child through the mouth.\"\nAconite and wolfsbane have also appeared in a references in modern settings. In the early 1980s, famed Spanish horror film star Paul Naschy named his production company \"Aconito Films\", an in-joke relating to the large number of werewolf movies he produced. In the 2003 Korean television series \"Dae Jang Geum\", set in the 15th and 16th centuries, Choi put \"wolf's bane\" in the previous queen's food. \nIn the 1980 novel \"Monk's-Hood\", third in Ellis Peters' series \"The Cadfael Chronicles\" and set in 1138, a wealthy donator to Shrewsbury Abbey, Gervase Bonel, is murdered with stolen Monks-hood liniment prepared by the Abbey's herbalist Brother Cadfael, who needs to identify the true culprit to exonerate Bonel's stepson Edwin.\nIn the \"Harry Potter\" series by J.K. Rowling, describing aconitum is one of three questions that Professor Snape asks Harry Potter during his first Potions class in the first novel. Snape's preparations of the drug as a treatment for lycanthropy are also an important plot point in the third novel.\nIn the TV series \"Dexter\", serial killer Hannah McKay (a love interest of protagonist Dexter Morgan) has a history of using aconite to murder her victims.\nThis family of poisons makes a showing in S. M. Stirling's 2000 science fiction novel, \"On the Oceans of Eternity\", where a renegade warlord is poisoned with aconite-laced food by his own chief of internal security. In the 2000s television show \"Merlin\", the titular character attempts to poison Arthur with aconite while under a spell.\nIn the 2010s TV series \"Forever\", Dr. Henry Morgan identifies the plants in the villain's greenhouse as specifically \"Aconitum variegatum\", which he has used to create a poison to release into the ventilation system of Grand Central Terminal. In the television series \"Game of Thrones\" (2011-2019), a Tywin Lannister's commander is assassinated by a dart, identified by Tywin as \"Wolf's Bane\" due to its scent. In the second season of the BBC drama \"Shakespeare and Hatherway\", episode 9, a tennis player is poisoned through the skin of his palm by aconite smeared on the handle of his racquet.\nIn the third season of \"You,\" Love Quinn murders her first husband, James, after injecting him with Aconite after James asked for a divorce. Love admits to Joe (the protagonist) that she killed James \"accidentally\" and then tells Joe she poisoned him with Aconite through skin contact after he grabbed a knife to protect himself after he asks Love for a divorce. When Love approaches Joe (who is believed to be dying from Aconite and is \"paralyzed\"), he stabs her with a needle with his own mixture he created from Love's Aconite substance. Joe tells Love, while she is paralyzed, that he knew what was growing in their backyard and tells her, \"You did this to yourself.\" \nIn the 2024 Netflix thriller \"Carry-On\", the Traveller (played by Jason Bateman) murders some of his targets by poisoning them with aconitum.\nIn mysticism.\nWolf's bane is used as an analogy for the power of divine communion in \"Liber 65\" 1:13\u201316, one of Aleister Crowley's \"Holy Books of Thelema\". Wolf's bane is mentioned in one verse of Lady Gwen Thompson's 1974 poem \"Rede of the Wiccae\", a long version of the Wiccan Rede: \"Widdershins go when Moon doth wane, And the werewolves howl by the dread wolfsbane.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59990", "revid": "35576730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59990", "title": "Aconitine", "text": "Toxic plant alkaloid\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nAconitine is an alkaloid toxin produced by various plant species belonging to the genus \"Aconitum\" (family Ranunculaceae), commonly known by the names wolfsbane and monkshood. Aconitine is notorious for its toxic properties.\nStructure and reactivity.\nBiologically active isolates from \"Aconitum\" and \"Delphinium\" plants are classified as norditerpenoid alkaloids, which are further subdivided based on the presence or absence of the C18 carbon. Aconitine is a C19-norditerpenoid, based on its presence of this C18 carbon. It is barely soluble in water, but very soluble in organic solvents such as chloroform or diethyl ether. Aconitine is also soluble in mixtures of alcohol and water if the concentration of alcohol is high enough.\nLike many other alkaloids, the basic nitrogen atom in one of the six-membered ring structure of aconitine can easily form salts and ions, giving it affinity for both polar and lipophilic structures (such as cell membranes and receptors) and making it possible for the molecule to pass the blood\u2013brain barrier. The acetoxyl group at the c8 position can readily be replaced by a methoxy group, by heating aconitine in methanol, to produce 8-deacetyl-8-\"O\"-methyl derivatives. If aconitine is heated in its dry state, it undergoes pyrolysis to form pyroaconitine ((1\u03b1,3\u03b1,6\u03b1,14\u03b1,16\u03b2)-20-ethyl-3,13-dihydroxy-1,6,16-trimethoxy-4-(methoxymethyl)-15-oxoaconitan-14-yl benzoate) with the chemical formula C32H43NO9.\nMechanism of action.\nAconitine can interact with the voltage-dependent sodium-ion channels, which are proteins in the cell membranes of excitable tissues, such as cardiac and skeletal muscles and neurons. These proteins are highly selective for sodium ions. They open to quickly depolarize the cell membrane, causing the upstroke of an action potential. Normally, the sodium channels close again very rapidly, but the action potential causes the opening of potassium channels and potassium efflux, which results in repolarization of the membrane.\nAconitine binds to the channel at the neurotoxin binding site\u00a02 on the alpha subunit (the same site bound by batrachotoxin, veratridine, and grayanotoxin). This binding results in a sodium-ion channel that stays open longer. Aconitine suppresses the conformational change in the sodium-ion channel from the active state to the inactive state. The membrane stays depolarized due to the constant sodium influx (which is 10\u20131000-fold greater than the potassium efflux). As a result, the membrane cannot be repolarized. The binding of aconitine to the channel also leads to the channel to change conformation from the inactive state to the active state at a more negative voltage. In neurons, aconitine increases the permeability of the membrane for sodium ions, resulting in a huge sodium influx in the axon terminal. As a result, the membrane depolarizes rapidly. Due to the strong depolarization, the permeability of the membrane for potassium ions increases rapidly, resulting in a potassium reflux to release the positive charge out of the cell. Not only the permeability for potassium ions but also the permeability for calcium ions increases as a result of the depolarization of the membrane. A calcium influx takes place. The increase of the calcium concentration in the cell stimulates the release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine into the synaptic cleft. Acetylcholine binds to acetylcholine receptors at the postsynaptic membrane to open the sodium-channels there, generating a new action potential.\nResearch with mouse nerve-hemidiaphragm muscle preparation indicate that at low concentrations (&lt;0.1\u00a0\u03bcM) aconitine increases the electrically evoked acetylcholine release causing an induced muscle tension. Action potentials are generated more often at this concentration. At higher concentration (0.3\u20133\u00a0\u03bcM) aconitine decreases the electrically evoked acetylcholine release, resulting in a decrease in muscle tension. At high concentration (0.3\u20133\u00a0\u03bcM), the sodium-ion channels are constantly activated, transmission of action potentials is suppressed, leading to non-excitable target cells or paralysis.\nBiosynthesis and total synthesis of related alkaloids.\nAconitine is biosynthesized by the monkshood plant via the terpenoid biosynthesis pathway (MEP chloroplast pathway). Approximately 700 naturally occurring C19-diterpenoid alkaloids have been isolated and identified, but the biosynthesis of only a few of these alkaloids are well understood.\nLikewise, only a few alkaloids of the aconitine family have been synthesized in the laboratory. In particular, despite over one hundred years having elapsed since its isolation, the prototypical member of its family of norditerpenoid alkaloids, aconitine itself, represents a rare example of a well-known natural product that has yet to succumb to efforts towards its total synthesis. The challenge that aconitine poses to synthetic organic chemists is due to both the intricate interlocking hexacyclic ring system that makes up its core and the elaborate collection of oxygenated functional groups at its periphery. A handful of simpler members of the aconitine alkaloids, however, have been prepared synthetically. In 1971, the Weisner group discovered the total synthesis of talatisamine (a C19-norditerpenoid). In the subsequent years, they also discovered the total syntheses of other C19-norditerpenoids, such as chasmanine, and 13-deoxydelphonine.\nThe total synthesis of napelline (Scheme a) begins with aldehyde 100. In a 7 step process, the A-ring of napelline is formed (104). It takes another 10 steps to form the lactone ring in the pentacyclic structure of napelline (106). An additional 9 steps creates the enone-aldehyde 107. Heating in methanol with potassium hydroxide causes an aldol condensation to close the sixth and final ring in napelline (14). Oxidation then gives rise to diketone 108 which was converted to (\u00b1)-napelline (14) in 10 steps.\nA similar process is demonstrated in Wiesner's synthesis of 13-desoxydelphinone (Scheme c). The first step of this synthesis is the generation of a conjugated dienone 112 from 111 in 4 steps. This is followed by the addition of a benzyl vinyl ether to produce 113. In 11 steps, this compound is converted to ketal 114. The addition of heat, DMSO and o-xylene rearranges this ketol (115), and after 5 more steps (\u00b1)-13-desoxydelphinone (15) is formed.\nLastly, talatisamine (Scheme d) is synthesized from diene 116 and nitrile 117. The first step is to form tricycle 118 in 16 steps. After another 6 steps, this compound is converted to enone 120. Subsequently, this allene is added to produce photoadduct 121. This adduct group is cleaved and rearrangement gives rise to the compound 122. In 7 steps, this compound forms 123, which is then rearranged, in a similar manner to compound 114, to form the aconitine-like skeleton in 124. A racemic relay synthesis is completed to produce talatisamine (13).\nMore recently, the laboratory of the late David Y. Gin completed the total syntheses of the aconitine alkaloids nominine and neofinaconitine.\nMetabolism.\nAconitine is metabolized by cytochrome P450 isozymes (CYPs). There has been research in 2011 in China to investigate in-depth the CYPs involved in aconitine metabolism in human liver microsomes. It has been estimated that more than 90 percent of currently available human drug metabolism can be attributed to eight main enzymes (CYP 1A2, 2C9, 2C8, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, 3A4, 3A5). The researchers used recombinants of these eight different CYPs and incubated it with aconitine. To initiate the metabolism pathway the presence of NADPH was needed. Six CYP-mediated metabolites (M1\u2013M6) were found by liquid chromatography, these six metabolites were characterized by mass-spectrometry. The six metabolites and the involved enzymes are summarized in the following table:\nSelective inhibitors were used to determine the involved CYPs in the aconitine metabolism. The results indicate that aconitine was mainly metabolized by CYP3A4, 3A5 and 2D6. CYP2C8 and 2C9 had a minor role to the aconitine metabolism, whereas CYP1A2, 2E1 and 2C19 did not produce any aconitine metabolites at all. The proposed metabolic pathways of aconitine in human liver microsomes and the CYPs involved to it are summarized in the table above.\nUses.\nAconitine was previously used as an antipyretic and analgesic and still has some limited application in herbal medicine, although the narrow therapeutic index makes calculating appropriate dosage difficult. Aconitine is also present in Yunnan Baiyao, a proprietary traditional Chinese medicine.\nToxicity.\nConsuming as little as 2 milligrams of pure aconitine or 1 gram of the plant itself may cause death by paralyzing respiratory or heart functions. Toxicity may occur through the skin; even touching the flowers can numb finger tips.\nThe toxic effects of aconitine have been tested in a variety of animals, including mammals (dog, cat, guinea pig, mouse, rat and rabbit), frogs and pigeons. Depending on the route of exposure, the observed toxic effects were local anesthetic effect, diarrhea, convulsions, arrhythmias or death. According to a review of different reports of aconite poisoning in humans, the following clinical features were observed:\nProgression of symptoms: the first symptoms of aconitine poisoning appear approximately 20 minutes to 2 hours after oral intake and include paresthesia, sweating and nausea. This leads to severe vomiting, colicky diarrhea, intense pain and then paralysis of the skeletal muscles. Following the onset of life-threatening arrhythmia, including ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation, death finally occurs as a result of respiratory paralysis or cardiac arrest.\nDiagnosis and treatment.\nFor the analysis of the \"Aconitum\" alkaloids in biological specimens such as blood, serum and urine, several GC-MS methods have been described. These employ a variety of extraction procedures followed by derivatisation to their trimethylsilyl derivatives. New sensitive HPLC-MS methods have been developed as well, usually preceded by SPE purification of the sample. The antiarrhythmic drug lidocaine has been reported to be an effective treatment of aconitine poisoning of a patient. Considering the fact that aconitine acts as an agonist of the sodium channel receptor, antiarrhythmic agents which block the sodium channel (Vaughan-Williams' classification I) might be the first choice for the therapy of aconitine induced arrhythmias. Animal experiments have shown that the mortality of aconitine is lowered by tetrodotoxin. The toxic effects of aconitine were attenuated by tetrodotoxin, probably due to their mutual antagonistic effect on excitable membranes. Also paeoniflorin seems to have a detoxifying effect on the acute toxicity of aconitine in test animals. This may result from alternations of pharmacokinetic behavior of aconitine in the animals due to the pharmacokinetic interaction between aconitine and paeoniflorin. In addition, in emergencies, one can wash the stomach using either tannic acid or powdered charcoal. Heart stimulants such as strong coffee or caffeine may also help until professional help is available.\nFamous poisonings.\nDuring the Indian Rebellion of 1857, a British detachment was the target of attempted poisoning with aconitine by the Indian regimental cooks. The plot was thwarted by John Nicholson who, having detected the plot, interrupted the British officers just as they were about to consume the poisoned meal. The chefs refused to taste their own preparation, whereupon it was force-fed to a monkey who \"expired on the spot\". The cooks were hanged.\nAconitine was the poison used by George Henry Lamson in 1881 to murder his brother-in-law in order to secure an inheritance. Lamson had learned about aconitine as a medical student from professor Robert Christison, who had taught that it was undetectable\u2014but forensic science had improved since Lamson's student days.\nRufus T. Bush, American industrialist and yachtsman, died on September 15, 1890, after accidentally taking a fatal dose of aconite.\nIn 1953 aconitine was used by a Soviet biochemist and poison developer, Grigory Mairanovsky, in experiments with prisoners in the secret NKVD laboratory in Moscow. He admitted killing around 10 people using the poison.\nIn 2004 Canadian actor Andre Noble died from aconitine poisoning. He accidentally ate some monkshood while he was on a hike with his aunt in Newfoundland.\nIn 2009 Lakhvir Singh of Feltham, west London, used aconitine to poison the food of her ex-lover Lakhvinder Cheema (who died as a result of the poisoning) and his current fianc\u00e9e Gurjeet Choongh. Singh received a life sentence with a 23-year minimum for the murder on February 10, 2010.\nIn 2022, twelve diners at a restaurant in York Region became acutely ill following a meal. All twelve became seriously ill and four of them were admitted to the intensive care unit after the suspected poisoning.\nIn popular culture.\nAconitine was a favorite poison in the ancient world. The poet Ovid, referring to the proverbial dislike of stepmothers for their step-children, writes:\n&lt;poem&gt;\"Lurida terribiles miscent aconita novercae\".\nFearsome stepmothers mix lurid aconites.&lt;/poem&gt; \nAconitine was also made famous by its use in Oscar Wilde's 1891 story \"Lord Arthur Savile's Crime\". Aconite also plays a prominent role in James Joyce's \"Ulysses\", in which the father to protagonist Leopold Bloom used pastilles of the chemical to commit suicide. Aconitine poisoning plays a key role in the murder mystery \"Breakdown\" by Jonathan Kellerman (2016). In \"Twin Peaks\" season 3 part 13, aconitine is suggested as a means to poison the main character.\n\"Monk's Hood\" is the name of the third Cadfael novel written in 1980 by Ellis Peters. The novel was made into an episode of the television series \"Cadfael\" starring Derek Jacobi.\nIn the third season of the Netflix series \"You\", two of the main characters poison each other with aconitine. One survives (due to a lower dose and an antidote), and the other is killed. \nHannah McKay (Yvonne Strahovski), a serial killer in the Showtime series \"Dexter\" uses aconite on at least three occasions to poison her victims.\nIn season 2 episode 16 of the series \"Person Of Interest\", aconitine is shown in a syringe stuck to the character Shaw (Sarah Shahi) nearly being injected and causing her death, until she is rescued by Reese (Jim Caviezel).\nIn a 2017 episode of \"The Doctor Blake Mysteries\", fight manager Gus Jansons (Steve Adams) murdered his boxer, Mickey Ellis (Trey Coward), during a match by applying aconitine he had put in petroleum jelly and applying it to a cut over the boxer\u2019s eye. He feared being blackmailed over a murder he helped cover up. He had made the poison from wolfsbane he had seen in a local garden. \nAconitine poisoning is used by Villanelle to kill the Ukrainian gangster, Rinat Yevtukh in \"Killing Eve: No Tomorrow\" by Luke Jennings (2018).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59991", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59991", "title": "Wolfsbane", "text": "Wolfsbane may refer to:\nArts and entertainment.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59992", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59992", "title": "Monkshood", "text": ""}
