{"id": "75485", "revid": "49789637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75485", "title": "Electrical discharge machining", "text": "Metal fabrication process\nElectrical discharge machining (EDM), also known as spark machining, spark eroding, die sinking, wire burning or wire erosion, is a metal\nfabrication process whereby a desired shape is obtained by using electrical discharges (sparks). Material is removed from the work piece by a series of rapidly recurring current discharges between two electrodes, separated by a dielectric liquid and subject to an electric voltage. One of the electrodes is called the tool-electrode, or simply the tool or electrode, while the other is called the workpiece-electrode, or work piece. The process depends upon the tool and work piece not making physical contact. Extremely hard materials like carbides, ceramics, titanium alloys and heat treated tool steels that are very difficult to machine using conventional machining can be precisely machined by EDM.\nWhen the voltage between the two electrodes is increased, the intensity of the electric field in the volume between the electrodes becomes greater, causing dielectric break down of the liquid, and produces an electric arc. As a result, material is removed from the electrodes. Once the current stops (or is stopped, depending on the type of generator), new liquid dielectric is conveyed into the inter-electrode volume, enabling the solid particles (debris) to be carried away and the insulating properties of the dielectric to be restored. Adding new liquid dielectric in the inter-electrode volume is commonly referred to as flushing. After a current flow, the voltage between the electrodes is restored to what it was before the breakdown, so that a new liquid dielectric breakdown can occur to repeat the cycle.\nHistory.\nThe erosive effect of electrical discharges was first noted in 1770 by English physicist Joseph Priestley.\nDie-sink EDM.\nTwo Soviet scientists, B. R. Lazarenko and N. I. Lazarenko, were tasked in 1943 to investigate ways of preventing the erosion of tungsten electrical contacts due to sparking. They failed in this task but found that the erosion was more precisely controlled if the electrodes were immersed in a dielectric fluid. This led them to invent an EDM machine used for working difficult-to-machine materials such as tungsten. The Lazarenkos' machine is known as an R-C-type machine, after the resistor\u2013capacitor circuit (RC circuit) used to charge the electrodes.\nSimultaneously, but independently, an American team, Harold Stark, Victor Harding, and Jack Beaver, developed an EDM machine for removing broken drills and taps from aluminium castings. Initially constructing their machines from under-powered electric-etching tools, they were not very successful. But more powerful sparking units, combined with automatic spark repetition and fluid replacement with an electromagnetic interrupter arrangement produced practical machines. Stark, Harding, and Beaver's machines produced 60 sparks per second. Later machines based on their design used vacuum tube circuits that produced thousands of sparks per second, significantly increasing the speed of cutting.\nWire-cut EDM.\nThe wire-cut type of machine arose in the 1960s for making tools (dies) from hardened steel. The tool electrode in wire EDM is simply a wire. To avoid the erosion of the wire causing it to break, the wire is wound between two spools so that the active part of the wire is constantly changing. The earliest numerical controlled (NC) machines were conversions of punched-tape vertical milling machines. The first commercially available NC machine built as a wire-cut EDM machine was manufactured in the USSR in 1967. Machines that could optically follow lines on a master drawing were developed by David H. Dulebohn's group in the 1960s at Andrew Engineering Company for milling and grinding machines. Master drawings were later produced by computer numerical controlled (CNC) plotters for greater accuracy. A wire-cut EDM machine using the CNC drawing plotter and optical line follower techniques was produced in 1974. Dulebohn later used the same plotter CNC program to directly control the EDM machine, and the first CNC EDM machine was produced in 1976.\nCommercial wire EDM capability and use has advanced substantially during recent decades. Feed rates have increased and surface finish can be finely controlled.\nGeneralities.\nElectrical discharge machining is a machining method primarily used for hard metals or those that would be very difficult to machine with traditional techniques. EDM typically works with materials that are electrically conductive, although methods have also been proposed for using EDM to machine insulating ceramics. EDM can cut intricate contours or cavities in pre-hardened steel without the need for heat treatment to soften and re-harden them. This method can be used with any other metal or metal alloy such as titanium, Hastelloy, kovar, and inconel. Also, applications of this process to shape polycrystalline diamond tools have been reported.\nEDM is often included in the \"non-traditional\" or \"non-conventional\" group of machining methods together with processes such as electrochemical machining (ECM), water jet cutting (WJ, AWJ), laser cutting, and opposite to the \"conventional\" group (turning, milling, grinding, drilling, and any other process whose material removal mechanism is essentially based on mechanical forces).\nIdeally, EDM can be seen as a series of breakdown and restoration of the liquid dielectric in-between the electrodes. However, caution should be exerted in considering such a statement because it is an idealized model of the process, introduced to describe the fundamental ideas underlying the process. Yet, any practical application involves many aspects that may also need to be considered. For instance, the removal of the debris from the inter-electrode volume is likely to be always partial. Thus the electrical properties of the dielectric in the inter-electrodes volume can be different from their nominal values and can even vary with time. The inter-electrode distance, often also referred to as spark-gap, is the result of the control algorithms of the specific machine used. The control of such a distance appears logically to be central to this process. Also, not all of the current between the dielectric is of the ideal type described above: the spark-gap can be short-circuited by the debris. The control system of the electrode may fail to react quickly enough to prevent the two electrodes (tool and workpiece) from coming into contact, with a consequent short circuit. This is unwanted because a short circuit contributes to material removal differently from the ideal case. The flushing action can be inadequate to restore the insulating properties of the dielectric so that the current always happens in the point of the inter-electrode volume (this is referred to as arcing), with a consequent unwanted change of shape (damage) of the tool-electrode and workpiece. Ultimately, a description of this process in a suitable way for the specific purpose at hand is what makes the EDM area such a rich field for further investigation and research.\nTo obtain a specific geometry, the EDM tool is guided along the desired path very close to the work; ideally it should not touch the workpiece, although in reality this may happen due to the performance of the specific motion control in use. In this way, a large number of current discharges (colloquially also called sparks) happen, each contributing to the removal of material from both tool and workpiece, where small craters are formed. The size of the craters is a function of the technological parameters set for the specific job at hand. They can be with typical dimensions ranging from the nanoscale (in micro-EDM operations) to some hundreds of micrometers in roughing conditions.\nThe presence of these small craters on the tool results in the gradual erosion of the electrode. This erosion of the tool-electrode is also referred to as wear. Strategies are needed to counteract the detrimental effect of the wear on the geometry of the workpiece. One possibility is that of continuously replacing the tool-electrode during a machining operation. This is what happens if a continuously replaced wire is used as electrode. In this case, the correspondent EDM process is also called wire EDM. The tool-electrode can also be used in such a way that only a small portion of it is actually engaged in the machining process and this portion is changed on a regular basis. This is, for instance, the case when using a rotating disk as a tool-electrode. The corresponding process is often also referred to as EDM grinding.\nA further strategy consists in using a set of electrodes with different sizes and shapes during the same EDM operation. This is often referred to as multiple electrode strategy, and is most common when the tool electrode replicates in negative the wanted shape and is advanced towards the blank along a single direction, usually the vertical direction (i.e. z-axis). This resembles the sink of the tool into the dielectric liquid in which the workpiece is immersed, so it is often referred to as die-sinking EDM (also called conventional EDM and ram EDM). The corresponding machines are often called sinker EDM. Usually, the electrodes of this type have quite complex forms. If the final geometry is obtained using a usually simple-shaped electrode which is moved along several directions and is possibly also subject to rotations, often the term EDM milling is used.\nIn any case, the severity of the wear is strictly dependent on the technological parameters used in the operation (for instance: polarity, maximum current, open circuit voltage). For example, in micro-EDM, also known as \u03bc-EDM, these parameters are usually set at values which generates severe wear. Therefore, wear is a major problem in that area.\nThe problem of wear to graphite electrodes is being addressed. In one approach, a digital generator, controllable within milliseconds, reverses polarity as electro-erosion takes place. That produces an effect similar to electroplating that continuously deposits the eroded graphite back on the electrode. In another method, a so-called \"Zero Wear\" circuit reduces how often the discharge starts and stops, keeping it on for as long a time as possible.\nDefinition of the technological parameters.\nDifficulties have been encountered in the definition of the technological parameters that drive the process.\nTwo broad categories of generators, also known as power supplies, are in use on EDM machines commercially available: the group based on RC circuits and the group based on transistor-controlled pulses.\nIn both categories, the primary parameters at setup are the current and frequency delivered. In RC circuits, however, little control is expected over the time duration of the discharge, which is likely to depend on the actual spark-gap conditions (size and pollution) at the moment of the discharge. Also, the open circuit voltage (i.e. the voltage between the electrodes when the dielectric is not yet broken) can be identified as steady state voltage of the RC circuit.\nIn generators based on transistor control, the user is usually able to deliver a train of pulses of voltage to the electrodes. Each pulse can be controlled in shape, for instance, quasi-rectangular. In particular, the time between two consecutive pulses and the duration of each pulse can be set. The amplitude of each pulse constitutes the open circuit voltage. Thus, the maximum duration of discharge is equal to the duration of a pulse of voltage in the train. Two pulses of current are then expected not to occur for a duration equal or larger than the time interval between two consecutive pulses of voltage.\nThe maximum current during a discharge that the generator delivers can also be controlled. Because other sorts of generators may also be used by different machine builders, the parameters that may actually be set on a particular machine will depend on the generator manufacturer. The details of the generators and control systems on their machines are not always easily available to their user. This is a barrier to describing unequivocally the technological parameters of the EDM process. Moreover, the parameters affecting the phenomena occurring between tool and electrode are also related to the controller of the motion of the electrodes.\nA framework to define and measure the electrical parameters during an EDM operation directly on inter-electrode volume with an oscilloscope external to the machine has been recently proposed by Ferri \"et al.\" These authors conducted their research in the field of \u03bc-EDM, but the same approach can be used in any EDM operation. This would enable the user to estimate directly the electrical parameters that affect their operations without relying upon machine manufacturer's claims. When machining different materials in the same setup conditions, the actual electrical parameters of the process are significantly different.\nMaterial removal mechanism.\nThe first serious attempt at providing a physical explanation of the material removal during electric discharge machining is perhaps that of Van Dijck. Van Dijck presented a thermal model together with a computational simulation to explain the phenomena between the electrodes during electric discharge machining. However, as Van Dijck himself admitted in his study, the number of assumptions made to overcome the lack of experimental data at that time was quite significant.\nFurther models of what occurs during electric discharge machining in terms of heat transfer were developed in the late eighties and early nineties. It resulted in three scholarly papers: the first presenting a thermal model of material removal on the cathode, the second presenting a thermal model for the erosion occurring on the anode and the third introducing a model describing the plasma channel formed during the passage of the discharge current through the dielectric liquid. Validation of these models is supported by experimental data provided by AGIE.\nThese models give the most authoritative support for the claim that EDM is a thermal process, removing material from the two electrodes because of melting or vaporization, along with pressure dynamics established in the spark-gap by the collapsing of the plasma channel. However, for small discharge energies the models are inadequate to explain the experimental data. All these models hinge on a number of assumptions from such disparate research areas as submarine explosions, discharges in gases, and failure of transformers, so it is not surprising that alternative models have been proposed more recently in the literature trying to explain the EDM process.\nAmong these, the model from Singh and Ghosh reconnects the removal of material from the electrode to the presence of an electrical force on the surface of the electrode that could mechanically remove material and create the craters. This would be possible because the material on the surface has altered mechanical properties due to an increased temperature caused by the passage of electric current. The authors' simulations showed how they might explain EDM better than a thermal model (melting or evaporation), especially for small discharge energies, which are typically used in \u03bc-EDM and in finishing operations.\nGiven the many available models, it appears that the material removal mechanism in EDM is not yet well understood and that further investigation is necessary to clarify it, especially considering the lack of experimental scientific evidence to build and validate the current EDM models. This explains an increased current research effort in related experimental techniques.\nTypes.\nSinker EDM.\nSinker EDM, also called ram EDM, cavity type EDM or volume EDM, consists of an electrode and workpiece submerged in an insulating liquid such as, more typically, oil or, less frequently, other dielectric fluids. The electrode and workpiece are connected to a suitable power supply. The power supply generates an electrical potential between the two parts. As the electrode approaches the workpiece, dielectric breakdown occurs in the fluid, forming a plasma channel, and a small spark jumps.\nThese sparks usually strike one at a time, because it is very unlikely that different locations in the inter-electrode space have the identical local electrical characteristics which would enable a spark to occur simultaneously in all such locations. These sparks happen in huge numbers at seemingly random locations between the electrode and the workpiece. As the base metal is eroded, and the spark gap subsequently increased, the electrode is lowered automatically by the machine so that the process can continue uninterrupted. Several hundred thousand sparks occur per second, with the actual duty cycle carefully controlled by the setup parameters. These controlling cycles are sometimes known as \"on time\" and \"off time\", which are more formally defined in the literature.\nThe on time setting determines the length or duration of the spark. Hence, a longer on time produces a deeper cavity from each spark, creating a rougher finish on the workpiece. The reverse is true for a shorter on time. Off time is the period of time between sparks. Although not directly affecting the machining of the part, the off time allows the flushing of dielectric fluid through a nozzle to clean out the eroded debris. Insufficient debris removal can cause repeated strikes in the same location which can lead to a short circuit. Modern controllers monitor the characteristics of the arcs and can alter parameters in microseconds to compensate. The typical part geometry is a complex 3D shape, often with small or odd shaped angles. Vertical, orbital, vectorial, directional, helical, conical, rotational, spin, and indexing machining cycles are also used.\nWire EDM.\nIn \"wire electrical discharge machining\" (WEDM), also known as \"wire-cut EDM\" and \"wire cutting\", a thin single-strand metal wire, usually brass, is fed through the workpiece, submerged in a tank of dielectric fluid, typically deionized water. Wire-cut EDM is typically used to cut plates as thick as and to make punches, tools, and dies from hard metals that are difficult to machine with other methods.\nThe wire, which is constantly fed from a spool, is held between upper and lower diamond guides which is centered in a water nozzle head. The guides, usually CNC-controlled, move in the \"x\"\u2013\"y\" plane. On most machines, the upper guide can also move independently in the \"z\"\u2013\"u\"\u2013\"v\" axis, giving rise to the ability to cut tapered and transitioning shapes (circle on the bottom, square at the top for example). The upper guide can control axis movements in the GCode standard, \"x\"\u2013\"y\"\u2013\"u\"\u2013\"v\"\u2013\"i\"\u2013\"j\"\u2013\"k\"\u2013\"l\"\u2013. This allows the wire-cut EDM to be programmed to cut very intricate and delicate shapes.\nThe upper and lower diamond guides are usually accurate to , and can have a cutting path or \"kerf\" as small as using \u00d8 wire, though the average cutting kerf that achieves the best economic cost and machining time is using \u00d8 brass wire. The reason that the cutting width is greater than the width of the wire is because sparking occurs from the sides of the wire to the work piece, causing erosion. This \"overcut\" is necessary, for many applications it is adequately predictable and therefore can be compensated for (for instance in micro-EDM this is not often the case). Spools of wire are long \u2014 an spool of wire is just over in length. Wire diameter can be as small as and the geometry precision is not far from \u00b1 .\nThe wire-cut process uses water as its dielectric fluid, controlling its resistivity and other electrical properties with filters and PID controlled de-ionizer units. The water flushes the cut debris away from the cutting zone. Flushing is an important factor in determining the maximum feed rate for a given material thickness.\nAlong with tighter tolerances, multi axis EDM wire-cutting machining centers have added features such as multi heads for cutting two parts at the same time, controls for preventing wire breakage, automatic self-threading features in case of wire breakage, and programmable machining strategies to optimize the operation.\nWire-cutting EDM is commonly used when low residual stresses are desired, because it does not require high cutting forces for removal of material. If the energy per pulse is relatively low (as in finishing operations), little change in the mechanical properties of a material is expected due to these low residual stresses, although material that hasn't been stress-relieved can distort in the machining process.\nThe work piece may undergo a significant thermal cycle, its severity depending on the technological parameters used. Such thermal cycles may cause formation of a recast layer on the part and residual tensile stresses on the work piece. If machining takes place after heat treatment, dimensional accuracy will not be affected by heat treat distortion.\nFast hole drilling EDM.\nFast hole drilling EDM was designed for producing fast, accurate, small, deep holes. It is conceptually akin to sinker EDM but the electrode is a rotating tube conveying a pressurized jet of dielectric fluid. It can make a hole an inch deep in about a minute and is a good way to machine holes in materials too hard for twist-drill machining. This EDM drilling type is used largely in the aerospace industry, producing cooling holes into aero blades and other components. It is also used to drill holes in industrial gas turbine blades, in molds and dies, and in bearings.\nApplications.\nPrototype production.\nThe EDM process is most widely used by the mold-making, tool, and die industries, but is becoming a common method of making prototype and production parts, especially in the aerospace, automobile and electronics industries in which production quantities are relatively low. In sinker EDM, a graphite, copper tungsten, or pure copper electrode is machined into the desired (negative) shape and fed into the workpiece on the end of a vertical ram.\nCoinage die making.\nFor the creation of dies for producing jewelry and badges, or blanking and piercing (through use of a pancake die) by the coinage (stamping) process, the positive master may be made from sterling silver, since (with appropriate machine settings) the master is significantly eroded and is used only once. The resultant negative die is then hardened and used in a drop hammer to produce stamped flats from cutout sheet blanks of bronze, silver, or low proof gold alloy. For badges these flats may be further shaped to a curved surface by another die. This type of EDM is usually performed submerged in an oil-based dielectric. The finished object may be further refined by hard (glass) or soft (paint) enameling, or electroplated with pure gold or nickel. Softer materials such as silver may be hand engraved as a refinement.\nSmall hole drilling.\nSmall hole drilling EDM is used in a variety of applications.\nOn wire-cut EDM machines, small hole drilling EDM is used to make a through hole in a workpiece through which to thread the wire for the wire-cut EDM operation. A separate EDM head specifically for small hole drilling is mounted on a wire-cut machine and allows large hardened plates to have finished parts eroded from them as needed and without pre-drilling.\nSmall hole EDM is used to drill rows of holes into the leading and trailing edges of turbine blades used in jet engines. Gas flow through these small holes allows the engines to use higher temperatures than otherwise possible. The high-temperature, very hard, single crystal alloys employed in these blades makes conventional machining of these holes with high aspect ratio extremely difficult, if not impossible.\nSmall hole EDM is also used to create microscopic orifices for fuel system components, spinnerets for synthetic fibers such as rayon, and other applications.\nThere are also stand-alone small hole drilling EDM machines with an \"x\"\u2013\"y\" axis also known as a super drill or \"hole popper\" that can machine blind or through holes. EDM drills bore holes with a long brass or copper tube electrode that rotates in a chuck with a constant flow of distilled or deionized water flowing through the electrode as a flushing agent and dielectric. The electrode tubes operate like the wire in wire-cut EDM machines, having a spark gap and wear rate. Some small-hole drilling EDMs are able to drill through of soft or hardened steel in less than 10 seconds, averaging 50% to 80% wear rate. Holes of can be achieved in this drilling operation. Brass electrodes are easier to machine but are not recommended for wire-cut operations due to eroded brass particles causing \"brass on brass\" wire breakage, therefore copper is recommended.\nMetal disintegration machining.\nSeveral manufacturers produce EDM machines for the specific purpose of removing broken cutting tools and fasteners from work pieces. In this application, the process is termed \"metal disintegration machining\" or MDM. The metal disintegration process removes only the center of the broken tool or fastener, leaving the hole intact and allowing a ruined part to be reclaimed.\nClosed-loop manufacturing.\nClosed-loop manufacturing can improve the accuracy and reduce the tool costs\nAdvantages and disadvantages.\nEDM is often compared to electrochemical machining.\nAdvantages of EDM include:\nDisadvantages of EDM include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75500", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75500", "title": "Project planning", "text": "Aspect of project management which uses schedules to plan and report progress\nProject planning is part of project management, which relates to the use of schedules such as Gantt charts to plan and subsequently report progress within the project environment. Project planning can be done manually or by the use of project management software.\nDescription.\nInitially, the project scope is defined and the appropriate methods for completing the project are determined. Following this step, the durations for the various tasks necessary to complete the work are listed and grouped into a work breakdown structure. Project planning is often used to organize different areas of a project, including project plans, workloads and the management of teams and individuals. The logical dependencies between tasks are defined using an activity network diagram that enables identification of the critical path. Project planning is inherently uncertain as it must be done before the project is actually started. Therefore, the duration of the tasks is often estimated through a weighted average of optimistic, normal, and pessimistic cases. The critical chain method adds \"buffers\" in the planning to anticipate potential delays in project execution. Float or slack time in the schedule can be calculated using project management software. Then the necessary resources can be estimated and costs for each activity can be allocated to each resource, giving the total project cost. At this stage, the project schedule may be optimized to achieve the appropriate balance between resource usage and project duration to comply with the project objectives. Once established and agreed, the project schedule becomes what is known as the baseline schedule. Progress will be measured against the baseline schedule throughout the life of the project. Analyzing progress compared to the baseline schedule is known as earned value management.\nThe inputs of the project planning phase 2 include the project charter and the concept proposal. The outputs of the project planning phase include the project requirements, the project schedule, and the project management plan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75508", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75508", "title": "Bartolome de las Casas", "text": ""}
{"id": "75513", "revid": "35107032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75513", "title": "The White Album", "text": ""}
{"id": "75515", "revid": "2587909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75515", "title": "Porridge", "text": "Food\nPorridge is a type of semi-solid food made by soaking, poaching or boiling, in milk or water, ground, crushed or chopped starchy plants, typically grain. Gruel is a thinner version of porridge, and congee is a savoury variation of porridge of Asian origin.\nPorridge is often cooked with added flavourings such as sugar, honey, fruits or syrup to sweeten the cereal, or it can be mixed with spices, meat or vegetables to make a savoury dish. It is usually served hot in a bowl or a pot, depending on its consistency. Oat porridge, known as oatmeal in North America, is one of the most common types; while rice porridge is more common in Asia. \nType of grains.\nThe term \"porridge\" is used in British English (Britain, Ireland, Australia and New Zealand) specifically for oatmeal. This is a hot mixture of oatmeal or oats slowly cooked with water or milk. It is typically eaten for breakfast by itself or with other ingredients, typically salt, sugar, honey, fruit, milk, cream, or butter.\nOther grains used for porridge include rice, wheat (cracked wheat porridge is also known as frumenty), barley, corn, triticale and buckwheat. Many types of porridge have their own names, such as congee (rice), polenta (maize) and poi (from taro).\nConventional uses.\nPorridge can be eaten for any meal of the day. Porridge is eaten in many cultures around the world as a common snack or as breakfast, lunch or dinner.\nNutrition.\nUnenriched porridge (as oatmeal), cooked by boiling or microwave, is 84% water, and contains 12% carbohydrates, including 2% dietary fiber and 2% each of protein and fat (table). In a reference amount, cooked porridge provides 71 calories and contains 26% of the Daily Value (DV) for manganese, with no other micronutrients in significant content (table).\nHealth effect.\nA 2014 review found that daily intake of at least 3 grams of oat beta-glucan lowers total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels by 5\u201310% in people with normal or elevated blood cholesterol levels. Beta-glucan lowers cholesterol by inhibiting cholesterol production, although cholesterol reduction is greater in people with higher total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol in their blood. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration issued a final ruling in 2015 stating that food companies can make health claims on food labels for products containing soluble fiber from whole oats (oat bran, oat flour and rolled oats), noting that 3.0\u00a0grams of soluble fiber daily from these foods may reduce the risk of heart disease. To qualify for the health claim, the food that contains the oats must provide at least 0.75\u00a0grams of soluble fiber per serving.\nVarieties.\nOat.\nTypes of oats.\nOats for porridge may be whole (groats), cut into two or three pieces (called \"pinhead\", \"steel-cut\" or \"coarse\" oatmeal), ground into medium or fine oatmeal or steamed and rolled into flakes of varying sizes and thicknesses (called \"rolled oats\", the largest size being \"jumbo\"). The larger the pieces of oat used, the more textured the resulting porridge. It is said that, because of their size and shape, the body breaks steel-cut oats down more slowly than rolled oats, reducing spikes in blood sugar and making the eater feel full longer. The US \"Consumer Reports\" website found that the more cooking required, the stronger the oat flavor and the less mushy the texture.\nOats are a good source of dietary fibre; health benefits are claimed for oat bran in particular, which is part of the grain.\nPreparation.\nThe oats are cooked in milk, water or a mixture of the two. Scottish traditionalists allow only oats, water and salt. There are techniques suggested by cooks, such as presoaking, but a comparative test found little difference in the end result. Various flavourings can be used and may vary widely by taste and locality. Demerara sugar, golden syrup, Greek yoghurt and honey are common. Cold milk or single cream may be used.\nHistory.\nHistorically, porridge was a staple food in much of the world, including Europe, Africa and Asia, and it remains so in many countries. There is archaeological evidence of porridge in Denmark from 4200 B.C. or earlier, and it became commonplace in societies that practiced grain cultivation from the Neolithic period onward.\nOat porridge has traditionally been particularly associated with Scotland, possibly because oats can be successfully cultivated on marginal upland soils. Oats were introduced to Scotland in about 600 AD; traces of barley porridge have been found in pots excavated in the Outer Hebrides which have been dated to 2,500 years ago.\nNorthern Europe.\nHistorically, porridge was a staple food in much of Northern Europe and Russia. It was often made from barley, though other grains and yellow peas could be used, depending on local conditions. It was primarily a savoury dish, with meats, root crops, vegetables and herbs added for flavor. Porridge could be cooked in a large metal kettle over hot coals or heated in a cheaper earthenware container by adding hot stones until boiling hot. Until leavened bread and baking ovens became commonplace in Europe, porridge was a typical means of preparing cereal crops for the table.\nPorridge was also commonly provided for breakfast for inmates in the British prison system, and so \"doing porridge\" became a slang term for a sentence in prison.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75516", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75516", "title": "Department of Essential Drugs and Medicines", "text": "The mission of the Department of Essential Drugs and Medicines of the World Health Organization is \"to help save lives and improve health by closing the huge gap between the potential that essential drugs have to offer and the reality that for millions of people \u2013 particularly the poor and disadvantaged \u2013 medicines are unavailable, unaffordable, unsafe or improperly used.\"\nThe EDM provides \"global guidance on essential drugs and medicines, and working with countries \u2013 at their request \u2013 to implement national drug policies to ensure equity of access to essential drugs, drug quality and safety, and rational use of drugs.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75525", "revid": "12418561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75525", "title": "Eleanor cross", "text": "English stone crosses erected in 1291\u201395\nThe Eleanor crosses were a series of twelve tall and lavishly decorated stone monuments erected in a line down part of the east of England. King Edward I had them built between 1291 and about 1295 in memory of his wife Eleanor of Castile. The King and Queen had been married for 36 years and she stayed by the King's side through his many travels. While on a royal progress, she died in Harby, Nottinghamshire, in November 1290. The crosses, erected in her memory, marked the nightly resting-places along the route taken when her body was transported to Westminster Abbey near the City of London.\nWhilst it is commonly accepted that there were crosses atop the monuments, this has never been proven. Theories of this date back to Victorian England, where people embellished stories of the past to make them sound more interesting. A more likely reason for the monuments being called \"crosses\" was due to their placement, as they were usually placed on crossroads. \nThe crosses stood at Lincoln, Grantham and Stamford, all in Lincolnshire; Geddington and Hardingstone in Northamptonshire; Stony Stratford in Buckinghamshire; Woburn and Dunstable in Bedfordshire; St Albans and Waltham (now Waltham Cross) in Hertfordshire; Cheapside in London; and Charing (now Charing Cross) in Westminster.\nThree of the medieval monuments \u2013 those at Geddington, Hardingstone and Waltham Cross \u2013 survive more or less intact; but the other nine, other than a few fragments, are lost. Some were destroyed during the Reformation and Civil War, due to their Catholic associations. The largest and most ornate of the twelve was at Charing Cross. Several memorials and elaborated reproductions of the crosses have been erected, including the Queen Eleanor Memorial Cross at Charing Cross Station (built 1865), northeast\u00a0\u2013 along the Strand roadway\u00a0\u2013 of the original site of the Charing Cross.\nEdward I's use of architecture is known for containing an element of propaganda. In her lifetime, Eleanor had been unpopular with the public, particularly for her acquisitiveness regarding land holdings, which had been associated with the abuse of Jewish loans, attracting strong criticism from the church. The series of Crosses played a role in rehabilitating Eleanor's image as an idealised Queen and woman, as well as projecting royal and spiritual power. The Lincoln tomb of a child falsely claimed to be martyred by Jews is widely assumed to form part of the series, positioning Eleanor and Edward as defenders against the recently expelled Jews. The series has architectural parallels, most notably the 1271 \"montjoies\" marking the funeral route of King Louis IX of France, which were designed as part of an attempt to promote his canonisation as a saint.\nBackground.\nProcession and burials.\nEleanor of Castile died on 28 November 1290 at Harby, Nottinghamshire. Edward and Eleanor loved each other and much like his father, Edward was very devoted to his wife and remained faithful to her throughout their married lives. He was deeply affected by her death and displayed his grief by erecting twelve so-called Eleanor crosses, one at each place where her funeral cort\u00e8ge stopped for the night.\nFollowing her death the body of Queen Eleanor was carried to Lincoln, about away, where she was embalmed \u2013 probably either at the Gilbertine priory of St Katherine in the south of the city, or at the priory of the Dominicans. Her viscera, with the exception of her heart, were buried in the Angel Choir of Lincoln Cathedral on 3 December. Eleanor's other remains were carried to London, a journey of about , that lasted 12 days. Her body was buried in Westminster Abbey, at the feet of her father-in-law King Henry III on 17 December; while her heart was buried in the church of the London Dominicans' priory at Blackfriars (a house that she and Edward had heavily patronised) on 19 December, along with those of her young son Alphonso, Earl of Chester, who had died in 1284, and of John de Vesci, who had died in 1289.\nPurpose and parallels.\nEleanor's crosses appear to have been intended in part as expressions of royal power; and in part as cenotaphs to encourage prayers for her soul from travellers. On the pedestal of each was inscribed the phrase \"Orate pro anima\" (\"Pray for [her] soul\"). Eleanor's reputation had been tarnished by her trafficking in Jewish loans and land acquisition in her own lifetime. Favourable mentions in contemporary chronicles do not emerge until the succession of her son. The Crosses have been an important element in forming her reputation as an idealised Queen, focusing attention on her relationship with Edward.\nIt was not unknown for memorial crosses to be constructed in the middle ages, although they were normally isolated instances and relatively simple in design. A cross in the Strand, just outside the City of London, was said to have been erected by William II in memory of his mother, Queen Matilda (d. 1083). Henry III erected one at Merton, Surrey, for his cousin the Earl of Surrey (d. 1240). Another was erected at Reading for Edward I's sister Beatrice (d. 1275). Yet another, almost contemporary with the Eleanor crosses, was erected near Windsor for Edward's mother, Eleanor of Provence (d.1291).\nThe closest precedent for the Eleanor crosses, and almost certainly their model, was the series of nine crosses known as \"montjoies\" erected along the funeral route of King Louis IX of France in 1271. These were elaborate structures incorporating sculptural representations of the King, and were erected in part to promote his canonisation (a campaign that in 1297 succeeded). Eleanor's crosses never aspired to this last purpose, but in design were even larger and more ornate than the \"montjoies\", being of at least three rather than two tiers.\nEleanor has subsequently been an unclear and contested figure in English history. Since her death, she has been portrayed in both positive and negative lights, with romantic and aggressive portrayals, focusing on her relationship with Edward or her r\u00f4le as a Spanish, foreign monarch.\nCommemoration.\nTomb monuments.\nBoth the burial of Eleanor's body at Westminster and her visceral burial at Lincoln were subsequently marked by ornate effigial monuments, both with similar life-sized gilt bronze effigies cast by the goldsmith William Torell. Her heart burial at the Blackfriars was marked by another elaborate monument, but probably not with a life-sized effigy. The Blackfriars monument was lost following the priory's dissolution in 1538. The Lincoln monument was destroyed in the 17th century, but was replaced in 1891 with a reconstruction, not on the site of the original. The Westminster Abbey monument survives.\nForm and content of the crosses.\nThe twelve crosses were erected to mark the places where Eleanor's funeral procession had stopped overnight. They take three part form, with the royal arms in the lower part, and statues of Eleanor above. In these, her crowned head is bowed, and she holds a sceptre. Her posture draws on Marian imagery to suggest grace and submission, and the imagery echoes that of her tombs. According to historian Paul Binski, their \"elaborate display\" conveys power as part of an authoritarian project; her statues' gaze should be interpreted as active, gazing out from a protected height onto her territory. They had a function that was both spiritual and temporal, binding localities with the source of power on earth, at Westminster.\nConstruction of the crosses.\nTheir construction is documented in the executors' account rolls, which survive from 1291 to March 1294, but not thereafter. By the end of that period, the crosses at Lincoln, Hardingstone, Stony Stratford, Woburn, Dunstable, St Albans and Waltham were complete or nearly so, and those at Cheapside and Charing in progress; but those at Grantham, Stamford and Geddington apparently not yet begun. It is assumed that these last three were erected in 1294 or 1295, and that they were certainly finished before the financial crisis of 1297 which brought a halt to royal building works. A number of artists worked on the crosses, as the account rolls show, with a distinction generally drawn between the main structures, made locally under the direction of master masons appointed by the King, and the statues of Eleanor, made of Caen stone, and other sculptural details, brought from London. Master masons included Richard of Crundale, Roger of Crundale (probably Richard's brother), Michael of Canterbury, Richard of Stow, John of Battle and Nicholas Dymenge. Sculptors included Alexander of Abingdon and William of Ireland, both of whom had worked at Westminster Abbey, who were paid \u00a33 6s. 8d. apiece for the statues; and Ralph of Chichester.\nShrine of Little St Hugh.\nThe tomb of Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln was rebuilt around the same time, probably by the same craftsmen and designers as the Eleanor crosses. It featured the royal arms, and decoration commemorating Eleanor. David Stocker believes that the shrine \"displays such close acquaintance with the Eleanor crosses that it has to be considered alongside them.\"\nThe cult of Little St Hugh venerated a false ritual murder allegation against the Jewish community of Lincoln, and was revived after the Expulsion of the Jews in 1290. Eleanor had been widely disliked for large-scale purchase of Jewish bonds, with the aim of requisitioning the lands and properties of those indebted. It has been suggested that the proximity of the shrine's design to the Eleanor crosses was deliberate, in order to position Edward and Eleanor as protectors of Christians against supposed Jewish criminality. According to historian Joe Hillaby, the crosses and tomb amounted to a \"propaganda coup\".\nDestruction, restoration and the Gothic revival.\nThe crosses suffered greatly during the Reformation and the English Civil Wars, as they represented a Catholic worldview, of public iconography.\nInterest in English Gothic styles of architecture grew around the start of the Industrial Revolution. This coincided with a revival of interest in Eleanor as an idealised Queen. The design and form of the Eleanor crosses was used to create new memorials, including commemorations of highly Protestant themes, while a number of the original Crosses including Charing Cross were recreated.\nLocations.\nLincoln.\nEleanor rested on the first night of the journey at the Priory of Saint Katherine without Lincoln and her viscera were buried in Lincoln Cathedral on 3 December 1290. The Lincoln cross was built between 1291 and 1293 by Richard of Stow at a total recorded cost of over \u00a3120, with sculptures by William of Ireland (also named as William \"\", or image-maker). John Leland, in the early 1540s, noted that \"a litle without Barre [gate] is a very fair crosse and large\". It stood at Swine Green, St Catherine's, an area just outside the city at the southern end of the High Street, but had disappeared by the early 18th century. The only surviving piece is the lower half of one of the statues, rediscovered in the 19th century and now in the grounds of Lincoln Castle.\nGrantham.\nEleanor's bier spent the night of 4 December 1290 in Grantham, Lincolnshire. The master mason for the cross here is not known: it was probably constructed in 1294 or 1295. It stood at the upper end of the High Street. It was pulled down during the Civil War, but in February 1647 Grantham Corporation ordered that any stones that could be traced should be recovered for public use. No part is known to survive, but it is conceivable that the substantial steps of the standing Market Cross comprise stones that originally belonged to the Eleanor Cross. A letter from the 18th-century antiquary William Stukeley (now untraceable) is alleged to have stated that he had one of the lions from Eleanor's coats of arms in his garden.\nA modern relief stone plaque to Eleanor was installed at the Grantham Guildhall in 2015.\nStamford.\nEleanor's bier spent the night of 5 December 1290, and possibly also that of 6 December, in Stamford, Lincolnshire. The master mason for the cross here is not known: it was probably constructed in 1294 or 1295. There is conflicting evidence about its precise location, but it is now generally agreed that it stood just outside the town on the Great North Road (modern Casterton Road, the B1081), in what is today the Foxdale area.\nThe cross was in decay by the early 17th century, and in 1621 the town council ordered some restoration work, although it is unknown whether this was carried out. Richard Symonds reported in 1645: \"In the hill before ye come into the towne, stands a lofty large crosse built by Edward III [\"sic\"], in memory of Elianor his queene, whose corps rested there coming from the North.\" In 1646 Richard Butcher, the Town Clerk, described it as \"so defaced, that only the Ruins appeare to my eye\". It had probably been destroyed by 1659, and certainly by the early 18th century.\nIn 1745, William Stukeley attempted to excavate the remains of the cross, and succeeded in finding its hexagonal base and recovering several fragments of the superstructure. His sketch of the top portion, which seems to have stylistically resembled the Geddington Cross, is found in his diaries in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. A single small fragment from among Stukeley's finds, a carved Purbeck marble rose, was rediscovered in about 1976, and identified as part of the cross in 1993. Following the closure of Stamford Museum in 2011, this fragment is now displayed in the Discover Stamford area at the town's library.\nA modern monument was erected in Stamford in 2009 in commemoration of Eleanor: see Replicas and imitations below.\nGeddington.\nEleanor's bier spent the night of either 6 or 7 December 1290, or possibly both, in Geddington, Northamptonshire. The master mason for the cross here is not known: it was probably constructed in 1294 or 1295. It was recorded by William Camden in 1607; and still stands in the centre of the village, the best-preserved of the three survivors. It is unique among the three in having a triangular plan, and a taller and more slender profile with a lower tier entirely covered with rosette diapering, instead of the arch-and-gable motif with tracery which appears on both the others; and canopied statues surmounted by a slender hexagonal pinnacle. It is possible that the other northern crosses (Lincoln, Grantham and Stamford) were in a similar relatively simple style; and that this reflects either the need to cut back expenditure in the latter stages of the project for financial reasons, or a decision taken at the planning stage to make the crosses progressively larger and more ornate as the sequence proceeded south.\nAn engraving of the Geddington cross (drawn by Jacob Schnebbelie and engraved by James Basire) was published by the Society of Antiquaries in its \"Vetusta Monumenta\" series in 1791. It was \"discreetly\" restored in 1892.\nHardingstone, Northampton.\nEleanor's bier spent the night of 8 December 1290, and perhaps also that of 7 December, at Hardingstone, on the outskirts of Northampton. The cross here was constructed between 1291 and 1292 by John of Battle, at a total recorded cost of over \u00a3100. William of Ireland and Ralph of Chichester carved the statues. A causeway leading from the town to the cross was constructed by Robert son of Henry. The cross is still standing, close to Delapr\u00e9 Abbey, on the side of the A508 leading out of Northampton, and just north of the junction with the A45. The King stayed nearby at Northampton Castle.\nThe monument is octagonal in shape and set on steps; the present steps are replacements. It is built in three tiers, and originally had a crowning terminal, presumably a cross. The terminal appears to have gone by 1460: there is mention of a \"headless cross\" at the site from which Thomas Bourchier, Archbishop of Canterbury, watched Margaret of Anjou's flight following the Battle of Northampton. The monument was restored in 1713, to mark the Peace of Utrecht and the end of the War of the Spanish Succession, and this work included the fitting of a new terminal in the form of a Maltese cross. Further repairs were undertaken in 1762. At a later restoration in 1840, under the direction of Edward Blore, the Maltese cross was replaced by the picturesque broken shaft which is seen today. Later, less intrusive restorations were undertaken in 1877 and 1986. Further restoration work was completed in 2019.\nThe bottom tier of the monument has carvings of open books. These probably included painted inscriptions of Eleanor's biography and of prayers for her soul to be said by viewers, now lost.\nJohn Leland, in the early 1540s, recorded it as \"a right goodly crosse, caullid, as I remembre, the Quenes Crosse\", although he seems to have associated it with the 1460 Battle of Northampton. It is also referred to by Daniel Defoe in his \"Tour thro' the Whole Island of Great Britain\", in reporting the Great Fire of Northampton in 1675: \"... a townsman being at Queen's Cross upon a hill on the south side of the town, about two miles () off, saw the fire at one end of the town then newly begun, and that before he could get to the town it was burning at the remotest end, opposite where he first saw it.\"\nCelia Fiennes in 1697 describes it as \"a Cross, a mile off the town call'd High-Cross \u2013 it stands just in the middle of England \u2013 its all stone 12 stepps which runs round it, above that is the stone carv'd finely and there are 4 large Nitches about the middle, in each is the statue of some queen at length which encompasses it with other carvings as garnish, and so it rises less and less to the top like a tower or Piramidy.\"\nAn engraving of the Hardingstone cross (drawn by Jacob Schnebbelie and engraved by James Basire) was published by the Society of Antiquaries in its \"Vetusta Monumenta\" series in 1791.\nStony Stratford.\nEleanor's bier spent the night of 9 December 1290 at Stony Stratford, Buckinghamshire. The cross here was built between 1291 and 1293 by John of Battle at a total recorded cost of over \u00a3100. The supplier of the statues is uncertain, but some smaller carvings were provided by Ralph of Chichester. The cross stood at the lower end of the town, towards the River Ouse, on Watling Street (now the High Street), although its exact location is debated. It is said to have been of a tall elegant design (perhaps similar to that at Geddington). It was described by William Camden in 1607 as \"minus elegantem\" (\"none of the fairest\"), suggesting that it was by this date in a state of decay. It is said to have been demolished in about 1643. In 1735, William Hartley, a man of nearly 80, could remember only the base still standing. Any trace has now vanished.\nThe cross is commemorated by a brass plaque on the wall of 157 High Street.\nWoburn.\nEleanor's bier spent the night of 10 December 1290 at Woburn, Bedfordshire. Work on the cross here started in 1292, later than some of the others, and was completed in the spring of 1293. It was built by John of Battle, at a total recorded cost of over \u00a3100. As at Stony Stratford, the supplier of the statues is uncertain, but some of the carvings were provided by Ralph of Chichester. No part of the cross survives. Its precise location, and its fate, are unknown.\nDunstable.\nEleanor's bier spent the night of 11 December 1290 at Dunstable, Bedfordshire. It rested first in the market place, before being carried into Dunstable Priory church, where the canons prayed in an overnight vigil. The cross was built between 1291 and 1293 by John of Battle at a total recorded cost of over \u00a3100. Some of the sculpture was supplied by Ralph of Chichester. It is thought to have been located in the middle of the town, probably in the market place, and was reported by William Camden as still standing in 1586. It is said to have been demolished in 1643 by troops under the Earl of Essex. No part survives, although some of the foundations are reported to have been discovered during roadworks at the beginning of the 20th century.\nThe Eleanor's Cross Shopping Precinct in High Street North contains a modern statue of Eleanor, erected in 1985.\nSt Albans.\nEleanor's bier spent the night of 12 December 1290 at St Albans, Hertfordshire. The cross here was built between 1291 and 1293 by John of Battle at a total recorded cost of over \u00a3100, with some of the sculpture supplied by Ralph of Chichester. It was erected at the south end of the Market Place, and for many years stood in front of the fifteenth-century Clock Tower in the High Street, opposite the Waxhouse Gateway entrance to the Abbey.\nIn 1596, it was described as \"verie stately\". However, having fallen into decay, and having probably been further damaged during the Civil War, it was eventually demolished in 1701\u201302, to be replaced by a market cross. This was demolished in turn in 1810, although the town pump it contained survived a little longer. A drinking fountain was erected on the site by philanthropist Isabella Worley in 1874: this was relocated to Victoria Square nearby in the late 20th century.\nA late 19th-century ceramic plaque on the Clock Tower commemorates the Eleanor cross.\nWaltham (now Waltham Cross).\nEleanor's bier spent the night of 13 December 1290 in the parish of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire. The cross here was built in about 1291 by Roger of Crundale and Nicholas Dymenge at a total recorded cost of over \u00a3110. It probably became known as \"Waltham Cross\" because it stood at the way to Waltham Abbey, across the River Lea in Essex, which was clearly visible from its site. The sculpture was by Alexander of Abingdon, with some items supplied by Robert of Corfe. The cross was located outside the village of Waltham, but as the village grew into a town in the 17th and 18th centuries, it began to suffer damage from passing traffic. In 1721, at the instigation of William Stukeley and at the expense of the Society of Antiquaries, two oak bollards were erected \"to secure Waltham Cross from injury by carriages\". The bollards were subsequently removed by the turnpike commissioners, and in 1757 Stukeley arranged for a protective brick plinth to be erected instead, at the expense of Lord Monson. The cross is still standing, but has been restored on several occasions, in 1832\u20131834, 1885\u20131892, 1950\u20131953, and 1989\u201390.\nThe Society of Antiquaries published an engraving of the cross by George Vertue from a drawing by Stukeley in its \"Vetusta Monumenta\" series in 1721; and another, engraved by James Basire from a drawing by Jacob Schnebbelie, in the same series in 1791.\nThe original statues of Eleanor, which were extremely weathered, were replaced by replicas at the 1950s restoration. The originals were kept for some years at Cheshunt Public Library; but they were removed, possibly in the 1980s, and are now held by the Victoria &amp; Albert Museum. A photograph formerly on the Lowewood Museum website shows one of the original statues in front of a staircase at the library.\nWestcheap (now Cheapside).\nEleanor's bier reached the City of London on 14 December 1290, and a site for the cross was selected in Westcheap (now Cheapside). Her heart was buried in the Blackfriars priory on 19 December. The Cheapside cross was built from 1291 onwards by Michael of Canterbury at a total recorded cost of \u00a3226 13s. 4d.\nUnder a licence granted by Henry VI in 1441, the cross was extensively restored or rebuilt in 1484\u201386. It was subsequently regilded several times in the 16th century on the occasion of coronations and royal visits to the City. John Stow included a detailed account of the cross and its history in his \"Survay of London\" of 1598, updating it in 1603.\nAlthough a number of images of the cross and its eventual destruction are known, these all postdate its various refurbishments, and so provide no certain guide to its original appearance. However, the chronicler Walter of Guisborough refers to this and Charing Cross as being fashioned of \"marble\"; and it is likely that it was similar to the Hardingstone and Waltham Crosses, but even more ornate and boasting some Purbeck marble facings.\nThe cross came to be regarded as something of a public hazard, both as a traffic obstruction and because of concerns about fragments of stone falling off; while in the post-Reformation period some of its Catholic imagery aroused resentment, and elements were defaced in 1581, 1599 and 1600\u201301. Matters came to a head during the years leading up to the Civil War. To puritanical reformers, it was identified with Dagon, the ancient god of the Philistines, and was seen as the embodiment of royal and Catholic tradition. At least one riot was fought in its shadow, as opponents of the cross descended upon it to pull it down, and supporters rallied to stop them. After Charles I had fled London to raise an army, the destruction of the cross was almost the first order of business for the Parliamentary Committee for the Demolition of Monuments of Superstition and Idolatry, led by Sir Robert Harley, and it was demolished on 2 May 1643. The downfall of the Cheapside Cross is an important episode of iconoclasm in English history.\nTwo Purbeck marble fragments of the original cross, displaying shields bearing the royal arms of England and of Castile and Le\u00f3n, were recovered in 1838 during reconstruction of the sewer in Cheapside. They are now held by the Museum of London.\nCharing (now Charing Cross).\nEleanor's bier spent the final night of its journey, 16 December 1290, in the Royal Mews at Charing, Westminster, a few hundred yards north of Westminster Abbey. The area subsequently became known as Charing Cross. The cross here was the most expensive of the twelve, built of Purbeck marble from 1291 onwards by Richard of Crundale, the senior royal mason, with the sculptures supplied by Alexander of Abingdon, and some items by Ralph de Chichester. Richard died in the autumn of 1293, and the work was completed by Roger of Crundale, probably his brother. The total recorded cost was over \u00a3700.\nThe cross stood outside the Royal Mews, at the top of what is now Whitehall, and on the south side of what is now Trafalgar Square. John Norden in about 1590 described it as the \"most stately\" of the series, but by this date so \"defaced by antiquity\" as to have become \"an old weather-beaten monument\". It was also noted by William Camden in 1607.\nIt was ordered to be taken down by Parliament in 1643, and was eventually demolished in 1647. Following the demolition, a contemporary ballad ran:\n&lt;poem&gt;Undone! undone! the lawyers cry,\nThey ramble up and down;\nWe know not the way to \"Westminster\"\nNow \"Charing-Cross\" is down.&lt;/poem&gt;\nAfter the Restoration of Charles II, an equestrian statue of Charles I by Hubert Le Sueur was erected on the site of the cross in 1675, and this still stands. The location is still known as Charing Cross, and since the early 19th century this point has been regarded as the official centre of London, in legislation and when measuring distances from London.\nA new Eleanor cross was erected in 1865 outside Charing Cross railway station, several hundred yards from the original site: see Replicas and imitations below.\nA mural by David Gentleman on the platform walls of Charing Cross underground station, commissioned by London Transport in 1978, depicts, in the form of wood engravings, the story of the building of the medieval cross by stonemasons and sculptors.\nFolk etymology holds that the name Charing derives from French (dear queen); but the name \"Charing\" for the area in fact pre-dates Eleanor's death and probably comes from the Anglo-Saxon word \"\", meaning a bend, as it stands on the outside of a sharp bend in the River Thames (compare Charing in Kent).\nReplicas and imitations.\nDuring the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries several replica Eleanor crosses, or monuments more loosely inspired by them, were erected.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75530", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75530", "title": "1E4 m", "text": ""}
{"id": "75537", "revid": "48014761", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75537", "title": "1E-13 m", "text": ""}
{"id": "75538", "revid": "26830857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75538", "title": "German submarine U-123", "text": "U-123 may refer to one of the following German submarines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "75539", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75539", "title": "Sherwood Forest Plantation", "text": "Historic house in Virginia, United States\nSherwood Forest Plantation is located on the north bank of the James River in Charles City County, Virginia. The main plantation house, built in 1730, was the home of the tenth president of the United States, John Tyler (1790\u20131862) for the last twenty years of his life. It is located on State Route 5, a scenic byway which runs between the independent cities of Richmond and Williamsburg. The house is located approximately from the river. It was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1961.\nHistory.\nIt is a misconception that Sherwood Forest is the only private residence in the United States to have been owned by two unrelated U.S. presidents. William Henry Harrison owned a plot of land called \"Brown's Quarter\" in the same county, and another (different) Brown's Quarter existed within the acreage that came to make up the land that Tyler later purchased. Harrison's vice president and successor John Tyler purchased the plantation in 1842 from his cousin Collier Minge and lived there after leaving the White House.\nJohn Tyler renamed the plantation Sherwood Forest in 1842. He said it signified that he had been \"outlawed\" by the Whig party. He was attracted to the plantation because it was near his birthplace at Greenway Plantation. He retired there when he left the White House in 1845 and spent the rest of his life there with his second wife Julia Gardiner Tyler and some of his children. He had eight with his first wife and seven with his second wife.\nPearl, the youngest, was born in 1860, when Tyler was 70 years old; she died in 1947.\nAs regional hostilities in the United States escalated to become the American Civil War in 1861, Tyler backed Virginia's secession, although he died in January 1862. Later that spring, the house was occupied by Union soldiers during McClellan's Peninsula Campaign of 1862 and again during Grant's Overland Campaign in 1864. During the latter, the Battle of Wilson's Wharf was fought nearby. When an Ohio regiment vacated the house in 1864, they attempted to raze it with fire as a punishment for Tyler's support of the Confederacy. The fire was quickly extinguished by a slave and did little damage to the house.\nOwners of the house who started restoring it in the mid-1970s started removing some home-made storm windows and then discovered from old records that Tyler had built them himself, so they kept them. One of the house's claims to fame is its length; 301 feet (91 m). It is noted for its long, skinny ballroom, a \"hyphen\" Tyler had added to the house to accommodate the style of dancing popular then - what is today called \"line dancing\" but was then the \"Virginia reel.\"\nThe house has been in the Tyler family since it was purchased in 1842. The house was most recently owned by Harrison Ruffin Tyler, President Tyler's grandson and the son of Lyon Gardiner Tyler; he and his wife, Frances Payne Bouknight Tyler, restored the home and grounds based on information gathered from over 47,000 letters describing the decor, furnishings, and landscape. It is open to the public for tours by appointment. The grounds are open daily for self-guided tours from 9am-5pm excepting Thanksgiving and Christmas days.\nSlavery.\nThe plantation complex was used by the Tylers to grow and process large amounts of tobacco. They owned dozens of African American slaves, between 54 and 70 being recorded during the Tylers' buying of the plantation in 1842 and Emancipation in 1865. The enslaved had the surnames Armistead, Hall, Black and Short.\nAlthough she was from New York, where slavery had been abolished, Julia Gardiner Tyler defended slavery. When several British noblewomen published an open letter challenging slavery in the Southern United States, Mrs Tyler wrote a response that defended slavery, publishing it in the \"Southern Literary Messenger\" in 1853. She claimed that slaves in the South lived better than the English working classes at the time.\nAn article in \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" criticized the modern plantation for a leaflet that called the plantation a \"an almost self-supporting community of approximately 110 people,\" and described enslaved Africans with euphemisms such as \"field hands\" and \"servants.\"\nCemetery.\nA pet cemetery is located on the property, where Tyler family pets were and still are buried, most notably, John Tyler's horse, The General.\nStaff at the site also maintain a small grove where Tyler planned to be buried. In January 1862, while in Richmond to serve in the Confederate House of Representatives, Tyler became seriously ill. He died while arranging plans to return to Sherwood Forest, and his request to be buried at his home was ignored. He was instead buried at Richmond\u2019s Hollywood Cemetery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75540", "revid": "40277", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75540", "title": "Operation Drumbeat", "text": ""}
{"id": "75554", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75554", "title": "Methodius", "text": "Methodius or Methodios may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "75555", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75555", "title": "Arbroath", "text": "Scottish town in Angus\nArbroath () or Aberbrothock ( ) is a former royal burgh and the largest town in the council area of Angus, Scotland, with a population of 23,902. It lies on the North Sea coast, some east-northeast of Dundee and south-southwest of Aberdeen.\nThere is evidence of Iron Age settlement, but its history as a town began with the founding of Arbroath Abbey in 1178. It grew much during the Industrial Revolution through the flax and then the jute industry and the engineering sector. A new harbour was created in 1839; by the 20th century, Arbroath was one of Scotland's larger fishing ports.\nThe town is notable for the Declaration of Arbroath and the Arbroath smokie. Arbroath Football Club holds the world record for the number of goals scored in a professional football match: 36\u20130 against Bon Accord of Aberdeen in the Scottish Cup in 1885.\nHistory.\nToponymy.\nThe earliest recorded name was 'Aberbrothock', referring to the Brothock Burn that runs through the town. The prefix \"Aber\" derived either from the Gaelic 'Obair', or the earlier Brythonic term \"Aber\" for confluence or river mouth. The name Aberbrothock was spelt numerous ways. The earliest manuscripts available have it as \"Abirbrothoke\" (in a letter to Edward I confirming the Treaty of Salisbury, which agreed that the Queen regnant, Margaret, Maid of Norway would marry Edward I) and \"Aberbrothok\" (in a subsequent letter of consent to the marriage). In the Declaration of Arbroath, it is seen as \"Abirbrothoc\". Early maps show a number of variants including Aberbrothock, Aberbrothik, Aberbrothick, and Aberbrothwick.\nThe modern name Arbroath came into common use from the mid-19th century, the older name being largely dropped by the time of the first Ordnance Survey edition. However, variants of 'Arbroath' had been used since the 17th century, including 'Arbroth' and Aberbreth.\nEarly history.\nThe area of Arbroath has been inhabited since at least the Neolithic period. Material from postholes at an enclosure at Douglasmuir, near Friockheim, some five miles north of Arbroath, have been radiocarbon dated to about 3500 BCE. The function of the enclosure is unknown \u2013 perhaps for agriculture or for ceremonial purposes.\nBronze Age finds are abundant in the area. They include short-cist burials near West Newbigging, about a mile north of the town, which yielded pottery urns, a pair of silver discs and a gold armlet. Iron Age archaeology is also present, for example in the souterrain near Warddykes Cemetery and at West Grange of Conan, as well as better-known examples at Carlungie and Ardestie.\nThe area appears to have had importance in the early Christian period, as shown by Pictish stone carvings found during restoration of St Vigeans Church, now housed in the small museum there. The stones had been used in building the old church and many were badly damaged. One of them, the 9th century Drosten Stone, is among the few Pictish artefacts with a Latin inscription: DROSTEN: IREUORET [E]TTFOR CUS'. This has been variously construed, but is thought to refer to the Pictish King Uurad, who reigned in 839\u2013842 CE.\nMedieval history.\nThe recorded history of Arbroath begins with the foundation of the Abbey by King William the Lion in 1178 for monks of the Tironensian order from Kelso Abbey. It was consecrated in 1197 with a dedication to Saint Thomas Becket, as the King's only personal foundation; he was buried within its precincts in 1214. The Abbey was not finally completed until 1233.\nKing John, also in the 13th century, exempted Arbroath from \"toll and custom\" in every part of England except London.\nOn 6 April 1320 the Scottish Parliament met at Arbroath Abbey and addressed to the Pope the Declaration of Arbroath, drafted by the Abbot of the time, Bernard. This detailed the services which their \"lord and sovereign\" Robert the Bruce had rendered to Scotland and eloquently affirmed Scots independence.\nThe Battle of Arbroath in 1446 came after a series of clashes between the Chief Justiciary of Arbroath, Alexander Lindsay, third Earl of Crawford and Bishop James Kennedy of St Andrews, which resulted in Lindsay sacking the bishop's lands and burning his properties. Lindsay was excommunicated and it was felt this conflicted with his role as Chief Justiciary. The monks of Arbroath Abbey selected Alexander Ogilvy of Inverquharity as his replacement and the insult led to pitched battle in the town, leaving 500 dead, including Lindsay and Ogilvy. Large parts of it were destroyed in the aftermath by the Lindsay family.\nThe abbey soon fell into disuse and eventual disrepair after its dissolution at the Reformation. The roof lead is rumoured to have been used in the 16th-century civil wars and the stonework plundered for housebuilding in the town. The ruins were a popular site for travellers in the 17th and 18th centuries. Finally in 1815, they were taken into state care. They are now administered by Historic Scotland.\nModern history.\nThe Jacobite rising known as the Forty-Five turned Arbroath into a Jacobite town. A high proportion of its able-bodied men joined the Jacobite army. It was one of the main ports where men and supplies could be landed from France. It and other Jacobite ports along the north-east coast collectively formed 'an asset of almost incalculable value' to the Jacobite cause.\nThe Industrial Revolution led to an expansion of Arbroath's economy and population. New housing was built for the influx of workers and Arbroath became known for jute and sailcloth production. In 1867, the mills employed 4,620 people and in 1875, 1,400 looms in 34 mills produced over a million yards of osnaburg cloth and 450,000 yards of sailcloth; the town is believed to have supplied the sails for \"Cutty Sark\". Arbroath was also prominent in the making of shoes and lawnmowers. Manufacturer Alexander Shanks, founded in 1840 and based at Dens Iron Works from 1853, supplied mowers to the Old Course at St Andrews and the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club. Shanks was taken over in the 1960s by local firm, Giddings &amp; Lewis-Fraser Ltd., which had evolved from the flax and canvas manufacturing business established by Douglas Fraser in 1832. In the last decade of the 19th century, Douglas Fraser &amp; Sons shifted focus to machine manufacture following the success of a braiding machine designed by Norman Fraser. The firm had interests in South America and India. In 1959 the business was taken over by the US company, Giddings &amp; Lewis and renamed Giddings &amp; Lewis-Fraser. Its headquarters were Wellgate Works, Arbroath.\nArbroath is well known for its ties to the fishing industry. Following significant improvements to the harbour in 1839, the council sought fishermen willing to migrate to the town. Men came from nearby Auchmithie and further afield, including Shetland. The industry grew, and in the peak years up to 1980 some 40 whitefish and pelagic vessels worked from Arbroath, employing hundreds on board and hundreds more ashore to service vessels and process the fish. Quota cuts and decommissioning took their toll in Scotland from the 1980s; however, Arbroath remains a whitefish port open for landing shellfish. Only one vessel now works regularly from Arbroath, but a further three Arbroath-owned vessels work from Aberdeen and ports further north. Fish processing remains a big employer, but the fish come from Aberdeen, Peterhead and even Iceland, Norway and Ireland.\nGovernance.\nArbroath was made a burgh of regality in 1178 by King William the Lion, when the abbey was founded. The burgh of regality permitted monks to hold a weekly market, dispense basic justice and establish a harbour. In 1599, the town was granted royal burgh status by King James VI of Scotland. A provost and town council were appointed.\nIn 1922, Lord Inchcape became burgess. He was presented with his ticket to the office in a silver casket engraved with the burgh coat-of-arms and views of the locality.\nArbroath remained controlled by Arbroath Burgh Council, which was based at Arbroath Town House, through to 1975, when Arbroath (and the county of Angus) were amalgamated with Perthshire and Dundee City into Tayside, controlled by Tayside Regional Council. Angus, along with Dundee City and Perth &amp; Kinross were re-established under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994.\nArbroath is represented on Angus Council by seven councillors; four from the ward of Arbroath West, Letham and Friockheim and three from Arbroath East &amp; Lunan.\nParliamentary representation.\nArbroath is part of Arbroath and Broughty Ferry constituency for elections to the House of Commons. The seat was first contested at the 2024 general election where Stephen Gethins of the SNP won the seat.\nArbroath is in the Angus South constituency of the Scottish Parliament (having been in the Angus constituency until its abolition in 2011). It returns a Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) to Holyrood directly. Graeme Dey of the Scottish National Party has won the seat in all three elections contested since its formation. Angus South forms part of the North East Scotland electoral region for electing additional Members of the Scottish Parliament.\nGeography.\nAt , Arbroath lies on the North Sea coast, north-east of Dundee, within the Angus region. Geologically, it sits predominantly on Old Red Sandstone. Lower-lying parts were below sea level until after the last Ice Age.\nArbroath lies north-east of Glasgow, south-west of Aberdeen and from Edinburgh. Neighbouring villages of St Vigeans, Carmyllie, Friockheim, Colliston and Inverkeilor are taken as part of Arbroath for council representation, and along with Carnoustie share its 01241 telephone area code.\nBrothock Water.\nA burn (or stream) named Brothock Water flows through the town from St Vigeans parallel to the railway line, before turning to meet the North Sea at Danger Point immediately east of the harbour. Flax and jute mills congregated alongside the stream in the 19th century to use the water for their steam-powered machinery. Much of its course within the town is open but some parts have been built over. The burn and its environs form a green artery between residential areas and along with the railway line divides the town, east to west. Data collected by the Brothock Water monitoring station from 1990 onwards shows the water level to normally range between and . The highest recorded level of was reached on 2 November 2009. A \u00a312 million publicly funded scheme to reduce flows in Brothock Water to protect parts of the town at risk from flooding was developed by Angus Council and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. The works, completed in December 2022, included the creation of flood storage areas at Dammy Meadows and north of the town.\nThe shoreline.\nSouth west of the harbour lies an area of craggy rocks with a large number of rock pools exposed at low tide. Rocks, boulders and shingle extend for about nine hundred metres to Arbroath West Links (or Elliot) beach. This gently sloping beach is of mixed sand and pebbles and the sea here is a designated bathing water site of about in length. The main access to the beach is via a slipway, but there are also steps down from the coastal path. Depending on the tide, the width of the beach can vary from twenty to two hundred metres.\nArbroath (or Seaton) cliffs rise about north east of the harbour. Whiting Ness at the end of the King's Drive promenade is an example of geological angular unconformity; a coarse conglomerate of late Devonian upper red sandstone overlies early Devonian lower red sandstone.\nClimate.\nArbroath has a typical British marine climate influenced by its seaside position. There are narrow temperature differences between seasons. January has an average high of and July of . The climate is somewhat dry and sunny for Scotland, with of precipitation and 1561.7 hours of sunshine. The data are sourced from the 1991\u20132020 averages of the Met Office weather station in Arbroath.\nDemography.\nResidents of Arbroath are called Arbroathians but often call themselves \"Red Lichties\" after the red lamp that shone from the harbour light and foghorn tower at the harbour entrance, as an aid to shipping entering the harbour.\nScotland's census of 2011 reports the total resident population of Arbroath as 23,902, a 4.9 per cent increase over the 22,785 reported by the 2001 census. About 86.5 per cent of the population was born in Scotland, down from 88.9 per cent in 2001 and 95.6 per cent was born in the United Kingdom as a whole (2001: 97.7 per cent). In 2011, Arbroath had a higher percentage of its population under 16 years of age (18.3 per cent) than Scotland (17.3 per cent). Persons aged 65 years and over are put at 18.9 per cent compared with Scotland's 16.8 per cent. Arbroath correspondingly has a lower percentage of 16 to 64 year olds than Scotland. In 2011 there were 47.8 per cent males to 52.2 per cent females.\nArbroath has a moderate unemployment rate \u2013 some 2.7 per cent claim job-related social welfare benefits.\nEconomy.\nThe 2011 census shows Arbroath to have an economically active population of 10,545 (2001: 9,192); of which jobs in health and social work account for 16.0 per cent of total employment (2001: 13.1 per cent), closely followed by wholesale and retail trade and repairs with 15.2 per cent (2001: 15.4 per cent). Manufacturing, the top employment sector in 2001 with 16.0 per cent, fell to third place in 2011 with 12.3 per cent. A separate figure for the fishing industry is not shown for 2011 but accounted for only 0.4 per cent (fewer than 50 people) in 2001, although the processing sector is counted separately under manufacturing and the figure of 50 relates directly to the catching and support sectors.\nThe port.\nArbroath's prospects originally revolved around the harbour. The original harbour was constructed and maintained by the abbot within the terms of an agreement between the burgesses and John Gedy, the abbot in 1394 AD. This gave way to a more commodious port in 1725, which in turn was enlarged and improved in 1839, when the sea wall, quay walls and breakwater were added to the old inner harbour, at a cost of \u00a358,000. Arbroath became a major coastal shipping port and in 1846 there were 89 Arbroath-registered vessels, totalling 9,100 gross tons. In the same year, 599 vessels docked at Arbroath, 56 from foreign ports (mainly Baltic ports) and the remaining 543 employed on the coastal trade. Bark, flax, hemp, hides, oak and fir timber, and guano for manure, groceries from London, and numerous articles of Baltic produce were imported via Arbroath, with manufactured goods (mainly sailcloth) exported.\nManufacturing.\nDriven by the needs of the fishing and sailing industry, Arbroath-based sailmaker Francis Webster Ltd perfected in 1795 the art of adding linseed oil to flax sails, creating an oiled flax. This developed in the late 19th century into waxed cotton, which drove Arbroath as a manufacturing centre until the early 1970s, when it began to decline. A major employer, Keith &amp; Blackman, closed in 1985 and Giddings and Lewis-Fraser wound down about the same time, with the whole plant later demolished to make way for a supermarket. Alps Electric Co. was a large employer in Arbroath from 1990 to 2001, employing 180. All were made redundant when the plant closed.\nArmed forces.\nArbroath is home to 45 Commando of the Royal Marines, which has been based at RM Condor since 1971. The barracks were built in 1940 and commissioned as RNAS Arbroath/HMS Condor, a Royal Naval Air Station (RNAS) until 1971. The Royal Marines moved to Arbroath in 1971 and remain a contributor to the local economy; in addition to the Marines stationed at Arbroath, some 600 residents are employed by the Ministry of Defence. In 2004, there was speculation that RM Condor would be transferred to the Army as a replacement for Fort George and the barracks become a permanent base for a battalion of the Royal Regiment of Scotland. This went no further than the planning stage and in 2005 it was confirmed the Marines would remain.\nHousing.\nHouse prices in Arbroath in April\u2013June 2006 were just \u00a399 below national average: \u00a3113,646 compared to a national \u00a3113,745. The average house price across Angus rose by 14.9 per cent to \u00a3124,451 in the year up to November 2006. Angus Council suggests the upgrading of the A92 between Arbroath and Dundee to a dual carriageway has lured Dundonians to Arbroath, which may be boosting house prices.\nTourism.\nA visitor survey compiled in 2017 found Arbroath to be the most popular destination in Angus and Arbroath Abbey the second most visited attraction after Glamis Castle. Arbroath Abbey receives around 14,000 visitors annually. A re-enactment of the signing of the Declaration of Arbroath (the declaration of Scottish independence) known as the Scots' or Arbroath Pageant has taken place in the Abbey ruins intermittently since 1947. The last full pageant took place in 2005 but a smaller ceremony is usually performed on the 6 April each year to commemorate the signing.\nFormer attractions.\nA summer event known as the Seafront Spectacular took place in the 2000s. The program for 2006 included flying displays, a sea rescue demonstration, exhibition of motor vehicles and fairground rides. The Sea Fest, an event themed around Arbroath's maritime heritage, was held annually for 21 years until 2017. Kerr's Miniature Railway was the oldest miniature railway in Scotland at the time of its closure in October 2020. It opened in 1935 and at its height, in 1955, drew 60,000 visitors; however numbers had fallen to just 3,500 in 2019. The Harbour Visitor Centre on Fishmarket Quay was completed in 2007. It was the focus of Angus Council's attempt to increase the number of tourists to the harbour. The centre originally housed a multimedia experience explaining the town's fishing history and a VisitScotland tourist information centre; both have closed and the space vacated let for commercial use.\nTransport.\nThe A92 dual carriageway connects Arbroath to Dundee and crosses the Tay estuary into Fife via the Tay Road Bridge. North to Montrose and Stonehaven the A92 is single carriageway but thereafter is dualled to Aberdeen. The A933 road runs north to Brechin. Within the town, the A92 was formerly dualled prior to 2024, when it was singled to allow a dedicated cycle-path and additional green space to be created. The project was completed in August 2025.\nDestinations from Arbroath Bus Station include Brechin, Dundee, Forfar and Montrose. The bus station is also a stopping point on the X7 Coastrider route that runs between Aberdeen and Dundee. Stagecoach East Scotland under its Stagecoach Strathtay brand operates most services.\nArbroath railway station is a short walk from the bus station. The station facilities and most of the passenger trains are operated by ScotRail. Direct services run along the east coast of Scotland to Aberdeen and via Dundee to Edinburgh and Glasgow with onward connections to London and other English cities. The overnight Caledonian Sleeper stops at Arbroath en route to London Euston.\nThe closest regional airport, Dundee has flights to London City, George Best Belfast City and Sumburgh. The airport lies 1.8\u00a0miles west of the city centre, adjacent to the River Tay. The nearest international airports are Edinburgh and Aberdeen. There is a sizeable airfield at the Royal Marines military base on the western outskirts of the town. It was created in 1940 as a Fleet Air Arm airfield and had a training role during World War II. The airstrip was used by a Volunteer Gliding Squadron up until 2016.\nEducation.\nFurther education is provided at the Arbroath campus of Dundee and Angus College, based in the former Arbroath High School buildings. The town has two secondary schools and seven primary schools. One primary school is Roman Catholic, the remainder non-denominational.\nSecondary schools.\nThe two secondaries are Arbroath High School on Keptie Road and Arbroath Academy in the Hayshead area of the town. The High School was originally a grammar school; a notable alumnus is former Scottish Secretary, Michael Forsyth. It caters for around 880 pupils and has a catchment area of west Arbroath and the villages of Arbirlot, Carmyllie and Colliston. The Academy, originally a comprehensive, opened in 1962. It has a school roll of around 700 pupils and a catchment area that includes east Arbroath and the villages of Auchmithie, Inverkeilor and Friockheim.\nFurther education.\nAngus College was established in 1957. In the mid 2000s, Angus College had around 8,500 students, with 80 per cent passing the course for which they enrol. There are about 1,700 full-time students, with part-time students making up the majority. On 1 November 2013, Angus College merged with Dundee College to form Dundee and Angus College. Arbroath is not a student town and there are no student residences. The student population is solely local students living within commuting distance of the college. The Arbroath campus offers mostly full and part time vocational courses from SCQF level 1 up to Higher National Diploma (level 8).\nPlaces of worship.\nTwelve denominations spread over twenty two places of worship are listed for Arbroath in a survey of Scotland published in 1884; all bar The Old Church are described as \"modern\". Only a handful of these remain in use as places of worship. Some redundant church buildings have been demolished but alternative uses have been found for others, including The Old Church, the United Presbyterian Erskine Church in Commerce Street and the High Street and Brothock Bridge United Free Churches.\nChurch of Scotland.\nThe Old and Abbey Church is in the centre of town on West Abbey Street. Formerly known as the Abbey Church, its name was changed on uniting with the Old Parish Church after the latter's closure in 1990. Abbey Church was originally built as a chapel of ease to the Old Parish Church in 1797 and was greatly extended in 1876\u20138 with the addition of the tower and Gothic style front facade.\nSt Andrew's is in Hamilton Green, and the minister is Rev. Dr. Martin Fair with associate minister Rev. Stuart Irvin. Dr Fair was Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in 2020\u20132021; the only time that a minister of a congregation in Arbroath has held the position.\nThe West Kirk in Keptie Street was opened as St Margaret's Chapel of Ease in 1879 and upgraded to a parish church in 1886. The height of the tower was doubled in 1903 by the addition of two storeys, a parapet and pinnacles. St Margaret's changed its name to Arbroath West Kirk in 1990 when joined by the members of Ladyloan St Columba's following that church's closure. Falling attendances at Knox's Church lead to its congregation uniting with West Kirk in 2019 and the site in Howard Street being put up for sale. Knox's Church was built in 1866 and linked with St Vigeans Church, St Vigeans in 1983.\nOther congregations.\nThere is an Episcopalian congregation based at St Mary the Virgin Church in Springfield Terrace. The minister is Rev. Peter Mead. St Mary's Church evolved from a meeting house set up in 1694 by Episcopalians forced out of Arbroath Parish Church. The present church building dates from 1854. The Scottish Episcopal Church in Arbroath is part of the Diocese of Brechin.\nSt Thomas of Canterbury Roman Catholic Church is in Dishlandtown Street. The church opened in 1848 and has distinctive twin octagonal and crenellated front towers. The priest is the Rev. Fr. Andrew Marshall and the church is part of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Dunkeld. The parish includes a primary school which celebrated its 150th anniversary in 1998.\nSt John's Methodist Church in Ponderlaw was opened and preached in by John Wesley in 1772 and since the closure of Dunbar Methodist Church has been the oldest Scottish Methodist Church still used for worship. The original church building is octagonal and situated behind a vestibule added in 1882.\nOther groups that worship in Arbroath include the Arbroath Corps of the Salvation Army, which meets in Marketgate; the Elim Pentecostal Church, which meets in Ogilvy Place; the Jehovah's Witnesses, who meet at the Kingdom Hall in Burnside Drive; the Springfield Christian Assembly, which meets in the Gospel Hall in Ponderlaw Lane and the Arbroath Town Mission on Grant Road, an interdenominational group established in 1849 and led by Dr Robert Clapham for sixty years, until 2010. The independent, non-denominational Life Church meet in the former St Vigeans Chapel of Ease in James Street. The church building dates from 1828 and became Inverbrothock Parish Church in 1855. The parish was dissolved in 1977.\nCulture.\nThe ANGUSalive Community Trust manages Arbroath Library and Art Gallery, Webster Memorial Theatre, Signal Tower Museum, Arbroath Community Centre and Arbroath Sports Centre.\nOn permanent display in the Corsar Gallery at Arbroath Art Gallery are \"The Adoration of the Magi\" and \"Saint John Preaching in the Wilderness;\" two large oil paintings attributed to Pieter Brueghel the Younger. The art gallery and public library are housed within a former school, The Academy, built in 1821 to a design by Dundee architect James Black. The building was bought for the town by former Provost, David Corsar, owner of a flaxspinning and manufacturing business. It was converted by local architect, Hugh Gavin and opened to much fanfare in 1898. \u00a0\nThe Webster Memorial Theatre building was opened as \"The Public Hall\" in 1867; James Maclaren of Dundee was the architect. As well as a large hall there was a library, reading-room, museum and smaller hall. The Arbroath Guide newspaper acclaimed the front facade to be \"the finest thing in architecture we have in the town\". The first public performance was by a troupe of Christy's Minstrels. The hall was renamed in memory of First World War casualty Joseph Webster, on his family gifting it to the town in 1919. Besides concerts, the hall was used for political addresses and lectures. HRH Princess Margaret reopened the hall in October 1970 as the Webster Memorial Theatre and Arts Centre, after major works and refurbishment. The front stonework was renovated, the auditorium remodelled and disabled access improved in 2008. The main auditorium seats five hundred. The theatre has featured among others Harry Lauder, Jimmy Tarbuck, Charlie Landsborough, The Drifters and the Chuckle Brothers and was the first venue the Alexander Brothers, a Scottish easy listening act, performed in as a professional duo.\nThe 10 year-old Marion Angus arrived in Arbroath in February 1876, when her father became minister at the Erskine United Presbyterian Church. An early contributor to the poetry of the Scottish Renaissance, in her early thirties she wrote \"The Diary of Arthur Ogilvie\" (1897\u201398) and \"Christabel's Diary\" (1899) columns for the \"Arbroath Guide\", sardonically chronicling the development of the town, musical concerts, visiting dramatic productions, and Church soir\u00e9es.\nThe Angus Black and White Minstrels were the last group in Britain to regularly perform blackface. In 2005, after pressure from Angus Council, the show began with normal stage makeup and the group changed its name to The Angus Minstrels. The move to stop performing in blackface received wide UK press coverage. The group performed its farewell concert in November 2019 and made a final charitable donation in 2022.\nBeginning in 1947, a pageant commemorating the signing of the Declaration has been held within the roofless remains of the abbey (last full-scale event 2005). This was run by the local Arbroath Abbey Pageant Society, now Arbroath Abbey Timethemes, a registered charity, and re-enacts the story and history of the signing. The group also spearhead Scotland's Tartan Day celebrations on 6 April in association with Angus Council as well as educational visits to local schools.\nArbroath Male Voice Choir was founded in 1934 and is one of the few remaining male voice choirs in Scotland. The choir sings a mix of songs from classical, through Scottish, show tunes and pop. It performs two main concerts each year, one at Christmas, another in spring. The choir is notable for attracting well known, often international singers to its annual spring concert. These have included, Jamie McDougall, Karen Cargill, Gordon Cree, Cheryl Forbes, Colette Ruddy and the international diva Lesley Garrett.\nThe author Sir Walter Scott's famous \"Waverley\" series of novels includes \"Rob Roy\" and \"Ivanhoe\". Scott is known to have visited Arbroath three times, and his personal favourite in the series, \"The Antiquary\" (1816), features fictionalised versions of Arbroath (\"Fairport\") and Auchmithie (\"Musselcrag\").\nArbroath has one museum, the former Bell Rock Lighthouse \"Signal Tower\". In 1807 Arbroath became the base of operations for the building of the Bell Rock Lighthouse. The shore station for the lighthouse \u2013 the Bell Rock Signal Tower \u2013 was completed in 1813 and acted as a lifeline for the keepers offshore. Signal Tower Museum was opened in 1974 as a visitor centre, detailing the history of the lighthouse and the town of Arbroath.\nHospitalfield House, a baronial mansion to the west of the town, houses an educational charity promoting contemporary arts.\nThe town was twinned with \"THE HADDOCK THAT NEVER GOT SMOKED\" by the Intercontinental Twinning Association in July 2024 following a short email exchange with Bill Drummond, commemorative signage is due to be deployed later in the year.\nArbroath smokies.\nArbroath smokies, known nationally and internationally, have been made solely in Arbroath since the award of Protected Geographical Indication in 2004, which limits their production to within of Arbroath Town House. Smokies are made from haddock by traditional methods dating back to the late 19th century. The fish are first salted overnight to preserve them, then left tied in pairs to dry. Next, the dried fish are hung in a covered barrel containing a hardwood fire. After 45 minutes to an hour of smoking, the fish are golden brown and ready to eat. The preparation of smokies remains a cottage industry in Arbroath, centred almost exclusively on the harbour area known as Fit o' the Toon. A large processor, R R Spink &amp; Sons, supplied Arbroath smokies to several UK supermarket chains for a number of years, however this was discontinued when the firm concentrated on smoked salmon and trout.\nSport.\nArbroath F.C., nicknamed the \"Red Lichties,\" is a semi-professional football team who play in the Scottish Championship, the second tier of the Scottish Professional Football League. The club plays its home matches at Gayfield Park. The stadium is set right on the North Sea coast, just 5\u00bd yards (5 metres) from the high tide line. Arbroath F.C. holds the world record for the largest winning margin in a senior football match, 36\u20130, in their Scottish Cup match against Bon Accord (a scratch team from Aberdeen) on 12 September 1885. Arbroath Victoria F.C., a junior football club, plays its home matches at Olgilvy Park. Arbroath SC, another junior football club folded in 2011.\nArbroath Lawn Tennis Club's origins date back to 1909. Despite its name the club no longer has grass courts at its home on Arbirlot Road. Blaes (red shale) a type of clay court surface, was in turn replaced by floodlit, all-weather hardcourts following a successful fundraising drive and grant from Sportscotland. Australian Open 2020 men's doubles quarter finalist Jonny O'Mara is a former club member.\nArbroath has a rugby union club, Arbroath RFC, and several bowls clubs, with former World, British and current Commonwealth Games singles champion Darren Burnett a native of Arbroath.\nArbroath has a successful cricket club. It won the CSL Eastern Premiership in 2013 and the Scottish Cup in 2015.\nArbroath is a popular location for angling.\nPublic services.\nWater is supplied by Scottish Water from Lintrathen and Backwater reservoirs in Glen Isla. Electricity distribution is by Scottish and Southern Electricity Networks.\nWaste management is handled by Angus Council. A kerbside recycling scheme has been in operation since May 2004. Cans, glass, paper and plastic bottles are collected on a weekly basis. Compostable material and non-recyclable material are collected on alternate weeks. Roughly two-thirds of non-recyclable material is sent to landfill at Angus Council's site at Lochhead, Forfar and the remainder sent for incineration (with energy recovery) outside the council area. A recycling centre is at Cairnie Loan and there are a number of neighbourhood recycling facilities. In 2020, Angus Council achieved a 57.9 per cent recycling rate \u2014 the highest by any Scottish council \u2014 compared with 34.7 per cent for 2007\u20132008.\nHealthcare facilities were developed in the 19th century. In 1836 a dispensary was set up by subscription to give medical care to the poor. In 1842 a typhus epidemic led to a small isolation ward. Arbroath Infirmary, also financed by subscriptions, opened in 1845 and relocated to larger premises in 1916. Medical facilities continue to be provided at Arbroath Infirmary on Rosemount Road by NHS Tayside and further afield at Ninewells Hospital, Dundee. The Abbey Health Centre in East Abbey Street and Springfield Medical Centre in Ponderlaw Street provide primary health care. Arbroath, along with the rest of Scotland is served by the Scottish Ambulance Service.\nPolice Scotland have a police station in Gravesend and the town is served by Scottish Fire and Rescue Service.\nA lifeboat station was established in 1803 and was among the first in Scotland. The current RNLI station houses the only remaining Scottish slipway-launched lifeboats. The two lifeboats are an inshore inflatable D-class lifeboat (IB1), the \"Robert Ferguson\", and an all-weather Mersey Class, the \"Inchcape\".\nNotable people.\nIn alphabetical order:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75558", "revid": "6285939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75558", "title": "List of films", "text": ""}
{"id": "75559", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75559", "title": "Wizard of Oz", "text": ""}
{"id": "75562", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75562", "title": "Breakfast club", "text": ""}
{"id": "75563", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75563", "title": "Best Years of Our Lives", "text": ""}
{"id": "75565", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75565", "title": "Big Lebowski", "text": ""}
{"id": "75568", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75568", "title": "Blair Witch Project", "text": ""}
{"id": "75570", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75570", "title": "Crying Game", "text": ""}
{"id": "75571", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75571", "title": "Crouching Tiger Hidden Dragon", "text": ""}
{"id": "75572", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75572", "title": "Empire Strikes Back", "text": ""}
{"id": "75573", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75573", "title": "Final Fantasy The Spirits Within", "text": ""}
{"id": "75575", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75575", "title": "Greatest Show on Earth", "text": ""}
{"id": "75576", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75576", "title": "Incredible Shrinking Man", "text": ""}
{"id": "75579", "revid": "415545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75579", "title": "Ipcress File", "text": ""}
{"id": "75582", "revid": "219529", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75582", "title": "Magic Christian", "text": ""}
{"id": "75583", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75583", "title": "Man for All Seasons", "text": ""}
{"id": "75584", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75584", "title": "Parent Trap", "text": ""}
{"id": "75592", "revid": "32727396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75592", "title": "Shining", "text": "Shining, The Shining or Shinin may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75593", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75593", "title": "Sound of Music", "text": ""}
{"id": "75594", "revid": "169380", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75594", "title": "Streetcar Named Desire", "text": ""}
{"id": "75595", "revid": "45916690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75595", "title": "Serbian language", "text": "Standard variety of Serbo-Croatian\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nSerbian is the standard variety of the Serbo-Croatian language mainly used by Serbs. It is the official and national language of Serbia, one of the three official languages of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and co-official in Montenegro and Kosovo. It is a recognized minority language in Croatia, North Macedonia, Romania, Hungary, Slovakia, and the Czech Republic.\nSerbian is based on the most widespread dialect of Serbo-Croatian, Shtokavian (more specifically on the dialects of \u0160umadija-Vojvodina and Eastern Herzegovina), which is also the basis of standard Croatian, Bosnian, and Montenegrin varieties. Reflecting this shared basis, the Declaration on the Common Language of Croats, Bosniaks, Serbs, and Montenegrins was issued in 2017. The other dialect spoken by Serbs is Torlakian in southeastern Serbia, which is transitional to Macedonian and Bulgarian.\nSerbian is the only European standard language whose speakers are fully functionally digraphic (i.e., its speakers can read and write in Cyrillic and Latin alphabets interchangeably). The Serbian Cyrillic alphabet was standardized in 1814 by Serbian linguist Vuk Karad\u017ei\u0107, who reformed it based on phonemic principles. The Latin alphabet used for Serbian was designed by the Croatian linguist Ljudevit Gaj in the 1830s based on the Czech system with a one-to-one grapheme-phoneme correlation between the Cyrillic and Latin orthographies, resulting in a parallel orthographic system.\nClassification.\nSerbian is a standard variety of Serbo-Croatian, a Slavic language (Indo-European), of the South Slavic subgroup. Other standard varieties of Serbo-Croatian are Bosnian, Croatian, and Montenegrin. \"An examination of all the major 'levels' of language shows that BCS is clearly a single language with a single grammatical system.\" It has lower intelligibility with the Eastern South Slavic languages Bulgarian and Macedonian, than with Slovene (Slovene is part of the Western South Slavic subgroup, but there are still significant differences in vocabulary, grammar and pronunciation to the standard varieties of Serbo-Croatian, although it is closer to the Kajkavian and Chakavian dialects of Serbo-Croatian).\nGeographic distribution.\nSpeakers by country:\nStatus in Montenegro.\nSerbian was the official language of Montenegro until October 2007, when the new Constitution of Montenegro replaced the Constitution of 1992. Amid opposition from pro-Serbian parties, Montenegrin was made the sole official language of the country, and Serbian was given the status of a language in official use along with Bosnian, Albanian, and Croatian.\nIn the 2023 Montenegrin census, 43.18% declared Serbian to be their native language, while Montenegrin was declared by 34.52% of the population.\nWriting system.\nStandard Serbian language uses both Cyrillic (, ) and Latin script (, ). Serbian is a rare example of synchronic digraphia, a situation where all literate members of a society have two interchangeable writing systems available to them. Media and publishers typically select one alphabet or the other. In general, the alphabets are used interchangeably; except in the legal sphere, where Cyrillic is required, there is no context where one alphabet or another predominates.\nAlthough Serbian language authorities have recognized the official status of both scripts in contemporary Standard Serbian for more than half of a century now, due to historical reasons, the Cyrillic script was made the official script of Serbia's administration by the 2006 Constitution.\nThe Latin script continues to be used in official contexts, although the government has indicated its desire to phase out this practice due to national sentiment. The Ministry of Culture believes that Cyrillic is the \"identity script\" of the Serbian nation.\nHowever, the law does not regulate scripts in standard language, or standard language itself by any means, leaving the choice of script as a matter of personal preference and to the free will in all aspects of life (publishing, media, trade and commerce, etc.), except in government paperwork production and in official written communication with state officials, which have to be in Cyrillic. Traffic signs and directional signs, and place names, on main or international roads are to be written with both Cyrillic and Latin script.\nUsage.\nTo most Serbians, the Latin script tends to imply a cosmopolitan or neutral attitude, while Cyrillic appeals to a more traditional or vintage sensibility.\nIn media, the public broadcaster, Radio Television of Serbia, predominantly uses the Cyrillic script whereas the privately run broadcasters, like RTV Pink, predominantly use the Latin script. Newspapers can be found in both scripts.\nIn the public sphere, with logos, outdoor signage and retail packaging, the Latin script predominates, although both scripts are commonly seen. The Serbian government has encouraged increasing the use of Cyrillic in these contexts. Larger signs, especially those put up by the government, will often feature both alphabets; if the sign has English on it, then usually only Cyrillic is used for the Serbian text.\nA survey from 2014 showed that 47% of the Serbian population favors the Latin alphabet whereas 36% favors the Cyrillic one.\nLatin script has become more and more popular in Serbia, as it is easier to input on phones and computers.\nAlphabetic order.\nThe sort order of the () alphabet:\nThe sort order of the () alphabet:\nGrammar.\nSerbian is a highly inflected language, with grammatical morphology for nouns, pronouns and adjectives as well as verbs.\nNouns.\nSerbian nouns are classified into three declensional types, denoted largely by their nominative case endings as \"-a\" type, \"-i\" and \"-e\" type. Into each of these declensional types may fall nouns of any of three genders: masculine, feminine or neuter. Each noun may be inflected to represent the noun's grammatical case, of which Serbian has seven:\nNouns are further inflected to represent the noun's number, singular or plural.\nPronouns.\nPronouns, when used, are inflected along the same case and number morphology as nouns. Serbian is a pro-drop language, meaning that pronouns may be omitted from a sentence when their meaning is easily inferred from the text. In cases where pronouns may be dropped, they may also be used to add emphasis. For example:\nAdjectives.\nAdjectives in Serbian may be placed before or after the noun they modify, but must agree in number, gender and case with the modified noun.\nVerbs.\nSerbian verbs are conjugated in four past forms\u2014perfect, aorist, imperfect, and pluperfect\u2014of which the last two have a very limited use (imperfect is still used in some dialects, but the majority of native Serbian speakers consider it archaic), one future tense (also known as the first future tense, as opposed to the second future tense or the future exact, which is considered a tense of the conditional mood by some contemporary linguists), and one present tense. These are the tenses of the indicative mood. Apart from the indicative mood, there is also the imperative mood. The conditional mood has two more tenses: the first conditional (commonly used in conditional clauses, both for possible and impossible conditional clauses) and the second conditional (without use in the spoken language\u2014it should be used for impossible conditional clauses). Serbian has active and passive voice.\nAs for the non-finite verb forms, Serbian has one infinitive, two adjectival participles (the active and the passive), and two adverbial participles (the present and the past).\nVocabulary.\nMost Serbian words are of native Slavic lexical stock, tracing back to the Proto-Slavic language. There are many loanwords from different languages, reflecting cultural interaction throughout history. Notable loanwords were borrowed from Greek, Latin, Italian, Turkish, Hungarian, English, Russian, German, Czech and French.\nSerbian literature.\nSerbian literature emerged in the Middle Ages, and included such works as \"Miroslavljevo jevan\u0111elje\" (Miroslav's Gospel) in 1186 and \"Du\u0161anov zakonik\" (Du\u0161an's Code) in 1349. Little secular medieval literature has been preserved, but what is there shows that it was in accord with its time; for example, the \"Serbian Alexandride\", a book about Alexander the Great, and a translation of \"Tristan and Iseult\" into Serbian. Although not belonging to the literature proper, the corpus of Serbian literacy in the 14th and 15th centuries contains numerous legal, commercial and administrative texts with marked presence of Serbian vernacular juxtaposed on the matrix of Serbian Church Slavonic.\nIn the mid-15th century, Serbia was conquered by the Ottoman Empire and for the next 400 years there was no opportunity for the creation of secular written literature. However, some of the greatest literary works in Serbian come from this time, in the form of oral literature, the most notable form being epic poetry. The epic poems were mainly written down in the 19th century, and preserved in oral tradition up to the 1950s, a few centuries or even a millennium longer than by most other \"epic folks\". Goethe and Jacob Grimm learned Serbian in order to read Serbian epic poetry in the original. By the end of the 18th century, the written literature had become estranged from the spoken language. In the second half of the 18th century, the new language appeared, called Slavonic-Serbian. This artificial idiom superseded the works of poets and historians like Gavrilo Stefanovi\u0107 Venclovi\u0107, who wrote in essentially modern Serbian in the 1720s. These vernacular compositions have remained cloistered from the general public and received due attention only with the advent of modern literary historians and writers like Milorad Pavi\u0107. In the early 19th century, Vuk Stefanovi\u0107 Karad\u017ei\u0107 promoted the spoken language of the people as a literary norm.\nDialects.\nThe dialects of Serbo-Croatian, regarded Serbian (traditionally spoken in Serbia), include:\nDictionaries.\nVuk Karad\u017ei\u0107's \"Srpski rje\u010dnik\", first published in 1818, is the earliest dictionary of modern literary Serbian. The \"Rje\u010dnik hrvatskoga ili srpskoga jezika\" (I\u2013XXIII), published by the Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts from 1880 to 1976, is the only general historical dictionary of Serbo-Croatian. Its first editor was \u0110uro Dani\u010di\u0107, followed by Pero Budmani and the famous Vukovian Tomislav Mareti\u0107. The sources of this dictionary are, especially in the first volumes, mainly \u0160tokavian. There are older, pre-standard dictionaries, such as the 1791 German\u2013Serbian dictionary or 15th century Arabic-Persian-Greek-Serbian Conversation Textbook.\nEtymological dictionaries.\nThe standard and the only completed etymological dictionary of Serbian is the \"Skok\", written by the Croatian linguist Petar Skok: \"Etimologijski rje\u010dnik hrvatskoga ili srpskoga jezika\" (\"Etymological Dictionary of Croatian or Serbian\"). I-IV. Zagreb 1971\u20131974.\nThere is also a new monumental \"Etimolo\u0161ki re\u010dnik srpskog jezika\" (Etymological Dictionary of Serbian). So far, two volumes have been published: I (with words on A-), and II (Ba-Bd).\nThere are specialized etymological dictionaries for German, Italian, Croatian, Turkish, Greek, Hungarian, Russian, English and other loanwords (cf. chapter \"word origin\").\nSample text.\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in Serbian, written in the Cyrillic script:\n\u0421\u0432\u0430 \u0459\u0443\u0434\u0441\u043a\u0430 \u0431\u0438\u045b\u0430 \u0440\u0430\u0452\u0430\u0458\u0443 \u0441\u0435 \u0441\u043b\u043e\u0431\u043e\u0434\u043d\u0430 \u0438 \u0458\u0435\u0434\u043d\u0430\u043a\u0430 \u0443 \u0434\u043e\u0441\u0442\u043e\u0458\u0430\u043d\u0441\u0442\u0432\u0443 \u0438 \u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u0438\u043c\u0430. \u041e\u043d\u0430 \u0441\u0443 \u043e\u0431\u0434\u0430\u0440\u0435\u043d\u0430 \u0440\u0430\u0437\u0443\u043c\u043e\u043c \u0438 \u0441\u0432\u0435\u0448\u045b\u0443 \u0438 \u0442\u0440\u0435\u0431\u0430 \u0458\u0435\u0434\u043d\u0438 \u043f\u0440\u0435\u043c\u0430 \u0434\u0440\u0443\u0433\u0438\u043c\u0430 \u0434\u0430 \u043f\u043e\u0441\u0442\u0443\u043f\u0430\u0458\u0443 \u0443 \u0434\u0443\u0445\u0443 \u0431\u0440\u0430\u0442\u0441\u0442\u0432\u0430.\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in Serbian, written in the Latin alphabet:\n\"Sva ljudska bi\u0107a ra\u0111aju se slobodna i jednaka u dostojanstvu i pravima. Ona su obdarena razumom i sve\u0161\u0107u i treba jedni prema drugima da postupaju u duhu bratstva.\"\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in English:\nAll human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJournals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "75596", "revid": "147617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75596", "title": "Terminator 2", "text": ""}
{"id": "75598", "revid": "7279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75598", "title": "Terminator II", "text": ""}
{"id": "75602", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75602", "title": "Man Who Would Be King", "text": ""}
{"id": "75603", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75603", "title": "The Thin Blue Line (emblem)", "text": ""}
{"id": "75605", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75605", "title": "Thing -- 1982", "text": ""}
{"id": "75606", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75606", "title": "Time Machine", "text": "A time machine is a fictional or hypothetical device for time travel.\nTime Machine or The Time Machine may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75609", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75609", "title": "A Space Odyssey", "text": ""}
{"id": "75610", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75610", "title": "Benjamin Harrison V", "text": "American planter, politician, and merchant (1726\u20131791)\nBenjamin Harrison V (April 5, 1726\u00a0\u2013 April 24, 1791) was an American planter, merchant, and politician who was a Founding Father of the United States. He served as a delegate to the United States Continental Congress, and was a signer of the Continental Association and the Declaration of Independence. He also served as Virginia's governor (1781\u20131784), affirming a tradition of public service in the Harrison family.\nBenjamin was born at the family homestead, Berkeley Plantation, where in 1619 there was established one of the first annual observances of a day of Thanksgiving. It is also the location where the Army bugle call of \"Taps\" was written and first played in 1862. Benjamin served an aggregate of three decades in the Virginia House of Burgesses, alternately representing Surry County and Charles City County. He was among the early patriots to formally protest measures that King George III and the British Parliament imposed upon the American colonies, leading to the American Revolution. Although a slaveholder, Harrison joined a 1772 petition to the king, requesting that he abolish the slave trade.\nAs a delegate to the Continental Congress and chair of its Committee of the Whole, Harrison attended and presided over the final debate of the Declaration of Independence. He was one of its signers in 1776. The Declaration included a foundational philosophy of the United States: \"We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.\"\nHarrison was elected as Virginia's fifth governor; his administration was marked by its futile struggle with a state treasury decimated by the Revolutionary War. He later returned to the Virginia House for two final terms. In rare disagreement with his traditional ally George Washington, Harrison in 1788 cast one of his last votes, opposing ratification of the nation's Constitution for its lack of a bill of rights. He left two descendants who became United States presidents\u2014son William Henry Harrison and great-grandson Benjamin Harrison.\nFamily.\nParents and siblings.\nHarrison was born April 5, 1726, in Charles City County, Virginia; he was the eldest son and 3rd oldest of ten children of Benjamin Harrison IV (1693\u20131745) and Anne Carter (1702\u20131743); Anne was a daughter of Robert Carter I. Benjamin Harrison I (1594\u20131648) arrived in the colonies around 1630 and by 1633 began a family tradition of public service when he was recorded as clerk of the Virginia Governor's Council.\nBenjamin Harrison II (1645\u20131712) and Benjamin Harrison III (1673\u20131710) followed this example, serving as delegates in the Virginia House of Burgesses. Benjamin IV and his wife Anne built the family's manor house at Berkeley Plantation; he served as a justice of the peace and represented Charles City County in the Virginia House of Burgesses. (Biographer Clifford Dowdey notes that the family did not employ the roman numeral suffixes, which historians have assigned for clarity.)\nBenjamin V, was described in his youth as \"tall and powerfully built,\" with \"features that were clearly defined, with a well-shaped mouth above a strong pointed chin.\" He spent a year or two at the College of William &amp; Mary. His brother Carter Henry (1736\u20131793) became a leader in Cumberland County. Brother Nathaniel (1742\u20131782) was elected to the House of Burgesses, then to the Virginia Senate. Brother Henry (1736\u20131772) fought in the French and Indian War and later established Hunting Quarter Plantation in Sussex County, brother Charles (1740\u20131793) became a brigadier general in the Continental Army.\nInheritance and slaveholding.\nHarrison's father, at age 51 and with a child in hand, was struck by lightning as he shut an upstairs window during a storm on July 12, 1745; he and his daughter Hannah were killed. Benjamin V inherited the bulk of his father's estate, including Berkeley and several surrounding plantations, as well as thousands of acres extending to Surry County and the falls of the James River. Also among his holdings was a fishery on the river and a grist mill in Henrico County. He also assumed ownership and responsibility for the manor house's equipment, stock, and numerous enslaved people. His siblings inherited another six plantations, possessions, and enslaved people, as the father chose to depart from the tradition of leaving the entire estate to the eldest son.\nHarrison and his ancestors enslaved as many as 80 to 100 people. Harrison's father was adamant about not breaking up slave families in the distribution of his estate. As with all planters, the Harrisons sustained enslaved people on their plantations. Nevertheless, the enslaved people's status was involuntary, and according to Dowdey, \"among the worst aspects of their slaveholding is the assumption that the men in the Harrison family, most likely the younger, unmarried ones, and the overseers, made night trips to the slaves' quarters for carnal purposes.\" Benjamin Harrison V owned mulattoes, though no record has been revealed as to their parentage. Dowdey portrays the Harrisons' further incongruity, saying the enslaved people in some ways \"were respected as families, and there developed a sense of duty about indoctrinating them in Christianity, though other slaveholders had reservations about baptizing children who were considered property.\"\nMarriage and children.\nIn 1748, Harrison married Elizabeth Bassett (1730\u20131792) of New Kent County; she was the daughter of Colonel William Bassett (1709\u20131744) and Elizabeth Churchill (1709\u20131779), daughter of burgess William Churchill (1649\u20131710). Harrison and his wife had eight children during their 40-year marriage. Among them was eldest daughter Lucy Bassett (1749\u20131809), who married Peyton Randolph (1738\u20131784). Another daughter, Anne Bassett (1753\u20131821), married David Coupland (1749\u20131822). The eldest son was Benjamin Harrison VI (1755\u20131799), a briefly successful merchant who served in the Virginia House of Delegates but who died a self-indulgent, troubled, young widower. Another was Carter Bassett Harrison (c. 1756\u20131808), who served in the Virginia House of Delegates and the U.S. House of Representatives. The other children were Elizabeth Harrison (1751\u20131791), who married physician William Rickman (c. 1731\u20131783) and Sarah Harrison (1770\u20131812), who married John Minge (1771\u20131829).\nThe youngest child was General William Henry Harrison (1773\u20131841), who became a congressional delegate for the Northwest Territory and also was governor of the Indiana Territory. In the 1840 United States presidential election, William Henry defeated incumbent Martin Van Buren but fell ill and died just one month into his presidency. Vice President John Tyler, a fellow Virginian and Berkeley neighbor succeeded him. William Henry's grandson, Benjamin Harrison (1833\u20131901), was a brigadier general in the Union Army during the American Civil War. Benjamin served in the U.S. Senate and was elected president in 1888 after defeating incumbent Grover Cleveland.\nVirginia legislator.\nAccording to one researcher, in 1749, Harrison first took his father's path in being elected to the Virginia House of Burgesses, initially for Surry County, and notes that Harrison was not of legal age to assume his burgesses seat until 1752. Either he or a relative succeeded the deceased Edward Broadnax as Charles City County's representative in the House of Burgesses in 1748 and won each election at least until 1769. Researchers agree that this man and William Acrill continually won re-election and represented Charles City County in the House of Burgesses from 1769 until Virginia's last colonial governor ended that assembly in 1776. Then Charles City County voters elected Harrison and Acrill to the first two Revolutionary Conventions, and Acrill with this man and his son Benjamin Harrison VI as alternates to the third and fourth convention, and Acrill with Samuel Harwood and this man as alternates to the fifth convention. Harrison, Acrill and Samuel Harwood then jointly represented Charles City County in the new Virginia House of Delegates at its inaugural session, then Acrill and Harrison, then John Tyler joined Harrison as Charles City County's other legislator beginning in 1778 until 1781. When fellow legislators elected Harrison Virginia's governor, he was replaced as delegate by William Green Munford. At the end of his gubernatorial term (he was ineligible for re-election), Harrison was briefly elected from Surry County across the James River, where he moved and which he represented for a term alongside his son Carter Bassett Harrison, and fellow delegates also elected him as their Speaker. Harrison then returned to Charles City County, and voters elected him as one of their representatives until his death (he died before taking his seat in the fall 1791 session). :\nIn his first year in the House of Burgesses in 1752, Harrison was appointed to the Committee of Propositions and Grievances and thereby participated in a confrontation with King George and his Parliament and their appointed Governor of Virginia, Robert Dinwiddie. There developed a dispute with the governor over his levy of a pistole (a Spanish gold coin) upon all land patents, which presaged the core issue of the American Revolution two decades later\u2014taxation without representation. Harrison assisted in drafting a complaint to the governor and the Crown, which read that the payment of any such levy would be \"deemed a betrayal of the rights and privileges of the people.\" When the British Privy Council received the complaint, it replied: \"that the lower house is a subordinate lawmaking body, and where the King's decisions are concerned, it counts for nothing.\" On this occasion, a compromise was reached, allowing the governor's levy on parcels of less than 100 acres lying east of the mountains.\nHarrison again joined the fray with Britain after it adopted the Townshend Acts, formally asserting the Parliament's right to tax the colonies. He was appointed in 1768 to a special committee to draft a response for the colony. A resolution asserted the right of British subjects to be taxed only by their elected representatives. The American colonies achieved their objective with a repeal of the Townshend Acts through the action of Lord North, who nevertheless continued the tax on tea.\nClearly this man in 1770 was a signer of the Virginia Association, an association of Virginia lawmakers and merchants boycotting British imports until the British Parliament repealed its tea tax. He also sponsored a bill declaring that Parliament's laws were illegal without the colonists' consent. Harrison, at this time, also served as a justice in Charles City County. When the city of Williamsburg lacked the funds for the construction of a courthouse, he and fellow delegate James Littlepage organized a group of \"Gentlemen Subscribers\" who purchased an unused building and presented it to the city in 1771. Early in 1772, Harrison and Thomas Jefferson were among a group of six Virginia house delegates assigned to prepare and deliver an address to the king which called for an end to the importation of enslaved people from Africa. Reportedly that the request was delivered and was unambiguous in its object to close the slave trade; the king rejected it.\nCongressional delegate in Philadelphia.\nIn 1773, colonists protested the British tax on tea by destroying a shipment during the Boston Tea Party. While all of the colonies were inspired by the news, some patriots, including Harrison, had misgivings and believed the Bostonians had a duty to reimburse the East India Company for its losses at their hands. The British Parliament responded to the protest by enacting more punitive measures, which colonists called the Intolerable Acts. Despite his qualms, Harrison was among 89 members of the Virginia Burgesses who signed a new association on May 24, 1774, condemning Parliament's action. The group also invited other colonies to convene a Continental Congress and called for a convention to select its Virginia delegates. At the First Virginia Convention, Harrison was selected on August 5, 1774, as one of seven delegates to represent Virginia at the Congress, to be located in Philadelphia.\nHarrison set out that month, leaving his home state for the first time. He was armed with a positive reputation built in the House of Burgesses, which Edmund Randolph articulated to the Congress: \"A favorite of the day was Benjamin Harrison. With strong sense and a temper not disposed to compromise with ministerial power, he scruples not to utter any untruth. During a long service in the House of Burgesses, his frankness, though sometimes tinctured with bitterness, has been the source of considerable attachment.\"\nHarrison arrived in Philadelphia on September 2, 1774, for the First Continental Congress. According to biographer Smith, he gravitated to the older and more conservative delegates in Philadelphia; he was more distant from the New Englanders and the more radical, particularly John and Samuel Adams. The genuine and mutual enmity between the Adams cousins and Harrison also stemmed from their Puritan upbringing in aversion to human pleasures and Harrison's appreciation for bold storytelling, fine food, and wine. John Adams described Harrison in his diary as \"another Sir John Falstaff,\" as \"obscene,\" \"profane,\" and \"impious.\" However, he also recalled Harrison's comment that he was so eager to participate in the Congress that \"he would have come on foot.\" Politically, Harrison aligned with John Hancock and Adams with Richard Henry Lee, whom Harrison had adamantly opposed in the House of Burgesses. Investments and commercial interests of the centrists such as Robert Morris, Thomas Willing, Carter Braxton, and Harrison informed their conservatism.\nIn October 1774, Harrison signed the Continental Association, an association with the other delegates dictating a boycott of exports and imports with Britain, effective immediately. This was modeled after the Virginia Association, which Harrison had earlier signed in his home state. The First Congress concluded that month with a Petition to the King, signed by all delegates, requesting the king's attention to the colonies' grievances and restoration of harmony with the crown. Upon his return home, Harrison received a letter from Thomas Jefferson advising of his order for 14 sash windows from London just before the passage of the boycott and apologizing for his inability to cancel the order.\nIn March 1775, Harrison attended a convention at St. John's Parish in Richmond, Virginia, made famous by Patrick Henry's \"Give me liberty or give me death!\" speech. A defense resolution was passed by a vote of 65\u201360 for raising a military force. It represented Virginia's substantial step in transitioning from a colony to a commonwealth. Biographer Smith indicates Harrison was probably in the minority, though he was named to a committee to carry the resolution into effect. He was also re-elected as a delegate to the new session of the Continental Congress.\nSecond Continental Congress and Declaration of Independence.\nWhen the Second Continental Congress convened in May 1775, Harrison took up residence in north Philadelphia with two roommates\u2014his brother-in-law Peyton Randolph and George Washington. The two men left him to reside alone when Randolph suddenly died, and Washington assumed command of the Continental Army. Harrison was kept busy with the issues of funding and supplying Washington's army and corresponded with him at length.\nIn the spring of 1775, an effort was made in Congress to seek reconciliation with the King of Britain through the Olive Branch Petition, authored by John Dickinson. A heated debate ensued with Dickinson's remark that he disapproved of only one word in the petition: \"Congress.\" Harrison angrily rose from his seat and replied, \"There is but one word in the paper, Mr. President, of which I do approve, and that is the word 'Congress.'\" The petition passed and was submitted to the Crown but remained unread by the king as he formally declared that the colonists were traitors.\nIn November 1775, Harrison was appointed to a select committee to review the army's needs. He went to Cambridge, Massachusetts with Washington, Benjamin Franklin, and Thomas Lynch to assess the needs, as well as the morale, of the forces. After a 10-day inspection, the committee concluded that the pay for the troops should be improved and that the ranks should be increased to over 20,000 men. Harrison then returned to Philadelphia to work closely with fellow delegates for the defense of his state as well as South Carolina, Georgia, and New York.\nHarrison attended until the session's end in July 1776, frequently serving as chair of the Committee of the Whole. As such, he presided over the final debates of the Lee Resolution offered by Virginia delegate Richard Henry Lee. This was the Congress' first expression of its objective of freedom from the Crown. Harrison oversaw the final debates and amendments of the Declaration of Independence. The Committee of Five presented Thomas Jefferson's draft of the Declaration on June 28, 1776, and the Congress resolved on July 1 that the Committee of the Whole should debate its content. The Committee amended it on July 2 and 3, then adopted it in final form on Thursday, July 4. Harrison duly reported this to Congress and gave a final reading of the Declaration. The Congress unanimously resolved to have the Declaration engrossed and signed by those present.\nHarrison was known for his audacious sense of humor. Even detractor John Adams conceded in his diary that \"Harrison's contributions and many pleasantries steadied rough sessions.\" Pennsylvania delegate Benjamin Rush in particular recalled the Congress' atmosphere during a signing of the Declaration on August 2, 1776. He described a scene of \"pensive and awful silence\". He said that Harrison singularly interrupted \"the silence and gloom of the morning\" as delegates filed forward to inscribe what they thought was their ensuing death warrant. Rush said that the rotund Harrison approached the diminutive Elbridge Gerry, who was about to sign the Declaration, and said, \"I shall have a great advantage over you, Mr. Gerry, when we are all hung for what we are now doing. From the size and weight of my body I shall die in a few minutes and be with the Angels, but from the lightness of your body you will dance in the air an hour or two before you are dead.\"\nRevolutionary War.\nFrom December 1775 until March 1777, the Congress was on two occasions threatened by British forces and forced to remove itself\u2014first to Baltimore and later to York, Pennsylvania\u2013circumstances that Harrison distinctly disliked. This has been attributed to some unspecified illness he was experiencing then. In 1777, Harrison became a member of the newly created Committee of Secret Correspondence for Congress. The committee's primary objective was to establish secure communication with American agents in Britain concerning the colonies' interests. Harrison was also named as Chairman of the Board of War, whose initial purpose was to review the movements of the army in the north and the exchange of prisoners.\nAt that time, Harrison found himself at odds with Washington over Marquis de Lafayette's commission, which Harrison insisted was honorary only and without pay. He also stirred controversy by endorsing the rights of Quakers not to bear arms per their religion. He unsuccessfully argued throughout the formation of the Articles of Confederation that Virginia should be given greater representation than other states based on its population and land mass. His Congressional membership permanently ended in October 1777; biographer John Sanderson indicates that when Harrison retired from Congress, \"his estates had been ravaged\" and \"his fortune had been impaired.\"\nHarrison returned to Virginia, where he quickly renewed his efforts in the Virginia legislature. In May 1776, the House of Burgesses had ended and was replaced by the House of Delegates, according to Virginia's new constitution. He was elected Speaker in 1777, defeating Thomas Jefferson by a vote of 51\u201323; he returned to the speakership on several occasions. He concerned himself in the ensuing years with many issues, including Virginia's western land interests, the condition of Continental forces, and the defense of the commonwealth.\nIn January 1781, a British force of 1,600 was positioned at the mouth of the James River, led by turncoat Benedict Arnold; Harrison was called upon to return immediately to Philadelphia to request military support for his state. He knew that Berkeley was one of Arnold's primary targets, so he relocated his family before setting out. In Philadelphia, his pleas for Virginia were heard, and he obtained increased gunpowder, supplies, and troops, but only on a delayed basis. Meanwhile, Arnold advanced up the James, wreaking havoc on both sides of the river. The Harrison family avoided capture in Arnold's January raid on Berkeley, but Arnold, intent that no likeness of the family survive, removed and burned all the family portraits there. Most of Harrison's other possessions and a large portion of the house were destroyed. Other signers were similarly targeted with more horrific consequences. Harrison took up the rehabilitation of his home, returned to his correspondence with Washington, and continued efforts to obtain armaments, troops, and clothing supplies for other southern states.\nGovernor of Virginia.\nThe new nation secured its Revolutionary War victory in October 1781 at Yorktown, Virginia\u2013this provided only brief respite for Harrison, who began to serve a month later as the fifth Governor of Virginia. He was also the fourth governor to assume the office in that year\u2013wartime events in Virginia occasioned multiple successions. Money was the primary problem he confronted, as the war had drained the coffers of the Virginia treasury, and creditors, both domestic and foreign, plagued the government. Hence, there was no capacity for military action outside of the immediate area, so Harrison steadfastly opposed offensive action against combative Indians in the Kentucky and Illinois country. He instead pursued a policy of treating with the Cherokee, Chickasaw, and Creek Indian tribes, which allowed peace to last for the remainder of his term. The situation resulted in some contentious exchanges with General George Rogers Clark who urged aggressive operations in the west.\nHarrison received a recently-revealed letter from Thomas Jefferson, dated December 31, 1783, in which Jefferson relates the wave of enthusiasm of Europeans for taking up arms against autocratic leaders. Jefferson was sharing the affirmation of his own promotion of the right to bear arms that brought about the American Revolution. The letter also conveys Jefferson\u2019s anxiety over the final ratification of the Treaty of Paris formally ending the revolutionary war. Signed initially by the parties in September, the still-outstanding consent of two colonies was required in London (then a two-month journey) by the following March. The deadline was ultimately but barely met, with the required signatures in mid-January.\nAs Harrison's term was ending, Washington accepted an invitation to visit with the Harrisons in Richmond, saying, \"And I shall feel an additional pleasure, in offering this tribute of friendship and respect to you, by having the company of Marsqs. de la Fayette\". The general visited in November 1784, though Lafayette could not accompany him. Harrison's service as governor was lauded, despite his inability to solve the financial problems that plagued his administration.\nReturn to legislature and death.\nIn 1786, Harrison and other legislature members were deeply divided over the issue of state aid to religion. He joined with his brother (and fellow delegate) Carter Henry Harrison in supporting a measure offered by Patrick Henry to provide funds for teachers of the Christian religion. The proposal failed, and the assembly enacted Thomas Jefferson's famous Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, establishing a separation of church and state.\nHarrison participated as a member of the Virginia Ratifying Convention for the United States Constitution in 1788, representing Charles City County. However, along with Patrick Henry, George Mason, and others, he was skeptical of a large central government and opposed the Constitution because of the absence of a bill of rights. He was in the minority when the constitution won ratification with a margin of 5 out of 170 votes cast. He overcame his ill health sufficiently to address those who opposed the result, imploring them to seek redress through the legitimate channels of amendments to the Constitution. Though Washington had promoted the Constitution, he praised Harrison, saying, \"Your individual endeavors to prevent inflammatory measures from being adopted redound greatly to your credit.\"\nDespite his chronic gout and weakened financial condition, Harrison continued his work in the House, and was a candidate for both Virginia's 10th congressional district and Virginia governor in 1788. Harrison wrote George Washington in early 1789, seeking appointment as naval officer of the Norfolk district, but Washington politely declined his request. Harrison sought and won re-election to the legislature in 1790, and that year again declined to run for a second gubernatorial term, although his name was placed in contention against Beverly Randolph; even his son Carter Basset Harrison (upon his father's instructions) voted against him.\nDeath and legacy.\nHarrison died on April 24, 1791, at his home days after celebrating his unanimous re-election to the legislature. His specific cause of death is not stated. He was buried at his home, and his wife, Elizabeth Bassett, who died a year later, was buried at his side. His youngest son, William Henry, aged 18, had just begun medical studies in Philadelphia. Still, adequate funds were lacking, so he soon abandoned medicine for military service and his own path of leadership.\nHis alma mater, the College of William &amp; Mary named a residence hall for Harrison. A major bridge spanning the James River near Hopewell is the Benjamin Harrison Memorial Bridge.\nThe Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence in Washington, D.C. also includes Harrison.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75615", "revid": "146242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75615", "title": "List of most popular Chinese family names", "text": ""}
{"id": "75616", "revid": "87355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75616", "title": "Hecatoncheire", "text": ""}
{"id": "75617", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75617", "title": ".Net", "text": ""}
{"id": "75618", "revid": "40374695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75618", "title": "Microsoft .NET", "text": ""}
{"id": "75619", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75619", "title": "Ronnie Barker", "text": "English actor, comedian and writer (1929\u20132005)\nRonald William George Barker (25 September 1929\u00a0\u2013 3 October 2005) was an English actor, comedian and writer. He was known for roles in British comedy television series such as \"The Frost Report\", \"The Two Ronnies\", \"Porridge\", and \"Open All Hours\".\nBarker began acting in Oxford amateur dramatics while working as a bank clerk, having dropped out of higher education. He moved into repertory theatre with the Manchester Repertory Company at Aylesbury and decided he was best suited to comic roles. He had his first success at the Oxford Playhouse and in roles in the West End including Tom Stoppard's \"The Real Inspector Hound\". During this period, he was in the cast of several BBC radio and television comedies, most notably the radio sitcom \"The Navy Lark\". He got his television break with David Frost's satirical sketch series \"The Frost Report\" (1966\u201367), where he worked with John Cleese and Ronnie Corbett, the latter becoming Barker's long-time comedy partner. He joined Frost's production company and starred in several ITV shows during the late 1960s. \nAfter rejoining the BBC in the early 1970s, Barker and Corbett achieved significant success with the sketch show \"The Two Ronnies\" (1971\u201387). The duo maintained their careers as solo performers; Barker notably starred as inmate Norman Stanley Fletcher in the sitcom \"Porridge\" (1974\u201377) and its sequel \"Going Straight\" (1978) and as shopkeeper Arkwright in the sitcom \"Open All Hours\" (1976\u201385). He wrote comedy under his own name, though for much of his written material after 1968 he adopted pseudonyms (including \"Gerald Wiley\") to avoid pre-judgment of his writing talent. He won a BAFTA for best light entertainment performance four times, among other awards, and was appointed an OBE in 1978.\nBarker's later sitcoms such as \"The Magnificent Evans\" (1984) and \"Clarence\" (1988) were less successful and he retired in December 1987. The following year, he opened an antiques shop with his wife, Joy. After 1999, he appeared in smaller, non-comic roles in films. He died of heart failure on 3 October 2005, aged 76.\nEarly life.\nBarker was born on 25 September 1929 at 70 Garfield Street, Bedford, the only son of Leonard William Barker (always known as \"Tim\") and Edith Eleanor (n\u00e9e Carter; known as \"Sis\", by virtue of being the youngest sister amongst her siblings).\nBarker's elder sister Vera was born in 1926 and his younger sister Eileen was born in 1933. His father was a clerk for Shell-Mex, and this job saw the family move to Church Cowley Road in Cowley, Oxfordshire, when Barker was four.\nBarker's biographer Bob McCabe described Barker's childhood as \"a happy time, marred by no ructions or family tensions, apart from the occasional wet sock.\" As a child, Barker enjoyed dressing up, particularly in his father's pierrot outfit, as well as films, comics and animals. He developed a love of the theatre, often attending plays with his family. The first play he saw was \"Cottage to Let\" and he once skipped school to see Laurence Olivier in \"Henry V\". He frequently stood outside stage doors to collect autographs, his first being the actress Celia Johnson.\nBarker grew up in the Florence Park area of Oxford, and went to Donnington Junior School, and then the City of Oxford High School for Boys. His chemistry textbook at Oxford had previously been used by T. E. Lawrence. He found his talent for humour at school and developed his musical ability by singing in the choir at St James's, his local church. He got into the sixth form a year early after gaining the School Certificate but he felt what he was learning would be of no use to him in later life and so left as soon as he could.\nAfter leaving school, he trained as an architect; however, feeling he was not skilled enough, he quit after six months. Barker took his sister Vera's job as a bank clerk at the Westminster Bank after she had left to become a nurse. He harboured dreams of becoming an actor, and took up amateur dramatics, although initially he just saw the pastime as a chance to meet girls.\nFor 18 months, while at the bank, he worked as an actor and stage manager, making his first appearance in \"A Murder Has Been Arranged\" as the musical director of the play-within-a-play. Eventually he gave up his job to become a professional actor. His father did not support his acting ambition.\nCareer.\nTheatrical career.\nBarker failed to get into the Young Vic School, but joined the Manchester Repertory Company, which was based in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, often taking comic roles in their weekly shows. Initially he was employed as the assistant to the assistant stage manager, earning \u00a32.10s. 0d (\u00a32.50) a week. He made his debut as a professional actor on 15 November 1948 as Lieutenant Spicer in a performance of J. M. Barrie's \"Quality Street\". He went on to play the organist in \"When We Are Married\" and by his third role, the chauffeur Charles in \"Miranda\", Barker realised he wanted to be a comic actor. He was described as \"ha[ving] the talent to be a great straight actor\", but noted: \"I want to make people laugh. Never mind about \"Hamlet\". Forget \"Richard the Second\". Give me \"Charley's Aunt\". My mission in life was now crystal clear.\" He appeared in stage adaptations of \"Treasure Island\" and \"Red Riding Hood\" before getting his first leading role in \"The Guinea Pig\" as a working-class boy at a public school. When the production moved to Rhyl, Barker followed. The Manchester Repertory Company closed, as did the Rhyl company shortly after.\nBarker, aged 20, then spent some time as a porter at Wingfield Hospital; he became distressed through his contact with polio patients and so opted to take on the persona of \"Charlie\" so as not to be himself. He and a male nurse often entertained the patients with comedy routines. He found work at the Mime Theatre Company, performing mimed folk music and dance, which soon folded in Penzance. He made his way back to Oxford and then worked in Bramhall for the Famous Players. There he met actor Glenn Melvyn; the two became firm friends and Barker stated Melvyn taught him everything he \"ever learned about comedy\".\nBarker joined the Oxford Playhouse in 1951 and worked there for three years, appearing in plays such as \"He Who Gets Slapped\" as Polly. Peter Hall worked with Barker at Oxford and gave him his break, casting him as the Chantyman and Joe Silva in his production of \"Mourning Becomes Electra\" at the Arts Theatre in London's West End in 1955. By the time he had made it to the West End, Barker had appeared in an estimated 350 plays.\nBarker remained a West End actor for several years, appearing in numerous plays between 1955 and 1968. These included, in 1955, two performances each night as he played a gypsy in \"Listen to the Wind\" at the Arts Theatre and then a peasant in \"Summertime\" later in the evening. His other roles included Mr. Thwaites in \"Double Image\" in 1956 (with Olivier), \"Camino Real\" (directed by Hall) in 1957, French gangster Robertoles-Diams in \"Irma La Douce\" for two years from 1958, Lord Slingsby-Craddock in \"Mr. Whatnot\" in 1964 and Birdboot in \"The Real Inspector Hound\" in 1968. He also appeared in several Royal Court Theatre productions, including \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" as Quince.\nEarly media career.\nBarker's theatrical success enabled him to move into radio work. Barker, who had previously been known by his full name \"Ronald\", was now referred to as the less formal form \"Ronnie\", after a director changed it in the credits, although he did not tell Barker. His first radio appearance was in 1956, playing Lord Russett in \"Floggit's\". He went on to play multiple characters, but primarily the put-upon Able Seaman \"Fatso\" Johnson and Lieutenant-Commander Stanton in \"The Navy Lark\", a navy based sitcom on the BBC Light Programme, which ran from 1959 to 1977, with Barker featuring in some 300 episodes.\nBarker also featured in the show's radio spin-off \"The TV Lark\", in which his character, Fatso, was now a camera operator after the main characters were drummed out of the service, and as a trainee chef in \"Crowther's Crowd\" in 1963, and had roles on \"Variety Playhouse\". Barker soon began working in film and television. His first acting job on television was in Melvyn's show \"I'm Not Bothered\". He appeared in various roles in the comedy series \"The Seven Faces of Jim\" from 1962, alongside Jimmy Edwards and June Whitfield, as well as parts in \"Bold as Brass\" and \"Foreign Affairs\" (as Russian embassy worker Grischa Petrovitch). This was followed with dramatic parts in \"A Tale of Two Cities\" as Jerry Cruncher in 1965 as well as a single episode role in \"The Avengers\", in which he played Cheshire, a cat lover.\nBarker had an uncredited role in the 1958 film \"Wonderful Things!\". In 1964 he appeared in Galton &amp; Simpson's gentle comedy \"The Bargee,\" as 'Ronnie', the illiterate cousin of Harry H. Corbett's rascally 'Hemmel Pike'. He did his first bit of on-screen 'porridge' as fellow convict to Charlie Drake in \"The Cracksman\" (1963). Other film work at that time included: \"Doctor in Distress\" (1963), \"Father Came Too!\" (1963) and \"A Home of Your Own\" (1965).\nIn 1966, Barker appeared in \"The Saint (S5, E9 \"The Better Mousetrap\")\" as the detective Alphonse. In 1966, Barker got his break with the satirical sketch series \"The Frost Report\", having been recommended for the show by producer James Gilbert. The show starred David Frost, John Cleese and Barker's future comedy partner Ronnie Corbett, whom he had met in 1963 when Corbett was the barman at the Buckstone Club near the Haymarket Theatre. Corbett stated in his autobiography that the two had gravitated towards each other because of their similar backgrounds; neither had attended university, while many of the other cast and writers on \"The Frost Report\" had. Each episode of the show, which was performed and broadcast live, focused on a single topic and principally revolved around a continuous monologue from Frost, with sketches from Barker, Corbett and Cleese as the show went on. Barker starred alongside Cleese and Corbett in \"The Frost Report\"'s best-known sketch, which satirised the British class system, with Barker representing the middle class.\nAfter the first series, the special \"Frost Over England\" was produced, winning the Golden Rose at the Montreux Television Festival. With a second series of the show announced, Frost, recognising their potential, signed both Barker and Corbett up to his production company David Paradine Productions. As part of the deal Barker was given his own show in 1968, \"The Ronnie Barker Playhouse\", which comprised six separate, thirty-minute plays. Barker starred in each piece as a different character. After two series of \"The Frost Report\" on the BBC, totalling 26 half-hour episodes, Frost moved to ITV after helping to set up London Weekend Television. There, Frost hosted \"Frost on Sunday\", with Barker and Corbett following and again performing sketches on the programme. Barker began writing sketches for the programme under the pseudonym Gerald Wiley. Barker and Corbett had a greater role on the show than on \"The Frost Report\" and Corbett felt \"more aware of what [they] were doing.\"\nBarker began using the pseudonym Gerald Wiley when writing sketches because he wished the pieces to be accepted on merit and not just because he, as a star of the programme, had written them; he continued this tradition with the material he wrote later in his career, using a variety of pseudonyms. Barker brought his sketches in, claiming they had come from Wiley through Barker's agent Peter Eade, and they were very well received. To maintain the deception, Barker had criticised material he himself had submitted under the pseudonym; when a Wiley-credited sketch about a ventriloquist had been poorly received by the audience Barker told Corbett \"Well, Gerald Wiley let us down there\", and on another occasion, when looking at a script, \"I don't understand this line. What's he getting at?\" One of the first sketches he wrote was called \"Doctor's Waiting Room\", with the main part written for Corbett. Barker encouraged Corbett to buy the rights to the sketch and, further maintaining the myth, told him to reject Wiley's \"request\" for \u00a33,000 as too expensive, before giving Corbett the sketch for free. Speculation began about Wiley's identity, with Tom Stoppard, Frank Muir, Alan Bennett and No\u00ebl Coward all rumoured. After the second series of \"Frost on Sunday\", the cast and crew were invited to a Chinese restaurant, while Wiley said that he would reveal himself. Barker, who had told Corbett earlier in the day, stood up and announced he was Wiley, although initially nobody believed him.\nIn 1969, Barker wrote, produced and starred as Sir Giles Futtock in the film \"Futtock's End\" which featured little dialogue and only \"grumble[s] and grunt[s]\". \n\"The Ronnie Barker Playhouse\" had been designed to find a successful idea for a sitcom, and the episode \"Ah, There You Are\" by Alun Owen, which introduced the bumbling aristocratic character Lord Rustless, was chosen. Despite Barker's success on ITV, LWT's programme controller Stella Richman opted to fire Frost's company Paradine (Frost was sacked from the LWT board) and as Barker was contracted to the company rather than the network, he lost his job, as did Corbett.\nMove to the BBC and \"The Two Ronnies\".\nSoon after, Barker, Corbett and Josephine Tewson performed a sketch about Henry VIII at the 1971 BAFTAs, with Barker playing Henry. The three also had to keep the audience entertained for around eight minutes as the show was stopped because of technical difficulties. Their performance at the award show impressed the BBC's Head of Light Entertainment Bill Cotton and Controller of BBC1, Paul Fox, who were sitting in the audience. Not knowing they were both essentially unemployed, although still contracted to Paradine, Cotton signed the duo up for their own show together, and a series each on their own; he later joked he \"must have offered them too much money.\" Barker and Corbett wished to avoid being remembered primarily as a duo, and felt they could not work in the same way as a conventional double act like Morecambe and Wise, and so each maintained their solo careers as well. They each were given a one-off variety special; Barker's, called \"The Ronnie Barker Yearbook\", featured a sketch for each month of the year although, because of time constraints, the first two had to be cut. Barker also reprised his character Lord Rustless in the sitcom \"His Lordship Entertains\" in 1972. Barker wrote all seven episodes, now using the pseudonym Jonathan Cobbald.\nTheir show together was \"The Two Ronnies\", a sketch show which aired for twelve series and eight specials between 1971 and 1987, to immediate success. The show, as described by Anthony Hayward of \"The Independent\", was \"a cocktail of comedy sketches, playlets, songs and parodies, a long-winded Corbett monologue and a singing star, sandwiched between the opening and closing news summaries.\" The usual format consisted of many sketches between the two, an ongoing filmed serial, a solo character sketch from Barker, Corbett's monologue, a musical number, a special guest, bookended by joke news items, delivered from a desk by the two in the style of newsreaders, before ending with the catchphrase \"It's good night from me \u2013 and it's good night from him.\"\nThis was a set format which was used for almost the entirety of the show's run. The end catchphrase and newsreader characters were devised because Barker found it difficult to appear as himself: Corbett explained that Barker \"was a very private man, a quiet man ... He found it almost impossible to talk directly, as himself, to an audience.\" Each also had their own solo segments to help ensure they were not totally associated as a double act. Filming took place over four months of each year. After outdoor and serial sketches were filmed on location, the studio material was filmed on Sunday evenings at BBC Television Centre in front of a live audience; the musical finale was filmed the day before without the audience.\nBarker wrote much of the show's material, roughly three-quarters, again under the name Gerald Wiley. He was heavily involved with the show's production, especially the serial. Corbett explained that Barker was a \"perfectionist\" and \"as he wrote it Ronnie knew how he wanted every shot to look.\" After filming the show all day, he spent the evenings helping technician Jim Franklin to edit it. While filming on location Barker and Corbett would look through all of the potential material for the studio recording of the rest of the show's content and decide on the running order. He and Corbett always got on, with Barker noting \"People refuse to believe that we don't have rows, tensions, private wars. It's a strange thing after so many years but we never have. Actually, it's even more amicable than a marriage \u2013 wedlock without the bad patches. Our sense of humour and perception of what's good and what's rubbish are uncommonly in tune.\" They took turns to play the parts which had the \"good lines\". One of the show's other writers, Barry Cryer, said: \"You could write almost anything knowing these two would do it brilliantly. Because they weren't a double act; they were two men who worked together and had their own careers.\"\nBarker's material included the sketch which came to be known as \"Four Candles\", airing in 1976, although in the original script it was titled \"Annie Finkhouse\". It sees a customer (Barker) ask for a series of items in a hardware store. The sketch's humour derives from similarities in word pronunciation, leading to confusion on the part of the store owner (Corbett). These misunderstandings include the confusion between \"four candles\" and \"fork handles\". The idea for the sketch came from the owners of a hardware shop in Hayes who wrote in to \"The Two Ronnies\" to describe some of the amusing events and misunderstandings in their store. Barker was never happy with the sketch's final line (a male assistant asking \"What sort of billhooks did you want?\") and changed it (to a female assistant asking \"What sort of knockers were you looking for?\") for the stage version of \"The Two Ronnies\", although he was still not totally satisfied with it. Nevertheless, the sketch is considered the show's most famous one and was voted as the show's best in a TV special, while also placing fifth on Channel 4's \"50 Greatest Comedy Sketches\". The original script, handwritten by Barker, was sold for \u00a348,500 at auction in 2007 after featuring in an episode of \"Antiques Roadshow\" the previous year.\nThe show was considered a \"national institution\" with audiences of between 15 and 20 million regularly tuning in to its 93 episodes. Barker won the BAFTA for Best Light Entertainment Performance in 1971 and 1977 for the show. \"The Two Ronnies\" ended with the 1987 Christmas special. In 1978 the two performed a stage version of the show at the London Palladium; lasting for three months, it followed the same format as the show, with old sketches and some new material, supported by variety acts. Barker's unease with appearing as himself in the stage show led him to create a fictionalised version of himself to play instead. A second stage series took place in 1983. Barker was reportedly offended by a sketch called \"The Two Ninnies\" on the BBC's \"Not the Nine O'Clock News\", which mocked their act as being based on dated innuendo-based humour.\nAfter a tip-off from Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais, Barker and Corbett opted to move with their families to Sydney, Australia, in 1979 for the year to exploit a tax loophole and avoid paying the year's income tax. They performed their stage show for four weeks in Sydney and a further four in Melbourne; because of their existing popularity in Australia and what Corbett termed the Australian audiences' \"[comedic] soul that still related to the UK\", they made no changes to the routine. Barker made no other appearances that year and spent his time writing and engaging in recreational activities. Following the show's success, Kerry Packer commissioned a six-episode TV series of \"The Two Ronnies in Australia\" for Nine Network. The show comprised material not yet shown in Australia from \"The Two Ronnies\" and new content targeted more towards an Australian audience. They returned for a second series in 1986.\nBarker and Corbett also starred in the short, mostly silent, films \"The Picnic\" (1976) and \"By the Sea\" (1982), both written by Barker as \"David Huggett and Larry Keith\". \"By the Sea\" was Barker's tribute to the seaside-postcard humour of Donald McGill and his most \"personal\" work. The show was also widely syndicated in North America by PBS and CBC, and in 1980 they appeared in the short-lived NBC variety show \"The Big Show\"; the two were glad the show did not last as they objected to the use of canned laughter by the American networks.\n\"Porridge\", \"Open All Hours\" and other work.\nFollowing the success of \"The Two Ronnies\", the BBC let Barker decide what he wanted to do. \"The Two Ronnies\" took up one third of a year to produce, allowing time for Barker and Corbett to do a solo project each. Barker opted to produce some sitcom pilots shown as part of 1973's \"Seven of One\". Two of these pilots, \"Open All Hours\" (written by Roy Clarke) and \"Prisoner and Escort\" (written by Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais) became series. \"Prisoner and Escort\" became \"Porridge\", airing from 1974 to 1977, with Barker starring as the cynical and cunning prisoner Norman Stanley Fletcher. \"Porridge\" was the first sitcom to take place in a prison; \"The Times\" said the show \"was about what it took to survive in prison, the little day-to-day triumphs over the system that kept the prisoners sane.\"\nThe opening sequence of the programme showed Fletcher being directed to his cell, as prison doors are locked behind him, all the while the judge can be heard pronouncing judgement and sentence. The judge's voice was performed by Barker. The show became a huge success, attracting 15 million viewers and earning what the BBC described as \"a chorus of critical acclaim and public adoration for what remains one of the most classic British sitcoms ever produced.\" \"The Times\" called Fletcher his \"finest creation\". Barker privately regarded the series as the finest work of his career. He won the BAFTA for Best Light Entertainment Performance in 1975 for his performance.\nIn 1976, Barker played Friar Tuck in the film \"Robin and Marian\", directed by Richard Lester. The same year, determined not to be remembered only as Fletcher, Barker opted to end \"Porridge\" after three series and instead focused on the second pilot \"Open All Hours\", alongside David Jason. Barker starred as Arkwright, a money-grabbing, stuttering shopkeeper. Arkwright's stutter was not in the script; Barker was inspired to use it by Melvyn's performance and use of a stutter in a 1955 play the two performed at the Palace Theatre called \"Hot Water\". \"Open All Hours\" aired one series in 1976 on BBC2 but was not renewed due to low ratings. As a result, Barker backtracked on his earlier decision and produced a third series of \"Porridge\", as well as a film adaptation. It was followed by the spin-off sitcom \"Going Straight\" which focused on Fletcher after his release from prison. While not as popular as \"Porridge\", Barker again won the BAFTA for Best Light Entertainment Performance. \nFurther plans for the show were ended when Barker's co-star Richard Beckinsale died of a heart attack in 1979, aged 31. With repeats of \"Open All Hours\" earning high ratings on BBC1, the BBC commissioned a further series of the show on 18 January 1980, with another two made as well as the show continued its ratings success. Both shows placed in the top ten of the 2004 poll to determine Britain's Best Sitcom; \"Porridge\" finished seventh and \"Open All Hours\" eighth.\nBarker was the first actor considered for the role of Frank Spencer in \"Some Mothers Do 'Ave 'Em\", but turned it down, so Michael Crawford was cast instead.\nBarker's next sitcom, \"The Magnificent Evans\", which was about a Welsh photographer and aired in 1984, was not successful. His final sitcom, \"Clarence\", in which he played Clarence Sale, a removal man with failing sight, aired in 1988. Barker wrote the show himself, again using a pseudonym, this time as \"Bob Ferris\", the name of a character in The Likely Lads.\nRetirement and re-appearances.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I had completely run out of ideas and it scared and panicked me. I was always able to write scripts but, you know, I couldn't think of a single thing to write about. It was a very weird sensation. I had seen friends of mine start burning out. No one wants to see a 70-year-old on television who can't remember his lines. And also I had lost interest.\"\n\u2014Barker on his decision to retire\nIn 1987, before \"Clarence\" aired and after rejecting Hall's offer of the part of Falstaff in a Royal National Theatre production of \"Henry IV, Part 1 &amp; 2\", Barker retired from show business, aged 58, \"at the height of his fame\", citing a decline in his own writing quality, lack of ambition and ideas, and a desire to go out on top so as not to damage his legacy, as well as concerns about the state of his heart. He had decided to retire in 1985 but his decision was kept secret for two years, Corbett being the only one knowing about it. He made his decision public on an appearance on the chat show \"Wogan\".\nOnce retired from acting, Barker opened and ran an antiques shop called The Emporium in Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, and resisted all calls to come out of retirement from then onwards. He joked: \"I lose money every week, but it's a hobby. It's cheaper than skiing and safer at my age.\" Because of its unprofitability, the shop was sold after ten years. He wrote his autobiography, \"Dancing in the Moonlight: My Early Years on Stage\", in 1993 and released \"All I Ever Wrote\", his complete scripts, in 1999. He wrote the play \"Mum\" (initially as \"Richard Mervyn\", but as the play was opening, consenting to use his own name) for his daughter Charlotte in 1998. The play was performed at The King's Head Theatre, but garnered a negative response, with Barker stating it got \"the worst notices of any play in the history of the theatre.\"\nJust over a decade after retiring, Barker was persuaded to make occasional appearances on television again. In 1997, he appeared with Corbett at the Royal Command Performance, driving on stage on a motorcycle combination as the Two Fat Ladies, and in 1999 he was reunited with Corbett for \"Two Ronnies Night\" on BBC One, and the following year for \"A Tribute to the Two Ronnies\". In 2002, director Richard Loncraine persuaded Barker to appear as Winston Churchill's butler David Inches in the BBC-HBO drama \"The Gathering Storm\" and then cast him in the larger role of the General in the TV film \"My House in Umbria\" in 2003, alongside Maggie Smith (whom Barker had advised, early in their careers, to give up acting as he felt she would not be a success). In the same year, he briefly reprised his role as Norman Stanley Fletcher in the spoof documentary \"\".\nBarker received several lifetime achievement awards. He won the Royal Television Society's award for Outstanding Creative Achievement in 1975. Alec Guinness presented him with a lifetime achievement honour at the inaugural British Comedy Awards in 1990, while he received another such honour at the BBC Centenary Programme in 1996. In 2004, he was given a special BAFTA lifetime achievement award at \"Ronnie Barker: A BAFTA Tribute\", a televised celebratory tribute evening. In 2005, he and Corbett were part of the first 100 people given stars on London's Avenue of Stars. Previous awards included the Variety Club of Great Britain Award in 1969, 1974 and 1980, the Radio Industry Club Award in 1973, 1974, 1977 and 1981.\nFollowing the success of \"Ronnie Barker: A BAFTA Tribute\", Barker wanted to return \"The Two Ronnies\" to television and the BBC commissioned \"The Two Ronnies Sketchbook\", a clip show of their best sketches along with newly recorded introductions. These were recorded in one day because of Barker's declining health and aired in 2005. The project, when announced, met with \"some derision among the professional critics\", but after the first episode drew eight million viewers, they had to \"eat their words\". The final special, and Barker's final appearance on television \u2013 \"The Two Ronnies Christmas Sketchbook\" \u2013 was recorded in July 2005 as a result of Barker's failing health and aired posthumously in December.\nActing and writing style.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I'll tell you who my favourite performer is. Ronnie Barker. Surprised? You shouldn't be. He's really great.\"\nAlec Guinness\nBarker became a comic actor in his theatre days, noting \"I think it's better to make people laugh than cry.\" He has been described by \"The Times\" as \"not a comedian, [but] an actor with a talent for comedy,\" who \"slipped into characters with apparent ease.\" Barker felt he was funny only in character. The BBC wrote of him: \"Able to deliver the great tongue-twisting speeches required of his characters, Barker pronounced himself 'completely boring' without a script.\" Peter Hall spoke of Barker's skills as a dramatic actor, calling him \"the great actor we lost\" and lamented that Barker was unable to take a role in one of his Shakespearean productions. Barker preferred comedy, and felt it was \"as good and as important as serious work\" and he was not \"dumbing down\" by doing it. Actor Gene Wilder compared him to Charlie Chaplin in saying \"no matter how farcical [his performance] was ... there was always an element of reality to what he did.\" Corbett praised Barker's skill at playing serious authority figures saying absurd things, using Barker's verbal dexterity and energetic performances.\n\"The Times\" stated that Barker's writing style was \"based on precise scripts and perfect timing.\" It often involved playing with language, including humour involving such linguistic items as spoonerisms and double entendres. Dennis Baker of \"The Guardian\" wrote that Barker \"preferred innuendo over the crudely explicit, a restraint that demanded some imagination from the audience and was the essence of his comedy.\" Corbett said he had \"a mastery of the English language\".\nIn private, Barker annotated a copy of \"A Book of Nonsense\" by Edward Lear, penning punch lines of his own for each limerick. On the title page he wrote, \"There was an old fossil named Lear, Whose verses were boring and drear. His last lines were worst \u2013 just the same as the first! So I've tried to improve on them here.\" The annotated copy of Lear's book, signed and dated November 2001, was auctioned in 2012.\nPersonal life.\nBarker met Joy Tubb in Cambridge while she was a stage manager for two plays he was in. They married nine months later in July 1957 and had three children: two sons, Larry (born 1959) and Adam (born 1968), and one daughter, Charlotte (born 1962), who became an actress. Larry, a leading advertising creative director, was named after Barker's idol Laurence Olivier. Adam Barker became an actor, but was jailed for twelve months in 2012 on twenty counts of making indecent images of children, having evaded police for eight years; he was not present at his father's funeral.\nThe family lived in Pinner for many years, and subsequently in a converted mill in Dean, Oxfordshire. According to Corbett, Barker was \"first and foremost a family man\". Joy died in January 2011, aged 78.\nBarker was appointed an OBE in 1978. He was an avid collector of antiques, books and posters and amassed a collection of over 53,000 postcards. He produced several compilation books of them, including \"Ronnie Barker's Book of Bathing Beauties\", \"A Pennyworth of Art\", and \"Sauce\". Barker rarely appeared in public, and when he did, it was almost always in character. He once said, \"I've always known I haven't a personality of my own, I have to be someone else to be happy. That's why I became an actor, I suppose.\"\nBarker was a heavy smoker until 1972, when he gave up the habit after having a pre-cancerous growth removed from his throat; he took to drinking wine and using placebo cigarettes to maintain his concentration and help him sleep. He underwent a heart bypass in 1996 and survived a pulmonary embolism the following year.\nDeath.\nBarker opted not to have heart valve replacement surgery, and his health rapidly declined after the recording of \"The Two Ronnies Christmas Sketchbook\". He died of heart failure at the Katherine House hospice in Adderbury, Oxfordshire, on 3 October 2005, aged 76, with his wife by his side. News of his death made top billing on television news bulletins.\nBarker's body was cremated at a private humanist funeral at Banbury Crematorium, which was attended only by family and close friends. A public memorial service for Barker was held on 3 March 2006 at Westminster Abbey, with some 2,000 people in attendance. Ronnie Corbett, Richard Briers, Josephine Tewson, Michael Grade, and Peter Kay all read at the service, while others in attendance included David Jason, Stephen Fry, Michael Palin, Leslie Phillips, Lenny Henry, Dawn French, June Whitfield and David Frost. A recording of Barker's rhyming slang sermon from \"The Two Ronnies\" was played, and while the cross was in procession in the aisle of the abbey, it was accompanied by four candles instead of the usual two, in reference to the Four Candles sketch. Barker was the third comedy professional to be given a memorial at Westminster Abbey, after Joyce Grenfell and Les Dawson.\nLegacy.\nFollowing Barker's death, the Writer of the Year Award at the British Comedy Awards was renamed in his honour. In 2005, he was voted as the 16th-greatest comedy act ever by fellow comedians and comedy insiders, in a poll to find \"The Comedians' Comedian\".\nThe BBC described him as \"one of the leading figures of British television comedy\", and \"much loved and admired\". \"The Independent\" called him \"a master of television sitcom\". \"The Guardian\" said he was \"much loved ... both as an actor and a writer he was recognised as a master of pyrotechnic puns, surreal behaviour in public and private places, and crackling cross-chat\". It concluded that \"it says much about the decline of the British television industry that Ronnie Barker, one of its most creative comic talents, should have turned his back on it long before he died at the age of 76.\" In a eulogy for Barker, the Reverend Robert Wright stated that he was \"undoubtedly one of the very greatest television comedy actors\" and that \"as a performer he made comedy look effortlessly funny\".\nIn 2006, Barker's stage play \"Mum\" was adapted and directed by Neil Cargill for BBC Radio 4, and broadcast as an \"Afternoon Play\", starring Maxine Peake and Sam Kelly.\nA bronze statue of Barker, sculpted by Martin Jennings and showing him in character as Norman Stanley Fletcher, was unveiled at the entrance of the Aylesbury Waterside Theatre in September 2010 by his widow Joy, David Jason and Ronnie Corbett.\nIn 2015, the Ronnie Barker Comedy Lecture (also referred to as The Ronnie Barker Talk) was commissioned by the BBC at the instigation of the head of comedy commissioning, Shane Allen. The first lecture was given in August 2017 by Ben Elton. Elton's lecture focused on the future of the British sitcom.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75620", "revid": "38516105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75620", "title": "Absolute path", "text": ""}
{"id": "75624", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75624", "title": "Abstract syntax", "text": "In computer science, the abstract syntax of data is its structure described as a data type (possibly, but not necessarily, an abstract data type), independent of any particular representation or encoding. This is particularly used in the representation of text in computer languages, which are generally stored in a tree structure as an abstract syntax tree. Abstract syntax, which only consists of the structure of data, is contrasted with concrete syntax, which also includes information about the representation. For example, concrete syntax includes features like parentheses (for grouping) or commas (for lists), which are not included in the abstract syntax, as they are implicit in the structure.\nAbstract syntaxes are classified as first-order abstract syntax (FOAS), if the structure is abstract but names (identifiers) are still concrete (and thus requires name resolution), and \"higher-order abstract syntax,\" if the names themselves are abstract.\nUses.\nTo be implemented either for computation or communications, a mapping from the abstract syntax to specific machine representations and encodings must be defined; these may be called the \"concrete syntax\" (in language implementation) or the \"transfer syntax\" (in communications).\nA compiler's internal representation of a program will typically be specified by an abstract syntax in terms of categories such as \"statement\", \"expression\" and \"identifier\". This is independent of the source syntax (concrete syntax) of the language being compiled (though it will often be very similar). A parse tree is similar to an abstract syntax tree but it will typically also contain features such as parentheses, which are syntactically significant but which are implicit in the structure of the abstract syntax tree.\nAlgebraic data types are particularly well-suited to the implementation of abstract syntax.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75625", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75625", "title": "ASN.1", "text": "Data interface description language\nAbstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1) is a standard interface description language (IDL) for defining data structures that can be serialized and deserialized in a cross-platform way. It is broadly used in telecommunications and computer networking, and especially in cryptography.\nProtocol developers define data structures in ASN.1 modules, which are generally a section of a broader standards document written in the ASN.1 language. The advantage is that the ASN.1 description of the data encoding is independent of a particular computer or programming language. Because ASN.1 is both human-readable and machine-readable, an ASN.1 compiler can compile modules into libraries of code, codecs, that decode or encode the data structures. Some ASN.1 compilers can produce code to encode or decode several encodings, e.g. packed, BER or XML.\nASN.1 is a joint standard of the International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) in ITU-T Study Group 17 and International Organization for Standardization/International Electrotechnical Commission (ISO/IEC), originally defined in 1984 as part of CCITT X.409:1984. In 1988, ASN.1 moved to its own standard, X.208, due to wide applicability. The substantially revised 1995 version is covered by the X.680\u2013X.683 series. The latest revision of the X.680 series of recommendations is the 6.0 Edition, published in 2021.\nLanguage support.\nASN.1 is a data type declaration notation. It does not define how to manipulate a variable of such a type. Manipulation of variables is defined in other languages such as SDL (Specification and Description Language) for executable modeling or TTCN-3 (Testing and Test Control Notation) for conformance testing. Both these languages natively support ASN.1 declarations. It is possible to import an ASN.1 module and declare a variable of any of the ASN.1 types declared in the module.\nApplications.\nASN.1 is used to define a large number of protocols. Its most extensive uses continue to be telecommunications, cryptography, and biometrics.\nEncodings.\nASN.1 is closely associated with a set of encoding rules that specify how to represent a data structure as a series of bytes. The standard ASN.1 encoding rules include:\nEncoding Control Notation.\nASN.1 recommendations provide a number of predefined encoding rules. If none of the existing encoding rules are suitable, the Encoding Control Notation (ECN, X.692) provides a way for a user to define his or her own customized encoding rules.\nRelation to Privacy-Enhanced Mail (PEM) Encoding.\nPrivacy-Enhanced Mail (PEM) encoding is entirely unrelated to ASN.1 and its codecs, but encoded ASN.1 data, which is often binary, is often PEM-encoded so that it can be transmitted as textual data, e.g. over SMTP relays, or through copy/paste buffers.\nAs computer files.\nASN.1 language and encoding specifications do not specify details such as what filename extension to use when a chunk of data is stored as a file on a computer. Nevertheless, some conventions have arisen:\nExample.\nModule and constraint.\nThis is an example ASN.1 module defining the messages (data structures) of a fictitious Foo Protocol:\nFooProtocol DEFINITIONS ::= BEGIN\n FooQuestion ::= SEQUENCE {\n trackingNumber INTEGER,\n question IA5String\n FooAnswer ::= SEQUENCE {\n questionNumber INTEGER,\n answer BOOLEAN\nEND\nThis could be a specification published by creators of Foo Protocol. Conversation flows, transaction interchanges, and states are not defined in ASN.1, but are left to other notations and textual description of the protocol.\nASN.1 supports constraints on values and sizes, and extensibility. The above specification can be changed to:\nFooProtocol DEFINITIONS ::= BEGIN\n FooQuestion ::= SEQUENCE {\n trackingNumber INTEGER(0..199),\n question IA5String\n FooAnswer ::= SEQUENCE {\n questionNumber INTEGER(10..20),\n answer BOOLEAN\n FooHistory ::= SEQUENCE {\n questions SEQUENCE(SIZE(0..10)) OF FooQuestion,\n answers SEQUENCE(SIZE(1..10)) OF FooAnswer,\n anArray SEQUENCE(SIZE(100)) OF INTEGER(0..1000),\nEND\nThis change constrains trackingNumbers to have a value between 0 and 199 inclusive, and questionNumbers to have a value between 10 and 20 inclusive. The size of the questions array can be between 0 and 10 elements, with the answers array between 1 and 10 elements. The anArray field is a fixed length 100 element array of integers that must be in the range 0 to 1000. The '...' extensibility marker means that the FooHistory message specification may have additional fields in future versions of the specification; systems compliant with one version should be able to receive and transmit transactions from a later version, though able to process only the fields specified in the earlier version. Good ASN.1 compilers will generate (in C, C++, Java, etc.) source code that will automatically check that transactions fall within these constraints. Transactions that violate the constraints should not be accepted from, or presented to, the application. Constraint management in this layer significantly simplifies protocol specification because the applications will be protected from constraint violations, reducing risk and cost.\nThe above examples only make use of syntax from X.680. More advanced constraints from X.682 are not used.\nExample PDU.\nAssuming a message that complies with the Foo Protocol and that will be sent to the receiving party, this particular message (protocol data unit (PDU)) is:\nmyQuestion FooQuestion ::= {\n trackingNumber 5,\n question \"Anybody there?\"\nTo send the myQuestion message through the network, the message is serialized (encoded) as a series of bytes using one of the encoding rules. The Foo protocol specification should explicitly name one set of encoding rules to use, so that users of the Foo protocol know which one they should use and expect.\nThe above is an example of X.681, specifically of the \"ObjectAssignment\" construct.\nExample encoded in DER.\nBelow is the data structure shown above as myQuestion encoded in DER format (all numbers are in hexadecimal):\n 30 13 02 01 05 16 0e 41 6e 79 62 6f 64 79 20 74 68 65 72 65 3f\nDER is a type\u2013length\u2013value encoding, so the sequence above can be interpreted, with reference to the standard SEQUENCE, INTEGER, and IA5String types, as follows:\n 30 \u2014 type tag indicating SEQUENCE\n 13 \u2014 length in octets of value that follows\n 02 \u2014 type tag indicating INTEGER\n 01 \u2014 length in octets of value that follows\n 05 \u2014 value (5)\n 16 \u2014 type tag indicating IA5String \n (IA5 means the full 7-bit ISO 646 set, including variants, \n but is generally US-ASCII)\n 0e \u2014 length in octets of value that follows\n 41 6e 79 62 6f 64 79 20 74 68 65 72 65 3f \u2014 value (\"Anybody there?\")\nExample encoded in XER.\nAlternatively, it is possible to encode the same ASN.1 data structure with XML Encoding Rules (XER) to achieve greater human readability \"over the wire\". It would then appear as the following 108 octets, (space count includes the spaces used for indentation):\n&lt;FooQuestion&gt;\n &lt;trackingNumber&gt;5&lt;/trackingNumber&gt;\n &lt;question&gt;Anybody there?&lt;/question&gt;\n&lt;/FooQuestion&gt;\nExample encoded in PER, either aligned or unaligned.\nAlternatively, if Packed Encoding Rules Unaligned are employed, the following 122 bits (16 octets amount to 128 bits, but here only 122 bits carry information and the last 6 bits are merely padding) will be produced:\n 01 05 0e 83 bb ce 2d f9 3c a0 e9 a3 2f 2c af c0\nIn this format, type tags for the required elements are not encoded, so it cannot be parsed without knowing the expected schemas used to encode. Additionally, the bytes for the value of the IA5String are packed using 7-bit units instead of 8-bit units, because the encoder knows that encoding an IA5String byte value requires only 7 bits. However the length bytes are still encoded here, even for the first integer tag 01 (but a PER packer could also omit it if it knows that the allowed value range fits on 8 bits, and it could even compact the single value byte 05 with less than 8 bits, if it knows that allowed values can only fit in a smaller range).\nThe last 6 bits in the encoded PER are padded with null bits in the 6 least significant bits of the last byte c0 : these extra bits may not be transmitted or used for encoding something else if this sequence is inserted as a part of a longer unaligned PER sequence.\nThis means that unaligned PER data is essentially an ordered stream of bits, and not an ordered stream of bytes like with aligned PER, and that it will be a bit more complex to decode by software on usual processors because it will require additional contextual bit-shifting and masking and not direct byte addressing (but the same remark would be true with modern processors and memory/storage units whose minimum addressable unit is larger than 1 octet). However modern processors and signal processors include hardware support for fast internal decoding of bit streams with automatic handling of computing units that are crossing the boundaries of addressable storage units (this is needed for efficient processing in data codecs for compression/decompression or with some encryption/decryption algorithms).\nFor comparison, Packed Encoding Rules Aligned produces instead:\n 01 05 0e 41 6e 79 62 6f 64 79 20 74 68 65 72 65 3f\nThis format is octet-aligned. In this case, each octet is padded individually with null bits on their unused most significant bits.\nTools.\nMost of the tools supporting ASN.1 do the following:\nA list of tools supporting ASN.1 can be found on the https://.\nComparison to similar schemes.\nASN.1 is similar in purpose and use to Google Protocol Buffers and Apache Thrift, which are also interface description languages for cross-platform data serialization. Like those languages, it has a schema (in ASN.1, called a \"module\"), and a set of encodings, typically type\u2013length\u2013value encodings. Unlike them, ASN.1 does not provide a single and readily usable open-source implementation, and is published as a specification to be implemented by third-party vendors. However, ASN.1, defined in 1984, predates them by many years. It also includes a wider variety of basic data types, some of which are obsolete, and has more options for extensibility. A single ASN.1 message can include data from multiple modules defined in multiple standards, even standards defined years apart.\nASN.1 also includes built-in support for constraints on values and sizes. For instance, a module can specify an integer field that must be in the range 0 to 100. The length of a sequence of values (an array) can also be specified, either as a fixed length or a range of permitted lengths. Constraints can also be specified as logical combinations of sets of basic constraints.\nValues used as constraints can either be literals used in the PDU specification, or ASN.1 values specified elsewhere in the schema file. Some ASN.1 tools will make these ASN.1 values available to programmers in the generated source code. Used as constants for the protocol being defined, developers can use these in the protocol's logic implementation. Thus all the PDUs and protocol constants can be defined in the schema, and all implementations of the protocol in any supported language draw upon those values. This avoids the need for developers to hand code protocol constants in their implementation's source code. This significantly aids protocol development; the protocol's constants can be altered in the ASN.1 schema and all implementations are updated simply by recompiling, promoting a rapid and low risk development cycle.\nIf the ASN.1 tools properly implement constraints checking in the generated source code, this acts to automatically validate protocol data during program operation. Generally ASN.1 tools will include constraints checking into the generated serialization / deserialization routines, raising errors or exceptions if out-of-bounds data is encountered. It is complex to implement all aspects of ASN.1 constraints in an ASN.1 compiler. Not all tools support the full range of possible constraints expressions. XML schema and JSON schema both support similar constraints concepts. Tool support for constraints varies. Microsoft's xsd.exe compiler ignores them.\nSchema translation.\nSome ASN.1 tools are able to translate between ASN.1 and XML schema (XSD). The translation is standardised by the ITU. This makes it possible for a protocol to be defined in ASN.1, and also automatically in XSD. Thus it is possible (though perhaps ill-advised) to have in a project an XSD schema being compiled by ASN.1 tools producing source code that serializes objects to/from JSON wireformat. A more practical use is to permit other sub-projects to consume an XSD schema instead of an ASN.1 schema, perhaps suiting tools availability for the sub-projects language of choice, with XER used as the protocol wireformat.\nOSS Nokalva offers a tool for converting a JSON data object or a JSON schema into an ASN.1 definition. There is not yet a tool for generating a JSON schema describing the JER-encoded structure of an ASN.1 data structure.\nOSS Nokalva also offers a tool for converting a Protocol Buffers schema into an ASN.1 definition.\nSchema-optional formats.\nMany programming languages define language-specific serialization formats. For instance, Python's \"pickle\" module and Ruby's \"Marshal\" module. These formats do not require a schema. They are generally language-specific, which makes them easier to use in ad hoc storage scenarios, but inappropriate for communications protocols.\nJSON and XML similarly do not require a schema, making them easy to use. They are also both cross-platform standards that are broadly popular for communications protocols, particularly when combined with a JSON schema or XML schema.\nProtocol definitions on different levels.\nASN.1 is visually similar to Augmented Backus-Naur form (ABNF), which is used to define many Internet protocols like HTTP and SMTP. However, in practice they are quite different: ASN.1 defines a data structure, which can be encoded in various ways (e.g. JSON, XML, binary). ABNF, on the other hand, defines the encoding (\"syntax\") at the same time it defines the data structure (\"semantics\"). ABNF tends to be used more frequently for defining textual, human-readable protocols, and generally is not used to define type\u2013length\u2013value encodings.\nASN.1 is also visually similar to CSN.1. However, CSN.1 also defines the encoding of an object, specifically on the bit level.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75626", "revid": "50150779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75626", "title": "Jean Chr\u00e9tien", "text": "Prime Minister of Canada from 1993 to 2003\nJoseph Jacques Jean Chr\u00e9tien (; born January 11, 1934) is a Canadian lawyer and retired politician who served as the 20th prime minister of Canada from 1993 to 2003. He served as leader of the Liberal Party from 1990 to 2003 and as leader of the Official Opposition from 1990 to 1993.\nBorn and raised in Shawinigan Falls, Quebec, Chr\u00e9tien studied law at the Universit\u00e9 Laval. A Liberal, he was first elected to the House of Commons in 1963 federal election. Chr\u00e9tien served in various cabinet posts in the governments of Lester B. Pearson and Pierre Trudeau, most notably as minister of Indian affairs and northern development, president of the Treasury Board, minister of finance, and minister of justice. In the latter role, Chr\u00e9tien played a key role in the patriation of the Constitution of Canada and the establishment of the \"Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms\". Chr\u00e9tien ran for the leadership of the Liberal Party in 1984, placing second to John Turner. He then served as deputy prime minister in Turner's short-lived government, which was defeated in the 1984 federal election. In 1986, Chr\u00e9tien briefly left politics amid tensions with Turner and began working in the private sector. After the Liberals were defeated again in 1988, he returned to politics and won the leadership of the party in 1990, thereby becoming leader of the Official Opposition. Chr\u00e9tien led the Liberal Party to a majority government in the 1993 federal election. The party won two additional majorities in 1997 and 2000.\nChr\u00e9tien became prime minister as Canada was on the brink of a debt crisis due to the country's chronic budget deficit. His government produced a series of austerity budgets adopting a centrist Third Way approach, which sharply reduced spending and reformed various programs, resulting in a budget surplus in 1997 (Canada's first in nearly 30 years). The latter half of Chr\u00e9tien's tenure saw consecutive budget surpluses which were primarily used to fund tax cuts and pay down government debt. In national unity, Chr\u00e9tien strongly opposed the Quebec sovereignty movement and led the federalist campaign to a narrow victory in the 1995 Quebec referendum. He then implemented a sponsorship program to promote Canada in Quebec and enacted the \"Clarity Act\", which set the conditions for any future referendum on secession. Chr\u00e9tien also advanced environmental legislation, including an updated \"Environmental Protection Act\" and the \"Species at Risk Act\". His government established the long-gun registry, privatized the Canadian National Railway, and introduced the harmonized sales tax (HST). He later oversaw Operation Yellow Ribbon in response to the September 11 attacks, passed the \"Youth Criminal Justice Act\", and laid the groundwork to legalize same-sex marriage. In foreign policy, Chr\u00e9tien's government signed the Kyoto Protocol on climate change and spearheaded the Ottawa Treaty aimed at eliminating anti-personnel landmines. He also ordered military intervention during the Kosovo War and the War in Afghanistan, while opposing participation in the Iraq War.\nAlthough his popularity and that of the Liberal Party were seemingly unchallenged for three consecutive federal elections, Chr\u00e9tien became subject to several controversies. He was accused of corruption in the Shawinigate and sponsorship scandals, although he has consistently denied any wrongdoing. He also became embroiled in a within the Liberal Party against his finance minister and long-time political rival Paul Martin. In December 2003, amid pressure from the pro-Martin faction of the party and the threat of losing a leadership review, Chr\u00e9tien resigned as prime minister and retired from politics. He ranks highly in historical rankings of Canadian prime ministers. At age , Chr\u00e9tien is the oldest living former Canadian prime minister.\nEarly life, family, and education.\nChr\u00e9tien was born on January 11, 1934, in Shawinigan Falls, Quebec, as the 18th of 19 children (10 of whom did not survive infancy), of Marie (n\u00e9e Boisvert, 1892\u20131954) and Wellie Chr\u00e9tien (1887\u20131980). His younger brother is the neuroendocrinology researcher Michel Chr\u00e9tien. The working-class Chr\u00e9tien family was poor, and Chr\u00e9tien had to wear hand-me-down clothes. Chr\u00e9tien's parents wanted their children to escape a working-class life in Shawinigan by attending a classical college. Chr\u00e9tien's father made him read the dictionary as a young boy. Chr\u00e9tien's older brother Maurice won a scholarship at the insurance company he was working for, which allowed him to attend medical school, and with the profits from his medical practice, was able to assist his younger siblings to attend the classical colleges. Wellie Chr\u00e9tien was a staunch Liberal who once got to shake hands as a young man with his hero, Sir Wilfrid Laurier. The local parish priest, Father Auger, a supporter of the Union Nationale who hated all Liberals as \"ungodly\", spread malicious rumours about the Liberal Chr\u00e9tien family, saying he would never let a teenage girl go on a date unchaperoned with any of the Chr\u00e9tien boys, which caused the young Jean Chr\u00e9tien to have troubled relations with the Catholic church.\nDuring World War II, the Canadian nationalist Wellie Chr\u00e9tien had attracted much public disapproval by being a staunch supporter of the war effort, and especially by being one of the few French-Canadians in Shawinigan willing to publicly support sending the conscripts (known as \"Zombies\") to fight overseas. Under the 1940 \"National Resources Mobilization Act\", the federal government could conscript Canadians only for the defence of Canada, and until late 1944, only volunteers went to fight overseas. In 1940s Quebec, where many French-Canadians were opposed to Canada fighting in the war, and especially to sending the \"Zombies\" overseas, this made Wellie Chr\u00e9tien and his family outcasts. Furthermore, during the Grande Noirceur (\"Great Darkness\") when Quebec society was dominated by the corrupt Union Nationale patronage machine, the Chr\u00e9tien family were excluded because of Wellie Chr\u00e9tien's support for the war. The Union Nationale Premier Maurice Duplessis had been an outspoken opponent of Canadian participation in World War II. Until 1964, Quebec had no public schools, and Chr\u00e9tien was educated in Catholic schools. Chr\u00e9tien disliked the Catholic priests who educated him and in turn was disliked by them with one of Chr\u00e9tien's former teachers, Father Fran\u00e7ois Lanoue, recalling that Chr\u00e9tien was the only student he ever grabbed by his ears, as he was too unruly. In an interview, Chr\u00e9tien called his education \"unnatural\", as he recalled an extremely strict regime where the priests beat anyone bloody who dared to question their authority while teaching via rote learning. One of Chr\u00e9tien's classmates recalled \"We didn't have the right to have feelings or express them\".\nChr\u00e9tien got his early schooling at a private boys' school in Joliette. He then attended S\u00e9minaire Saint-Joseph de Trois-Rivi\u00e8res. He obtained excellent grades and then studied law at Universit\u00e9 Laval, the training ground of the French-Canadian elite. Despite the thuggish image that he cultivated at S\u00e9minaire Saint-Joseph, Chr\u00e9tien's grades were high, with an education that focused mostly on Catholic theology, the classics, philosophy, and French. When Chr\u00e9tien graduated from S\u00e9minaire Saint-Joseph, Duplessis came to address the class and upon meeting Chr\u00e9tien asked him if his grandfather was Fran\u00e7ois Chr\u00e9tien, who once served as mayor of St-\u00c9tiene-des-Gr\u00e8s, and if his father was Wellie Chr\u00e9tien. Upon receiving affirmative answers to both questions, the premier said with disgust, \"Then you're a damn \"rouge\"\".\nLater at Laval, Chr\u00e9tien protested the fact that the law faculty gave the \"Revised Statutes of Quebec\" free to Union Nationale students while Liberal students had to pay $10 for it, which led him and another student whose family was well connected to meet Duplessis in his office. Duplessis told Chr\u00e9tien the Union Nationale only rewarded those who had \"faith\", and if he wanted the book for free, then he should have had \"faith\", noting that there were no \"rights\" in Quebec as he was \"Le Chef\" (\"the boss\"). At Laval, Chr\u00e9tien became active in the Young Liberals, becoming president as no one else wanted the job as most students were too frightened to antagonize the Union Nationale. In 1958 he attended the Liberal convention in Ottawa that chose Lester Pearson as the party's leader, and where Chr\u00e9tien supported Paul Martin Sr.\nChr\u00e9tien later drew attention to his humble origins, calling himself \"le petit gars de Shawinigan\", or the \"little guy from Shawinigan\". In his youth he suffered from an attack of Bell's palsy, permanently leaving the left side of his face partially paralyzed. Chr\u00e9tien used this in his first Liberal leadership campaign, saying that he was \"One politician who didn't talk out of both sides of his mouth.\" He is also deaf in his right ear.\nOn September 10, 1957, he married Aline Cha\u00een\u00e9, whom he had met when he was 18 and she was 16. They had three children: France (b. 1958), Hubert (b. 1965) and Michel (b. 1968), who was adopted in 1970. France Chr\u00e9tien Desmarais, who is a lawyer, is married to Andr\u00e9 Desmarais, the son of Paul Desmarais, Sr., and the president and co-chief executive officer of his father's company, Power Corporation, based in Montreal, Canada. Reflecting Chr\u00e9tien's poor relations with the Catholic church, the local priest in Shawinigan, Father Auger, refused to marry Chr\u00e9tien in his church, saying only \"bleus\" (blues, i.e. Union Nationale supporters) were welcome in his church and \"rouges\" (reds, i.e. Liberals) were not.\nEarly political career.\nChr\u00e9tien practised law at the Shawinigan firm of Alexandre G\u00e9linas and Joe Lafond until he was first elected to the House of Commons of Canada as a Liberal from the riding of Saint-Maurice\u2013Lafl\u00e8che in the 1963 election. He represented this Shawinigan-based constituency, renamed Saint-Maurice in 1968, for all but eight of the next 41 years. The Social Credit Party had won the district in the 1962 election, and Chr\u00e9tien won the Liberal nomination for the 1963 election as the previous Liberal Member of Parliament (MP) decided to retire. Chr\u00e9tien won the election by portraying the incumbent Social Credit MP, G\u00e9rard Lamy, as a \"buffoon\" who made French-Canadians look stupid. Early in Chr\u00e9tien's career, Dalton Camp described him as looking like \"the driver of the getaway car\", a condescending assessment which stuck with him, and which journalists and others often cited throughout his career, usually considering his eventual success. The only committee assignment he requested, and obtained, during his first term was to the Finance Committee.\nShortly before the 1965 election, Chr\u00e9tien very briefly served as parliamentary secretary to Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson. When Pearson recruited his \"Three Wise Men\" (Jean Marchand, G\u00e9rard Pelletier, and Pierre Trudeau) into the cabinet, Chr\u00e9tien was disappointed at being bypassed, telling Pearson he deserved to be promoted to the cabinet. Starting in 1966, he served for a more substantial period of time as parliamentary secretary to Minister of Finance Mitchell Sharp. Sharp was to serve as Chr\u00e9tien's mentor and patron, helping him rise through the ranks.\nIn 1967, Chr\u00e9tien visited western Canada for the first time, which he was curious to see. In Vancouver, he declared in a speech about the demands for more powers for Quebec being made by Union Nationale Premier Daniel Johnson that \"those who are in favour of a special status [for Quebec] are often separatists who don't want to admit they are separatists\", which caused an uproar in Quebec, with Johnson saying he just wanted more powers for Quebec, not independence. When, in a speech during a visit to Montreal for Expo 67, French President Charles de Gaulle said \"Vive le Qu\u00e9bec libre!\" (\"Long Live A Free Quebec!\") and compared the Quiet Revolution to the liberation of France from the Nazis, Chr\u00e9tien demanded during a cabinet meeting that the government order de Gaulle to leave Canada.\nJoins cabinet.\nChr\u00e9tien was appointed minister without portfolio in April 1967 and then minister of national revenue in January 1968, making him a junior minister in the cabinet. During the 1968 Liberal leadership race, Chr\u00e9tien fought hard on behalf of his mentor Sharp, who aspired to lead the Liberal Party. When Sharp withdrew from the race, Chr\u00e9tien followed Sharp in swinging his support behind the man who eventually won the race, Pierre Trudeau.\n After the June 1968 election that gave the Liberals a majority government, Trudeau appointed Chr\u00e9tien minister of Indian affairs and northern development. Trudeau and Chr\u00e9tien were never close, as the gulf between the intellectual Trudeau and the decidedly non-intellectual Chr\u00e9tien was too wide, but Trudeau did value Chr\u00e9tien as an extremely loyal and competent minister, and as a \"tough guy\" trouble-shooter who could handle difficult assignments. Trudeau and his intellectual advisors in the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) held Chr\u00e9tien in contempt as someone who spoke French with a working-class accent and whose manners were unpolished, but they appreciated his toughness and ability to get things done.\nWhile at Indian Affairs, Chr\u00e9tien introduced the 1969 White Paper, a proposal to abolish treaties between Canada and First Nations and related legislation including the \"Indian Act\". Critics charged that the goal was to assimilate First Nations people into the general Canadian population. First Nations groups widely opposed the White Paper, and it was later abandoned. It was the 1969 White Paper that first brought Chr\u00e9tien to widespread public attention in English Canada. At a press conference announcing the White Paper, Chr\u00e9tien openly clashed with Indian activists with one First Nations woman asking Chr\u00e9tien, \"When did we lose our identity?\", to which he replied: \"When you signed the treaties\", which prompted boos and jeers. Another woman from the Iroquois reserve at Brantford asked Chr\u00e9tien, \"How can you come here and ask us to become citizens, when we were here long before you?\", noting the Crown had granted the Grand River valley to Joseph Brant in 1784, to which Chr\u00e9tien had no reply. Cree activist Harold Cardinal attacked Chr\u00e9tien and Trudeau for the White Paper in his bestselling 1969 book \"The Unjust Society\", accusing them of \"cultural genocide\" against the First Nations. To counteract such criticism, Chr\u00e9tien adopted an Inuk boy from a local orphanage during a 1970 visit to the Northwest Territories. As Indian Affairs minister, Chr\u00e9tien fell in love with the far north of Canada, whose beauty moved him, and he vacationed in the north every summer during his time while holding the Indian Affairs portfolio.\nDuring the October Crisis of 1970, Chr\u00e9tien told Trudeau to \"act now, explain later\" when Trudeau was hesitant to invoke the \"War Measures Act\". Eighty-five percent of Canadians agreed with the move. In the 1972 election, Chr\u00e9tien, who was frightened by a near-defeat in 1968, had a friend. Antonio Genest, win the Progressive Conservative (PC) nomination and then run a deliberately inept campaign in order to ensure his re-election. Robert Bourassa, the Liberal premier of Quebec, was a nationalist who frequently pressed for more devolution of federal powers to his province, making him Trudeau's \"b\u00eate noire\", with the two men openly feuding. In 1971, when the Bourassa government began the James Bay Project to develop hydroelectric dams on rivers flowing into James Bay, which was opposed by the local Cree bands who claimed the land slated for development, Chr\u00e9tien intervened on the side of the Cree. In a speech Chr\u00e9tien said Bourassa \"could go to hell\", stated he did not have the right to build on or flood the land claimed by the Cree, and hired lawyers to argue for the Cree in the courts. In November 1973, a judge ruled for the Cree, but a few days later the appeals court ruled for Quebec.\nIn 1974, Chr\u00e9tien was appointed President of the Treasury Board, and beginning in 1976, he served as Minister of Industry, Trade and Commerce. At the Treasury Board, Chr\u00e9tien become known as \"Doctor No\", as he refused in a brusque manner requests from other ministers for more money for their departments. The 1970s were a time of rapid inflation, and Chr\u00e9tien often clashed with public sector unions who demanded wage increases. At a time when deficits were rising and the Trudeau government was widely seen as drifting, Chr\u00e9tien's \"tough guy\" image won him widespread attention, with many in the media portraying him as one of the few people in the Trudeau cabinet willing to make tough decisions. As industry minister, Chr\u00e9tien was in charge of the Trudeau government's efforts to \"diversify\" the economy by trading more with Asia and Europe and less with the United States. Chr\u00e9tien often complained the high Canadian dollar hindered his efforts to \"diversify\" trade, and he became known for his belief in the value of a low dollar. As industry minister, Chr\u00e9tien moved to the left, being known for his populist policies, imposing tariffs on clothing made abroad to encourage more production in Canada, and having the government fund the development of the Challenger aircraft.\nMinister of finance.\nIn 1977, following the resignation of Finance Minister Donald MacDonald, Chr\u00e9tien succeeded him. He was the first francophone minister of finance, and remains one of only three francophones to have held that post. Chr\u00e9tien's time at Finance highlighted his \"enforcer\" status, namely as someone who often helped to execute Trudeau's policies, but who rarely helped Trudeau to make policy. During his time at Finance, Trudeau completely excluded Chr\u00e9tien from any role in making financial policy, instead expecting Chr\u00e9tien to simply carry out the policies that he and his advisors at the PMO had decided beforehand without consulting Chr\u00e9tien at all. \nTrudeau was extremely close to the West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, and during the 1978 G7 summit in Bonn, Trudeau had extensive discussions with his friend Schmidt about how best to win re-election in 1979. Schmidt suggested to Trudeau that he respond to criticism of the deficits he had been running by bringing in some big cuts to spending, an idea that Trudeau took up. In 1978 Trudeau announced in a press statement $2\u00a0billion in cuts without bothering to inform Chr\u00e9tien beforehand about what he had decided to do, leaving his finance minister looking clueless in the resulting press interview. Chr\u00e9tien found this experience so humiliating that he seriously considered resigning in protest. Chr\u00e9tien was especially humiliated by the fact that Chancellor Schmidt was better informed of about what was going to happen than he was, which underlined that he was not a member of Trudeau's inner circle. \nChr\u00e9tien presented the two federal budgets to the House floor in 1978, one in April and the other in November.\nMajor role in referendum campaign.\nThe Liberals lost the federal election of May 1979 to a minority Progressive Conservative government led by Joe Clark. However, the PC government fell when the House of Commons failed to approve its budget in December, triggering the 1980 Canadian federal election in February. Trudeau had originally resigned the Liberal leadership after his 1979 election loss, but no leadership election had taken place to choose his successor before the fall of the Clark government; this allowed him to rescind his resignation and lead the Liberals to victory with a majority government.\nTrudeau appointed Chr\u00e9tien as Minister of Justice and Attorney General. In this role, Chr\u00e9tien was a major force in the 1980 Quebec referendum, being one of the main federal representatives \"on the ground\" during the campaign. His fiery and emotional speeches would enthrall federalist crowds with his blunt warnings of the consequences of separation. During the referendum, Chr\u00e9tien fiercely fought behind the scenes with the leader of the Quebec Liberals, Claude Ryan, who served as the chairman of the \"non\" committee, about the best course to follow, with Ryan favouring a more Quebec nationalist message as opposed to Chr\u00e9tien's unabashed Canadian nationalist message. Chr\u00e9tien delivered an average of six or seven speeches a day during the 1980 referendum all across Quebec and always managed to work in a local reference in every speech.\nPatriation of the Constitution.\nChr\u00e9tien also served as minister of state for social development and minister responsible for constitutional negotiations, playing a significant role in the debates leading to the patriation of the Constitution of Canada in 1982. On September 28, 1981, the Supreme Court ruled that the federal government could patriate the British North America Acts without the consent of the provinces, but also ruled this would be \"odious\". Chr\u00e9tien informed the premiers opposing patriation that Ottawa would unilaterally patriate the Constitution, but was willing to talk at a final conference. During the resulting First Ministers conference in November 1981, two of the premiers, Allan Blakeney of Saskatchewan and Sterling Lyon of Manitoba, made it clear that their principal objection to the proposed Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms was that it undermined the ancient British tradition of parliamentary supremacy. Ever since the Glorious Revolution of 1688, the principle had always been that Parliament was the supreme lawmaking body in the land, and both Blakeney and Lyon were concerned that the Charter would give too much power to the courts.\nChr\u00e9tien was the chief negotiator of what would be called the \"Kitchen Accord\", an agreement which led to the agreement of nine provinces to patriation. In the Kitchen Accord, Chr\u00e9tien, along with Attorneys-General Roy McMurtry of Ontario and Roy Romanow of Saskatchewan, devised the compromise of Section 33, the so-called \"notwithstanding clause\", allowing Parliament and provincial legislatures to overrule the courts in Charter cases. Chr\u00e9tien remembered that Trudeau \"hated\" the idea of Section 33 and that he had to tell him: \"Pierre, if you don't take the notwithstanding clause, you don't have the Charter.\" Trudeau only accepted Section 33 when Ontario Premier Bill Davis, one of only two premiers supporting the federal government (Richard Hatfield of New Brunswick being the other), phoned him to say he would not support Trudeau in London if Trudeau did not accept Section 33, which Chr\u00e9tien remembered changed Trudeau's attitude completely. In a 2012 interview, Chr\u00e9tien defended the controversial Section 33, saying: \"Because some would argue that in a society the elected people have to be supreme \u2014 not judges \u2014 and I subscribe to that. Look at what happened in the United States where the judges reign according to their so-called philosophy. That is not the tradition here.\" All of the English-speaking premiers accepted the compromise of Section 33, but Quebec Premier Ren\u00e9 L\u00e9vesque did not. Chr\u00e9tien's role in the dealings would not be forgotten in his native province of Quebec (although the Supreme Court of Canada ruled that Quebec was bound by it). One of Trudeau's aides, Barry Strayer, later said about Chr\u00e9tien's role in the constitutional battle: \"He was able to contemplate compromises that Trudeau would not have been able to. Everybody saw him as a honest broker. Without him you could argue it would not have happened.\"\nMinister of Energy, Mines and Resources.\nIn 1982, Chr\u00e9tien was appointed Minister of Energy, Mines and Resources, putting him in charge of enforcing the National Energy Program (NEP), which helped to make him a hated figure in Alberta. Chr\u00e9tien himself was doubtful about the value of the NEP, saying at the time of his appointment as Energy Minister that, \"We've got to back off on the NEP without destroying our credibility,\" but upon learning that Trudeau and his right-hand man, Finance Minister Marc Lalonde, were in favour of continuing the NEP, Chr\u00e9tien decided to fall in line rather than risk his chances of one day winning the Liberal leadership. Chr\u00e9tien's battles with Alberta Premier Peter Lougheed over the NEP helped to confirm his disdain for provincial politicians, whom he saw as petty people only interested in their own provinces at the expense of the nation.\n1984: First leadership bid and relationship with Turner.\nAfter Trudeau announced his retirement as Prime Minister and Liberal Party leader in early 1984, Chr\u00e9tien was one of the candidates seeking to replace him as leader. The experience was a hard one for Chr\u00e9tien, as many of his longtime Cabinet allies supported the bid of John Turner, who was viewed as more electable, much to Chr\u00e9tien's intense disappointment. During the leadership race in the spring of 1984, Chr\u00e9tien ran as the defender of the Trudeau era and promised to continue all of Trudeau's policies, unlike Turner, who promised a break with Trudeau. During the leadership race, Chr\u00e9tien presented himself as a folksy leftish populist and mocked Turner as a right-wing Bay Street snob who was out of touch with ordinary people. Chr\u00e9tien opposed Turner's claim that the national deficit was not a problem, arguing in a speech, \"We have to use the deficit to keep the dignity of our people.\" Chr\u00e9tien attracted larger and more enthusiastic crowds than anything that Turner ever managed, but most of the Liberal Party establishment had rallied to Turner when he announced his candidacy in March 1984, which proved to be an insurmountable handicap for Chr\u00e9tien. Chr\u00e9tien was thought to be a dark horse until the end but lost on the second ballot to Turner at the leadership convention that June. Liberal Party president Iona Campagnolo introduced Chr\u00e9tien as \"Second on the ballot, but first in our hearts.\" Turner appointed Chr\u00e9tien Deputy Prime Minister and Secretary of State for External Affairs.\nAfter winning the leadership race, Turner wanted to reconcile with Chr\u00e9tien and lead a united party into the coming general election, and so asked Chr\u00e9tien what terms he would accept. Chr\u00e9tien, angry about losing the leadership race, asked for terms he knew Turner could never give him, demanding to be appointed Quebec lieutenant, with control of patronage and organization in Quebec. However, Turner had already promised the position to Andr\u00e9 Ouellet in exchange for support in the leadership race. As a result, Turner compromised by creating a troika of Chr\u00e9tien, Ouellet, and Lalonde to run Liberal operations in Quebec. The troika was a sham, and during the 1984 election, its three members spent more time feuding with one another than in combating the Progressive Conservatives.\nChr\u00e9tien's demand for the Quebec lieutenancy was not his only issue with Turner, as he almost immediately clashed with the Prime Minister over the calling of an early election. As the last general election had been held in February 1980, the next general election could be held no later than February 1985. Chr\u00e9tien advised Turner not to ask the Governor General to dissolve Parliament, but to instead keep it in session during the fall of 1984 to give the government a record to run on in a winter election in early 1985. Turner disregarded Chr\u00e9tien's advice, believing that a boost in the polls after he assumed the premiership in late June 1984 justified asking for Parliament to be dissolved, and for an election to be held in September 1984.\n1984\u20131993: In opposition.\nRelations between Chr\u00e9tien and Turner were strained, especially after the Liberals' severe defeat in the 1984 election by the Progressive Conservatives, now led by Brian Mulroney. Chr\u00e9tien was one of only 17 Liberal MPs elected from Quebec (the party had won 74 out of 75 seats there in 1980), and one of only four elected from a riding outside Montreal.\nChr\u00e9tien was a major focal point of dissatisfaction with Turner, with many polls showing his popularity. His 1985 book, \"Straight from the Heart\", was an instant bestseller that recounted his early life in Shawinigan, his years spent in the House of Commons of Canada as both a member of Parliament and Cabinet minister, and his failed 1984 leadership bid.\n1986: Temporarily leaves politics.\nChr\u00e9tien, whose relations with Turner were very poor, resigned his seat and left public life for a time. On February 27, 1986, Chr\u00e9tien, accompanied by his special executive assistant Jean Carle, went to Turner's office to hand in his resignation. Turner forced Chr\u00e9tien to wait a considerable period of time during which Carle broke down in tears, and Chr\u00e9tien was visibly angry when Turner finally received them, making for a tense and barely civil meeting. Chr\u00e9tien's resignation was largely motivated by his desire to better organize against Turner in the leadership review, which was due in the fall of 1986. Now working in the private sector again, Chr\u00e9tien sat on the boards of several corporations, including the Power Corporation of Canada subsidiary Consolidated Bathurst, the Toronto-Dominion Bank, and the Brick Warehouse Corporation. Chr\u00e9tien professed to be retired from politics, but he told reporters within days of his retirement, \"I will always be a politician. I love politics.\" Crucially, Chr\u00e9tien did not disband the campaign organization that he founded in 1984, suggesting that his retirement had always been intended to be temporary.\nIn November 1986, when the Liberals held their leadership review, Chr\u00e9tien attempted to organize against Turner, which led to a bruising battle between factions loyal to the two men. Chr\u00e9tien used Turner's penchant for heavy drinking to spread rumors that Turner was an alcoholic who was simply too drunk most of the time to lead the Liberals to power effectively. He formally claimed to be neutral on the question of Turner's management of the Liberal Party, but lobbied as many Liberal MPs and senators as possible behind the scenes for their support in bringing down Turner. The intense emotions stirred up by the leadership review boiled over when Chr\u00e9tien arrived to vote in the review, leading to a chaotic scene on the convention floor where police had to be called to quell physical fighting between Chr\u00e9tien partisans and Turner partisans. Turner won the leadership review, earning about 75% of the delegate vote.\nIn the 1988 election, the Liberals only experienced a moderate recovery, doubling the number of seats they won in 1984. However, Mulroney's Progressive Conservatives won a second consecutive majority government, campaigning in favour of a free trade agreement with the United States. Having lost a second straight general election, Turner announced his resignation as Liberal leader in 1989, triggering the June 1990 Liberal leadership election in Calgary.\n1990: Returns to politics and wins Liberal leadership.\nAt a press conference in Ottawa on January 23, 1990, Chr\u00e9tien declared that he would run for the Liberal Party leadership and proudly stated that the day would be remembered as the beginning of the \"Chr\u00e9tien era\" in Canada. Chr\u00e9tien's principal opponent in the contest, Paul Martin, was generally seen as the ideological heir to Turner, while Chr\u00e9tien was seen to be the ideological heir to Trudeau. The fact that most of the Liberals who had supported Turner in the 1980s supported Martin in 1990 confirmed Chr\u00e9tien's disdain for Martin, whom he saw as a Bay Street \"big shot\" like Turner.\nThe most controversial issue facing Canada during the first half of 1990 was the Meech Lake Accord, a set of proposed constitutional amendments that would have seen a significant devolution of federal powers to the provinces and included a clause that would have recognized Quebec as a \"distinct society\" within Canada. Chr\u00e9tien had announced in a January 1990 speech that he was an opponent of Meech Lake but stated that he would support the accord with amendments, such as scrapping the controversial \"distinct society\" clause as written; having the preamble to the constitution instead declare that Quebec was a \"distinct society\"; and adding a new clause saying if any conflict arose between the constitutional recognition of Quebec as a \"distinct society\" and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, the latter would always prevail. The \"distinct society\" clause theoretically could have been the basis of a wide-ranging devolution of federal power, since the clause might have empowered the Quebec government to pass any law short of secession to protect the \"distinct society\". This made the clause very popular in Quebec, but aroused passionate opposition in English Canada. In a much-discussed essay, Trudeau had warned that giving Quebec the constitutional right to be a \"distinct society\" would mean that Quebec could quite legally start to expel its anglophone minority. Chr\u00e9tien's proposed amendments would have meant that the constitution would have recognized Quebec as a \"distinct society\" but effectively gutted any attempt to use that to grant any special powers to Quebec. In private, Chr\u00e9tien opposed Meech Lake, but as the accord was extremely popular in Quebec, running as an out-and-out opponent of Meech Lake was judged to be too risky politically, causing him to conditionally oppose the accord in public. Meech Lake placed Chr\u00e9tien in a difficult position, as it was very popular in Quebec and loathed by the Trudeau wing of the Liberals; Chr\u00e9tien needed the support of both entities in the leadership race. He tried to avoid talking about Meech Lake as much as possible, which was a minefield issue for him; he instead stuck to generalities about national unity. Martin, by contrast, had declared himself an unconditional supporter of Meech Lake as it was; he was also quite willing to talk about his support.\nChr\u00e9tien's key campaign man was Jim Karygiannis, who specialized in signing up immigrants to serve as Chr\u00e9tien delegates. He signed 9,500 immigrants as Chr\u00e9tien delegates between January and June 1990. In large part because of Karygiannis and his team, Chr\u00e9tien had by late April 1990 signed up 1,500 delegates, which made him the clear front-runner compared to Martin's 500 delegates.\nA key moment in the leadership contest took place at an all-candidates debate in Montreal on June 2, 1990. The discussion quickly turned to the Meech Lake Accord, which had emerged as the major policy issue dividing Chr\u00e9tien and Martin. Martin attempted to force Chr\u00e9tien to abandon his nuanced position on Meech Lake and speak out either for or against it, saying that Chr\u00e9tien's position of opposing Meech Lake as it was, but being willing to support it with amendments, was trying to have it both ways. When Chr\u00e9tien refused to endorse Meech Lake as it was, young Liberal delegates crowding the hall began to chant \"vendu\" (\"sellout\" in French), \"you're selling out to the Anglos,\" and \"Judas\" at Chr\u00e9tien. One of Chr\u00e9tien's aides frantically asked that Martin \"get the fuck out there and do something,\" as the Young Liberals continued shouting abuse at Chr\u00e9tien to his clear discomfort, only to be told that the Quebec youth were \"hotheads\" whom nobody could control. Privately, Chr\u00e9tien was deeply enraged by the incident, claimed that the delegates shouting \"vendu\" at him were actually Martin supporters from Toronto, and charged that their poor French had betrayed that they had not been from Quebec. Martin denied involvement in \"coordinating\" any response from the floor or a similar outburst by his supporters at the convention. Ultimately, Chr\u00e9tien defeated Martin for the leadership on the first and only ballot, but his position on Meech Lake had irreversibly damaged his reputation in his home province.\nLeader of the Official Opposition.\nAs Chr\u00e9tien's leadership victory occurred on June 23, 1990 \u2013 the same day that the Meech Lake Accord failed to gain ratification \u2013 he was heavily criticized in the Quebec media for his opposition to the accord. Photographs of Chr\u00e9tien embracing Newfoundland Premier Clyde Wells, a prominent opponent of Meech Lake, at the convention attracted much negative comment in Quebec. His leadership was also shaken by the defection of francophone MPs (and Martin loyalists) Jean Lapierre and Gilles Rocheleau from the caucus to the new Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois (BQ); Lapierre and Rocheleau contended that they could not serve under the anti-Meech Lake Chr\u00e9tien. In a by-election for Laurier\u2014Sainte-Marie on August 13, 1990, the Bloc's Gilles Duceppe badly defeated Chr\u00e9tien's hand-picked candidate Denis Coderre, costing the Liberals a constituency they had held since 1917; many attributed this to Chr\u00e9tien's opposition to the Meech Lake Accord. Upon becoming Liberal leader, Chr\u00e9tien appointed his friend Eddie Goldenberg as his chief of staff, and formed a leadership team comprising John Rae and David Zussman as his policy advisors, his \"surrogate son\" Jean Carle as his special executive assistant, Warren Kinsella as his media adviser, and George Radwanski as his speech-writer. All members of this leadership team were later to play prominent roles in the Prime Minister's Office during Chr\u00e9tien's time as Prime Minister.\nIn September 1990, Chr\u00e9tien, seeing a chance to make a strong impression on public opinion after a shaky start as leader, reaped a major windfall after Mulroney introduced an unpopular Goods and Services Tax (GST), which Chr\u00e9tien decided to vigorously oppose. Traditionally in Canada, the government had levied a 13.5% Manufacturer's Sales Tax (MST) paid by manufacturers, who passed on the cost of the tax to consumers in the form of higher prices. Since foreign manufacturers did not pay the MST, however, this placed Canadian companies at a competitive disadvantage in their home market. To compensate, the government had levied tariffs on manufactured imports to maintain a level playing field. When the free trade agreement with the United States came into effect in 1989, the government could no longer levy tariffs on American imports, leading to furious complaints from Canadian industry about having to compete with American companies who did not pay the MST. To save Canadian industry and the jobs of those Canadians employed in manufacturing from being destroyed by American competition, the Mulroney government decided in late 1989 to abolish the MST and replace it with the GST, whose 7% costs would be borne by consumers. On the proposed GST, Chr\u00e9tien was torn between his belief that the tax was economically necessary and his desire to score political points by opposing a proposed tax that most Canadians hated; consequently, he was initially vague about where he stood on the GST. Only in September 1990, after months of vacillation, did Chr\u00e9tien finally make up his mind to oppose the GST.\nChr\u00e9tien's decision to oppose the GST in 1990 was taken for reasons of political expediency rather than principle, namely that he needed an issue to oppose the government on that would allow him to connect with the public; sources close to Chr\u00e9tien were later to claim that he had wanted to support the GST bill, but his caucus had forced him to oppose it against his will. At a Liberal event in the fall of 1990, Chr\u00e9tien stated that if he became Prime Minister, \"the Mulroney GST will disappear\", going on to say: \"I am opposed to the GST. I have always been opposed to it. And I will be opposed to it, always\". To capitalize on widespread public dislike on the proposed GST, Chr\u00e9tien ordered the Liberal-dominated Senate to defeat the GST bill in late September 1990, leading Mulroney on September 27, 1990, to appoint eight PC senators to give the Tories a majority using a never-before-used section of the \"Constitution Act\", the so-called \"Deadlock Clause\". At that point, Chr\u00e9tien ordered the Liberal senators to filibuster the GST bill, reducing the Senate to scenes of chaos for the entire fall of 1990. On October 24, 1990, a poll revealed that the Liberals had fallen behind the New Democrats, which Chr\u00e9tien admitted in an interview might have something to do with the scenes of obstructionist, often childish behavior by the Liberal senators.\nIn December 1990, Chr\u00e9tien returned to the House of Commons after winning a by-election in the safe Liberal riding of Beaus\u00e9jour in New Brunswick. The incumbent, Fernand Robichaud, stood down in Chr\u00e9tien's favour, which is traditional practice when a newly elected party leader does not have a seat in the Commons. Initially, Chr\u00e9tien had planned to wait until the next general election before running, but was advised by Herb Gray that: \"To have credibility, you're got to be in the House. You can't afford to wait two more years until a general election.\" Gray's appeal changed Chr\u00e9tien's mind about when to seek a seat in the House of Commons. For much of 1991\u201392, Chr\u00e9tien found himself emotionally exhausted after his adopted son Michel was charged with kidnapping, rape, and sodomy against a Montreal woman and was convicted. Michel Chr\u00e9tien suffered from fetal alcohol spectrum disorder and had a long history of legal trouble.\nIn October 1991, Chr\u00e9tien first expressed his views about how best to end the recession which had begun in 1990, arguing that the answer was a policy of slow devaluation in which the dollar would be allowed to decline against other major world currencies; this would have the effect of both pricing out foreign imports and, by giving Canadian firms a competitive advantage in world markets, boosting exports. However, Chr\u00e9tien concluded that his planned export offensive powered by a low dollar would come to nothing if other nations maintained tariffs to keep Canadian goods out of their markets. In order to make his plans to export Canada back into prosperity work, Chr\u00e9tien decided that the solution was globalization. Besides for globalization, Chr\u00e9tien also argued to combat the recession, the federal government needed to make the system of unemployment insurance less generous, and to end the policy of high interest rates maintained by Bank of Canada Governor John Crow to achieve his target of zero percent inflation, which Chr\u00e9tien argued was needlessly crippling the economy.\nIn November 1991, Chr\u00e9tien organized a party conference in Aylmer, Quebec, where the Liberals formally disavowed most of the economic nationalism and protectionism of the Pearson-Trudeau years and instead embraced globalization as the cure for the ongoing recession. Reflecting this changed emphasis, the Liberals declared their support for the free trade agreement with the United States, which the party had famously promised to tear up if they won the 1988 election; instead, Mulroney was now denounced for not going far enough in opening up the economy by signing more free trade agreements with other nations.\nChr\u00e9tien revealed himself to be a staunch \"hard federalist\" favouring a strong federal government at the expense of the provinces, much along the same lines as his predecessor Trudeau. However, unlike Trudeau, Chr\u00e9tien supported the Charlottetown Accord of August 1992, another package of constitutional amendments which proposed devolving federal powers to the provinces and once again recognized Quebec as a \"distinct society\". Chr\u00e9tien endorsed the Charlottetown Accord on the rather negative grounds that the constitutional debates of the late 1980s and early 1990s were destroying Canada, saying it \"was bleeding the nation to death\" and that Charlottetown was the best way of ending that debate in order to move the focus back to the economic recession. At a Liberal caucus meeting on September 8, 1992, Chr\u00e9tien declared that \"if we had been the government we would not have made this deal\", and that only reason to support Charlottetown was that rejecting it would increase support for Quebec separatism.\nWhen Mulroney began to lose ground in the polls, Chr\u00e9tien was the major beneficiary. In preparation for the 1993 election, Chr\u00e9tien won the right to have final approval over riding nominations and to veto any candidate that displeased him. Chr\u00e9tien's use of this power caused some protests within the party, with John Nunziata publicly complaining that, \"The backroom guys have taken control of the party. I guess they think they can muzzle us all\". Chr\u00e9tien was so confident that he was going to win the 1993 election that he formed his transition team in October 1992 to prepare for the hand-over of power 13 months before it actually happened.\nThe 1993 election.\nMulroney announced his retirement in February, and was succeeded by Minister of National Defence Kim Campbell in June. Campbell pulled the PCs to within a few percentage points of the Liberals by the time the writs were dropped in September.\nOn September 19, Chr\u00e9tien released the Liberal platform. The 112-page document, \"Creating Opportunity\", quickly became known as the Red Book because of its bright red cover. Chr\u00e9tien's rival Paul Martin, who led the team that produced the Red Book, was less complimentary about it in private; he was often reported to have said: \"Don't tell me about the Red Book, I wrote the damn thing, and I know that it is a lot of crap!\" \nThe Liberals promised to remove the GST, which had previously been imposed by the Tories; Sheila Copps famously promised to resign within a year of taking office if the GST was not repealed. Chr\u00e9tien also promised to renegotiate the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and reform the unemployment insurance system. The Liberals were in favour of a free trade agreement for North America in principle, but accused Mulroney of having given away too much to the Americans and Mexicans when he signed NAFTA in 1992, and stated that the Liberal government would renegotiate NAFTA on more favourable terms to Canada within six months of taking office. Failing that, Chr\u00e9tien promised that Canada would renounce NAFTA. The main emphasis was on a promise to spend $6\u00a0billion on improving infrastructure in a Keynesian move to fight the recession of the early 1990s. As regarding the debt situation, Chr\u00e9tien promised to reduce Canada's deficit to 3 per cent of GDP (the same deficit to GDP ratio required to enter the European Union) within three years of taking office. Chr\u00e9tien made it clear that the 3 percent deficit to GDP ratio would apply only to the federal government, whereas the Maastricht Treaty of 1991 which set out the 3 percent deficit to GDP ratio in order to enter the European Union stated that this applied to all levels of government. The Liberal government promised to achieve its goal of reducing the deficit to three percent of the GDP by cancelling the contract to replace the Sea King helicopters, privatizing Toronto Pearson Airport, and by eliminating unspecified \"waste\" in the government. After the 3 percent target had been achieved within the first three years of taking office, Chr\u00e9tien promised the deficit would be eliminated at some unspecified time in the future. Martin wanted to promise to eliminate the deficit altogether, but had been overruled by Chr\u00e9tien, who had wanted to present the Liberals as the \"caring\" party that would defend social programs, unlike the \"heartless\" Conservatives and the Reform Party who Chr\u00e9tien claimed wanted to eliminate the deficit within two or three years by gutting social programs with no thought for any suffering that this might cause. Chr\u00e9tien claimed in his campaign speeches that Reform's plans for eliminating the deficit within two or three years of taking office would cause at least a 25 percent unemployment rate, if not higher, which Chr\u00e9tien claimed starkly in a series of speeches would cause a bloody \"revolution\". Chr\u00e9tien had personally chosen the target of reducing the deficit to 3 percent of GDP as it made the Liberals seemed fiscally responsible while at the same time promised that the Liberals would not inflict too much economic pain to achieve that fiscal responsibility. One Liberal candidate Herb Dhaliwal recalled that for Chr\u00e9tien at time of the 1993 election that the national deficit was not a major issue and that: \"His attitude was that the deficit is ok as long as you can manage it\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBut last night, the Conservative Party reached a new low; they tried to make fun of the way I look. God gave me a physical defect, and I accepted that since I'm a kid. [\"sic\"] It's true, that I speak on one side of my mouth. I'm not a Tory, I don't speak on both sides of my mouth.\n \u2014Jean Chretien responding to the \"face ad\", 1993. https://\nBy late September 1993, the Liberals had a double-digit lead in most opinion polls, and by October they were favourites to win at least a minority government. Even at this stage, however, Chr\u00e9tien's personal approval ratings were far behind those of Campbell. Realizing this, the PC campaign team released a series of ads attacking Chr\u00e9tien. The ads were viewed as a last-ditch effort to keep the Liberals from winning a majority. The second ad, released on October 14, appeared to mock Chr\u00e9tien's facial paralysis and generated a severe backlash from all sides. Even some Tory candidates called for the ad to be removed. Campbell was not directly responsible for the ad, and ordered it off the air over her staff's objections.\nOn October 25, the Liberals were elected to a majority government, winning 177 seats\u00a0\u2013 the third-best performance in the Liberals' history, and their most impressive win since their record of 190 seats in 1949. The PCs were nearly wiped out, winning only two seats in the worst defeat ever suffered by a governing party at the federal level. Chr\u00e9tien himself yielded Beaus\u00e9jour back to Robichaud in order to run in his old riding, Saint-Maurice. However, he was unable to lead the Liberals back to their traditional dominance in Quebec, being one of only four Liberal MPs elected from that province outside the Montreal area. With few exceptions, most of the support that had switched from the Liberals to the PCs nine years earlier switched to the Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois, which became the Official Opposition.\nPrime Minister (1993\u20132003).\nOn November 4, 1993, Chr\u00e9tien became prime minister. While Trudeau, Joe Clark, and Mulroney had been relative political outsiders prior to becoming prime minister, Chr\u00e9tien had served in every Liberal cabinet since 1965. This experience gave him knowledge of the Canadian parliamentary system, and allowed Chr\u00e9tien to establish a very centralized government that, although highly efficient, was also lambasted by critics such as Jeffrey Simpson and the media as being a \"friendly dictatorship\" and intolerant of internal dissent. Chr\u00e9tien liked to present himself as the heir to Trudeau, but his governing style had little in common with the intense bouts of governmental activism that had characterised the Trudeau era. The Chr\u00e9tien government had a cautious, managerial approach to governing, reacting to issues as they arose, and was otherwise inclined to inactivity.\nQuebec.\n1995 Quebec referendum.\nOne of Chr\u00e9tien's main concerns in office was separation of the province of Quebec, which was governed by the sovereigntist Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois for nearly the entirety of his term. When the 1995 Quebec independence referendum began in September, Chr\u00e9tien was relaxed and confident of victory as polls showed federalist forces were leading by a wide margin. On October 8, 1995, Lucien Bouchard replaced the separatist premier of Quebec, Jacques Parizeau, as the \"de facto\" chair of the \"oui\" committee and, at that point, the support for the side started to dramatically increase, aided by the committee's complacency. In the weeks leading to the referendum on October 30, 1995, the federal government was seized with fear and panic as polls showing that, under the leadership of Bouchard, the \"oui\" side was going to win. On October 30, 1995, the federalist \"non\" side won by the narrowest of margins, with 50.58%.\nAftermath of referendum.\nOn November 5, 1995, six days after the referendum, Chr\u00e9tien and his wife escaped injury when Andr\u00e9 Dallaire, armed with a knife, broke in the prime minister's official residence at 24 Sussex Drive. Aline Chr\u00e9tien shut and locked the bedroom door until security came, while Chr\u00e9tien held a stone Inuit carving in readiness. Dallaire was \na separatist who was angered by the result of the referendum.\nIn the aftermath of the narrow victory in the referendum, Chr\u00e9tien started in late 1995 a new policy of \"tough love\", also known as \"Plan B\", where the federal government sought to discredit Quebec separatism by making it clear to the people of Quebec how difficult it would be to leave Canada. Though Chr\u00e9tien had promised to enshrine recognition of Quebec as a \"distinct society\" in the constitution in order to win the referendum, this promise was quickly forgotten in the aftermath of victory with Chr\u00e9tien arguing that the very vocal opposition of Ontario Premier Mike Harris to amending the constitution to recognize Quebec as a \"distinct society\" made that impossible. Instead, Chr\u00e9tien had Parliament pass a resolution recognizing Quebec as a \"distinct society\", which had no constitutional force and was only a symbolic step. Though Harris's promise to veto any sort of \"distinct society\" clause in the constitution made fulfilling Chr\u00e9tien's commitment to put such a clause into the constitution impossible, Chr\u00e9tien did not seem to champion the idea of a \"distinct society\" clause with any great conviction.\nIn early 1996, the federal government launched an advertising program to increase the presence of Canada in Quebec, a policy that Chr\u00e9tien believed would avoid a repeat of the near-defeat of 1995, and was to lead eventually to the Sponsorship scandal. As part of his \"Plan B\" for combatting Quebec separatism, in a speech in January 1996, Chr\u00e9tien endorsed the idea of partitioning Quebec in the event of a \"oui\" vote in another referendum, stating all of the regions of Quebec that voted \"non\" would remain part of Canada, regardless of what the Quebec separatists thought. On February 15, 1996, Chr\u00e9tien was confronted by a protester, Bill Clennett, during a walkabout in Hull, Quebec. Chr\u00e9tien responded with a choke-hold, which was referred to by the press as the \"Shawinigan handshake\", after Chr\u00e9tien's hometown.\n\"Clarity Act\".\nAfter the 1995 referendum very narrowly defeated a proposal on Quebec sovereignty, Chr\u00e9tien started to champion what eventually become the \"Clarity Act\" as part of his \"Plan B\". In August 1996, the lawyer Guy Bertrand won a ruling in a Quebec court declaring that the sovereignty question was not just a political matter between the federal and Quebec governments, but also a legal matter subject to court rulings. Following that ruling, Chr\u00e9tien decided that here was a means of defeating the Quebec sovereignty movement and, in September 1996, ordered the Justice Minister Allan Rock to take the question of the legality of Quebec separating to the Supreme Court. St\u00e9phane Dion advised Chr\u00e9tien that, if the federal government won the reference to the Supreme Court as expected, the government should draft a bill stating the precise rules for Quebec to leave\u2014telling Chr\u00e9tien if the people of Quebec could be shown how difficult it would be to leave, then support for separatism would fall. Along the same lines, Dion started to send much-publicised open letters to Quebec ministers questioning the assumptions behind the separatist case.\nIn December 1999 the Chr\u00e9tien government tabled the \"Clarity Act\", which passed Parliament in June 2000. The \"Clarity Act\", which was Chr\u00e9tien's response to his narrow victory in the 1995 referendum requires that no Canadian government may acknowledge any province's declaration of independence unless a \"clear majority\" supports a \"clear question\" about sovereignty in a referendum, as defined by the Parliament of Canada, and a constitutional amendment is passed. The size of a \"clear majority\" is not specified in the Act. After the \"Clarity Act\" had passed by the House of Commons in February 2000, a poll showed that the federalist forces enjoyed a 15 percent lead in the polls on the question if Quebec should become independent, which Chr\u00e9tien argued meant that the sovereignty option was now effectively off the table as Bouchard had always said he would only call another referendum if he could obtain \"winning conditions\", which he plainly did not possess at the moment.\nDomestic affairs.\nIn November 1997, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit was held on the University of British Columbia (UBC) campus in Vancouver. Students on UBC's campus protested the meeting because of the poor human rights practices of some of the attending leaders; one of the leaders most criticized was Indonesian President Suharto. Demonstrators tore down a barrier and were pepper-sprayed by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP), with other peaceful demonstrators being subsequently pepper-sprayed as well. There was debate over whether the action was necessary. In response to Suharto's concerns about his \"dignity\" being called into question by protests, the Canadian government had promised him that no protesters would be allowed to get close, and in early August 1997, the PMO informed the RCMP that the prime minister did not wish for any \"distractions\" at the upcoming conference. Later that day, Chr\u00e9tien, when asked by Nardwuar the Human Serviette about the use of pepper-spray, stated \"...For me, pepper, I put it on my plate.\" On August 7, 2001, the APEC report was issued by Judge Ted Hughes; it cleared Chr\u00e9tien of wrongdoing, but stated that the PMO's Jean Carle had improperly pressured the RCMP to attack the protesters.\nIn August 1999, the Anglo-Canadian media magnate Conrad Black was due to receive a British life peerage. Two days before Black was to receive his title, Chr\u00e9tien advised Queen Elizabeth II not to accord Black a title of nobility, citing the 1917 Nickle Resolution whereby the Canadian House of Commons asked King George V not to grant any hereditary peerages or knighthoods to Canadians, thereby ensuring that Black was not raised to the peerage as he was expecting to be. A humiliated Black sued Chr\u00e9tien for what he alleged to be an abuse of power, leading to the legal case of \"Black v Chr\u00e9tien\". In 2001, the Court of Appeal for Ontario ruled in Chr\u00e9tien's favour, stating it was the prime minister's prerogative to advise the Queen not to give Canadians a British peerage if he felt so inclined, and therefore it was not an abuse of power as Black had claimed. Black gave up his Canadian citizenship to accept the peerage.\nElectoral affairs.\nIn July 2003 Chretien passed a bill to reform the way elections are financed. In the previous century, the political parties were largely left to their own devices. After these changes to the Canada Elections Act (SC 2000), each vote obtained by a party was subsidized. The subsidy entered into effect on January 1, 2004, at $1.75 per vote (indexed to the Consumer Price Index) as part of a set of amendments made by the 37th Canadian Parliament to the Canada Elections Act which for the first time set limits on political contributions by individuals and organizations (corporations, unions, non-profit groups). The per-vote subsidy was introduced to replace the reliance of political parties and candidates on corporate, union, and wealthy donors in order to reduce the political influence of such donors. The law provides a refund for 50% of the expenditure on the most recent election campaign.\nSocial issues.\nIn 1995, the Chr\u00e9tien government introduced and passed the Canadian Firearms Registry, also called the long-gun registry. This would require the registration of all non-restricted firearms in Canada. This gun registry would document and record information of the firearms, their owners, and their owners' licenses.\nThe government under Chr\u00e9tien's premiership introduced a new and far-reaching \"Youth Criminal Justice Act\" in April 2003, which replaced the \"Young Offenders Act\" and changed the way youths were prosecuted for crimes in Canada. A flurry of major environmental legislation, including the \"Canadian Environmental Protection Act\", \"National Marine Conservation Areas Act\", \"Pest Control Products Act\", and the \"Species at Risk Act\" were enacted. The cooperation of federal, provincial, and municipal governments also enabled Vancouver to win the bid to host the 2010 Winter Olympics.\nIn July 2003, Chr\u00e9tien reversed his position on gay marriage, which he had previously been opposed to (in 1999 Chr\u00e9tien had voted for a resolution sponsored by the Reform saying marriage was a union of a man and a woman only). After a Toronto court ruled that laws forbidding homosexual marriage violated the \"Charter of Rights and Freedoms\", legalizing same-sex marriage throughout Ontario, Chr\u00e9tien embraced the idea of gay marriage and introduced a bill in the House of Commons that would have legalized gay marriage despite the very vocal opposition of the Roman Catholic Church with the bishop of Calgary warning in a sermon that Chr\u00e9tien's \"eternal salvation\" was at risk.\nEconomic policy.\nChr\u00e9tien canceled the privatization of Toronto's Pearson airport. The consortium that was due to take ownership of Pearson sued for breach of contract, which led the government to settle out of court in April 1997 for $60\u00a0million in damages.\nThe first budget introduced by Martin, in February 1994, was described as a \"mild and tame\" budget focused only on the target of reducing the deficit to 3 percent of Gross National Product (GNP) within three years, and brought in modest cuts, mostly to defence spending. Until the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the Chr\u00e9tien government tended to be hostile towards defence spending with the government's white paper \"Defence 94\" declaring that in a post-Cold War world there would be less and less need for armed forces, which accordingly meant reduced budgets for the military. Outside of defence spending, there were few cuts in the 1994 budget. In a radio interview with Ron Collister in March 1994, Chr\u00e9tien stated: \"To go to our goal of 3 per cent of GNP, all the cuts have been announced in the budget. There will not be a new round.\" According to the diplomat James Bartleman, Chr\u00e9tien told him in early 1994 that major cuts to government spending outside of defence were out of the question, and instead he hoped that the economy would grow enough on its own that the deficit would disappear without any cuts. Chr\u00e9tien's plans in early 1994 for economic growth were to increase exports by embracing globalization and free trade with as many nations as possible, arguing that the export offensive would stimulate the economy out of the early 1990s recession. The 1994 budget was widely criticized by journalists such as Andrew Coyne as useless in even achieving its target of reducing the deficit to 3 percent of GNP within three years, let alone eliminating the deficit, and led to a celebrated clash between Coyne and Martin in the boardroom of \"The Globe and Mail\" newspaper. In April 1994, interest rates in Canada started a steady rise that would continue until early 1995.\nChr\u00e9tien was not keen on making deep cuts to government spending, but given the crisis caused by the skyrocketing interest rates had decided \"reluctantly\" there was no alternative. Once he had decided upon making deeper cuts than he promised, Chr\u00e9tien proved to be firm supporter of the new course, and supported Martin's cuts to other departments despite the complaints of the other ministers. Chr\u00e9tien's advisor Eddie Goldenberg later recalled that Chr\u00e9tien was unyielding in the face of efforts by other ministers to \"spare\" their departments, and that Chr\u00e9tien kept on saying \"If I change anything, everything will unravel\". In a 2011 interview, Chr\u00e9tien recalled about the 1995 budget that: \"There would have been a day when we would have been the Greece of today. I knew we were in a bind and we had to do something.\" In order to silence objections from left-wing Liberal backbenchers and Cabinet ministers, Chr\u00e9tien ensured that the Program Review Committee chaired by Marcel Mass\u00e9 that would decide what programs to end and which to cut had a majority comprising the leftist MPs Brian Tobin, Sheila Copps, Sergio Marchi and Herb Gray, people who would not normally be supporting cutting programs, and thereby underlined the seriousness of the crisis. It was only with the budget that Martin introduced on February 27, 1995, that the Chr\u00e9tien government began a policy of cuts designed to eliminate the deficit in order to reassure the markets. Much of the Liberal caucus was deeply unhappy with the 1995 budget, arguing that this was not what they had been elected for in 1993, only to be informed by the prime minister that there was no alternative. Chr\u00e9tien himself expressed his unhappiness with his budget in a radio interview with Peter Gzowski in March 1995, saying about the budget: \"It is not our pleasure sir, I have to tell you that. I've been around a long time. It's no pleasure at all. I'm not doctrinaire, a right-winger. I'm a Liberal, and I feel like a Liberal, and it is painful. But it is needed\".\nThe government began a program of deep cuts to provincial transfers and other areas of government finance. During his tenure as prime minister, a $42\u00a0billion deficit was eliminated, five consecutive budget surpluses were recorded (thanks in part to favorable economic times), $36\u00a0billion in debt was paid down, and taxes were cut by $100\u00a0billion (cumulatively) over five years. Using the low incomes cut-offs after tax measure, the percentage of Canadians who had low income in 1993 was 14.1 percent; in 1995, when the budget was introduced, that figure had jumped to 14.5; in 2003, the end of Chr\u00e9tien's time in office, that number had fallen to just 11.6 percent. The share of Canadians living in persistent poverty (i.e. low income for at least 3 years out of 6 years) has declined by almost half since the mid-1990s to 2010. Social spending as a percentage of GDP fell from 20.35 percent in 1993, to 18.35 percent in 1995, eventually falling to 16.94 percent in 1997 and 15.76 percent in 2000, and eventually rising to 16.29 percent in 2003. The 1995 budget, which was called by Peter C. Newman a \"watershed document\" that marked the first time in recent memory that anybody had made a serious effort to deal with the deficit, won a favorable reaction from the international markets, and a led to an immediate fall in interest rates. There were, however, undeniable costs associated with this endeavour. The cuts resulted in fewer government services, most noticeably in the health care sector, as major reductions in federal funding to the provinces meant significant cuts in service delivery. Moreover, the across-the-board cuts affected the operations and achievement of the mandate of most federal departments. Many of the cuts were restored in later years of Chr\u00e9tien's period in office.\nIn March 1996, when the Chr\u00e9tien government presented its third budget, the backbencher Liberal MP John Nunziata voted against the budget under the grounds it failed to repeal the GST as the Liberals had promised in 1993 and singled out for criticism his former Rat Pack colleague Sheila Copps, who had promised during the 1993 election to resign within a year if the GST was not repealed. Chr\u00e9tien's response was to expel Nunziata from the Liberal caucus. However, the expulsion of Nunziata drew attention to the fact that Copps was still in office despite her promise to resign within a year if the GST was not repealed. Chr\u00e9tien first stated that Copps would stay in Parliament despite her promise of 1993, but then intense public pressure (together with a poll showing Copps would win a by-election) forced Copps to resign from the Parliament. After resigning, Copps then contested the resulting by-election, where she won and then went straight back into the Cabinet. To help defuse anger over the GST issue, in the spring of 1996 the Chr\u00e9tien government moved to harmonize sales taxes (GST with provincial taxes) by signing an accord with three of the four Atlantic provinces; the other provinces were not interested in the federal offer to harmonize.\nIn February 1998, for the first time since 1969 a balanced budget was presented by the government. Shortly afterwards, the Chr\u00e9tien government introduced the National Child Benefit program for the children of low-income parents.\nForeign policy.\nCanada in the Yugoslav Wars.\nIn 1999, Chr\u00e9tien supported Canada's involvement in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) bombing campaign of Yugoslavia over the issue of Kosovo, even through the operation was unsanctioned by the United Nations Security Council. There had been an Anglo-American resolution asking for the Security Council's approval of the NATO bombing, but it was vetoed by Russia. The idea of bombing Yugoslavia caused some discomfort within the ranks of the Liberal party as the NATO campaign effectively meant supporting Kosovo separatists against a government determined to prevent Kosovo's secession from Yugoslavia. Chr\u00e9tien was personally uncomfortable with the idea of bombing Yugoslavia, but supported the war because he valued good relations with the United States far more than he cared about Yugoslavia. Chr\u00e9tien's foreign minister at the time, Lloyd Axworthy justified Canada's involvement in the bombing of Yugoslavia on the grounds that allegations of massacres against ethnic Albanians in Kosovo made the use of force legitimate on humanitarian grounds, even without the approval of the UN Security Council. Likewise, Chr\u00e9tien was later to tell Lawrence Martin that it was far better to intervene in the internal affairs of Yugoslavia to stop human rights violations in the Kosovo region by Serbian forces than to do nothing.\nChina.\nChr\u00e9tien was known to be a Sinophile and an admirer of the People's Republic of China. In November 1994, he led the first of four \"Team Canada\" trade missions comprising himself and nine premiers to China (Quebec Premier Jacques Parizeau having declined to go), which had as their stated objective increasing Sino-Canadian trade. The Team Canada mission was meant to be the beginning of the export offensive that would stimulate the economy out of the recession, and also to achieve Chr\u00e9tien's goal going back to the 1970s of a Canadian economy less dependent on trade with the United States. Under his leadership, China and Canada signed several bilateral relations agreements. The Team Canada missions attracted criticism that Chr\u00e9tien seemed concerned only with economic issues, that he rarely raised the subject of China's poor human rights record, and that on the few occasions that he did mention human rights in China he went out of his way to avoid offending his hosts. Moreover, Chr\u00e9tien attracted criticism for presenting the case for improved human rights in purely economic terms, arguing that a better human rights record would allow China to join the WTO and thus sell more goods to the West. Chr\u00e9tien argued that there was no point in criticizing China's human rights record because the Chinese never listened to such criticism, and instead were greatly annoyed about being lectured by Western leaders about their poor human rights record. Given that Canada could not really do anything to change the views of China's leaders about human rights, Chr\u00e9tien contended that the best that could be done was to improve Sino-Canadian economic relations while ignoring the subject of human rights.\nUnited States.\nChr\u00e9tien phoned U.S. President Bill Clinton in November 1993 to ask him to renegotiate aspects of NAFTA. Clinton bluntly refused, saying that it had been extremely difficult to get Congress to ratify NAFTA, and if NAFTA was renegotiated, then he would have to submit the renegotiated treaty again for ratification, which was not something that he was going to do just for the sake of Chr\u00e9tien. Clinton informed the prime minister that he could either scrap NAFTA or accept it as it was, and that the most he could offer were a few cosmetic concessions like writing a letter saying the United States was not interested in taking over Canada's energy and water. Chr\u00e9tien chose the latter, and sought to portray Clinton's letter as a major American concession that constituted a renegotiated NAFTA, though in fact Clinton's letter was not legally binding and meant nothing. Only treaties ratified by Congress are legally binding on the U.S. government and presidential letters impose only a moral obligation, not a legal one, on the U.S government.\nFollowing the September 11 attacks, Canadian forces joined with a multinational coalition to pursue al-Qaeda in Afghanistan. U.S. President George W. Bush had also commended how Canada responded to the crisis. Among them included Operation Yellow Ribbon and the memorial service on Parliament Hill three days after 9/11. In January 2002, Chr\u00e9tien together with the Defence Minister Art Eggleton were accused of misleading Parliament. When asked in Question Period if Canadian troops had handed over captured Taliban and al-Qaeda members in Afghanistan to the American forces amid concerns about the treatment of POWs at Guantanamo Bay, Chr\u00e9tien stated this was only a \"hypothetical question\" that could not be answered as the Canadians had taken no POWs. Critics of the government, such as Joe Clark, then pointed out that in the previous week, \"The Globe &amp; Mail\" had run on its front page a photo of Canadian soldiers turning over POWs to American troops. Eggleton claimed that he had only learned of the policy of handing over POWs several days after the photo had appeared in \"The Globe and Mail\". When pressed by opposition critics about his apparent ignorance of what was Canada's policy on turning over POWs captured in Afghanistan, Eggleton then claimed that he had not only forgotten that he had been briefed by senior bureaucrats that Canadian Forces were to hand over POWs to the Americans, but that he had also forgotten to inform the Cabinet.\nOne year after the 9/11 attacks, Chr\u00e9tien gave controversial remarks about what led to the attacks, suggesting they were a reaction to Western foreign policy. During the 2002 CBC interview, Chr\u00e9tien said \"I do think that the Western world is getting too rich in relations to the poor world. And necessarily, we're looked upon as being arrogant, self-satisfied, greedy and with no limits. And the 11th of September is an occasion for me to realize it even more. When you are powerful like you are, you guys, it's the time to be nice. And it is one of the problems\u2014you cannot exercise your powers to the point of humiliation of the others. And that is what the Western world\u2014not only the Americans but the Western world\u2014has to realize.\" The comments were condemned by the new Official Opposition leader and the new Canadian Alliance leader, Stephen Harper, who charged Chretien with victim blaming, while the leaders of the New Democratic Party and Progressive Conservative Party did not interpret Chr\u00e9tien's comments as critical of the United States.\nRefusal to join the Iraq War.\nChr\u00e9tien's government did not support the US-led 2003 invasion of Iraq. His reasoning was that the war lacked UN Security Council sanction; while not a member of the Security Council, Canada nevertheless attempted to build a consensus for a resolution authorizing the use of force after a short (two- to three-month) extension to UN weapon inspections in Iraq. Critics also noted that, while in opposition, he had also opposed the first US-led Gulf War, which had been approved by the UN Security Council and in 1999 supported NATO air strikes against Serbia, which had no Security Council approval. In order to avoid damaging relations with the United States, Chr\u00e9tien agreed to another and larger deployment of Canadian troops to Afghanistan on February 12, 2003, in order to prove that Canada was still a good American ally, despite opposing the upcoming Iraq war. Canada sent 2,000 soldiers to Afghanistan in the summer of 2003. Twenty years later, in a French-language interview, Chretien recalled the personalities and events that led up to his refusal. At the time some in the business community were petrified that the US would look elsewhere for Canadian products; 85% of Canadian trade was with the US.\nDefence policy.\nIn 1993, Chr\u00e9tien canceled the contract to buy the EH-101 helicopters, requiring the search for new helicopters to start over, and paid a $478\u00a0million termination fee to AgustaWestland.\nIn January 1998, Chr\u00e9tien's government announced that the CH-113 helicopters would be replaced by a scaled-down search-and-rescue variant of the EH101, carrying the designation CH-149 Cormorant. Unlike the Petrel/Chimo contract which Chr\u00e9tien had cancelled in 1993, these 15 aircraft were to be built entirely in Europe with no Canadian participation or industrial incentives. The first two aircraft arrived in Canada in September 2001 and entered service the following year. His Maritime Helicopter Project was supposed to find a low-cost replacement aircraft. The candidates were the Sikorsky S-92, the NHIndustries NH90 and the EH-101, although critics accused the government of designing the project so as to prevent AgustaWestland from winning the contract. A winner, the Sikorsky CH-148 Cyclone, would not be announced until after Chr\u00e9tien retired.\nReelections.\n1997 federal election.\nChr\u00e9tien called an early election in the spring of 1997, hoping to take advantage of his position in the public opinion polls and the continued division of the conservative vote between the Progressive Conservative Party and the upstart Reform Party of Canada. Despite slipping poll numbers, he advised the governor general to call an election in 1997, a year ahead of schedule. Many of his own MPs criticized him for this move, especially in light of the devastating Red River Flood, which led to charges of insensitivity. Liberal MP John Godfrey tried hard to interest Chr\u00e9tien in an ambitious plan to eliminate urban poverty in Canada as a platform to run on in the election, which was vetoed by Eddie Goldenberg and John Rae of the PMO, who convinced Chr\u00e9tien that it was better to stick with an \"incrementalist\" course of small changes than risk any grand project. The Progressive Conservatives had a popular new leader in Jean Charest and the New Democrats' Alexa McDonough led her party to a breakthrough in Atlantic Canada, where the Liberals had won all but one seat in 1993. Chr\u00e9tien benefited when the Reform Party aired a TV ad in English Canada charging that the country was being dominated by French-Canadian politicians, which Chr\u00e9tien used to accuse Preston Manning of being anti-French. In 1997, the Liberals lost all but a handful of seats in Atlantic Canada and Western Canada, but managed to retain a bare majority government due to their continued dominance of Ontario.\n2000 federal election.\nChr\u00e9tien called another early election in the fall of 2000, again hoping to take advantage of the split in the Canadian right and catch the newly formed Canadian Alliance and its neophyte leader Stockwell Day off guard. At the funeral of Pierre Trudeau in September 2000, the Cuban President, Fidel Castro happened to meet with Day. Later that same day, Chr\u00e9tien met with Castro, where Chr\u00e9tien asked Castro about his assessment of Day and if he should call an early election or not. Castro advised Chr\u00e9tien to dissolve Parliament early as he considered Day to be a lightweight, and as Castro was a leader whom Chr\u00e9tien respected, his advice was an important reason for the election. Finance Minister Paul Martin released a 'mini-budget' just before the election call that included significant tax cuts, a move aimed at undermining the Alliance position going into the campaign. Chr\u00e9tien formed a \"war room\" comprising his communications director Fran\u00e7oise Ducros, Warren Kinsella, Duncan Fulton and Kevin Bosch to gather material to attack Day as a right-wing extremist. In the first weeks of the 2000 election campaign, the Canadian Alliance gained in the polls and some voters complained that Chr\u00e9tien had overstayed his time in office and had no agenda beyond staying in power for the sake of staying in power. The fact that the Red Book of 2000 consisted almost entirely of recycled promises from the Red Books of 1993 and 1997 and various banal statements further reinforced the impression of a prime minister with no plans or vision for Canada and whose only agenda was to hang onto power as long as possible. However, the Liberal claim that Day planned to dismantle the health care system to replace it with a \"two-tier\" health care system along with a number of gaffes on Day's part in addition to Alliance candidate Betty Granger warning that Canada was faced with the threat of an \"Asian invasion\" (which furthered the Liberals' plan to paint the Alliance as a xenophobic and extreme right-wing party) started to turn opinion decisively against the Canadian Alliance. Day's socially conservative views were also attacked by Chr\u00e9tien as the Liberals claimed that Day would make homosexuality and abortion illegal. The New Democrats and Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois also ran lacklustre campaigns, while the Progressive Conservatives, led by former Prime Minister Joe Clark, struggled to retain official party status. On November 27, the Liberals secured a strong majority mandate in the 2000 election, winning nearly as many seats as they had in 1993, largely thanks to significant gains in Quebec and Atlantic Canada. Without Jean Charest as leader, the PCs who had done well in winning the popular vote in Quebec in 1997 fared poorly in 2000, and most of their voters defected over to the Liberals.\nScandals and controversies.\nShawinigate.\nIn late 2000 and early 2001, politics were dominated by questions about the Grand-Mere Affair (or the Shawinigate scandal). Opposition parties frequently charged that Chr\u00e9tien had broken the law in regards to his lobbying for Business Development Bank of Canada for loans to the Auberge Grand-M\u00e8re inn. Questions were especially centered around the firing of the president of the bank, Fran\u00e7ois Beaudoin, and the involvement of Jean Carle, formerly of the PMO, in sacking Beaudoin. Carle served as Chr\u00e9tien's chief of operations between 1993 and 1998 before leaving to take up an executive post at the Business Development Bank. Chr\u00e9tien claimed that Carle was not involved in any way with the loans to the Grand-Mere Inn, only to be countered by Joe Clark, who produced a leaked document showing that he was. After initial denials, Chr\u00e9tien acknowledged having lobbied the Business Development Bank to grant a $2\u00a0million loan to Yvon Duhaime. Duhaime was a friend and constituent to whom the Prime Minister stated that he had sold his interest in the Grand-M\u00e8re Inn, a local Shawinigan-area hotel and golf resort, eventually providing evidence of the sale\u2014a contract written on a cocktail napkin. Duhaime was a local businessman with an unsavoury reputation and a criminal record, who received a loan from the Business Development Bank that he was ineligible to collect on the account of his criminal record (Duhaime did not mention his record when applying for the loan). The bank had turned down the initial loan application, but later approved a $615,000 loan following further lobbying by Chr\u00e9tien. When the bank refused to extend the loan in August 1999 under the grounds that Duhaime had a bad financial history, Beaudoin was fired by Chr\u00e9tien in September 1999, which led to a wrongful dismissal suit that Beaudoin was to win in 2004. It was revealed that Chr\u00e9tien had never been paid for his share in the sale of the adjoining golf course, and criminal charges were laid against Duhaime. On February 19, 2001, the RCMP announced that there they did not find sufficient evidence to lay criminal charges against anyone in regards to the Grand-Mere Affair, and Chr\u00e9tien accused Clark of waging a \"witch hunt\" against the Liberals. On March 2, 2001, the federal ethics counselor Howard Wilson cleared Chr\u00e9tien of wrongdoing in the Grand-Mere Affair. On April 5, 2001, the \"National Post\" received documents purportedly from an anonymous source within the bank, indicating that Chr\u00e9tien was still owed $23,040 by Duhaime for his share in the Auberge Grand-M\u00e8re. The revelation of the Grand-M\u00e8re affair did not affect the outcome of the 2000 election. Chr\u00e9tien and his circle believed that the breaking of the Grand-M\u00e8re story was the work of the Martin faction.\nSponsorship Scandal.\nThe major controversy of the later Chr\u00e9tien years was the Sponsorship Scandal, which involved more than $100\u00a0million distributed from the Prime Minister's Office to Quebec's federalist and Liberal Party interests without much accountability. On May 8, 2002, the Sponsorship Scandal broke when the auditor general, Sheila Fraser, issued a report accusing Public Works bureaucrats of having broken \"just about every rule in the book\" in awarding $1.6\u00a0million to the Montreal ad firm Groupaction Marketing Inc. The money awarded to Groupaction in three dubious contracts appeared to have disappeared, and the firm had a long history of donating to the Liberals. Opposition critics further suggested that the public works minister at the time, Alfonso Gagliano, whom Chr\u00e9tien had praised as a great patriot, was not just a mere bystander to questionable contacts associated with the sponsorship program that Fraser had identified. In response to the public outrage, Chr\u00e9tien argued in a speech in Winnipeg that all this was necessary to stop Quebec separatism and justified by the results, stating that: \"Perhaps there was a few million dollars that might have been stolen in the process. It is possible. But how many millions of dollars have we saved the country because we have re-established the stability of Canada as a united country? If somebody has stolen the money, they will face the courts. But I will not apologize to Canadians.\" Chr\u00e9tien's argument that he had nothing to apologize for in regards to the sponsorship program, and his apparent condoning of corruption as justified by the results of saving Canada fared poorly with the Canadian public, which increasingly started to perceive the prime minister as an autocratic leader with a thuggish streak. A poll taken later in May 2002 showed that over half of Canadians believed that the Chr\u00e9tien government was corrupt. The Sponsorship Scandal would tarnish Chr\u00e9tien's reputation only a few years after he left office, and contributed to the Liberals losing their majority government in 2004 and losing power altogether in 2006.\nChr\u00e9tien and Martin: Liberal Party infighting.\nRelations between Chr\u00e9tien and Martin were frequently strained, and Martin was reportedly angling to replace Chr\u00e9tien as early as 1997. Martin had long hoped that Chr\u00e9tien would just retire at the end of his second term, thereby allowing him to win the Liberal leadership, and was greatly disappointed in January 2000 when Chr\u00e9tien's communications director Fran\u00e7oise Ducros had fired \"a shot across the bow\" by confirming what had been strongly hinted at since the summer of 1999 in an announcement to the caucus that Chr\u00e9tien would seek a third term.\nChr\u00e9tien was due to face a leadership review in February 2002, but the Liberal national executive, which was controlled by partisans of Paul Martin, agreed to Chr\u00e9tien's request in early January 2001 that the leadership review be pushed back to February 2003. In agreeing to this request, Martin believed that this was the \"quid pro quo\" for allowing Chr\u00e9tien a decent interval to retire with dignity sometime in 2002, an interpretation that Chr\u00e9tien did not hold.\nRebellion and resignation.\nBy early 2002, the long-simmering feud with Martin came to a head. A particular concern that had badly strained relations between the prime minister and the finance minister by early 2002 was Martin's control of the Liberal Party apparatus, especially his control over the issuing of membership forms, which he reserved largely for his own supporters. In January 2002, Brian Tobin complained to Chr\u00e9tien that the Liberal Party machinery had been \"captured\" by Martin's followers to the extent that it was now virtually impossible for anyone else to sign up their own followers. This posed a major problem for Chr\u00e9tien as the Liberals were due to hold a leadership review in February 2003. However, it was still quite possible that Chr\u00e9tien would win the review by a slim margin.\nIn January 2002, an incident occurred which was to greatly damage Chr\u00e9tien's relations with the Liberal caucus. After Chr\u00e9tien reorganized the Cabinet in late January 2002, Liberal MP Carolyn Bennett criticised Chr\u00e9tien at a caucus meeting for not appointing more women to the Cabinet. Chr\u00e9tien exploded with rage at Bennett's criticism, saying that as a mere backbencher she did not have the right to criticise the prime minister in front of the caucus, and attacked her with such fury that Bennett collapsed in tears. In February 2002, reflecting a growing number of Liberal MPs' displeasure with Chr\u00e9tien, the Liberal caucus elected the outspoken pro-Martin MP Stan Keyes (who had already openly mused in 2001 about how it was time for Chr\u00e9tien to go) as their chairman, who defeated pro-Chr\u00e9tien MP Steve Mahoney. Chr\u00e9tien had expected Mahoney to win, and was reported to be shocked when he learned of Keyes's victory, which now gave Martin more control of the caucus.\nIn late May 2002, Chr\u00e9tien tried to curtail Martin's campaign for the leadership of the party by delivering a lecture to Cabinet to stop raising money for leadership bids within the Liberal Party. At what was described as a \"stormy\" Cabinet meeting on May 30, 2002, Chr\u00e9tien stated that he intended to serve out his entire term, and ordered the end of all leadership fundraising. Martin left his cabinet on June 2, 2002. Martin claimed that Chr\u00e9tien dismissed him from Cabinet, while Chr\u00e9tien said that Martin had resigned. In his memoirs, Chr\u00e9tien wrote that he regretted not having fired Martin a few years earlier.\nMartin's departure generated a severe backlash from Martin's supporters, who controlled much of the party machinery, and all signs indicated that they were prepared to oust Chr\u00e9tien at a leadership review in February 2003. To win the leadership review, Chr\u00e9tien formed a team in early June 2002 comprising his close associates John Rae, David Collenette, Jean Carle, and David Smith who were ordered to sign up as many pro-Chr\u00e9tien (\"Chr\u00e9tienist\") Liberals as possible for the leadership review. The open split, which was covered extensively on national media, increasingly painted Chr\u00e9tien as a lame duck. During the summer of 2002, a number of backbencher Liberal MPs associated with Martin started to openly criticise Chr\u00e9tien's leadership, calling on him to resign now or suffer the humiliation of losing the leadership review. Chr\u00e9tien asked Jim Karygiannis, who had been so effective in signing up supporters for him in 1990 to repeat that performance, only to be told by Karygiannis that Chr\u00e9tien had never rewarded him by appointing him to the Cabinet as he asked for many times over the years, had not even returned his phone calls to set up a meeting to discuss his possible appointment to the Cabinet and that he was now a Martin man. Karygiannis then called a press conference on July 13, 2002, where he called for Chr\u00e9tien to retire \"with dignity\", rather than risk losing a potentially divisive leadership review and avoid having his career end that way.\nAfter less than half the caucus committed to support him in August 2002 by signing a letter indicating their support for the prime minister in the up-coming leadership review, Chr\u00e9tien announced that he would not lead the party into the next election, and set his resignation date for February 2004. Martin was not happy with the 2004 departure date, preferring that Chr\u00e9tien retire at the end of 2002, but considered it better if Chr\u00e9tien were to retire than having to defeat him at the 2003 leadership review, which would have been more divisive and would have established the ominous precedent of a prime minister being ousted by his own party for no other reason other that someone else wanted the job. Due to mounting pressure from the Martin camp, Chr\u00e9tien no longer saw his February 2004 resignation date as tenable. His final sitting in the House of Commons took place on November 6, 2003. He made an emotional farewell to the party on November 13 at the 2003 Liberal leadership convention. The following day, Martin was elected his successor. On December 12, 2003, Chr\u00e9tien formally resigned as prime minister, handing power over to Martin. Chr\u00e9tien joined the law firm, Heenan Blaikie on January 5, 2004, as counsel. The firm announced he would work out of its Ottawa offices four days per week and make a weekly visit to the Montreal office. In early 2004, there occurred much in-fighting within the Liberal Party with several Liberal MPs associated with Chr\u00e9tien such as Sheila Copps and Charles Caccia losing their nomination battles against Martin loyalists.\nRetirement.\nOn February 18, 2004, Fran\u00e7ois Beaudoin won his wrongful dismissal suit against the Business Development Bank of Canada. Justice Andre Denis ruled in favor of Beaudoin's claim that he was fired for political reasons in 1999 for trying to call the loan on the Grand M\u00e8re Inn, ruled that Chr\u00e9tien's former aide Jean Carle and Michel Vennat were guilty of making false criminal and civil charges of wrongdoing against Beaudoin to discredit him for suing the bank, accused Carle of committing perjury during the trial and declared given the \"unspeakable injustice\" Beaudoin had suffered, told the government not to appeal his ruling because they would be wasting the tax-payers' money if they did. The lingering repercussions of the sponsorship scandal of 2002 reduced the Liberal Party to a minority in the 2004 election, may have strengthened the separatist case, and contributed to the government's defeat in the 2006 election. The scandal led to long-running, deep investigations by the RCMP, a federal inquiry, the Gomery Commission, chaired by Justice John Gomery (called by Martin in 2004), and several prosecutions and convictions; the legal process continued to late 2011, more than a decade after the scandal began.\nJean Chr\u00e9tien testified for the Gomery Commission regarding the sponsorship scandal in February 2005. Earlier that year his lawyers tried, but failed, to have Justice John Gomery removed from the commission, arguing that he lacked objectivity. Chr\u00e9tien contends that the Gomery Commission was set up to tarnish his image, and that it was not a fair investigation. He cites comments Gomery made calling him \"small town cheap\", referring to the management of the sponsorship program as \"catastrophically bad\", and calling Chuck Guit\u00e9 a \"charming scamp\". Subsequent to the release of the first report, Chr\u00e9tien has decided to take an action in Federal Court to review the commission report on the grounds that Gomery showed a \"reasonable apprehension of bias\", and that some conclusions didn't have an \"evidentiary\" basis. Chr\u00e9tien believes that the appointment of Bernard Roy, a former chief of staff to former PC prime minister Brian Mulroney, as chief counsel for the commission was a mistake, as he failed to call some relevant witnesses such as Don Boudria and Ralph Goodale. In his report of November 1, 2005, on responsibility for the sponsorship scandal, Justice Gomery ruled that Chr\u00e9tien was not responsible for the awarding of advertising contracts in Quebec in which millions were stolen, but did accept Charles Guit\u00e9's claim that he received his instructions on what program to sponsor and to spend how much money on each program from Jean Pelletier, the chief of staff at the PMO between 1993 and 2001 and Jean Carle, the director of operations at the PMO between 1993 and 1998 as the truth.\nIn April 2007, Chr\u00e9tien and Canadian book publishers Knopf Canada and \u00c9ditions du Bor\u00e9al announced they would be publishing his memoirs, \"My Years as Prime Minister\", which would recount Chr\u00e9tien's tenure as prime minister. The book was announced under the title of \"A Passion for Politics\". It arrived in bookstores in October 2007, in both English and French, but the promotional tour was delayed due to heart surgery. As well \"Straight from the Heart\" was republished with a new preface and two additional chapters detailing his return to politics as the leader of the Liberal Party and his victory in the election of 1993. Publisher Key Porter Books timed the re-issuing to coincide with the publication of \"My Years as Prime Minister\".\nOn October 1, 2007, Chr\u00e9tien was playing at the Royal Montreal Golf Club, north of Montreal, at a charity golf event. Playing alongside a cardiologist, he mentioned his discomfort, saying he \"had been suffering some symptoms for some time\" and the doctor advised he come for a check up. After examination, Chr\u00e9tien was hospitalized at the Montreal Heart Institute, with unstable angina, a sign a heart attack might be imminent. He underwent quadruple heart bypass surgery as a result on the morning of October 3, 2007. The operation forced Chr\u00e9tien to delay a promotional tour for his book. He was \"expected to have a full and complete recovery\".\nIn November 2008, Chr\u00e9tien and former NDP leader Ed Broadbent came out of retirement to negotiate a formal coalition agreement between the Liberals, the New Democratic Party and the Bloc Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois, the first power-sharing coalition since the Union government of 1917\u20131918 founded in response to the conscription crisis caused by World War I, in a bid to form a new government to replace the government of Prime Minister Stephen Harper. Harper's request to prorogue parliament was granted by Governor General Micha\u00eblle Jean, staving off the opposition's scheduled motion of non-confidence.\nOn August 5, 2010, Chr\u00e9tien complained of experiencing difficulty walking, and was admitted to a hospital. A brain scan was conducted the next day, and it revealed that a 3 centimeter wide subdural hematoma was pushing 1.5 centimeters into his brain. Emergency surgery was then performed that afternoon, and the blood was successfully drained. He was released from hospital on August 9, 2010. Doctors, who were impressed with the speed of his recovery, ordered him to rest for two to four weeks.\nChr\u00e9tien's name was rumoured as a replacement for Kofi Annan as secretary-general of the United Nations.\nChr\u00e9tien is a member of the Fondation Chirac's honour committee, ever since the foundation was launched in 2008 by former French president Jacques Chirac in order to promote world peace. He is also a member of the Club de Madrid, a group of former leaders from democratic countries, that works to strengthen democracy and respond to global crises. Jean Chr\u00e9tien is also an Honorary Member of The International Raoul Wallenberg Foundation.\nChr\u00e9tien is named in the Paradise Papers, a set of confidential electronic documents relating to offshore investment that were leaked to the German newspaper \"S\u00fcddeutsche Zeitung\".\nChr\u00e9tien was appointed a Companion of the Order of Canada on June 29, 2007. He was appointed to the Order of Merit by Queen Elizabeth II in July 2009 and received the insignia of the order from the Queen on October 20, 2009.\nIn December 2011, Chr\u00e9tien claimed that the Conservative Party and their majority government would overturn the legalization of same-sex marriage and abortion. In March 2013, Chr\u00e9tien criticized Stephen Harper's foreign policy, sparking some debate about the different degrees of influence Canada has held in foreign affairs under the two prime ministers. On September 12, 2015, Chr\u00e9tien published an open letter to Canadian voters in multiple newspapers in which he criticized Harper's response to the European migrant crisis, stating that Harper has turned Canada into a \"cold hearted\" nation and he has \"shamed Canada\". \"I am sad to see that in fewer than 10 years, the Harper government has tarnished almost 60 years of Canada's reputation as a builder of peace and progress\", Chr\u00e9tien stated before imploring voters to topple the Harper government in the upcoming election.\nIn October 2021, Chr\u00e9tien faced controversy during a promotional press interview for his recent book publication in which he denied having knowledge of the ongoing abuse happening to Indigenous children in residential schools during his time as Indian Affairs Minister. He went on to compare the experience of Indian Residential Schools, which inflicted lifelong psychological and physical trauma and led either directly or indirectly to the deaths of thousands of children who attended the schools, to his own experience at a private boarding school. NDP MP Charlie Angus contested that the residential school abuse was reported to the department while Chr\u00e9tien was minister, citing a letter from a teacher at St. Anne's Residential School in Fort Albany, Ont. It was dated 1968. In it, the teacher told him \"that crimes are being committed against children,\" and \"that he as Indian affairs minister had to step up and do something.\" Chr\u00e9tien never responded.\nIn September 2022, Chr\u00e9tien attended Elizabeth II's state funeral, along with other former Canadian prime ministers.\nChr\u00e9tien was expected to attend King Charles III's historic speech from the throne in the Senate of Canada on May 27, 2025. However, Chr\u00e9tien was unable to attend because he was recovering from heart surgery.\nLegacy.\nChr\u00e9tien was ranked the 9th greatest prime minister in a survey of Canadian scholars in 1999, which appeared in \"Prime Ministers: Ranking Canada's Leaders\" by J.L. Granatstein and Norman Hillmer. \"Maclean's\" has consistently ranked Chr\u00e9tien in the top ten on their assessments of Canadian prime ministers; he was ranked 9th greatest in 1997, 6th greatest in 2011 and 7th greatest in 2016.\nWriting in \"Policy Options\", historian and author Bob Plamondon pointed out that \"After demonizing Chr\u00e9tien, Quebec nationalists could not reconcile themselves to the reality that he gave their province new tools to protect the French language and culture. Canada had not been as united in the previous 50 years as when Chr\u00e9tien left office. Economists were left to wonder how Chr\u00e9tien turned around the national finances without triggering a recession. Canadians said in a survey that staying out of Iraq was the country's greatest foreign policy achievement. University presidents still marvel at how Chr\u00e9tien rebuilt Canada's intellectual infrastructure, turning a brain drain into a brain gain.\"\nHistorian Michael Bliss wrote that Chr\u00e9tien was \"moderately competent and only moderately corrupt.\" Bliss also wrote, \"Jean Chr\u00e9tien's career shows how much can be accomplished in Canadian politics by someone who is ambitious, hard-working, and has good luck \u2014 even if they speak English with a very thick accent.\"\nSupreme Court appointments.\nChr\u00e9tien chose the following jurists to be appointed as justices of the Supreme Court of Canada:\nHonours.\n \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAcademic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75627", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75627", "title": "X.208", "text": ""}
{"id": "75628", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75628", "title": "X.680", "text": ""}
{"id": "75629", "revid": "44524978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75629", "title": "Abstract syntax tree", "text": "Tree representation of the abstract syntactic structure of source code\nAn abstract syntax tree (AST) is a data structure used in computer science to represent the structure of a program or code snippet. It is a tree representation of the abstract syntactic structure of text (often source code) written in a formal language. Each node of the tree denotes a construct occurring in the text. It is sometimes called just a syntax tree.\nThe syntax is \"abstract\" in the sense that it does not represent every detail appearing in the real syntax, but rather just the structural or content-related details. For instance, grouping parentheses are implicit in the tree structure, so these do not have to be represented as separate nodes. Likewise, a syntactic construct like an if-condition-then statement may be denoted by means of a single node with three branches.\nThis distinguishes abstract syntax trees from concrete syntax trees, traditionally designated parse trees. Parse trees are typically built by a parser during the source code translation and compiling process. Once built, additional information is added to the AST by means of subsequent processing, e.g., contextual analysis.\nAbstract syntax trees are also used in program analysis and program transformation systems.\nApplication in compilers.\nAbstract syntax trees are data structures widely used in compilers to represent the structure of program code. An AST is usually the result of the syntax analysis phase of a compiler. It often serves as an intermediate representation of the program through several stages that the compiler requires, and has a strong affect on the final output of the compiler.\nMotivation.\nAn AST has several properties that aid in the additional steps of the compilation process:\nLanguages are often ambiguous by nature. In order to avoid this ambiguity, programming languages are often specified as a context-free grammar (CFG). However, there are often aspects of programming languages that a CFG can't express, but are part of the language and are documented in its specification. These are details that require a context to determine their validity and behavior. For example, if a language allows new types to be declared, a CFG cannot predict the names of such types nor the way in which they should be used. Even if a language has a predefined set of types, enforcing proper usage usually requires some context. Another example is duck typing, where the type of an element can change depending on context. Operator overloading is yet another case where correct usage and final function are context-dependent.\nDesign.\nThe design of an AST is often closely linked with the design of a compiler and its expected features.\nCore requirements include the following:\nThese requirements can be used to design the data structure for the AST.\nSome operations will always require two elements, such as the two terms for addition. However, some language constructs require an arbitrarily large number of children, such as argument lists passed to programs from the command shell. As a result, an AST used to represent code written in such a language has to also be flexible enough to allow for the quick addition of an unknown quantity of children.\nTo support compiler verification it should be possible to unparse an AST into source code form. The source code produced should be sufficiently similar to the original in appearance and identical in execution, upon recompilation.\nThe AST is used intensively during semantic analysis, where the compiler checks for correct usage of the elements of the program and the language. The compiler also generates symbol tables based on the AST during semantic analysis. A complete traversal of the tree allows verification of the correctness of the program.\nAfter verifying correctness, the AST serves as the base for code generation. The AST is often used to generate an intermediate representation (IR), sometimes called an intermediate language, for the code generation.\nOther usages.\nAST differencing.\nAST differencing, or for short tree differencing, consists of computing the list of differences between two ASTs. This list of differences is typically called an edit script. The edit script directly refers to the AST of the code. For instance, an edit action may result in the addition of a new AST node representing a function. \nClone detection.\nAn AST is a powerful abstraction to perform code clone detection.\nDefinition.\nArities.\nLet formula_1 be a set of \"sorts\", an \"arity is a tuple\" formula_2, for formula_3, also written as formula_4. More precisely, formula_5.\nLet formula_6 be an formula_7-indexed family of disjoint sets of \"operators\". If formula_8 is an operator arity formula_4 we say that formula_8 has sort formula_11 and has formula_12 arguments of sorts formula_13.\nASTs.\nFix formula_1 be a finite set of sorts, and formula_15 an formula_7-indexed family of disjoint sets of \"operators\". Let formula_17 be an formula_1-indexed family of disjoint sets of variables. The family formula_19 of abstract syntax trees, or ASTs, is the smallest formula_1-indexed family of disjoint sets closed under the following conditions:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75630", "revid": "50336451", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75630", "title": "AST", "text": "AST, Ast, or ast may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75631", "revid": "29884708", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75631", "title": "Nidhogg", "text": "Serpent from Norse mythology\nNidhogg (, ; Modern ; ; ; ) is a Germanic dragon in Norse mythology who is said to gnaw at the roots of the world tree, Yggdrasil, and is likewise associated with the dead in Hel and Niflheim.\nEtymology.\nWhile the suffix of the name, \"-h\u00f6ggr\", literally \"hewer\", clearly means \"biter, striker\", etc, the prefix is not as clear. In particular, the length of the first vowel is not determined in the original sources. It could be (\"down, downwards\"), thus \"Biter Below (the roots)\", or (see below). The prefix might be the same as used in \"Ni\u00f0afj\u01ebll\".\nIn historical Viking society, \"n\u00ed\u00f0\" (archaic English: \"nith\") was a term for a social stigma, implying the loss of honor and the status of a villain. Thus, its name might refer to its role as a horrific monster in its action of chewing the corpses of the inhabitants of Niflheim: those guilty of murder, adultery, and oath-breaking, thus something akin to \"Malice Biter\". Some scholars prefer the reading \"Striker in the Dark\".\nIn either case, the name seems to also refer to him gnawing on the roots of the tree Yggdrasil.\nOrthography.\nIn the standardized Old Norse orthography, the name is spelled ', but the letter ' is frequently replaced with the Modern Icelandic \"\" for reasons of familiarity or technical expediency.\nThe name can be represented in English texts with \"i\" for \"\u00ed\"; \"th\", \"d\" or (rarely) \"dh\" for \"\u00f0\"; \"o\" for \"\u01eb\" and optionally without \"r\" as in Modern Scandinavian reflexes. The Modern Icelandic form ' is also sometimes seen, with special characters or similarly anglicized. The Danish forms ' and ' can also be encountered; or Norwegian ' and Swedish \"\". The English cognate would be Nithhewer.\n\"Prose Edda\".\nAccording to the \"Gylfaginning\" part of Snorri Sturluson's \"Prose Edda\", N\u00ed\u00f0h\u01ebggr is a being which gnaws one of the three roots of Yggdrasill. It is sometimes believed that the roots are trapping the beast from the world. This root is placed over Niflheimr and N\u00ed\u00f0h\u01ebggr gnaws it from beneath. The same source also says that \"[t]he squirrel called Ratatoskr runs up and down the length of the Ash, bearing envious words between the eagle and N\u00eddh\u01ebggr [the snake].\"\nIn the \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\" section of the \"Prose Edda\" Snorri specifies N\u00ed\u00f0h\u01ebggr as a serpent in a list of names of such creatures:\nThese are names for serpents: dragon, Fafnir, Jormungand, adder, Nidhogg, snake, viper, Goinn, Moinn, Grafvitnir, Grabak, Ofnir, Svafnir, masked one.\nSnorri's knowledge of N\u00ed\u00f0h\u01ebggr seems to come from two of the Eddic poems: \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" and \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\".\nLater in \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", Snorri includes N\u00ed\u00f0h\u01ebggr in a list of various terms and names for swords.\nPoetic Edda.\nThe poem \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\" identifies a number of beings which live in Yggdrasill. The tree suffers great hardship from all the creatures which live on it. The poem identifies N\u00ed\u00f0h\u01ebggr as tearing at the tree from beneath and also mentions Ratatoskr as carrying messages between N\u00ed\u00f0h\u01ebggr and the eagle who lives at the top of the tree. Snorri Sturluson often quotes Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l and clearly used it as his source for this information.\nThe poem \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\" mentions N\u00ed\u00f0h\u00f6ggr/N\u00ed\u00f0h\u01ebggr twice. The first instance is in its description of N\u00e1str\u00f6nd.\nNidhogg is also mentioned at the end of \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", where he is identified as a dragon and a serpent (see Germanic dragon).\nThe context and meaning of this stanza are disputed. The most prevalent opinion is that the arrival of N\u00ed\u00f0h\u01ebggr heralds Ragnar\u00f6k and thus that the poem ends on a tone of ominous warning. It could be, however, as the prevalent themes of Norse mythology are those of change and renewal, that this could be a 'redemption' of the serpent, 'shedding' the corpses and beginning life anew, much like a macabre Phoenix, or perhaps, lifting the bodies of the righteous rulers mentioned two stanzas before (the stanza immediately before is considered spurious by translator Henry Adam Bellows), so that they can dwell in Gimle, and then either N\u00ed\u00f0h\u01ebggr sinks, or the v\u00f6lva sinks, depending on the translation, and the poem ends.\nN\u00ed\u00f0h\u01ebggr is not mentioned elsewhere in any ancient source.\nComparisons to Celtic culture.\nAt least one Irish story, that of Conneda, tells of a man journeying into the otherworld and having to work his way past several giant snakes with names of different sins and transgressions. This would imply snakes consume, torment or punish the bad souls in Celtic culture. Similarly, Nidhogg is seen as the parent of all the snakes of the Norse underworld realm of N\u00e1str\u00f6nd, separated from the rest of Helheim by the river Gjallar, which is made up of their acidic poison. This is where souls that are denied crossing on the Gjallarbr\u00fa wind up and where Loki is eventually imprisoned. This is probably a reasonable explanation for his name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "75639", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75639", "title": "Train a grande vitesse", "text": ""}
{"id": "75643", "revid": "19014806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75643", "title": "Petra Kelly", "text": "Co-founder of the Green Party in Germany (1947\u20131992)\nPetra Karin Kelly (29 November 1947 \u2013 c. 1 October 1992) was a German Green politician and ecofeminist activist. She was a founding member of the German Green Party, the first Green party to rise to prominence both nationally in Germany and worldwide. In 1982, she was awarded the Right Livelihood Award for \"forging and implementing a new vision uniting ecological concerns with disarmament, social justice and human rights.\"\nOn 19 October 1992, the decomposed bodies of Kelly and her partner, the ex-general and Green politician Gert Bastian were discovered in the bedroom of her house in Bonn by police officials after they received a call from both Bastian's wife and Kelly's grandmother who reported that they had not heard from either Bastian or Kelly for a few weeks. The police determined that Kelly was shot dead while sleeping by Bastian, who then died of suicide. She was 44, he was 69. The last time anyone heard from the couple was on 30 September 1992 when Kelly sent a parcel to her grandmother. Police estimated the deaths had most likely occurred on 1 October but the exact time of death could not be pinpointed owing to the delay in finding the bodies and their resultant state of decomposition.\nEarly life and education.\nPetra Karin Lehmann was born in G\u00fcnzburg, Bavaria in 1947. She changed her name to Kelly after her mother married John E. Kelly, a US Army officer. She was educated in a Catholic convent in G\u00fcnzburg and later attended school in Georgia and Virginia after her family relocated to the United States in 1959. She lived and studied in the United States until her return to West Germany in 1970. She retained her West German citizenship throughout her life.\nKelly admired Martin Luther King Jr., and campaigned for Robert F. Kennedy and Hubert Humphrey in the 1968 U.S. elections. She studied political science at the School of International Service at American University (Washington, D.C.), from which she graduated in 1970 with a bachelor's degree. She also graduated from the European Institute at the University of Amsterdam in 1971 with a master's degree.\nCareer.\nWhile working at the European Commission (Brussels, Belgium, 1971\u201383), Kelly participated in numerous peace and environmental campaigns in Germany and other countries.\nAfter working for two years at the European Commission, she moved to an administrative post at the Economic and Social Committee, where she championed women's rights.\nGerman Green Party.\nKelly was one of the founders of \"Die Gr\u00fcnen\", the German Green Party in 1979. In 1983 she was elected to the Bundestag via the Electoral list as a Member of the Bundestag representing Bavaria. She was subsequently re-elected in 1987 with a higher share of the vote.\nIn 1981, Kelly was involved in a protest of 400,000 people in Bonn against nuclear weapons. In 1982, Gerhard Schr\u00f6der wrote a contribution in \"Die Zeit\" for the book \"Prinzip Leben\", edited by Kelly and Jo Leinen, which discussed ecological problems and a possible nuclear war.\nIn the same year, Kelly received the Right Livelihood Award \"...for forging and implementing a new vision uniting ecological concerns with disarmament, social justice, and human rights.\"\nOn 12 May 1983, Kelly, Gert Bastian and three other Green Bundestag members unfurled a banner on Alexanderplatz in East Berlin, which said \"\"The Greens \u2013 Swords to Ploughshares\".\" After being briefly arrested, they met with East German opposition parties. The East German authorities tolerated this since the West German Greens repudiated the NATO Double-Track Decision. In October 1983, Erich Honecker, the leader of the German Democratic Republic, met Petra Kelly, Gert Bastian and other Greens. Kelly wore a pullover with the words \"Swords to Ploughshares\" on it. She demanded the release of all prisoners of the East German peace movement and asked Honecker why he repressed something in the GDR which he supported in the West.\nKelly wrote the book \"Fighting for Hope\" in 1984, published by South End Press. The book is an urgent call for a world free from violence between North and South, men and women, ourselves and our environment.\nIn the final years of her life, Kelly became increasingly estranged from most of her party colleagues owing to the pragmatic turn taken by the Greens at the time, while she continued to oppose any alliance with traditional political parties.\nDeath.\nOn 19 October 1992, the decomposed bodies of Kelly and her partner, ex-general and Green politician Gert Bastian (born 1923), were discovered in the bedroom of her house in Bonn by police officials after they received a call from both Bastian's wife and Kelly's grandmother who reported that they had not heard from either Bastian or Kelly for a few weeks. The police determined that Kelly was shot dead while sleeping by Bastian, who then died of suicide. She was 44, he was 69. The last time anyone heard from the couple was on 30 September 1992 when Kelly sent a parcel to her grandmother. Police estimated the deaths had most likely occurred on 1 October but the exact time of death could not be pinpointed owing to the delay in finding the bodies and their resultant state of decomposition. Kelly was buried in the Waldfriedhof (forest cemetery) in W\u00fcrzburg, near the village of Heidingsfeld in Lower Franconia, Bavaria.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75644", "revid": "15482012", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75644", "title": "Progressive psytrance", "text": ""}
{"id": "75646", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75646", "title": "Tadmor, Syria", "text": ""}
{"id": "75647", "revid": "29421082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75647", "title": "Carl Hiaasen", "text": "American novelist (born 1953)\nCarl Hiaasen (; born March 12, 1953) is an American journalist and novelist. He began his career as a newspaper reporter and by the late 1970s had begun writing novels in his spare time, both for adults and for middle grade readers. Two of his novels have been made into feature films, and one has been made into a TV series.\nHiaasen's adult novels are humorous crime thrillers set in Florida. They feature casts of eccentric, sometimes grotesque characters and satirize aspects of American popular culture. Many of the novels include themes related to environmentalism and political corruption in his native state.\nEarly life and education.\nHiaasen was born in 1953 born to Odel and Patricia Hiaasen of Norwegian and Irish ancestry as the first of four children, including his brother Rob Hiaasen. Raised in Plantation, Florida, then a rural suburb of Fort Lauderdale, he started writing at age six when his father gave him a typewriter for Christmas. After graduating from Plantation High School in 1970, he entered Emory University, where he contributed satirical humor columns to the student newspaper \"The Emory Wheel\". In 1972, he transferred to the University of Florida, where he wrote for \"The Independent Florida Alligator\". Hiaasen graduated in 1974 with a degree in journalism.\nJournalism.\nHiaasen was a reporter at \"TODAY\" (Cocoa, Florida) for two years before being hired in 1976 by the \"Miami Herald\", where he worked for the city desk, Sunday magazine and award-winning investigative team. Hiaasen was a columnist for the newspaper from mid-1985 until he retired in March 2021. His columns have been collected in three published volumes, \"Kick Ass\" (1999\"), Paradise Screwed\" (2001) and \"Dance of the Reptiles\" (2014), all edited by Diane Stevenson.\nHis only brother was Rob Hiaasen, an editor and columnist at \"The Capital\" newspaper in Annapolis, Maryland, who was killed in the mass shooting at the newspaper's office on June 28, 2018. Carl Hiaasen's 1991 novel \"Native Tongue\" carries the dedication \"For my brother Rob.\"\nNovelist.\nAfter becoming a reporter, Hiaasen began writing novels in his spare time. The first three were co-authored with his friend and fellow journalist William Montalbano: \"Powder Burn\" (1981), \"Trap Line\" (1982), and \"A Death in China\" (1984). His first solo novel, \"Tourist Season\" (1986), featured a group of ragged eco-warriors who kidnap the Orange Bowl Queen in Miami. The book's main character was whimsically memorialized by Jimmy Buffett in a song called \"The Ballad of Skip Wiley\", which appeared on his \"Barometer Soup\" album.\nTwenty-one of Hiaasen's novels and nonfiction books have been on the \"New York Times\" Best Seller lists. His work has been translated into 34 languages. In 2016, his novel \"Razor Girl\" was shortlisted for the Bollinger Everyman Wodehouse Prize.\nAn earlier Hiaasen novel, \"Strip Tease,\" was adapted into the 1996 feature film \"Striptease\" starring Demi Moore and Burt Reynolds. Another book, \"Bad Monkey,\" has been adapted into a series on Apple TV. It stars Vince Vaughn and is written and executive produced by Bill Lawrence, who co-created \"Ted Lasso\". The series began airing in August 2024. \"Bad Monkey\" has been renewed for a second season. \nHiaasen's first venture into writing for younger readers was the 2002 novel \"Hoot\", which was named a Newbery Medal honor book. It was adapted as a 2006 film of the same name (starring Logan Lerman, Brie Larson and Luke Wilson). The movie was written and directed by Wil Shriner. Jimmy Buffett provided songs for the soundtrack, and appeared in the role of Mr. Ryan, a middle school teacher.\nHiaasen's subsequent children's novels are \"Flush\"; \"Scat\"; \"Chomp\"; \"Skink - No Surrender\", which introduces one of his most popular adult characters to younger readers; \"Squirm\"; and the latest, \"Wrecker\". \nIn 2014, \"Skink\" was longlisted for a National Book Award in Young People's Literature. Hiaasen's books for young readers feature environmental themes, eccentric casts and adventure-filled plots. \"Squirm,\" which is set in Florida and Montana, was published in fall 2018 and opened at #4 on the New York Times bestseller list for middle-grade novels.\n\"Wrecker,\" released on September 26, 2023, is set in Key West during the COVID-19 pandemic. \"Kirkus Reviews\" called it, \"A batten-down-the-hatches thriller anchored by critical real-life themes\". \"Booklist\" wrote, \"Wielding his writing talents and wit, Hiaasen seamlessly incorporates...disparate elements into one heck of a ride\". \"Wrecker\" debuted at number one on \"The New York Times\" Children's Middle Grade Hardcover Best Sellers List.\nHis adult book, \"Squeeze Me,\" was published on August 25, 2020, and debuted at #2 on the New York Times Combined Print and E-Book Best Sellers List. The novel takes place during the glitzy Palm Beach social season, and features wild pythons and a fictional, well-fed U.S. president who has a vacation mansion on the island. Amazon and the \"Washington\" \"Post\" listed \"Squeeze Me\" among the best novels of 2020.\n\"Fever Beach\", his latest novel, was published on May 13, 2025 and opened at #8 on the New York Times Combined Print and E-Book Best Sellers List. It features the character Twilly Spree, who was introduced in 2000's \"Sick Puppy,\" and tells the story of two fumbling hate-mongers who are trying to start their own white nationalist group.\nHiaasen's most recent nonfiction work is \"Assume the Worst: The Graduation Speech You'll Never Hear\", which was published in April 2018 and illustrated by Roz Chast, known for her cartoons in \"The New Yorker\".\nSongwriting.\nDuring the 1990s, Hiaasen co-wrote the lyrics of three songs with his friend, L.A. rocker Warren Zevon. \"Rottweiler Blues\" and \"Seminole Bingo\" appeared on Zevon's \"Mutineer\" album in 1995. The third song they wrote together, \"Basket Case,\" was done in conjunction with Hiaasen's novel of the same name, and appeared in 2002 on Zevon's album \"My Ride's Here.\"\nHiaasen co-wrote \"Fish Porn\" on Jimmy Buffett's final album, \"Equal Strain on All Parts\", with Buffett and Mac McAnally.\nPersonal life.\nHiaasen lives in Vero Beach, Florida. He is a fly fisherman who has won the Invitational Fall Fly Bonefish Tournament in Islamorada six times, fishing with guide Tim Klein.\nHis wife is Katie Fox, whom he married in 2020. Hiaasen was previously married to Connie, a nurse, whom he thanks in the dedication for \"Skin Tight\".\nWorks.\nFiction.\nAdult fiction.\nWith William Montalbano\nCollections.\n34 books in total\nAdaptations.\nHiaasen's novels have been adapted for film and television:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75649", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75649", "title": "Sauna", "text": "Type of bathhouse\nA sauna (, ) is a room or building designed as a place to experience dry or wet heat sessions or an establishment with one or more of these facilities. The steam and high heat make the bathers perspire. A thermometer in a sauna is used to measure temperature; a hygrometer can be used to measure levels of humidity or steam. Infrared therapy is often referred to as a type of sauna, but according to the Finnish sauna organizations, infrared is not a sauna. \nHistory.\nAreas such as the rocky Orkney islands of Scotland have many ancient stone structures for normal habitation, some of which incorporate areas for fire and bathing. It is possible some of these structures also incorporated the use of steam in a way similar to the sauna, but this is a matter of speculation. The sites are from the Neolithic age, dating to approximately 4000 B.C.E. Archaeological sites in Greenland and Newfoundland have uncovered structures very similar to traditional Scandinavian farm saunas, some with bathing platforms and \"enormous quantities of badly scorched stones\".\nThe traditional Korean sauna, called the \"hanjeungmak\", is a domed structure constructed of stone that was first mentioned in the \"Sejong Sillok\" of the Annals of the Joseon Dynasty in the 15th century. Supported by Sejong the Great, the \"hanjeungmak\" was touted for its health benefits and used to treat illnesses. In the early 15th century, Buddhist monks maintained \"hanjeungmak\" clinics, called \"hanjeungso\", to treat sick poor people; these clinics maintained separate facilities for men and women due to high demand. Korean sauna culture and kiln saunas are still popular today, and Korean saunas are ubiquitous.\nWestern saunas originated in Finland where the oldest known saunas were made from pits dug in a slope in the ground and primarily used as dwellings in winter. The sauna featured a fireplace where stones were heated to a high temperature. Water was thrown on the hot stones to produce steam and to give a sensation of increased heat. This would raise the apparent temperature so high that people could take off their clothes. The first Finnish saunas were always of a type now called \"savusauna\"; \"smoke sauna\". These differed from present-day saunas in that they were operated by heating a pile of rocks called a \"kiuas\" by burning large amounts of wood for about 6 to 8 hours and then letting out the smoke before enjoying the \"l\u00f6yly\", a Finnish term meaning, collectively, both the steam and the heat of a sauna (in the closely related Estonian, the equivalent term is \"leili\"). A properly heated \"savusauna\" yields heat for up to 12 hours.\nAs a result of the Industrial Revolution, the sauna evolved to use a wood-burning metal stove with rocks on top, \"kiuas\", with a chimney. Air temperatures averaged around but sometimes exceeded in a traditional Finnish sauna. As the Finns migrated to other areas of the globe, they brought their sauna designs and traditions with them. This led to a further evolution of the sauna, including the electric sauna stove, which was introduced in 1938 by Metos Ltd in Vaasa. Although sauna culture is more or less related to Finnish and Estonian culture, the evolution of the sauna took place around the same time in Finland and Baltic countries; they all have valued the sauna, its customs and traditions until the present day.\nThe sauna became very popular especially in Scandinavia and the German-speaking regions of Europe after the Second World War: German soldiers had experienced Finnish saunas when the two nations fought together against the Soviet Union (see Continuation War). Saunas were so important to Finnish soldiers that they built them not only in mobile tents but even in bunkers. After the war, the German soldiers brought the custom back to Germany and Austria, where it became popular in the second half of the 20th century. The German sauna culture also became popular in neighbouring countries such as Switzerland, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg.\nSauna culture has been registered in the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity under two entries: \"Smoke sauna tradition in V\u00f5romaa\" in 2014 and \"Sauna culture in Finland\" in 2020.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"sauna\" is an ancient Finnish word referring to both the traditional Finnish bath and to the bathhouse itself. In Finnic languages other than Finnish and Estonian, \"sauna\" and cognates do not necessarily mean a building or space built for bathing. It can also mean a small cabin or cottage, such as a cabin for a fisherman. The word is the best known Finnicism in many languages.\nModern saunas.\nThe sauna known in the Western world today originates from Northern Europe. In Finland, there are built-in saunas in almost every house, including communal saunas in the older apartment buildings; since the 80s, private saunas have often been built into the bathrooms of typical Finnish flats in apartment buildings, sometimes even in student housing. There are also many public saunas in Finland, including Rajaportin Sauna, a sauna located in Tampere, that was first established in 1906 by Hermanni and Maria Lahtinen. Helsinki even has a sauna built into one of the gondolas of a Ferris wheel, SkyWheel Helsinki. Unlike many other countries, Finnish people usually prefer to be naked instead of wearing a swimsuit, towel, or other kind of clothing.\nUnder many circumstances, temperatures approaching and exceeding would be completely intolerable and possibly fatal to a person exposed to them for long periods. Saunas overcome this problem by controlling the humidity. The hottest Finnish saunas have relatively low humidity levels in which steam is generated by pouring water on the hot stones. This allows air temperatures that could evaporate water to be tolerated and even enjoyed for longer periods. Steam baths, such as the hammam, where the humidity approaches 100%, will be set to a much lower temperature of around to compensate. The \"wet heat\" would cause scalding if the temperature were set much higher.\nIn a typical Finnish sauna, the temperature of the air, the room, and the benches are above the dew point even when water is thrown on the hot stones and vaporized. Thus, they remain dry. In contrast, the sauna bathers are at about , which is below the dew point, so that water is condensed on the bathers' skin. This process releases heat and makes the steam feel hot.\nFiner control over the perceived temperature can be achieved by choosing a higher-level bench for those wishing for a hotter experience, or a lower-level bench for a more moderate temperature. A good sauna has a relatively small temperature gradient between the various seating levels. Doors need to be kept closed and used quickly to maintain the temperature and to keep the steam inside.\nSome North American, Western European, Japanese, Russian, and South African public sport center and gyms include sauna facilities. They may also be present at public and private swimming pools. As an additional facility, a sauna may have one or more jacuzzi. In some spa centers, there are the so-called special \"snow rooms,\" also known as cold saunas or cryotherapy. Operating at a temperature of , the user is in the sauna for only about three minutes.\nAccording to the Guinness Book of World Records, the world's largest sauna is the Koi Sauna in the Thermen &amp; Badewelt Sinsheim, Germany. It measures 166 square meters, holds 150 people, and sports a koi aquarium. The title may now belong to Cape East Spa in Haparanda, Sweden, which also holds 150 people but is more spacious.\nHowever, in Czeladz, south Poland, there is now a sauna for 300 people, sporting light shows, theatre, and several sauna masters.\nUse.\nA modern sauna with an electric stove usually takes about 15\u201330 minutes to heat up. Some users prefer taking a shower beforehand to speed up perspiration in the sauna. When in the sauna, people often sit on a towel for hygiene and put a towel over their heads if the face feels too hot but the body feels comfortable. In Russia, a felt \"banya hat\" may be worn to shield the head from the heat; this allows the wearer to increase the heat on the rest of the body. The temperature of one's bath can be controlled via:\nThe heat is greatest closest to the stove. Heating from the air is cooler on the lower benches as the hot air rises. The heat given by the steam can be very different in different parts of the sauna. As the steam rises directly upwards, it spreads across the roof and travels out towards the corners, where it is then forced downwards. Consequently, the heat of fresh steam may sometimes be felt most strongly in the furthest corners of the sauna. Users increase the duration and the heat gradually over time as they adapt to the sauna. When pouring water onto the stove, it cools down the rocks, but carries more heat into the air via advection, making the sauna warmer.\nPerspiration is the result of autonomic responses trying to cool the body. Users are advised to leave the sauna if the heat becomes unbearable, or if they feel faint or ill. Some saunas have a thermostat to adjust the temperature, but the owner of the sauna and the other bathers expect to be consulted before changes are made. The sauna stove and rocks are very hot\u2014one must stay well clear of them to avoid burns, particularly when water is thrown on the rocks, which creates an immediate blast of steam. Combustibles on, or near the stove have been known to cause fires. Contact lenses dry out in the heat. Jewelry or anything metallic, including glasses, will get hot in the sauna and can cause discomfort or burning.\nThe temperature on different parts of the body can be adjusted by shielding one's body with a towel. Shielding the face with a towel has been found to reduce the perception of heat. Some may wish to put an additional towel or a special cap over the head to avoid dryness. Few people can sit directly in front of the stove without feeling too hot from the radiant heat, but this may not be reflected in their overall body temperature. As the person's body is often the coolest object in a sauna room, steam will condense into water on the skin; this can be confused with perspiration.\nCooling down by immersing oneself in water (in a shower, lake, or pool) is a part of the sauna cycle and is as important as the heating. However, healthy people and heart patients alike should take some precautions if plunging into very cold water straight after coming from the hot room, as the rapid cooling of the body produces considerable circulatory stress. It is considered good practice to take a few moments after exiting a sauna before entering a cold plunge and to enter a plunge pool or a lake by stepping into it gradually, rather than immediately immersing oneself fully. In summer, a session is often started with a cool shower.\nIn some countries, the closest and most convenient access to a sauna is at a gymnasium. Some public pools, major sports centers, and resorts also contain a sauna. Therapeutic sauna sessions are often carried out in conjunction with physiotherapy or hydrotherapy; these are gentle exercises that do not exacerbate symptoms.\nHealth effects.\nPotential health benefits.\nThere has been widespread research into the health benefits and risks that come from sauna usage; most studies have focused on the Finnish sauna specifically. Sauna bathing leads to mild heat stress, which activates heat shock proteins responsible for repairing misfolded proteins, promoting longevity as well as protection against muscle atrophy and chronic illness.\nThere is evidence that long-term exposure to Finnish-style sauna is correlated with a reduced risk of sudden cardiac death; and that risk reduction increases with duration and frequency of use; this reduction is more pronounced when sauna bathing is combined with exercise, compared with either of these practices alone. Tentative evidence supports that the heat stress from saunas is associated with reduced blood pressure and arterial stiffness, and therefore also decrease the risk of cardiovascular disease. These benefits are more pronounced in persons with low cardiovascular function. Evidence exists for the benefit of sauna on people with heart failure. Frequent Finnish-style sauna usage (4-7 times per week) is associated with a decreased risk of neurovascular diseases, including Alzheimer's disease and stroke, relative to those individuals who used sauna once per week. Individuals suffering from musculoskeletal disorders could have symptomatic improvement from sauna, and it could be beneficial for glaucoma. It also is associated with a reduced risk and symptom relief from the symptoms of respiratory illness. Weight loss in obese people and improvement of appetite loss present with normal body weight can also be achievable with sauna bathing.\nEvidence for the use of sauna for depression or skin disorders is insufficient, but the frequency of sauna sessions is correlated with a diminished risk of developing psychosis, and it might be beneficial for psoriasis.\nPotential health risks.\nSauna bathing coupled with alcohol consumption or dehydration increases the risk of sudden death; the use of narcotic drugs, such as cocaine, also increases the risk. Being severely obese, having high blood pressure, or being diabetic all serve as reasons to decrease the duration of sauna sessions. Individuals prone to postural hypotension or severe valvular heart disease should use a sauna cautiously to reduce the risk of a drop in blood pressure. In people with cardiovascular disease, sauna usage is generally safe, as long as their condition is stable. However, sauna bathing is contraindicated in persons with unstable angina and severe aortic stenosis. A one-year study in Finland showed that only 67 (2.6%) of sudden deaths in saunas were non-accidental, mostly due to coronary heart disease.\nPregnant women can use saunas as long as their core temperature does not exceed , as this may be teratogenic.\nOne study has found that genital heat stress from frequent sauna sessions could cause male infertility.\nTechnologies.\nToday there is a wide variety of sauna options. Heat sources include wood, electricity, gas, and other unconventional methods such as solar power. There are wet saunas, dry saunas, infrared saunas, smoke saunas, and steam saunas. There are two main types of stoves: continuous heating and heat storage type. Continuously heating stoves have a small heat capacity and can be heated up on a fast on-demand basis, whereas a heat storage stove has a large heat (stone) capacity and can take much longer to heat.\nHeat storage-type.\nSmoke sauna.\nSmoke sauna (Finnish \"savusauna\", Estonian \"suitsusaun\", V\u00f5ro \"savvusann\") is one of the earliest forms of the sauna. It is simply a room containing a pile of rocks but without a chimney. A fire is lit directly under the rocks and after a while, the fire is extinguished. The heat is retained in the rocks, and the earlier fire becomes the main source for heating the sauna. Following this process, the ashes and embers are removed from the hearth, the benches and floor are cleaned, and the room is allowed to air out and freshen for some time. The smoke deposits a layer of soot on every surface, so if the benches and back-rests can be removed while the fire is alight the amount of cleaning necessary is reduced. Depending on the size of the stove and the airing time, the temperature may be low, about , while the humidity is relatively high. The tradition almost died out in Finland but was revived by enthusiasts in the 1980s. These are still used in present-day Finland by some enthusiasts, but usually only on special occasions such as Christmas, New Year's, Easter, and \"juhannus\" (Midsummer). Smoke saunas are popular in the southern Estonia and smoke sauna tradition in V\u00f5rumaa was added into UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists in 2014.\nHeat storage-sauna.\nThe smoke-sauna stove is also used with a sealed stone compartment and chimney (a heat storage stove) which eliminates the smoke odor and eye irritation of the smoke sauna. A heat storage stove does not give up much heat in the sauna before bathing since the stone compartment has an insulated lid. When the sauna bath is started and the \"l\u00f6yly\" shutter opens a soft warmth flows into the otherwise relatively cold () sauna. This heat is soft and clean because, thanks to combustion, the stove stones glow red, even white-hot, and are free of dust at the same time. When bathing the heat-storage sauna will become as hot as a continuous fire-type sauna () but more humid. The stones are usually durable heatproof and heat-retaining peridotite. The upper part of the stove is often insulated with rock wool and firebricks. Heat-storing stoves are also found with electric heating, with similar service but no need to maintain a fire.\nContinuous heat-type.\nContinuous fire sauna.\nA continuous fire stove, instead of stored heat, is a relatively recent invention. There is a firebox and a smokestack, and stones are placed in a compartment directly above the firebox. It takes a shorter time to heat than the heat-storage sauna, about one hour. A fire-heated sauna requires manual labor in the form of maintaining the fire during bathing; the fire can also be seen as a hazard.\nFire-heated saunas are common in cottages, where the extra work of maintaining the fire is not a problem.\nElectric stove sauna.\nThe most common modern sauna types are those with electric stoves. The stones are heated up and kept on temperature using electric heating elements. There is a thermostat and a timer (typically with eight hours' maximum delay time, followed by one hour's continuous heating time) on the stove. This type of heating is generally used only in urban saunas.\nFar-infrared saunas.\nFar-infrared saunas utilize infrared light to generate heat. Unlike traditional saunas that heat the body indirectly through the air or by conduction from heated surfaces, far-infrared saunas use infrared panels or other methods like a sauna blanket that emit far-infrared light, which is absorbed by the surface of the skin. The heat produced by far-infrared saunas is generally lower, making it more tolerable for people who cannot withstand the high temperatures of traditional saunas. Infrared heat penetrates more deeply into fat and the neuromuscular system resulting in a more vigorous sweat at lower temperature than traditional saunas. These effects are favorable for the neuromuscular system to recover from maximal endurance exercise.\nOther sweat bathing facilities.\nMany cultures have sweat baths, though some have more spiritual uses while others are purely secular. In Ancient Rome there was the \"thermae\" or \"balneae\" (from Greek \u03b2\u03b1\u03bb\u03b1\u03bd\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bf\u03bd \"balane\u00eeon\"), traits of which survive in the Turkish or Arab \"hammam\" and in the Victorian Turkish bath (which uses only hot dry air). In the Americas there is the Nahuatl (Aztec) \"tem\u0101zcalli\" , Maya \"zumpul-ch\u00e9\", and the Mixtec \"\u00d1ihi\"; in Canada and the United States, a number of First Nations and Native American cultures have various kinds of spiritual sweat lodges (Lakota: \"inipi\", Anishinaabemowin \"madoodiswan\"). In Europe we find the Estonian \"saun\" (almost identical to the Finnish sauna), Russian \"banya\", Latvian \"pirts\", the European Jews' \"shvitz\", and the Swedish \"bastu\". In Asia the Japanese \"Mushi-Buro\" and the Korean \"jjimjilbang\". The Karo people of Indonesia have the \"oukup\". In some parts of Africa, there is the \"sifutu\".\nAround the world.\n&lt;mapframe zoom=\"1\" width=\"450\" height=\"200\" text=\"Countries that visit the sauna naked are blue, those who wear swim wear are red and those who bring a towel are violet.\"&gt;\n \"type\": \"ExternalData\",\n \"service\": \"geoshape\",\n \"ids\": \"Q17, Q20, Q31, Q32, Q33, Q34, Q35, Q37, Q40, Q55, Q183, Q191, Q211, Q213, Q214, Q224, Q21195\", \n \"properties\": {\n \"title\": \"naked\",\n \"fill\": \"#377eb8\",\n \"stroke-width\": 0,\n \"description\": \"\"\n}, {\n \"type\": \"ExternalData\",\n \"service\": \"geoshape\",\n \"ids\": \"Q28, Q29, Q30, Q36, Q155, Q408, Q142, Q145, Q159, Q212, Q794\", \n \"properties\": {\n \"title\": \"with swimwear\",\n \"fill\": \"#e41a1c\",\n \"stroke-width\": 0,\n \"description\": \"\"\n}, {\n \"type\": \"ExternalData\",\n \"service\": \"geoshape\",\n \"ids\": \"Q16, Q38, Q64\", \n \"properties\": {\n \"title\": \"with towel\",\n \"fill\": \"#9f61e7\",\n \"stroke-width\": 0,\n \"description\": \"\"\n&lt;/mapframe&gt;\nAlthough cultures in all corners of the world have imported and adapted the sauna, many of the traditional customs have not survived the journey. Today, public perception of saunas, sauna \"etiquette\" and sauna customs vary hugely from country to country. In many countries sauna going is a recent fashion and attitudes towards saunas are changing, while in others traditions have survived over generations.\nAfrica.\nIn Africa, most sauna facilities are found in more upmarket hotels, spas, and health clubs and predominantly share both sauna heater technology and design concepts as applied in Europe. Even though outdoor temperatures remain warmer and more humid, this does not affect the general application or intended sauna experience offered within these commercial environments offering a traditional sauna and or steam shower experience.\nAsia.\nIn Iran, most gyms, hotels, and almost all public swimming pools have indoor saunas. It is very common for swimming pools to have two saunas which are known in Persian as \u0633\u0648\u0646\u0627\u06cc \u062e\u0634\u06a9 \"dry sauna\" and \u0633\u0648\u0646\u0627\u06cc \u0628\u062e\u0627\u0631 \"steam sauna\", with the dry type customarily boasting a higher temperature. A cold-water pool (and/or more recently a cold Jacuzzi) is almost always accompanied and towels are usually provided. Adding therapeutic or relaxing essential oils to the rocks is common. In Iran, unlike Finland, sitting in a sauna is mostly seen as part of the spa/club culture, rather than a bathing ritual. It is most usually perceived as a means for relaxation or detoxification (through perspiration). Having a sauna room on private property is considered a luxury rather than a necessity. Public saunas are segregated and nudity is prohibited.\nIn Japan, many saunas exist at sports centers and public bathhouses (sent\u014d). The saunas are almost always gender separated, often required by law, and nudity is a required part of proper sauna etiquette. While right after World War II, public bathhouses were commonplace in Japan, the number of customers dwindled as more people were able to afford houses and apartments equipped with their own private baths as the nation became wealthier. As a result, many sent\u014ds have added more features such as saunas to survive.\nIn Korea, saunas are essentially public bathhouses. Various names are used to describe them, such as the smaller mogyoktang, outdoor oncheon, and the elaborate jjimjilbang. The word \"sauna\" is used a lot for its 'English appeal'; however, it does not strictly refer to the original Fennoscandian steam rooms that have become popular throughout the world. The konglish word \"sauna\" (\uc0ac\uc6b0\ub098) usually refers to bathhouses with Jacuzzis, hot tubs, showers, steam rooms, and related facilities.In Laos, herbal steam sauna or \"hom yaa\" in Lao, is very popular, especially with women and is available in every village. Many women apply yogurt or a paste blend based on tamarind on their skin as a beauty treatment. The sauna is always heated by wood fire and herbs are added either directly to the boiling water or steam jet in the room. The sitting lounge is mixed gender but the steam rooms are gender separated. Bael fruit tea known in lao as \"muktam\" tea is usually served.\nAustralia and Canada.\nIn Australia and Canada, saunas are found mainly in hotels, swimming pools, and health clubs and if used by both men and women, nudity is often forbidden, even if implicitly. In gyms or health clubs with separate male and female change rooms, nudity is permitted; however, members are usually asked to shower before using the sauna and to sit on a towel.\nIn Canada, saunas have increasingly become a fixture of cottage culture, which shares many similarities with its Finnish counterpart (m\u00f6kki).\nEurope.\nNordic and Baltic.\nFinland and Estonia.\nA sauna session can be a social affair in which the participants disrobe and sit or recline in temperatures typically between . This induces relaxation and promotes sweating. People use a bundle of birch twigs with fresh leaves (Finnish: \"vihta\" or \"vasta\"; Estonian: \"viht\"), to slap the skin and create further stimulation of the pores and cells.\nThe sauna is an important part of daily life, and families bathe together in the home sauna. There are at least 2 million saunas in Finland according to official registers. The Finnish Sauna Society believes the number can be as high as 3.2 million saunas (population 5.5 million). Many Finns take at least one a week, and much more when they visit their summer cottage in the countryside. Here the pattern of life tends to revolve around the sauna, and a nearby lake used for cooling off.\nSauna traditions in Estonia are almost identical to Finland as saunas have traditionally held a central role in the life of an individual. Ancient Estonians believed saunas were inhabited by spirits. In folk tradition, the sauna was not only the place where one washed but also used as the place where brides were ceremoniously washed, where women gave birth, and the place where the dying made their final bed. The folk tradition related to the Estonian sauna is mostly identical to that surrounding the Finnish sauna. On New Year's Eve, a sauna would be held before midnight to cleanse the body and spirit for the upcoming year.\nLatvia and Lithuania.\nIn Lithuanian, bathhouse or sauna is ; in Latvian, it is . Both countries have long bathhouse traditions, dating back to the pagan times.\nThe 13th-century bathhouses in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania were mentioned in the Hypatian Codex and Chronicon terrae Prussiae, as they were practised by the Lithuanian dukes. Livonian Chronicle of Henry describes a bathhouse built around 1196 near the pier on the bank of Daugava river. The chronicle also mentions the year 1215 baths of the Latgalian ruler T\u0101livaldis which were built in Trik\u0101ta. These baths are also mentioned in the Livonian Rhymed Chronicle. Sauna had a considerable role in the pagan traditions of the Baltic people. In the 17th century, Matth\u00e4us Pr\u00e4torius described various rituals the Baltic people practiced in the sauna. For example, sauna was a primary place for women to give birth and rites would be performed for the Baltic goddess Laima. At that time, sauna traditions were similar in Auk\u0161taitija, Samogitia, Latgale, Semigallia as well as some West Slavic lands. In 1536, Vilnius gained a royal privilege to build public bathhouses, and by the end of the 16th century, the city already had 60 of them with a countless number of private ones. In Latvian lands, bathhouses became particularly popular in the 19th century.\nThe contemporary Baltic sauna is similar to others in the north-eastern part of Europe: it varies according to personal preference but is typically around , humidity 60\u201390%, with steam being generated by pouring water on the hot stones. Traditionally, birch twigs (; ) are the most common, but oak or linden are used too. Sauna enthusiasts also make twigs from other trees and plants, including nettle and juniper. Dry air sauna of and very low humidity became popular relatively recently; despite being a misconception, it is sometimes locally described as \"Finnish-type\".\nNorway and Sweden.\nIn Norway and Sweden saunas are found in many places and are known as 'badstu' or 'bastu' (from 'badstuga' \"bath cabin, bath house\"). In Norway and Sweden, saunas are common in almost every public swimming pool and gym. The public saunas are generally single-sex and may or may not permit the use of swimwear. Rules for swimwear and towels for sitting on or covering yourself differ between saunas. Removing body hair in the sauna, staring at other's nudity, or spreading odors is considered impolite.\nDutch-speaking regions.\nPublic saunas can be found throughout the Netherlands and Flanders, both in major cities and in smaller municipalities, mixed-sex nudity is the generally accepted rule. Some saunas might offer women-only (or \"bathing suit only\") times for people who are less comfortable with mixed-sex nudity; \"Algemeen Dagblad\" reported in 2008 that women-only, bathing suit-required times are drawing Muslim women in the Netherlands to the sauna.\nUnited Kingdom, Atlantic and Mediterranean Europe.\nIn the United Kingdom and much of Southern Europe, single-gender saunas are the most common type. Nudity is expected in the segregated saunas but is usually forbidden in the mixed saunas. Sauna sessions tend to be shorter, and cold showers are shunned by most. In the United Kingdom, where public saunas are becoming increasingly fashionable, the practice of alternating between the sauna and the jacuzzi in short seatings (considered a \"faux pas\" in Northern Europe) has emerged.\nThere is a fast-growing new British sauna culture consisting mainly of 'wild' outdoor spas, popping up all over the UK.\nIn Portugal, the steam baths were commonly used by the Castrejos people, before the arrival of the Romans in the western part of the Iberian Peninsula. The historian Strabo spoke of Lusitans traditions that consisted of having steam bath sessions followed by cold water baths. Pedra Formosa is the original name given to the central piece of the steam bath in pre-Roman times.\nGerman-speaking countries.\nIn Germany, Austria, Luxembourg, South Tyrol and Liechtenstein, most public swimming pool complexes have sauna areas; in these locales, nudity is the generally accepted rule, and benches are expected to be covered by people's towels. These rules are strictly enforced in some public saunas. Separate single-sex saunas for both genders are rare, most places offer women-only and mixed-gender saunas or organize women-only days for the sauna once a week. Loud conversation is not usual as the sauna is seen as a place of healing rather than socializing. Contrary to Russia and Nordic countries, pouring water on hot stones to increase humidity (\"Aufguss\", lit: \"Onpouring\") is not normally done by the sauna visitors themselves; larger sauna areas have a person in charge (the \"Saunameister\") for that, either an employee of the sauna complex or a volunteer. Aufguss sessions can take up to 10 minutes, and take place according to a schedule. During an Aufguss session, the Saunameister uses a large towel to circulate the hot air through the sauna, intensifying sweating and the perception of heat. Once the Aufguss session has started it is not considered good manners to enter the sauna, as opening the door would cause loss of heat (Sauna guests are expected to enter the sauna just in time before the Aufguss. Leaving the session is allowed, and is advised when feeling too hot or otherwise uncomfortable). Aufguss sessions are usually announced by a schedule on the sauna door. An Aufguss session in progress might be indicated by a light or sign hung above the sauna entrance. Cold showers or baths shortly after a sauna, as well as exposure to fresh air in a special balcony, garden, or open-air room (\"Frischluftraum\") are considered a must.\nIn German-speaking Switzerland, customs are generally the same as in Germany and Austria, although you tend to see more families (parents with their children) and young people. Also concerning socializing in the sauna, the Swiss tend more to be like the Finns, Scandinavians, or Russians. Also in German-speaking countries, there are many facilities for washing after using the sauna, with 'dunking pools' (pools of very cold water in which a person dips themselves after using the sauna) or showers. In some saunas and steam rooms, scented salts are given out which can be rubbed into the skin for extra aroma and cleaning effects.\nHungary.\nHungarians see the sauna as part of a wider spa culture. Most commonly, mixed genders use the sauna together and wear swimsuits. Single-sex saunas are rare, as well as those that impose nudity although the practice is growing and several spas have a towel-only policy on designated days. The most common types of saunas are the very hot and dry Finnish sauna (\"finn szauna\"), the steam room (\"g\u0151zkabin\"), and the infrared sauna (\"infraszauna\"). In many larger spas, you can find a separate sauna section that can only be used with a separate entrance ticket. These units are often called sauna world (\"szaunavil\u00e1g\") and have additional services, for example, a cold plunge pool, resting areas, jacuzzi, showers, and crushed ice bucket. Aufguss sessions, led by a qualified sauna master, are becoming popular.\nCzech Republic and Slovakia.\nIn the Czech Republic and Slovakia, saunas have a long tradition and are often found as part of recreational facilities, as well as public swimming pools. Many people are regular goers, while many never go. Saunas became more popular after about the year 2000 when large aquaparks and wellness centers began to include them. Nudity is increasingly tolerated, and many places prohibit the use of swimsuits; however, most people cover themselves with a towel. Showers are typically semi-private. Having men and women-only days was the norm in the past, but today, men-only facilities are rare, while women-only hours are sometimes provided.\nRussia.\nIn many regions of Russia, sauna-going plays a central social role. These countries also have the tradition of massaging fellow sauna-goers with leafy, wet birch bunches, called \"venik\" (\u0432\u0435\u043d\u0438\u043a) in Russian. In Russian-speaking communities, the word \"banya\" (Russian: \u0411\u0430\u043d\u044f) is widely used also when referring to a public bath. In Russia, public \"banya\" baths are strictly single-sex. During wintertime, sauna-goers often run outdoors for either ice swimming or, in the absence of lake, just to roll around in the snow naked and then go back inside. Russian traditional \"banya\" is quite similar to the Finnish sauna, despite the popular misconception that the Finnish sauna is very dry.\nNorth America and Central America.\nIn the United States, the earliest saunas that arrived with the colonists were Swedish \"bastu\"s in the colony of New Sweden around the Delaware River. The Swedish governor at the time had a bathhouse on Tinicum Island. Today sauna culture enjoys its greatest popularity in the Lake Superior Region, specifically the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, especially the Keweenaw Peninsula, and parts of Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Iowa, which are home to large populations of Swedish and particularly Finnish Americans. Duluth, Minnesota, at its peak, had as many as 14 public saunas. Indeed, among Finnish farms in Great Lakes \"sauna country\", the cultural geographer Matti Kaups, found that 90% had sauna structures - more even than the farms in Finland. Elsewhere, sauna facilities are normally provided at health clubs and hotels, but there is no tradition or ritual to their use. To avoid liability, many saunas operate at only moderate temperatures and do not allow pouring water on the rocks. A wider range of sauna etiquette is usually acceptable in the United States compared to other countries, with the exception that most mixed-sex saunas usually require some clothing such as a bathing suit to be worn. These are uncommon, however, as most saunas are either in small private rooms or in the changing rooms of health clubs or gyms. There are few restrictions and their use is casual; bathers may enter and exit the sauna as they please, be it nude, with a towel, dripping wet in swimsuits, or even in workout clothes (the latter being very unusual). Like many aspects of US culture, there are few prescribed conventions and the bather should remain astute to \"read\" the specific family or community's expectations. Besides the Finnish Americans, the older generation of Korean Americans still uses the saunas as it is available to them. Sauna societies are beginning to emerge in colleges across America, with the first one being formed at Gustavus Adolphus College.\nA cultural legacy of Eastern European Jews in America is the culture of 'shvitz', which used to be widespread on the East Coast and occasionally on the Pacific West Coast.\nThe sweat lodge, used by several Native American and First Nations traditional ceremonial cultures, is a location for a spiritual ceremony. The focus is on the ceremony, and the sweating is only secondary. Unlike sauna traditions, and most forcefully in the case of the Inipi, the sweat lodge ceremonies have been robustly defended as an exclusively Native expression of spirituality rather than a recreational activity.\nTraditions and old beliefs.\nThe Finnish word \"l\u00f6yly\" is strictly connected to the sauna. It can be translated as \"sauna steam\" and refers to the steam vapour created by splashing water on the heated rocks. In many languages related to Finnish, there is a word corresponding to \"l\u00f6yly\". The same approximate meaning is used across the Finnic languages such as in Estonian \"leil\". Originally this word meant \"spirit\" or \"life\", as in e.\u00a0g. Hungarian \"l\u00e9lek\" and Khanty \"lil\", which both mean \"soul\", referring to the sauna's old, spiritual essence. The same dual meaning of both \"spirit\" and \"(sauna) steam\" is also preserved in the Latvian word \"gars\". There is an old Finnish saying, \"saunassa ollaan kuin kirkossa\",\u2014one should behave in the sauna as in church.\n\"Saunatonttu\", literally translated as \"sauna elf\", is a little gnome or tutelary spirit that was believed to live in the sauna. He was always treated with respect, otherwise, he might have caused much trouble for people. It was customary to warm up the sauna just for the \"tonttu\" every now and then, or to leave some food outside for him. It is said that he warned the people if a fire was threatening the sauna or punished people who behaved improperly in it\u2014for example, slept, played games, argued, were generally noisy, or behaved otherwise immorally there. Such creatures are believed to exist in different cultures. The Russian banya has an entirely corresponding character called a \"bannik\".\nIn Thailand, women spend hours in a makeshift sauna tent during the month following childbirth. The steam is typically infused with several herbs. It is believed that the sauna helps the new mother's body return to its normal condition more quickly.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75653", "revid": "45093283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75653", "title": "Lituus", "text": "Roman augural staff\nThe word lituus originally meant a curved augural staff, or a curved war-trumpet in the ancient Latin language. This Latin word continued in use through the 18th century as an alternative to the vernacular names of various musical instruments.\nRoman ritual wand.\nThe \"lituus\" was a crooked wand (similar in shape to the top part of some Western European crosiers) used as a cult instrument in ancient Roman religion by augurs to mark out a ritual space in the sky (a \"templum\"). The passage of birds through this \"templum\" indicated divine favor or disfavor for a given undertaking.\nThe \"lituus\" was also used as a symbol of office for the college of the augurs to mark them as a priestly group.\nMusic instrument.\nAntiquity.\nThe ancient \"lituus\" was an Etruscan high-pitched brass instrument, which was straight but bent at the end, in the shape of a letter J, similar to the Gallic carnyx. It was later used by the Romans, especially for processional music and as a signalling horn in the army. For the Roman military it may have been particular to the cavalry, and both the Etruscan and Roman versions were always used in pairs, like the prehistoric lurer. Unlike the Roman \"litui\", the Etruscan instruments had detachable mouthpieces and in general appear to have been longer. The name \"lituus\" is Latin, thought to have been derived from an Etruscan cultic word describing a soothsayer's wand modelled on a shepherd's crook and associated with sacrifice and favourable omens. Earlier Roman and Etruscan depictions show the instrument used in processions, especially funeral processions. Players of the lituus were called \"liticines\", though the name of the instrument appears to have been loosely used (by poets, not likely by soldiers) to describe other military brass instruments, such as the \"tuba\" or the \"buccina\". In 17th-century Germany a variant of the bent ancient \"lituus\" was still used as a signalling horn by nightwatchmen.\nMedieval period.\nFrom the end of the 10th through the 13th centuries, chroniclers of the Crusades used the word \"lituus\" vaguely\u2014along with the Classical Latin names for other Roman military Trumpets and horns, such as the \"tuba\", \"cornu\", and \"buccina\" and the more up-to-date French term \"trompe\"\u2014to describe various instruments employed in the Christian armies. However, it is impossible to determine what sort of instrument might have been meant, and it is unlikely their litui were the same as the Etrusco-Roman instrument.\nIn the early 15th century, Jean de Gerson listed the lituus among those string instruments that were sounded by beating or striking, either with the fingernails, a plectrum, or a stick. Other instruments Gerson names in this category are the \"cythara\", \"guiterna\", \"psalterium\", \"timpanum\", and \"campanula\".\nModern era.\nThroughout the postclassical era the name \"lituus\" continued to be used when discussing ancient and Biblical instruments, but with reference to contemporary musical practice in the Renaissance it usually referred to \"bent horns\" made of wood, particularly the crumhorn and the cornett. The crumhorn was especially associated with the lituus because of the similarity of its shape. The equation of the crumhorn with the lituus was especially strong among German writers. A 1585 English translation of Hadrianus Junius's \"Nomenclator\" defines \"lituus\" as \"a writhen or crooked trumpet winding in and out; a shaulme\" (i.e., shawm), but a polyglot edition of the same book published in 1606 demonstrates how differently the term might have been understood in various languages at that time: German \"Schalmey\", \"Krumme Trommeten\", \"Krumhorn\"; Dutch \"Schalmeye\"; French \"Claron, ou cleron\"; Italian \"Trombetta bastarda\"; Spanish \"Trompeta curua, \u00f2 bastarda\". The early Baroque composer and author Michael Praetorius used the word as a Latin equivalent of the German \"Schallmeye\" (shawm) or for the \"Krumbhoerner\" (crumhorns)\u2014in the latter case also offering the Italian translations \"storti\", and \"cornamuti torti\".\nA more particular term, \"lituus alpinus\", was used in 1555 by the Swiss naturalist Conrad Gessner when he published the earliest detailed description of the Alphorn: \"nearly eleven feet long, made from two pieces of wood slightly curved and hollowed out, fitted together and skillfully bound with osiers\".\nA study made of Swedish dictionaries found that during the seventeenth century \"lituus\" was variously translated as \"sinka\" (= German \"Zink\", cornett), \"krumhorn\", \"krum trumeta\" (curved trumpet), \"claret\", or \"horn\".\nIn the eighteenth century the word once again came to describe contemporary brass instruments, such as in a 1706 inventory from the Ossegg monastery in Bohemia, which equates it with the hunting horn: \"litui vulgo Waldh\u00f6rner duo ex tono G\". Nevertheless, in 1732 Johann Gottfried Walther referred back to Renaissance and Medieval definitions, defining \"lituus\" as \"a cornett, formerly it also signified a shawm or, in Italian \"tubam curvam\", a HeerHorn\". (\"Heerhorn\" or \"Herhorn\" was a Middle High German name for a metal, slightly curved military signal horn, approximately five feet long, played with the bell turned upward.) In 1738, the well-known horn player Anton Joseph Hampel served as a godfather at the baptism of a daughter of the renowned Dresden lutenist Silvius Leopold Weiss. In the baptismal register he was described as \"Lituista Regius\"\u2014\"royal lituus player\". In the second half of the 18th century the lituus was described in one source as a Latin name for the trumpet or horn.\nA number of musical compositions from the Baroque era specify an instrument by the Latin name \"lituus\", including Bach's motet \"O Jesu Christ, meins Lebens Licht\" (BWV 118), a partita attributed to Jan Josef Ign\u00e1c Brentner, as well as several masses and concertos by Johann Valentin Rathgeber. Scientists from Edinburgh University tried to recreate the lituus used by Bach in May 2009, in the form of a long wooden trumpet, assuming the word did not refer to a modern horn but to an instrument that had been out of use for 300 years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75654", "revid": "50010380", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75654", "title": "Hyperthermia", "text": "Elevated body temperature due to failed thermoregulation\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nHyperthermia, also known as overheating, is a condition in which an individual's body temperature is elevated beyond normal due to failed thermoregulation. The person's body produces or absorbs more heat than it dissipates. According to the \"International Emergency Medicine Education Project\", severe hyperthermia (body temperature elevation of beyond ) \"becomes a medical emergency requiring immediate treatment to prevent disability or death\". Almost half a million deaths are recorded every year from hyperthermia.\nThe most common causes include heat stroke and adverse reactions to drugs. Heat stroke is an acute temperature elevation caused by exposure to excessive heat, or combination of heat and humidity, that overwhelms the heat-regulating mechanisms of the body. The latter is a relatively rare side effect of many drugs, particularly those that affect the central nervous system. Malignant hyperthermia is a rare complication of some types of general anesthesia. Hyperthermia can also be caused by a traumatic brain injury.\nHyperthermia differs from fever in that the body's temperature set point remains unchanged. The opposite is hypothermia, which occurs when the temperature drops below that required to maintain normal metabolism. The term is from Greek \u1f51\u03c0\u03ad\u03c1, \"hyper\", meaning \"above\", and \u03b8\u03ad\u03c1\u03bc\u03bf\u03c2, \"thermos\", meaning \"heat\".\nThe highest recorded body temperature recorded in a patient who survived hyperthermia is , measured on 10 July 1980 from a man who had been admitted to hospital for serious heat stroke.\nClassification.\nIn humans, hyperthermia is defined as a temperature greater than , depending on the reference used, that occurs without a change in the body's temperature set point.\nThe normal human body temperature can be as high as in the late afternoon. Hyperthermia requires an elevation from the temperature that would otherwise be expected. Such elevations range from mild to extreme; body temperatures above can be life-threatening.\nSigns and symptoms.\nAn early stage of hyperthermia can be \"heat exhaustion\" (or \"heat prostration\" or \"heat stress\"), whose symptoms can include heavy sweating, rapid breathing and a fast, weak pulse. If the condition progresses to heat stroke, then hot, dry skin is typical as blood vessels dilate in an attempt to increase heat loss. An inability to cool the body through perspiration may cause dry skin. Hyperthermia from neurological disease may include little or no sweating, cardiovascular problems, and confusion or delirium.\nOther signs and symptoms vary. Accompanying dehydration can produce nausea, vomiting, headaches, and low blood pressure and the latter can lead to fainting or dizziness, especially if the standing position is assumed quickly.\nIn severe heat stroke, confusion and aggressive behavior may be observed. Heart rate and respiration rate will increase (tachycardia and tachypnea) as blood pressure drops and the heart attempts to maintain adequate circulation. The decrease in blood pressure can then cause blood vessels to contract reflexively, resulting in a pale or bluish skin color in advanced cases. Young children, in particular, may have seizures. Eventually, organ failure, unconsciousness and death will result.\nCauses.\nHeat stroke occurs when thermoregulation is overwhelmed by a combination of excessive metabolic production of heat (exertion), excessive environmental heat, and insufficient or impaired heat loss, resulting in an abnormally high body temperature. In severe cases, temperatures can exceed . Heat stroke may be \"non-exertional\" (classic) or \"exertional\".\nExertional.\nSignificant physical exertion in hot conditions can generate heat beyond the ability to cool, because, in addition to the heat, humidity of the environment may reduce the efficiency of the body's normal cooling mechanisms. Human heat-loss mechanisms are limited primarily to sweating (which dissipates heat by evaporation, assuming sufficiently low humidity) and vasodilation of skin vessels (which dissipates heat by convection proportional to the temperature difference between the body and its surroundings, according to Newton's law of cooling). Other factors, such as insufficient water intake, consuming alcohol, or lack of air conditioning, can worsen the problem.\nThe increase in body temperature that results from a breakdown in thermoregulation affects the body biochemically. Enzymes involved in metabolic pathways within the body such as cellular respiration fail to work effectively at higher temperatures, and further increases can lead them to denature, reducing their ability to catalyse essential chemical reactions. This loss of enzymatic control affects the functioning of major organs with high energy demands such as the heart and brain. Loss of fluid and electrolytes cause heat cramps \u2013 slow muscular contraction and severe muscular spasm lasting between one and three minutes. Almost all cases of heat cramps involve vigorous physical exertion. Body temperature may remain normal or a little higher than normal and cramps are concentrated in heavily used muscles.\nSituational.\nSituational heat stroke occurs in the absence of exertion. It mostly affects the young and elderly. In the elderly in particular, it can be precipitated by medications that reduce vasodilation and sweating, such as anticholinergic drugs, antihistamines, and diuretics. In this situation, the body's tolerance for high environmental temperature may be insufficient, even at rest.\nHeat waves are often followed by a rise in the death rate, and these 'classical hyperthermia' deaths typically involve the elderly and infirm. This is partly because thermoregulation involves cardiovascular, respiratory and renal systems which may be inadequate for the additional stress because of the existing burden of aging and disease, further compromised by medications. During the July 1995 heatwave in Chicago, there were at least 700 heat-related deaths. The strongest risk factors were being confined to bed, and living alone, while the risk was reduced for those with working air conditioners and those with access to transportation. Even then, reported deaths may be underestimated as diagnosis can be mis-classified as stroke or heart attack.\nDrugs.\nSome drugs cause excessive internal heat production. The rate of drug-induced hyperthermia is higher where use of these drugs is higher.\nPersonal protective equipment.\nThose working in industry, in the military, or as first responders may be required to wear personal protective equipment (PPE) against hazards such as chemical agents, gases, fire, small arms and improvised explosive devices (IEDs). PPE includes a range of hazmat suits, firefighting turnout gear, body armor and bomb suits, among others. Depending on design, the wearer may be encapsulated in a microclimate, due to an increase in thermal resistance and decrease in vapor permeability. As physical work is performed, the body's natural thermoregulation (i.e. sweating) becomes ineffective. This is compounded by increased work rates, high ambient temperature and humidity levels, and direct exposure to the sun. The net effect is that desired protection from some environmental threats inadvertently increases the threat of heat stress.\nThe effect of PPE on hyperthermia has been noted in fighting the 2014 Ebola virus epidemic in Western Africa. Doctors and healthcare workers were only able to work for 40 minutes at a time in their protective suits, fearing heat stroke.\nOther.\nOther rare causes of hyperthermia include thyrotoxicosis and an adrenal gland tumor, called pheochromocytoma, both of which can cause increased heat production. Damage to the central nervous system from brain hemorrhage, traumatic brain injury, status epilepticus, and other kinds of injury to the hypothalamus can also cause hyperthermia.\nPathophysiology.\nA fever occurs when the core temperature is set higher, through the action of the pre-optic region of the anterior hypothalamus. For example, in response to a bacterial or viral infection, certain white blood cells within the blood will release pyrogens which have a direct effect on the anterior hypothalamus, causing body temperature to rise, much like raising the temperature setting on a thermostat.\nIn contrast, hyperthermia occurs when the body temperature rises without a change in the heat control centers.\nSome of the gastrointestinal symptoms of acute exertional heatstroke, such as vomiting, diarrhea, and gastrointestinal bleeding, may be caused by barrier dysfunction and subsequent endotoxemia. Ultraendurance athletes have been found to have significantly increased plasma endotoxin levels. Endotoxin stimulates many inflammatory cytokines, which in turn may cause multiorgan dysfunction. Experimentally, monkeys treated with oral antibiotics prior to induction of heat stroke do not become endotoxemic.\nThere is scientific support for the concept of a temperature set point; that is, maintenance of an optimal temperature for the metabolic processes that life depends on. Nervous activity in the preoptic-anterior hypothalamus of the brain triggers heat losing (sweating, etc.) or heat generating (shivering and muscle contraction, etc.) activities through stimulation of the autonomic nervous system. The pre-optic anterior hypothalamus has been shown to contain warm sensitive, cool sensitive, and temperature insensitive neurons, to determine the body's temperature setpoint. As the temperature that these neurons are exposed to rises above , the rate of electrical discharge of the warm-sensitive neurons increases progressively. Cold-sensitive neurons increase their rate of electrical discharge progressively below .\nDiagnosis.\nHyperthermia is generally diagnosed by the combination of unexpectedly high body temperature and a history that supports hyperthermia instead of a fever. Most commonly this means that the elevated temperature has occurred in a hot, humid environment (heat stroke) or in someone taking a drug for which hyperthermia is a known side effect (drug-induced hyperthermia). The presence of signs and symptoms related to hyperthermia syndromes, such as extrapyramidal symptoms characteristic of neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and the absence of signs and symptoms more commonly related to infection-related fevers, are also considered in making the diagnosis.\nIf fever-reducing drugs lower the body temperature, even if the temperature does not return entirely to normal, then hyperthermia is excluded.\nPrevention.\nWhen ambient temperature is excessive, humans and many other animals cool themselves below ambient by evaporative cooling of sweat (or other aqueous liquid; saliva in dogs, for example); this helps prevent potentially fatal hyperthermia. The effectiveness of evaporative cooling depends upon humidity. Wet-bulb temperature, which takes humidity into account, or more complex calculated quantities such as wet-bulb globe temperature (WBGT), which also takes solar radiation into account, give useful indications of the degree of heat stress and are used by several agencies as the basis for heat-stress prevention guidelines. (Wet-bulb temperature is essentially the lowest skin temperature attainable by evaporative cooling at a given ambient temperature and humidity.)\nA sustained wet-bulb temperature exceeding is likely to be fatal even to fit and healthy people unclothed in the shade next to a fan; at this temperature, environmental heat gain instead of loss occurs. A 2020 survey of weather station data shows that wet-bulb temperatures have exceeded \u00a0\u2013 many times across the world, and have exceeded multiple times in two stations. \nIn cases of heat stress caused by physical exertion, hot environments, or protective equipment, prevention or mitigation by frequent rest breaks, careful hydration, and monitoring body temperature should be attempted. However, in situations demanding one is exposed to a hot environment for a prolonged period or must wear protective equipment, a personal cooling system is required as a matter of health and safety. There are a variety of active or passive personal cooling systems; these can be categorized by their power sources and whether they are person- or vehicle-mounted.\nBecause of the broad variety of operating conditions, these devices must meet specific requirements concerning their rate and duration of cooling, their power source, and their adherence to health and safety regulations. Among other criteria are the user's need for physical mobility and autonomy. For example, active-liquid systems operate by chilling water and circulating it through a garment; the skin surface area is thereby cooled through conduction. This type of system has proven successful in certain military, law enforcement, and industrial applications. Bomb-disposal technicians wearing special suits to protect against improvised explosive devices (IEDs) use a small, ice-based chiller unit that is strapped to one leg; a liquid-circulating garment, usually a vest, is worn over the torso to maintain a safe core body temperature. By contrast, soldiers traveling in combat vehicles can face microclimate temperatures in excess of and require a multiple-user, vehicle-powered cooling system with rapid connection capabilities. Requirements for hazmat teams, the medical community, and workers in heavy industry vary further.\nTreatment.\nThe underlying cause must be removed. Mild hyperthemia caused by exertion on a hot day may be adequately treated through self-care measures, such as increased water consumption and resting in a cool place. Hyperthermia that results from drug exposure requires prompt cessation of that drug, and occasionally the use of other drugs as counter measures.\nAntipyretics (e.g., acetaminophen, aspirin, other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) have no role in the treatment of heatstroke because antipyretics interrupt the change in the hypothalamic set point caused by pyrogens; they are not expected to work on a healthy hypothalamus that has been overloaded, as in the case of heatstroke. In this situation, antipyretics actually may be harmful in patients who develop hepatic, hematologic, and renal complications because they may aggravate bleeding tendencies.\nWhen body temperature is significantly elevated, mechanical cooling methods are used to remove heat and to restore the body's ability to regulate its own temperatures. Passive cooling techniques, such as resting in a cool, shady area and removing clothing can be applied immediately. Active cooling methods, such as sponging the head, neck, and trunk with cool water, remove heat from the body and thereby speed the body's return to normal temperatures. When methods such as immersion are impractical, misting the body with water and using a fan have also been shown to be effective.\nSitting in a bathtub of tepid or cool water (immersion method) can remove a significant amount of heat in a relatively short period of time. It was once thought that immersion in very cold water is counterproductive, as it causes vasoconstriction in the skin and thereby prevents heat from escaping the body core. However, a British analysis of various studies stated: \"this has never been proven experimentally. Indeed, a recent study using normal volunteers has shown that cooling rates were fastest when the coldest water was used.\" The analysis concluded that iced water immersion is the most-effective cooling technique for exertional heat stroke. No superior cooling method has been found for \"non-exertional heat stroke\". Thus, aggressive \"ice-water\" immersion remains the gold standard for \"life-threatening heat stroke\".\nWhen the body temperature reaches about , or if the affected person is unconscious or showing signs of confusion, hyperthermia is considered a medical emergency that requires treatment in a proper medical facility. A cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) may be necessary if the person goes into cardiac arrest (stop of heart beats). Already in a hospital, more aggressive cooling measures are available, including intravenous hydration, gastric lavage with iced saline, and even hemodialysis to cool the blood.\nEpidemiology.\nHyperthermia affects those who are unable to regulate their body heat, mainly due to environmental conditions. The main risk factor for hyperthermia is the lack of ability to sweat. People who are dehydrated or who are older may not produce the sweat they need to regulate their body temperature. High heat conditions can put certain groups at risk for hyperthermia including: physically active individuals, soldiers, construction workers, landscapers and factory workers. Some people that do not have access to cooler living conditions, like people with lower socioeconomic status, may have a difficult time fighting the heat. People are at risk for hyperthermia during high heat and dry conditions, most commonly seen in the summer.\nVarious cases of different types of hyperthermia have been reported. A research study was published in March 2019 that looked into multiple case reports of drug induced hyperthermia. The study concluded that psychotropic drugs such as anti-psychotics, antidepressants, and anxiolytics were associated with an increased heat-related mortality as opposed to the other drugs researched (anticholinergics, diuretics, cardiovascular agents, etc.). A different study was published in June 2019 that examined the association between hyperthermia in older adults and the temperatures in the United States. Hospitalization records of elderly patients in the US between 1991 and 2006 were analyzed and concluded that cases of hyperthermia were observed to be highest in regions with arid climates. The study discussed finding a disproportionately high number of cases of hyperthermia in early seasonal heat waves indicating that people were not yet practicing proper techniques to stay cool and prevent overheating in the early presence of warm, dry weather.\nIn urban areas people are at an increased susceptibility to hyperthermia. This is due to a phenomenon called the urban heat island effect. Since the 20th century in the United States, the north-central region (Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, Iowa, and Nebraska) was the region with the highest morbidity resulting from hyperthermia. Northeastern states had the next highest. Regions least affected by heat wave-related hyperthermia causing death were Southern and Pacific Coastal states. Northern cities in the United States are at greater risk of hyperthermia during heat waves due to the fact that people tend to have a lower minimum mortality temperature at higher latitudes. In contrast, cities residing in lower latitudes within the continental US typically have higher thresholds for ambient temperatures. In India, hundreds die every year from summer heat waves, including more than 2,500 in the year 2015. Later that same summer, the 2015 Pakistani heat wave killed about 2,000 people. An extreme 2003 European heat wave caused tens of thousands of deaths.\nCauses of hyperthermia include dehydration, use of certain medications, using cocaine and amphetamines or excessive alcohol use. Bodily temperatures greater than can be diagnosed as a hyperthermic case. As body temperatures increase or excessive body temperatures persist, individuals are at a heightened risk of developing progressive conditions. Greater risk complications of hyperthermia include heat stroke, organ malfunction, organ failure, and death. There are two forms of heat stroke; classical heatstroke and exertional heatstroke. Classical heatstroke occurs from extreme environmental conditions, such as heat waves. Those who are most commonly affected by classical heatstroke are very young, elderly or chronically ill. Exertional heatstroke appears in individuals after vigorous physical activity. Exertional heatstroke is displayed most commonly in healthy 15-50 year old people. Sweating is often present in exertional heatstroke. The associated mortality rate of heatstroke is 40 to 64%.\nResearch.\nHyperthermia can also be deliberately induced using drugs or medical devices, and is being studied and applied in clinical routine as a treatment of some kinds of cancer. Research has shown that medically controlled hyperthermia can shrink tumours. This occurs when a high body temperature damages cancerous cells by destroying proteins and structures within each cell. Hyperthermia has also been researched to investigate whether it causes cancerous tumours to be more prone to radiation as a form of treatment; which as a result has allowed hyperthermia to be used to complement other forms of cancer therapy. Various techniques of hyperthermia in the treatment of cancer include local or regional hyperthermia, as well as whole body techniques.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75655", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75655", "title": "Game classification", "text": "Taxonomy of game activities\nGame classification is the classification of games, forming a game taxonomy. Many different methods of classifying games exist.\nPhysical education.\nThere are four basic approaches to classifying the games used in physical education:\nGames further divided as per the physical activity are mainly divided into three categories: soft active sports, medium active sports, and highly active sports. \nVideo games.\nThere are several methods of classifying video games, alongside the system of video game genres commonly used by retailers and player communities.\nSolomon puts forward a \"commonsense, but broad\" classification of video games, into simulations (the game reflects reality), abstract games (the game itself is the focus of interest), and sports. In addition to these, he points out that games (in general, not just video games) fall into classes according to the number of players. Games with two players encompass board games such as chess. Games with multiple players encompass card games such as poker, and marketed family games such as Monopoly and Scrabble. Puzzles and Solitaire are one-player games. He also includes zero-player games, such as Conway's Game of Life, although acknowledging that others argue that such games do not constitute a game, because they lack any element of competition. He asserts that such zero-player games are nonetheless games because they are used recreationally.\nAnother method, developed by Wright, divides games into the following categories: educational or informative, sports, sensorimotor (e.g. action games, video games, fighting and shoot 'em up games, and driving and racing simulators), other vehicular simulators (not covered by driving and racing), strategy games (e.g. adventure games, war games, strategic simulations, role-playing games, and puzzles), and \"other\".\nA third method, developed by Funk and Buchman, and refined by others, classifies electronic games into six categories: general entertainment (no fighting or destruction), educational (learning or problem-solving), fantasy violence (cartoon characters that must fight or destroy things, and risk being killed, to achieve a goal), human violence (like fantasy violence, but with human rather than cartoon characters), nonviolent sports (no fighting or destruction), and sports violence (fighting or destruction involved).\nClassification by cause of uncertainty.\nGames can be categorized by the source of uncertainty which confront the players:\nBased on these three causes, three classes of games arise:\nGame theory.\nGame theory classifies games according to several criteria: whether a game is a symmetric game or an asymmetric one, what a game's \"sum\" is (zero-sum, constant sum, and so forth), whether a game is a sequential game or a simultaneous one, whether a game comprises perfect information or imperfect information, and whether a game is determinate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75656", "revid": "5957417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75656", "title": "Battle of Almansa", "text": "Battle in the War of the Spanish Succession\nThe Battle of Almansa took place on 25 April 1707, during the War of the Spanish Succession. It was fought between an army loyal to Philip V of Spain, Bourbon claimant to the Spanish throne, and one supporting his Habsburg rival, Archduke Charles of Austria. The result was a decisive Bourbon victory that reclaimed most of eastern Spain for Philip.\nThe Bourbon army was commanded by the Duke of Berwick, illegitimate son of James II of England, while Habsburg forces were led by Henri de Massue, Earl of Galway, an exiled French Huguenot. This makes it \"probably the only battle in history in which the English forces were commanded by a Frenchman, the French by an Englishman.\"\nBackground.\nCampaigning in Spain and size of the armies involved were limited by logistics to a greater extent than Flanders or Italy. Reliance on local sources for forage and other supplies limited operations in arid areas like Northern Spain, that until the advent of railways in the 19th century, goods and supplies were largely transported by water. Control of the seas allowed the Allies to successfully conduct short-term offensives outside the coastal areas but lack of popular support meant they could not hold territory. The Grand Alliance secured an operations base in Lisbon when Peter II of Portugal changed sides in May 1703, and the following March, Archduke Charles of Austria arrived to head a land campaign. \nThe Bourbon alliance between France and Spain won a series of minor victories along the Spanish-Portuguese border, offset by the British capture of Gibraltar; attempts to retake it were defeated at the naval Battle of M\u00e1laga in August 1704, with a land siege being abandoned in April 1705. The 1705 'Pact of Genoa' between English and Catalan representatives opened a second front in the north-east; the Allied capture of Barcelona and Valencia left Toulon as the only major port available to the Bourbons in the Western Mediterranean. \nAn attempt in May 1706 by Philip V of Spain to retake Barcelona failed, while his absence allowed an Allied force to capture Madrid and Zaragossa but they could not be resupplied so far from their bases and were forced to withdraw. By November 1706, Philip controlled the Crown of Castile, Murcia and parts of the Kingdom of Valencia. Over the course of 1706, Allied victories in the Spanish Netherlands and Italy forced the French onto the defensive and Galway sought to take advantage by launching a new offensive in 1707. To counter this, James FitzJames, 1st Duke of Berwick, was appointed commander of Bourbon forces in North-East Spain, a total of 33,000 men, split equally between French and Spanish troops, with a number of exiled Irish regiments. \nBefore beginning his advance on Valencia, Berwick detached 8,000 men to besiege X\u00e0tiva, prompting the Earl of Peterborough, Allied commander in Spain, to consolidate his forces in Catalonia, rather than combine with the 16,500 troops led by Galway and Minas. This left them badly outnumbered when they moved to intercept Berwick. On 22 April, Berwick halted outside the town of Almansa, from where he could threaten supply lines for the Allied garrison in Valencia.\nBattle.\nThe Allies broke camp early on 25 April and reached Almansa after a long and tiring march. Berwick had drawn up his army in two lines, just in front of the town, his infantry in the centre and the French and Spanish cavalry on the wings. Although Galway was clearly outnumbered, he commenced his attack in mid-afternoon after a short artillery exchange. His infantry successfully drove back the Bourbon centre but a gap opened between them and Portuguese troops on the right, under the 63-year-old Marquess of Minas. Seeing this, the Franco-Spanish cavalry attacked; Berwick's account states the Portuguese fought bravely for some time but eventually collapsed and fled. Their retreat was covered by a few squadrons under Das Minas' personal command, including his mistress, who fought dressed as a man and was killed.\nThe Allied centre was now attacked on three sides; using his remaining cavalry, Galway successfully withdrew some of his troops but 13 battalions lost contact with the rest of the army. Pursued by the Spanish cavalry, they took up a defensive position some 8 miles (12\u00a0km) from the battlefield but surrendered the next morning; according to Henry Kamen, allied casualties were 4,000 killed or wounded and 3,000 captured, with Franco-Spanish losses around 5,000 killed or wounded. French military historian P\u00e9rini claimed Franco-Spanish casualties totalled around 2,000 killed or wounded, with the Allies losing 5,000 casualties and 10,000 prisoners, but from a larger force than 16,500 men. P\u00e9rini also accepts the bulk of the cavalry escaped, some 3,500 men. According to Gaston Bodart, the Franco-Spanish lost 2,000 men from an army of 21,000 and the allies 12,000 men (5,000 killed or wounded and 7,000 captured) from a force of 16,000. Finally, according to Joaquim Albareda, the Bourbon forces lost 1,500 men, whereas total allied losses were around 7,000. \nAftermath.\nAlmansa has been described as \"the single most important battle fought in Spain during the war\". Berwick's tactics were admired by many, Frederick the Great later describing it as the most impressive battle of the century. Victory confirmed Philip's control of North-East Spain and Valencia, while by the end of 1707 the Allies were once again restricted to Catalonia and the Balearic Islands. \nIn a letter written shortly after the battle, Jacques-Louis Comte de Noyelles, overall commander of Dutch troops in Spain based in Girona, notes the Franco-Spanish army quickly over-ran Valencia and besieged X\u00e0tiva. When the town surrendered in June, much of it was destroyed and the name changed to 'San Felipe.' In memory of these events, a portrait of the monarch still hangs upside down in the local museum. The defeat and its consequences for the autonomy of Valencia and Catalonia gave rise to two modern proverbs; \"De ponent, ni vent ni gent,\" ('From the west, neither wind nor people') and \"Quan el mal ve d'Almansa, a tots alcan\u00e7a,\" ('Bad news from Almansa reaches everybody').\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75658", "revid": "21738558", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75658", "title": "Asymptotic", "text": ""}
{"id": "75660", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75660", "title": "Sweat lodge", "text": "North American Indigenous structure and ceremony for prayer and healing\nA sweat lodge is a low profile hut, typically dome-shaped or oblong, and made with natural materials. The structure is the \"lodge\", and the ceremony performed within the structure may be called by some cultures a purification ceremony or simply a sweat. \nTraditionally the structure is simple, constructed of saplings covered with blankets and sometimes animal skins. The induction of sweating is a spiritual ceremony \u2013 it is for prayer and healing, and it is only to be led by Indigenous Elders who know the language, songs, traditions, and safety protocols of their culture's inherited tradition. Otherwise, the ceremony can be dangerous if performed improperly.\nThe ceremony is traditional to some Indigenous peoples of the Americas, predominantly those from the Plains cultures, but with the rise of pan-Indianism, numerous nations that did not originally have the sweat lodge ceremony have learned the ceremony from other Nations. Sweat lodges have also been imitated by many non-natives in North America and internationally, resulting in responses from Indigenous Elders declaring that these imitations are dangerous and disrespectful misappropriations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The sweat bath was in common use among almost all the tribes north of Mexico excepting the central and eastern Eskimo, and was considered the great cure-all in sickness and invigorant in health. Among many tribes it appears to have been regarded as a ceremonial observance. The person wishing to make trial of the virtues of the sweat bath entered the \"\u00e2\u00b4s\u012d\", a small earth-covered log house only high enough to allow of sitting down. After divesting himself of his clothing, some large boulders, previously heated in a fire, were placed near him, and over them was poured a decoction of the beaten roots of the wild parsnip. The door was closed so that no air could enter from the outside, and the patient sat in the sweltering steam until he was in a profuse perspiration and nearly choked by the pungent fumes of the decoction. In accordance with general Indian practice it may be that he plunged into the river before resuming his clothing; but in modern times this part of the operation is omitted and the patient is drenched with cold water instead.\u2014\u200a\nTraditions.\nNative Americans in many regions have sweat lodge ceremonies. For example, Chumash peoples of the central coast of California build sweat lodges in coastal areas in association with habitation sites. The ancient Mesoamerican tribes of Mexico, such as the Aztec and Olmec, practiced a sweat bath ceremony known as temazcal as a religious rite of penance and purification.\nTraditions associated with sweating vary regionally and culturally. Ceremonies often include traditional prayers and songs. In some cultures drumming and offerings to the spirit world may be part of the ceremony, or a sweat lodge ceremony may be a part of another, longer ceremony such as a Sun Dance. Some common practices and key elements associated with sweat lodges include:\nSome participants will go nude as it is considered the \u201ctraditional\u201d way.\nRisks.\nPhysical effects.\nEven people who are experienced with sweat rituals, or who attend a ceremony led by a properly trained and authorized traditional Native American ceremonial leader, could suddenly experience problems due to underlying health issues. It is recommended by Lakota spiritual leaders that people only attend lodges with authorized, traditional spiritual leaders.\nThere have been reports of lodge-related deaths resulting from overexposure to heat, dehydration, smoke inhalation, or improper lodge construction leading to suffocation.\nIf rocks are used, it is important not to use river rocks, or other kinds of rocks with air pockets inside them. Rocks must be completely dry before heating. Rocks with air pockets or excessive moisture could crack and possibly explode in the fire or when hit by water. Previously used rocks may absorb humidity or moisture leading to cracks or shattering.\nDeaths.\nThe following is a list of reported deaths related to non-traditional \"New Age\" sweat rituals:\nSedona deaths and Lakota Nation lawsuit.\nIn October 2009, during a New Age retreat organized by James Arthur Ray, three people died and 21 more became ill while attending an overcrowded and improperly set up sweat lodge containing some 60 people and located near Sedona, Arizona. Ray was arrested by the Yavapai County Sheriff's Office in connection with the deaths on February 3, 2010, and bond was set at $5 million. In response to these deaths, Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse issued a statement reading in part:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Our First Nations People have to earn the right to pour the \"mini wic'oni\" (water of life) upon the \"inyan oyate\" (the stone people) in creating \"Inikag'a\" \u2013 by going on the vision quest for four years and four years Sundance. Then you are put through a ceremony to be painted \u2013 to recognize that you have now earned that right to take care of someone's life through purification. They should also be able to understand our sacred language, to be able to understand the messages from the Grandfathers, because they are ancient, they are our spirit ancestors. They walk and teach the values of our culture; in being humble, wise, caring and compassionate. What has happened in the news with the make shift sauna called the sweat lodge is not our ceremonial way of life!\nOn November 2, 2009, the Lakota Nation filed a lawsuit against the United States, Arizona State, James Arthur Ray, and Angel Valley Retreat Center site owners, to have Ray and the site owners arrested and punished under the Sioux Treaty of 1868 between the United States and the Lakota Nation. That treaty states that \u201cif bad men among the whites or other people subject to the authority of the United States shall commit any wrong upon the person or the property of the Indians, the United States will (...) proceed at once to cause the offender to be arrested and punished according to the laws of the United States, and also reimburse the injured person for the loss sustained.\u201d\nThe Lakota Nation holds that James Arthur Ray and the Angel Valley Retreat Center have \u201cviolated the peace between the United States and the Lakota Nation\u201d and have caused the \u201cdesecration of our Sacred \"Oinikiga\" (purification ceremony) by causing the death of Liz Neuman, Kirby Brown and James Shore\u201d. As well, the Lakota claim that James Arthur Ray and the Angel Valley Retreat Center fraudulently impersonated Indians and must be held responsible for causing the deaths and injuries, and for evidence destruction through dismantling of the sweat lodge. The lawsuit seeks to have the treaty enforced and does not seek monetary compensation.\nPreceding the lawsuit, Native American experts on sweat lodges criticized the reported construction and conduct of the lodge as not meeting traditional ways (\"bastardized\", \"mocked\" and \"desecrated\"). Indian leaders expressed concerns and prayers for the dead and injured. The leaders said the ceremony is their way of life and not a religion. It is Native American property protected by U.S. law and United Nations declaration. The ceremony should only be in sanctioned lodge carriers' hands from legitimate nations. Traditionally, a typical leader has 4 to 8 years of apprenticeship before being allowed to care for people in a lodge, and have been officially named as ceremonial leaders before the community. Participants are instructed to call out whenever they feel uncomfortable, and the ceremony is usually stopped to help them. The lodge was said to be unusually built from non-breathable materials. Charging for the ceremony was said to be inappropriate. The number of participants was criticized as too high and the ceremony length was said to be too long. Respect to elders' oversight was said to be important for avoiding unfortunate events. The tragedy was characterized as \"plain carelessness\", with a disregard for the participants' safety and outright negligence. The Native American community actively seeks to prevent abuses of their traditions. Organizers have been discussing ways to formalize guidance and oversight to authentic or independent lodge leaders.\nSimilar structures and rites in other cultures.\nThere are examples of ritual sweating in other cultures, though often without any ceremonial or mystical significance. Secular uses around the world include many forms including Ancient Roman baths, steambath, sauna, Slavic banya, the culturally important Islamic hammam, and the heated \"dry\" air Victorian Turkish bath. Other varieties are used by Indigenous people around the Bering Strait, ancient Greeks, the Finns and the S\u00e1mi.\nSome European cultures have historically used sweating for cleansing. In most cases the usage is primarily for physical cleansing and warmth, but in others prayer and songs may be involved. Scandinavian, Baltic and Eastern European cultures incorporate sweat baths in their sauna traditions, which are held within a permanent, wooden hut. While modern-day saunas are wholly secular, there are older traditions of songs and rituals in the sauna, and the acknowledgment of a spirit-being who lives in the sauna.\n\"Vapour baths were in use among the Celtic tribes, and the sweat-house was in general use in Ireland down to the 18th, and even survived into the 19th century. It was of beehive shape and was covered with clay. It was especially resorted to as a cure for rheumatism.\" These permanent structures were built of stone, and square or corbelled \"beehive\" versions are often found, mostly in the Irish and Gaelic-speaking areas of Ireland and Scotland, though most seem of relatively recent date. The method of construction, heating the structure, and usage was different from the North American examples, and they seem to have been regarded as therapeutic in function, like the sauna, and perhaps typically used by one person at a time, given their small size.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75661", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75661", "title": "9 Men's Morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75662", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75662", "title": "9 Mens Morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75663", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75663", "title": "Three Mens Morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75664", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75664", "title": "3 Mens Morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75665", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75665", "title": "3 Men's Morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75666", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75666", "title": "Six Mens Morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75667", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75667", "title": "6 Mens Morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75668", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75668", "title": "6 Men's Morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75669", "revid": "378390", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75669", "title": "Three Men's Morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75670", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75670", "title": "Three mens morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75671", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75671", "title": "3 mens morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75672", "revid": "21818394", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75672", "title": "3 men's morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75674", "revid": "253188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75674", "title": "Six men's morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75675", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75675", "title": "Six mens morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75676", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75676", "title": "6 mens morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75677", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75677", "title": "6 men's morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75678", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75678", "title": "Nine mens morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75679", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75679", "title": "9 mens morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75680", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75680", "title": "9 men's morris", "text": ""}
{"id": "75682", "revid": "44507318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75682", "title": "List of World Chess Championships", "text": "The World Chess Championship has taken various forms over time, including both match and tournament play. While the concept of a world champion of chess had already existed for decades, with several events considered by some to have established the world's foremost player, an event explicitly held to decide a world champion did not take place until 1886. World Championships were initially privately organized matches, with each requiring the consent of the incumbent champion to take place. After 1948, the International Chess Federation (FIDE) began organizing the Championship under its auspices. The championship was fixed to a three-year cycle, with each challenger decided by a Candidates Tournament. In 1993, the short-lived Professional Chess Association (PCA) split from FIDE, and as a result there were two competing World Championship titles between 1993 and 2006.\nPredecessor events (before 1886).\nChess was first introduced to Europe during the 9th century. In the early modern era, following the solidification of the modern rules of chess, the game continued to carry consistent prestige and public interest. While numerous players have been characterized as the game's strongest over the centuries, the idea of an international chess match or tournament did not occur until the 18th century, and did not materialize until the 19th century. While the following events did not have the title of World Champion at stake, they have been recognized either at the time or in retrospect as indicating the world's leading player.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrivately organized matches (1886\u20131946).\nWith both Wilhelm Steinitz and Johannes Zukertort seen as plausible claimants, the two played a match for the first World Championship in 1886. While Steinitz would later claim that he had been the World Champion since the 1860s, no match before 1886 was played for any formal title. From then until after World War II, championship matches were privately organized, and the champion was not formally obliged to face an opponent. An agreement had to be reached between the champion, the challenger, and the patrons sponsoring each match, which included providing the funds for the prize pool. Lasker's 27-year reign as World Champion is the longest in the history of organized chess since 1886, but featured two separate 10-year spans during which he did not defend his title.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFIDE World Championships (1948\u20131990).\nIn 1946, Alexander Alekhine died while still holding the title of World Chess Champion. The International Chess Federation (FIDE), which had been founded in 1924, had been attempting to directly participate in organizing the World Championship since at least 1935. By the late 1940s, around half of the plausible contenders for the World Championship were Soviet citizens, and in 1947, the Soviet Chess Federation joined FIDE after decades of declining to do so. FIDE based the 1948 World Chess Championship on the 1938 AVRO tournament that had been organized in part to select a challenger for Alekhine. The tournament ultimately featured five players, three of them Soviet citizens\u2014including the winner, Mikhail Botvinnik. Botvinnik went on to win or retain in four further championship matches. At the same time, FIDE established the rules for the championship going forward. It was organized around a 3-year cycle, during which a series of Zonal and Interzonal tournaments were held, with their highest-scoring performers invited to a Candidates Tournament. The winner of the Candidates tournament in turn played the champion in a match for the title. A defeated champion was entitled to a rematch the following year, after which the 3-year cycle would resume. Botvinnik benefited from this rule twice, in 1958 and 1961.\nWith the exception of the American Bobby Fischer in 1972, Soviet citizens won every championship from 1948 until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. With the further exception of Viktor Korchnoi, who had defected from the USSR in 1976, each challenger was also a Soviet citizen. Following his victory, Fischer never played another game organized by FIDE. Disagreements between the two parties\u2014which included Fischer's insistence on a format that required the victor to get a certain number of wins, as opposed to the number of games in a match being fixed\u2014led to his forfeiting the title in 1975. In the absence of a match, FIDE declared Anatoly Karpov, winner of the 1974 Candidates Tournament, to be the World Chess Champion by default.\nWhile the issue had played a role in Fischer's forfeit, FIDE ultimately did change the match format going forward, such that the first to win 6 games would be champion. Under these rules, Karpov twice defended his title against Korchnoi. The next match\u2014which began in September 1984 and featured the 21-year-old Garry Kasparov as Karpov's challenger\u2014ultimately saw 48 games played over the span of five months, with neither player able to get to 6 wins. In an unprecedented step, FIDE president Florencio Campomanes stepped in and declared the match to have ended with no result. A new match, reverted to having a set number of games, was to be played later in 1985. After nearly being knocked out early in 1984, Kasparov defeated Karpov in their rematch. Over the following decade, the two played three more championship matches, with Kasparov narrowly retaining the title in each.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSplit title (1993\u20132006).\nIn 1993, following Nigel Short's victory in the Candidates Tournament, FIDE president Campomanes announced that that year's Championship would take place in Manchester, England. Both Kasparov and Short claimed that FIDE had made this decision without consulting either player, in violation of FIDE's regulations regarding the championship. Kasparov and Short responded by splitting from FIDE and forming the Professional Chess Association (PCA), which organized a World Championship match between the two, played in London later that year. Meanwhile, FIDE stripped Kasparov of his title and organized a championship match between Karpov and Jan Timman, who had finished second and third in the Candidates Tournament. For the 13 years between 1993 and 2006, there were two rival titles. While the PCA itself would fold after only a couple of years, Kasparov would retain what is referred to as \"Classical\" title, which would be inherited by Vladimir Kramnik upon defeating Kasparov in 2000.\nMeanwhile, FIDE once again began experimenting with the championship format. Beginning with the 1998 championship, the system of Zonal, Interzonal, Candidates, and Championship stages was replaced with one single-elimination tournament featuring dozens of players competing for the championship. For the next event in 1999, the incumbent World Champion would not automatically qualify for the finals. Due to this additional change, Karpov\u2014who had won three additional titles during the schism\u2014declined to participate going forward. Each of the four Classical Championships retained a traditional match format.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFIDE World Championships (2006\u2013present).\nFollowing a period of negotiation, in 2006 the Classical Champion Vladimir Kramnik played a match against the FIDE Champion Veselin Topalov to reunify the World Championship. Since then, the championship has remained under the auspices of FIDE. The Candidates Tournament returned, and with the exception of the 2007 tournament, FIDE would return to a match format for the World Championship. Instead of the previous system of Zonals and Interzonals to provide candidates, the system was redesigned around the Chess World Cup. Later, means for selecting candidates would variously include the FIDE Grand Prix, the FIDE Grand Swiss Tournament, selection by rating, and wild cards selected by the venue hosting the event.\nWhile shorter matches had taken place at various points, the block of 12 classical games was much shorter than matches had been for much of the 20th century. In the 2018 match, all 12 classical games resulted in draws for the first time in the history of the championship. Following this, the number of games was increased to 14. Citing a lack of motivation and interest in the format, incumbent five-time champion Magnus Carlsen declined to defend his title in 2023. Instead, the match featured the two best performers in the Candidates, with Ding Liren defeating Ian Nepomniachtchi to become the new World Champion. Carlsen later declined his spot in the 2024 Candidates Tournament.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnrecognized championship events.\nIn 1909, amid discussions that would ultimately culminate with the World Championship match played the following year, Emanuel Lasker played a casual match with Dawid Janowski in Paris. This was reported in later decades as being a World Championship match. However, research by Edward Winter has demonstrated that the title was not at stake.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75683", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75683", "title": "Telecommunications in Saint Kitts and Nevis", "text": " \nThis is a list of Communications in Saint Kitts and Nevis.\nTelephone.\nSaint Kitts and Nevis is a member of the North American Numbering Plan (NANP), whose assigned area code is area code 869.\nWhen dialing from a telephone in Saint Kitts and Nevis, telephone users can dial the local seven digit number. When calling a telephone number in the United States, Canada or any other NANP member country from Saint Kitts and Nevis, the user would dial 1 + area code + phone number.\nWhen calling a telephone number inside Saint Kitts and Nevis from the United States, Canada or other countries participating in the NANP, the user would dial 1 + 869 + seven digit phone number.\nTelephones - main lines in use: 17,000 (1997)\nTelephones - mobile cellular: at least 30,000(2005)\nTelephone system:\n\"General assessment:\" good inter-island and international connections\n\"Domestic:\" inter-island links to Antigua and Barbuda and Saint Martin (Guadeloupe and Netherlands Antilles) are handled by VHF/UHF/SHF radiotelephone\n\"International:\" International calls are carried by radiotelephone to Antigua and Barbuda and switched there to submarine cable or to Intelsat; or carried to Saint Martin (Guadeloupe and Netherlands Antilles) by radiotelephone and switched to Intelsat.\nRadio.\nRadio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 1, shortwave 0 (1998)\nRadios: 28,000 (1997)\nTelevision.\nTelevision broadcast stations: 1 (ZIZ-TV, plus three repeaters) (1997)\nTelevisions: 10,000 (1997)\nInternet.\nCountry code: .kn (Top-level domain)\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs): 16 (2000)\nInternet users: 2,001 (2000)\nAverage Internet Speed: 27.84 mbps download/10.74 mbps upload (2020)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75686", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75686", "title": "Poker game play", "text": ""}
{"id": "75689", "revid": "251228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75689", "title": "Low hand", "text": ""}
{"id": "75691", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75691", "title": "Betting in poker", "text": "In the game of poker, the play largely centers on the act of betting, and as such, a protocol has been developed to speed up play, lessen confusion, and increase security while playing. Different games are played using different types of bets, and small variations in etiquette exist between cardrooms, but for the most part the following rules and protocol are observed by the majority of poker players.\nProcedure.\nPlayers in a poker game act in turn, in clockwise rotation (acting out of turn can negatively affect other players). When it is a player's turn to act, the first verbal declaration or action they take binds them to their choice of action; this rule prevents a player from changing their action after seeing how other players react to their initial action.\nUntil the first bet is made each player in turn may \"check\", which is to not place a bet, or \"open\", which is to make the first bet. After the first bet each player may \"fold\", which is to drop out of the hand losing any bets they have already made; \"call\", which is to match the highest bet so far made; or \"raise\", which is to increase the previous high bet.\nA player may fold by surrendering one's cards. (Some games may have specific rules regarding how to fold: for example in stud poker one must turn one's upcards face down.) A player may check by tapping the table or making any similar motion. All other bets are made by placing chips in front of the player, but not directly into the pot (\"splashing the pot\" prevents other players from verifying the bet amount).\nOrder of betting.\nIn general, the person to the left of the dealer acts first and action proceeds in a clockwise fashion. If any player has folded earlier, action proceeds to next player. In games with blinds, the first round of betting begins with the player to the left of the blinds. In stud games, the action begins with the player showing the strongest cards and proceeds clockwise. If there is a bring-in, the first round of betting begins with the player obliged to post the bring-in.\nCheck.\nIf no one has yet opened the betting round, a player may pass or check, which is equivalent to betting zero and/or to call the current bet of zero. When checking, a player declines to make a bet; this indicates that they do not wish to open, but do wish to keep their cards and retain the right to call or raise later in the same round if an opponent opens. In games played with blinds, players may not check on the opening round because the blinds are live bets and must be called or raised to remain in the hand. A player who has posted the big blind has the right to raise on the first round, called the option, if no other player has raised; if they decline to raise they are said to check their option. If all players check, the betting round is over with no additional money placed in the pot (often called a free round or free card). A common way to signify checking is to tap the table, either with a fist, knuckles, an open hand or the index finger(s).\nOpen, bet, raise.\nIf in any betting round it is a player's turn to act and the action is unopened, then the player can open action in a betting round by making a bet\u2014the act of making the first voluntary bet in a betting round is called opening the round. On the first betting round, it is also called opening the pot, though in variants where \"blind bets\" are common, the blind bets \"open\" the first betting round and other players call and/or raise the \"big blind\" bet. Some poker variations have special rules about opening a round that may not apply to other bets. For example, a game may have a betting structure that specifies different allowable amounts for opening than for other bets, or may require a player to hold certain cards (such as \"Jacks or better\") to open.\nNormally, a player makes a bet by placing the chips they wish to wager into the pot. Under normal circumstances, all other players still in the pot must either call the full amount of the bet or raise if they wish to remain in, the only exceptions being when a player does not have sufficient stake remaining to call the full amount of the bet (in which case they may either call with their remaining stake to go \"all-in\" or fold) or when the player is already all-in.\nTo raise is to increase the size of an existing bet in the same betting round. A player making the second (not counting the open) or subsequent raise of a betting round is said to re-raise. A player making a raise after previously checking in the same betting round is said to check-raise. The sum of the opening bet and all raises is the amount that all players in the hand must call in order to remain eligible to win the pot, subject to the table stakes rules described in the previous paragraph.\nA bluff is when a player bets or raises when it is likely they do not have the best hand; it is often done in hopes that (an) opponent(s) will fold mediocre yet stronger hands. When a player bets or raises with a weak hand that has a chance of improvement on a later betting round, the bet or raise is classified as a semi-bluff. On the other hand, a bet made by a player who hopes or expects to be called by weaker hands is classified as a value bet.\nIn no-limit and pot-limit games, there is a minimum amount that is required to be bet in order to open the action. In games with blinds, this amount is usually the amount of the big blind. Modern poker rules require that raises must be at least equal to the amount of the previous bet or raise. For example, if an opponent bets $5, a player must raise by at least another $5, and they may not raise by only $2. If a player raises a bet of $5 by $7 (for a total of $12), the next re-raise would have to be by at least another $7 (the previous raise) more than the $12 (for a total of at least $19). The primary purpose of the minimum raise rule is to avoid game delays caused by \"nuisance\" raises (small raises of large bets, such as an extra $1 over a current bet of $50, that have little effect on the action but take time as all others must call). This rule is overridden by table stakes rules, so that a player may in fact raise a $5 bet by $2 if that $2 is their entire remaining stake. The only exception is if someone goes all in for less than a legal raise. For example, if the minimum bet is $5 and a player goes all in for $4, the next player can call the $4; if they want to raise, they would have to make it $9 ($4 plus the minimum bet).\nIn no-limit and pot-limit games, if a player opens action in a betting round by placing any number of chips in the pot without a verbal declaration, or if they place two or more chips in the pot of sufficient value to raise an outstanding bet or raise without a verbal declaration, then the full amount placed in the pot will be assumed to be the amount of the bet or raise. Sometimes, a player will not have enough chips in smaller denominations that would be needed to make a bet or raise in the desired amount\u2014for example, a player may be out of $1 and $5 chips and still have $25 chips\u2014if the pot is currently $70 and the player wants to open action by betting half the pot, they will want to bet $35. In such cases, instead of slowing down the game by asking the dealer or another player to provide \"change\" a player may simply verbally declare the amount they are betting while placing (a) chip(s) of sufficient value to make good on the bet. Any \"change\" will be returned to them by the dealer if necessary.\nAlso in no-limit and pot-limit games, a raise may be expressed as either a \"raise by $X\" or a \"raise to $X\". For example, suppose Alice opens by betting $5. If Dianne subsequently announces \"I raise \"by\" $15\" she will be raising by $15 \"over and above\" the opening bet of $5, for a total bet of $20. On the other hand, if Dianne subsequently announces \"I raise \"to\" $15\" she will be raising by only $10 for a \"total bet\" of $15. Today, most public cardrooms prefer for players to use the \"raise to\" standard as opposed to the \"raise by\" standard. In the event of any ambiguity in a player's verbal action while raising, the player will normally be bound to raise \"to\" the stated amount. For example, if Alice were to have opened with a $5 bet and Dianne subsequently announced \"raise, $15\" while putting $15 into pot (making the pot $20), in most public cardrooms Dianne would be bound to a \"total bet\" of $15 and the \"excess\" $5 would be returned to her.\nIn fixed-limit games, the size of bets and raises is determined by the specified stakes. For example, in $3/$6 fixed limit Hold 'em, during the first two betting rounds (preflop and flop) the big blind is $3, the opening bet after the flop must be for $3 and all raises must be for $3. For the last two betting rounds (turn and river) the opening bet must be for $6 and all raises must be for $6. As in no-limit and pot-limit games, these amounts will be overridden by table stakes rules (so for example, in $3/$6 fixed limit Hold 'em a player could bet, raise or call for only $2 at any time if that is their remaining stake).\nAlso, in fixed-limit and spread-limit games most casinos cap the total number of raises allowed in a single betting round (typically three or four, not including the opening bet of a round). For example, in a casino with a three-raise rule, if one player opens the betting for $5, the next raises by $5 making it $10, a third player raises another $5, and a fourth player raises $5 again making the current bet $20, the betting is said to be capped at that point, and no further raises beyond the $20 level will be allowed on that round. It is common to suspend this rule when there are only two players betting in the round (called being heads-up), since either player can call the last raise if they wish. Pot-limit and no-limit games do not have a limit on the number of raises.\nIf, because of opening or raising, there is an amount bet that the player in-turn has not paid, the player must at least match that amount, or must fold; the player cannot pass or call a lesser amount (except where table stakes rules apply).\nCall.\nTo call is to match a bet or match a raise. A betting round ends when all active players have bet an equal amount. If no opponents call a player's bet or raise, the player wins the pot.\nThe second and subsequent calls of a particular bet amount are sometimes called overcalls. This term is also sometimes used to describe a call made by a player who has put money in the pot for this round already. A player calling a raise before they have invested money in the pot in that round is cold calling. For example, if in a betting round, Alice bets, Dianne raises, and Carol calls, Carol \"calls two bets cold\". A player calling instead of raising with a strong hand is smooth calling or flat calling, a form of slow play.\nCalling in the final betting round when a player thinks they do not have the best hand is called a crying call. Calling when a player has a relatively weak hand but suspects their opponent may be bluffing is called a hero call. Calling a bet prior to the final betting round with the intention of bluffing on a later betting round is called a float.\nIn public cardrooms, placing a single chip in the pot of \"any\" value sufficient to call an outstanding bet or raise without a verbal action declaring otherwise always constitutes a call. If necessary, any \"change\" from the chip will be returned to the player at the end of the betting round, or perhaps even sooner if this can conveniently be done. If, when it is a player's turn to act, the player already has an oversized chip in the pot that has not yet been \"changed\" and that is of sufficient value to call an outstanding bet or raise, then the player may call by tapping the table as if checking.\nIn public cardrooms and casinos where verbal declarations are binding, the word \"call\" is such a declaration. In public card rooms, the practice of saying \"I call, and raise $100\" is considered a string raise and is not allowed. Saying \"I call\" commits the player to the action of calling, and only calling.\nNote that the verb \"see\" can often be used instead of \"call\": \"Dianne saw Carol's bet\", although the latter can also be used with the bettor as the object: \"I'll see you\" means 'I will call your bet'. However, terms such as \"overseeing\" and \"cold seeing\" are not valid.\nFold.\nTo fold is to discard one's hand and forfeit interest in the current pot. No further bets are required by the folding player, but the player cannot win. Folding may be indicated verbally or by discarding one's hand face down into the pile of other discards called the muck, or into the pot (uncommon). For this reason it is also called \"mucking\". In stud poker played in the United States, it is customary to signal folding by turning all of one's cards face down. Once a person indicates a fold or states \"I fold\", that person cannot re-enter the hand. In casinos in the United Kingdom, a player folds by giving their hand as is to the \"house\" dealer, who spreads the cards face up for the other players to see before mucking them.\nEtiquette.\nAction and betting.\nWhen participating in the hand, a player is expected to keep track of the betting action. Losing track of the amount needed to call, called the bet to the player, happens occasionally, but multiple occurrences of this slow the game down and so it is discouraged. The dealer may be given the responsibility of tracking the current bet amount, from which each player has only to subtract their contribution, if any, thus far.\nTo aid players in tracking bets, and to ensure all players have bet the correct amount, players stack the amount they have bet in the current round in front of them. When the betting round is over (a common phrase is \"the pot's good\"), the players will push their stacks into the pot or the dealer will gather them into the pot. Tossing chips directly into the pot (known as splashing the pot), though popular in film and television depictions of the game, causes confusion over the amount of a raise and can be used to hide the true amount of a bet. Likewise, string raises, or the act of raising by first placing chips to call and then adding chips to raise, causes confusion over the amount bet. Both actions are generally prohibited at casinos and discouraged at least in other cash games.\nActing out of turn.\nMost actions (calls, raises or folds) occurring out-of-turn\u2014when players to the right of the player acting have not yet made decisions as to their own action\u2014are considered improper, for several reasons. First, since actions by a player give information to other players, acting out of turn gives the person in turn information that they normally would not have, to the detriment of players who have already acted.\nFor instance, say that with three players in a hand, Player A has a weak hand but decides to try a bluff with a large opening bet. Player C then folds out of turn while Player B is making up their mind. Player B now knows that if they fold, A will take the pot, and also knows that they cannot be re-raised if they call. This may encourage Player B, if they have a good \"drawing hand\" (a hand currently worth nothing but with a good chance to improve substantially in subsequent rounds), to call the bet, to the disadvantage of Player A.\nSecond, calling or raising out of turn, in addition to the information it provides, assumes all players who would act before the out of turn player would not exceed the amount of the out-of-turn bet. This may not be the case, and would result in the player having to bet twice to cover preceding raises, which would cause confusion.\nCards.\nA player is never required to expose their concealed cards when folding or if all others have folded; this is only required at the showdown.\nMany casinos and public cardrooms using a house dealer require players to protect their hands. This is done either by holding the cards or, if they are on the table, by placing a chip or other object on top. Unprotected hands in such situations are generally considered folded and are mucked by the dealer when action reaches the player. This can spark heated controversy, and is rarely done in private games.\nThe style of game generally determines whether players should hold face-down cards in their hands or leave them on the table. Holding \"hole\" cards allows players to view them more quickly and thus speeds up gameplay, but spectators watching over a player's shoulder can communicate the strength of that hand to other players, even unintentionally. Unwary players can hold their hand such that a \"rubbernecker\" in an adjacent seat can sneak a peek at the cards. Lastly, given the correct light and angles, players wearing glasses can inadvertently show their opponents their hole cards through the reflection in their glasses. Thus for most poker variants involving a combination of faceup and facedown cards (most variants of stud and community are dealt in this manner), the standard method is to keep hole cards face-down on the table except when it is that player's turn to act. Five-card draw is generally played with hands held by the players at all times.\nCash and chips.\nMaking change out of the pot is allowed in most games; to avoid confusion, the player should announce their intentions first. Then, if opening or cold calling, the player may exchange a large chip for its full equivalent value out of the pot before placing their bet, or if over-calling may place the chip (announcing that they are calling or raising a lesser amount) and remove the change from their own bet for the round. Normally, if a player places one oversized chip in the pot without explicitly voicing intention while facing a bet, the action is automatically deemed a call whether or not the chip is large enough to otherwise qualify as a raise. In most casinos players are prohibited from handling chips once they are placed in the pot, although a player removing their own previous bet in the current round from the pot for the purpose of calling a raise (or re-raising) is usually tolerated. Otherwise, the dealer is expected to make change when required.\nMaking change should, in general, be done between hands whenever possible, when a player sees they are running low of an oft-used value. The house dealer at most casinos maintains a chip bank and can usually make change for a large amount of chips. In informal games, players can make change with each other or with unused chips in the set. While this can prevent delays while players figure out change for a bet, casinos generally frown on or outright prohibit such practices to prevent players from surreptitiously \"ratholing\" (taking away and securing part of the stakes for personal use) and/or circumventing buy-in limits. Similarly, buying in for an additional amount must be done between hands (or, at least, done after a player has folded during the current hand) since players are not allowed to add to their stack during a hand. If buy-ins cannot and/or are not expected to be handled by the dealer it can take two or three hands for an attendant to bring another tray to the table. As described below, some casinos alleviate this issue by allowing cash to be deemed temporarily \"in play\" while staff fetches chips. Players who wish to always play with at least the buy-in limit will often carry additional chips in their pocket so that whenever they lose a pot they can quickly \"top up\" without inconveniencing the dealer or delaying the game.\nWhile having players buy chips directly from the dealer is seen as a convenience by some players, and can help deter players from exceeding buy-in limits, many players dislike this system because it slows down the game, especially if the dealer is expected to count large numbers of small denominations of chips. Also, many jurisdictions require all such purchases (or, at least, all larger transactions) to be confirmed (primarily to ensure accuracy) by a supervisor or other staff member, potentially causing further delay. To speed up play (and, by extension, increase the number of hands dealt and rake earned by the casino), many casinos require players to buy chips from a cashier\u2014to assist players, some establishments employ chip runners to bring cash and chips to and from the tables. Many casinos have a dedicated cashier station located in or very near the poker room, although in some (usually, smaller venues) the same cashier station that handles other transactions will also handle poker-related purchases. In addition, if the casino uses the same chips for poker as for other games then it is often possible to bring chips from such games to the poker table.\nTouching another player's chips without permission is a serious breach of protocol and can result in the player being barred from the casino.\nMost tournaments and many cash games require that larger denomination chips be stacked in front (i.e., closer to the center of the table, or closer to the pot) of the player's lesser denomination chips, or at least stacked in such a manner that they can be easily seen by all opponents. This rule is employed to discourage attempts to conceal stack size. Some casinos discourage, prohibit or simply refrain from circulating larger chip denominations to prevent them from being used in lower-stakes cash games, although the drawback is that larger stacks won during play will become more difficult to handle and manage as a result.\nSome informal games allow a bet to be made by placing the amount of cash on the table without converting it to chips, as this speeds up play. However, table stakes rules strictly prohibit this from being done while a hand is in progress. Other drawbacks to using cash include the ease with which cash can be \"ratholed\", which is normally disallowed, in addition to the security risk of leaving cash on the table. As a result, many games and virtually all casinos require a formal \"buy-in\" when a player wishes to increase their stake, or at least require any cash placed on the table to be converted into chips as quickly as possible.\nPlayers in home games typically have both cash and chips available; thus, if money for expenses other than bets is needed, such as food, drinks and fresh decks of cards, many players typically pay out of pocket. Some players (especially professionals) loathe removing any part of their stack from play for any reason, especially once their stacks exceed the initial buy-in limit. In casinos and public cardrooms, however, the use of cash is occasionally restricted or discouraged, so players often establish a small cache of chips called the \"kitty\", used to pay for such things. Players contribute a chip of lowest value towards the kitty when they win a pot, and it pays for expenses other than bets such as tipping the dealer as well as (where applicable) to pay for \"rent\" (formally known as time fees) and/or buying fresh decks of cards (while many public cardrooms include such costs in the \"rake\" or other fees, some charge separately for such things as playing cards and \"rent\"), and similar costs.\nAt a casino, dealers who exchange cash for chips are expected to immediately secure any cash by placing it into a locked box near their station. This means that regardless of how chips are purchased, when cashing them in it is typically not possible to sell them back to the dealer since they have no access to any cash. Poker chips must therefore be taken to the cashier to be exchanged for cash. Dealers who handle buy-ins will often be willing (and sometimes encourage) departing players to \"color up\" their stacks by exchanging them for the highest-available denominations, both for the convenience of the player and to minimize the number of times casino staff must deliver fresh chips to the poker table\u2014a time-consuming process. On the other hand, casinos that expect players to buy chips from the cashier will usually furnish players with chip trays (typically designed to handle 100 chips each) to ease the handling of large numbers of chips.\nChips given by players or otherwise retained by the dealer for tips, rake and other fees (where applicable) are usually placed in separate locked boxes by the dealer, although in some casinos the rake is kept in a separate row in the dealer's tray.\nOther rules.\nPublic cardrooms often have additional rules designed to speed up play, earn revenue for the casino (such as the \"rake\"), improve security and discourage cheating.\nForced bets.\nAll poker games require some forced bets to create an initial stake for the players to contest, as well as an initial cost of being dealt each hand for one or more players. The requirements for forced bets and the betting limits of the game (see below) are collectively called the game's \"betting structure\".\nAnte.\nAn ante is a forced bet in which all players put an equal amount of money or chips into the pot before the deal begins. Often this is either a single \"unit\" (a one-value or the smallest value in play) or some other small amount; a proportion such as a half or a quarter of the minimum bet is also common. An ante paid by every player ensures that a player who folds every round will lose money (though slowly), thus providing all players with an incentive, however small, to play the hand rather than toss it in when the opening bet reaches them.\nAntes are the most common forced bet in draw poker and stud poker but are uncommon in games featuring blind bets (see next section). However, some tournament formats of games featuring blinds impose an ante to discourage extremely tight play. Antes encourage players to play more loosely by lowering the cost of staying in the hand (calling) relative to the current pot size, offering better pot odds. With antes, more players stay in the hand, which increases pot size and makes for more interesting play. This is considered important to ensure good ratings for televised tournament finals. Most televised high-stakes cash games also use both blinds and antes. Televised cash games usually have one of the players, normally the dealer, pay for everyone to accelerate play. If there are six players for example, the dealer would toss six times the ante into the pot, paying for each person. Tournaments which employ antes, often do so only in the later rounds.\nIn live cash games where the acting dealer changes each turn, it is not uncommon for the players to agree that the dealer (or some other position relative to the button) provides the ante for each player. This simplifies betting, but causes minor inequities if other players come and go or miss their turn to deal. During such times, the player can be given a special button indicating the need to pay an ante to the pot (known as \"posting\"; see below) upon their return. Some cardrooms eliminate these inequities by always dealing all players into every hand whether they are present or not. In such cases casino staff (or neighboring players under staff supervision) will be expected to post antes and fold hands on behalf of absent players as necessary.\nBlinds.\nA blind bet or just blind is a forced bet placed into the pot by one or more players before the deal begins, in a way that simulates bets made during play. The most common use of blinds as a betting structure calls for two blinds: the player after the dealer blinds about half of what would be a normal bet, and the next player blinds what would be a whole bet. This two-blind structure, sometimes with antes, is the dominating structure of play for community card poker games such as Texas hold 'em. Sometimes only one blind is used (often informally as a \"price of winning\" the previous hand), and sometimes three are used (this is sometimes seen in Omaha hold 'em). In the case of three blinds (usually one quarter, one quarter, and half a normal bet amount), the first blind goes \"on the button\", that is, is paid by the dealer.\nA blind is usually a \"live bet\"; the amount paid as the blind is considered when figuring the bet to that player (the amount needed to call) during the first round. However, some situations, such as when a player was absent from the table during a hand in which they should have paid a blind, call for placing a \"dead blind\"; the blind does not count as a bet.\nFor example, in a $2\u20134 limit game, the first player to the dealer's left (who, if not for the blinds, would be the first to act) posts a small blind of $1, and the next player in turn posts a big blind of $2. After the cards are dealt, play begins with the next player in turn (third from the dealer), who must either call $2, raise, or fold. When the betting returns to the player who blinded $1, they must equal the bet facing them (toward which they may count their $1), raise, or fold. If there have been no raises when action first gets to the big blind (that is, the bet amount facing them is just the amount of the big blind they posted), the big blind has the ability to raise or check. This right to raise (called the \"option\") occurs only once. As with any raise, if their raise is now called by every player, the first betting round closes as usual.\nSimilarly to a missed ante, a missed blind due to the player's temporary absence (e.g. for drinks or a restroom break) can be denoted by use of a special button. Upon the player's return, they must pay the applicable blind to the pot for the next hand they will participate in. The need for this rule is eliminated in casinos that deal in absent players as described above. Also the rule is for temporary absences only; if a player leaves the table permanently, special rules govern the assigning of blinds and button (see next subsection).\nIn some fixed-limit and spread-limit games, especially if three blinds are used, the big blind amount may be less than the normal betting minimum. Players acting after a sub-minimum blind have the right to call the blind as it is, even though it is less than the amount they would be required to bet, or they may raise the amount needed to bring the current bet up to the normal minimum, called \"completing\" the bet. For example, a limit game with a $5 minimum bet on the first round might have blinds of $1 and $2. Players acting after the blind may either call the $2, or raise to $5. After the bet is raised to $5, the next raise must be to $10 in accordance with the normal limits.\nWhen a player in the blinds leaves the game.\nWhen one or more players pays the small or big blinds for a hand, then after that hand permanently leaves the game (by \"busting out\" in a tournament or simply calling it a night at a public cardroom), an adjustment is required in the positioning of the blinds and the button. There are three common rule sets to determine this:\nIn tournaments, the \"dead button\" and \"moving button\" rules are common (replacement players are generally not a part of tournaments). Online cash games generally use the \"simplified moving button\" as other methods are more difficult to codify and can be abused by players constantly entering and leaving.\nCasino card rooms where players can come and go can use any of the three rulesets, though \"moving button\" is most common. When a player immediately takes the place of a player who leaves, the player may have the option to either pay the blinds in the leaving player's stead, in which case play continues as if the player never left, or to \"sit out\" until the button has moved past them, and thus the chair is effectively empty for purposes of the blinds. Many card rooms do not allow new players to sit out as it is highly advantageous for the new player, both to watch one or more hands without obligation to play, and to enter the game in a very \"late\" position (on their first hand they see all other player's actions except the dealer's). For these reasons, new players must often post a \"live\" big blind to enter regardless of their position at the table.\nWhen there are only two players.\nThe normal rules for positioning the blinds do not apply when there are only two players at the table. The player on the button is always due the small blind, and the other player must pay the big blind. The player on the button is therefore the first to act before the flop, but last to act for all remaining betting rounds.\nA special rule is also applied for placement of the button whenever the size of the table shrinks to two players. If three or more players are involved in a hand, and at the conclusion of the hand one or more players have busted out such that only two players remain for the next hand, the position of the button may need to be adjusted to begin heads-up play. The big blind always continues moving, and then the button is positioned accordingly.\nFor example, in a three-handed game, Alice is the button, Dianne is the small blind, and Carol is the big blind. If Alice busts out, the next hand Dianne will be the big blind, and the button will skip past Dianne and move to Carol. On the other hand, if Carol busts out, Alice will be the big blind, Dianne will get the button and will have to pay the small blind for the second hand in a row.\nKill blind.\nA kill blind is a special blind bet made by a player who triggers the kill in a \"kill game\". It is often twice the amount of the big blind or minimum bet (known as a full kill), but can be 1.5 times the big blind (a half-kill) or any other amount according to house rules. This blind is \"live\"; the player posting it normally acts last in the opening round (after the other blinds, regardless of relative position at the table), and other players must call the amount of the kill blind to play. As any player can trigger a kill, there is the possibility that the player must post a kill blind when they are already due to pay one of the other blinds. Rules vary on how this is handled.\nBring-in.\nA bring-in is a type of forced bet that occurs after the cards are initially dealt, but before any other action. One player, usually chosen by the value of cards dealt face up on the initial deal, is forced to open the betting by some small amount, after which players act after them in normal rotation. Because of this random first action, bring-ins are usually used in games with an ante instead of structured blind bets.\nThe bring-in is normally assigned on the first betting round of a stud poker game to the player whose upcards indicate the poorest hand. For example, in traditional high hand stud games and high-low split games, the player showing the lowest card pays the bring-in. In low hand games, the player with the highest card showing pays the bring-in. The high card by suit order can be used to break ties, but more often the person closest to the dealer in order of rotation pays the bring-in.\nIn most fixed-limit and some spread-limit games, the bring-in amount is less than the normal betting minimum (often half of this minimum). The player forced to pay the bring-in may choose either to pay only what is required (in which case it functions similarly to a small blind) or to make a normal bet. Players acting after a sub-minimum bring-in have the right to call the bring-in as it is, even though it is less than the amount they would be required to bet, or they may raise the amount needed to bring the current bet up to the normal minimum, called completing the bet. For example, a game with a $5 fixed bet on the first round might have a bring-in of $2. Players acting after the bring-in can either call the $2, or increase it to $5, which would count as a normal bet, not a raise. After the bet is completed to $5, the first raise must be to $10 in accordance with the normal limits.\nIn a game where the bring-in is equal to the fixed bet (this is rare and not recommended), the game must either allow the bring-in player to optionally come in for a raise, or else the bring-in must be treated as live in the same way as a blind, so that the player is guaranteed their right to raise on the first betting round (the \"option\") if all other players call.\nPost.\nSome cash games, especially with blinds, require a new player to post when joining a game already in progress. Posting in this context means putting an amount equal to the big blind or the minimum bet into the pot before the deal. This amount is also called a \"dead blind\". The post is a \"live\" bet, meaning that the amount can be applied towards a call or raise when it is the player's turn to act. If the player is not facing a raise when the action gets to them, they may also \"check their option\" as if they were in the big blind.\nA player who is away from their seat and misses one or more blinds is also required to post to reenter the game. In this case, the amount to be posted is the amount of the big or small blind, or both, at the time the player missed them. If both must be posted immediately upon return, the big blind amount is \"live\", but the small blind amount is \"dead\", meaning that it cannot be considered in determining a call or raise amount by that player. Some house rules allow posting one blind per hand, largest first, meaning all posts of missed blinds are live.\nPosting is usually not required if the player who would otherwise post happens to be in the big blind. This is because the advantage that would otherwise be gained by missing the blind, that of playing several hands before having to pay blinds, is not the case in this situation. It is therefore common for a new player to lock up a seat and then wait several hands before joining a table, or for a returning player to sit out several hands until the big blind comes back around, so that they may enter in the big blind and avoid paying the post. For this same reason, only one set of missed blinds can be accumulated by the player; old missed blinds are removed when the big blind returns to that player's seat because the player was never in any position to gain from missing the blinds.\nIn online poker it is common for the post to be equal in size to a big blind and to be live, just like the big blind. This can create a tactical advantage for the player if they choose not to play during the time they would otherwise spend in the blind in full ring games.\nStraddle and sleeper bets.\nA \"straddle bet\" is an optional and voluntary blind bet made by a player after the posting of the small and big blinds, but before cards are dealt. Straddles are typically used only in cash games played with fixed blind structures. Some jurisdictions and casinos prohibit live straddles. Straddles are normally not permitted in tournament formats and are rarely allowed online.\nThe purpose of a straddle is to \"buy\" the privilege of last action, which on the first round with blinds is normally the player in the big blind. A straddle or sleeper blind may count as a raise towards the maximum number of raises allowed, or it may count separately; in the latter case this raises the maximum total bet of the first round. For example, straddling is permitted in Nevada and Atlantic City but illegal in other areas on account of differences in state and local laws.\nLive straddle.\nThe player immediately to the left of the big blind (\"under the gun\", UTG) may place a \"live straddle\" blind bet. The straddle must be the size of a normal raise over the big blind. A straddle is a live bet; but does not become a \"bigger blind\". The straddle acts as a minimum raise but with the difference being that the straddler still gets their option of acting when the action returns to them. In a no-limit game if any other player wants to make a raise with a straddle on board, the minimum raise will be the difference between the big blind and the straddle.\nExample: small blind is at 5, big blind is 10 then a straddle would cost 20. The minimum raise would be 10, for a total of 30; it doesn't need to double to 40.\nAction begins with the player to the left of the straddle. If action returns to the straddle without a raise, the straddle has the option to raise. (This is part of what makes a straddle different from a \"sleeper\" because a sleeper does not have the option to raise if everyone folds or calls around to him.) Some casinos permit the player to the left of a live straddle to \"re-straddle\" by placing a blind bet raising the original straddle. Most public cardrooms do not permit more than one re-straddle. Depending on house rules, each re-straddle is often required to be double the previous straddle, so as to limit the number of feasible re-straddles.\nStraddling is considered poor long-term strategy by most experts, since the benefit of obtaining last action is more than offset by the cost of making a blind raise. Because straddling has a tendency to enrich the average pot size without a corresponding increase in the blinds (and antes if applicable), players who sit at tables that allow straddling can increase their profits considerably simply by choosing not to straddle themselves.\nMandatory straddles.\nStraddling is voluntary at most cardrooms that allow it, however house rules can make straddling obligatory at times by using a special token (called \"the rock\") at the table. Whoever is in possession of the \"rock\" is obliged to place a live straddle for double the big blind when they are in the UTG position. The winner of the ensuing pot takes possession of the \"rock\" and is obliged to make a live straddle when the UTG position comes around to this player. If the pot is split the \"rock\" goes to the winner closest to the left (i.e. clockwise) of the previous holder. This is very similar in principle to the \"kill blind\" of a kill game, but does not necessarily occur in the same circumstances, and the betting amounts do not have to be affected beyond the first round as in a kill game.\nMississippi straddle.\nA \"Mississippi straddle\" is similar to a live straddle, but instead of being made by the player \"under the gun\", it can be made by any player, depending on house rules (one common variation is to allow this left of big blind or on the button). House rules permitting Mississippi straddles are common in the southern United States. Like a live straddle, a Mississippi straddle must be at least the minimum raise. Action begins with the player to the left of the straddle (in a common variation, action starts left of the big blind, skips over the straddle who is last). If, for example (in a game with $10\u201325 blinds), the button puts a live $50 on it, the first player to act would be the small blind, followed by the big blind, and so on. If action gets back to the straddle the straddle has the option of raising. The player to the left of a Mississippi straddle may re-straddle by placing a blind bet raising the original straddle.\nSleepers.\nA \"sleeper\" is a blind raise, made from a position other than the player \"under the gun\". A Mississippi straddle is a sleeper raise given this definition, but Mississippi straddles can be disallowed or restricted while sleepers are allowed at any position. A sleeper bet is not given the option to raise if other players call, and the player is not buying last action; thus the sleeper bet simply establishes a higher minimum to call for the table during the opening round and allows the player to ignore their turn as long as no one re-raises the sleeper bet.\nSleepers are often considered illegal out-of-turn play and are commonly disallowed, but they can speed up a game slightly as a player who posts a sleeper can focus their attention on other matters such as ordering a drink or buying a tray of chips. It can also be an intimidation tactic as a sleeper raise makes it unfeasible to \"limp in\" (a situation where a player with a mediocre starting hand but acting late only has to call the minimum to see more cards), thus forcing weaker but improvable starting hands out of the play.\nExamples.\nA game of no-limit poker with blinds of $1/$2. Alice is in the small blind, Dianne is in the big blind, Carol is next to act, followed by Joane, with Ellen on the button.\nLimits.\nBetting limits apply to the amount a player may open or raise, and come in four common forms: \"no limit\", \"pot limit\" (the two collectively called big bet poker), \"fixed limit\", and \"spread limit\".\nAll such games have a minimum bet as well as the stated maximums, and also commonly a betting unit, which is the smallest denomination in which bets can be made. For example, it is common for games with $20 and $40 betting limits to have a minimum betting unit of $5, so that all bets must be in multiples of $5, to simplify game play. It is also common for some games to have a bring-in that is less than the minimum for other bets. In this case, players may either call the bring-in, or raise to the full amount of a normal bet, called completing the bet.\nFixed limit.\nIn a game played with a fixed-limit betting structure, a player chooses only whether to bet or not\u2014the amount is fixed by rule in most situations. To enable the possibility of bluffing and protection, the fixed amount generally doubles at some point in the game. This double wager amount is referred to as a big bet.\nFor example, a four-round game called \"20 and 40 limit\" (usually written as $20/$40) may specify that each bet in the first two rounds is $20, and that each \"big bet\" used in the third and fourth rounds is $40. This amount applies to each raise, not the total amount bet in a round, so a player may bet $20, be raised by $20, and then re-raise by another $20, for a total bet of $60, in such a game.\nSome limit games have rules for specific situations allowing a player to choose between a small or big bet. For example, in seven-card stud high, when a player has a face-up pair on the second round (4th street), players may choose a small or big bet (e.g. $20 or $40 in a 20\u201340 game).\nMaximum number of raises.\nMost fixed-limit games will not allow more than a predefined number of raises in a betting round. The maximum number of raises depends on the casino house rules, and is usually posted conspicuously in the card room. Typically, an initial bet plus either three or four raises are allowed.\nConsider this example in a $20/$40 game, with a posted limit of a bet and three raises. During a $20 round with three players, play could proceed as follows:\n* Player A bets $20.\n* Player B puts in another bet, raises another $20, making it $40 to play.\n* Player C puts in a third bet, raising another $20 on that, thus making it $60 to play.\n* Player A puts in the fourth bet (they are usually said to cap the betting).\nOnce Player A has made their final bet, Players B and C may only call another two and one bets (respectively); they may not raise again because the betting is capped.\nA common exception in this rule practiced in some card rooms is to allow unlimited raising when a pot is played heads up (when only two players are in the hand at the start of the betting round). Usually, this has occurred because all other players have folded, and only two remain, although it is also practiced when only two players get dealt in. Many card rooms will permit these two players to continue re-raising each other until one player is all in.\nKill game.\nSometimes a fixed-limit game is played as a kill game. In such a game, a kill hand is triggered when a player wins a pot over a certain predetermined amount, or when the player wins a certain number of consecutive hands. The player triggering the kill must post a kill blind, generally either 1.5 times (a half kill) or double (a full kill) the amount of the big blind. In addition, the betting limits for the kill hand are multiplied by 1.5 or doubled, respectively.\nThe term kill, when used in this context, should not be confused with \"killing a hand\", which is a term used for a hand that was made a dead hand by action of a game official.\nSpread limit.\nA game played with a spread-limit betting structure allows a player to raise any amount within a specified range. For example, a game called \"one to five limit\" allows each bet to be anywhere from $1 to $5 (subject to other betting rules). These limits are typically larger in later rounds of multi-round games. For example, a game might be \"one to five, ten on the end\", meaning that early betting rounds allow bets of $1 to $5, and the last betting round allows bets of $1 to $10.\nPlaying spread-limit requires some care to avoid giving easy tells with one's choice of bets. Beginners frequently give themselves away by betting high with strong hands and low with weak ones, for instance. It is also harder to force other players out with big bets.\nThere is a variation of this known as \"California Spread,\" where the range is much higher, such as 3\u2013100 or 10\u20131000. California Spread, as the name implies, is played in California, Colorado, and Minnesota, where local laws forbid no limit.\nHalf-pot limit.\nIn a half-pot limit game, no player can raise more than the half of the size of the total pot. Half-pot limit games are often played at non-high-low games including Badugi in South Korea.\nPot limit.\nIn a pot-limit game no player can raise more than the size of the total pot, which includes:\nThis does not preclude a player from raising less than the maximum so long as the amount of the raise is equal to or greater than any previous bet or raise in the same betting round.\nMaking a maximum raise is referred to as \"raising the pot\", or \"potting\", and can be announced by the acting player by declaring \"Raise pot\", or simply \"Pot\".\nIf there is $20 in the pot at the start of a betting round in a $2/$5 pot limit game, and Player A bets $5, player B may \"raise the pot\" and wager $35 creating a new pot total of $60. This is derived from the $20 previous round action, Player A's $5 bet, Player B's $5 call, and player B's $30 Pot Raise ($20+$5+$5+$30=$60). Bear in mind, however, that $60 is the \"new\" pot, player B's \"Pot\" declaration will cost them $35. (These actions, with additional follow-up wagering, are laid out in Table '1' on the right.)\nOnly pot limit games allow the dealer, on request, to inform the players of the pot size and the amount of a pot raise before it's made. The dealer is also required to push any amount over the maximum raise back to the offending player. Keeping track of those numbers can be harrowing if the action becomes heated, but there are simple calculations that allow a dealer or player to keep track of the maximum raise amount. Here is an example:\n(3L+T)+S=M\nwhere:\nL=last wager T=trail(action prior to previous bet) S=starting pot(previous round action) and M=maximum bet\nGoing to player D's actions in TABLE 1 on the right:\nThe last wager made was made by Player C ($35), so L=$35\nThe trail is the total of Player A+Player B ($5+$35), so T=$40\nThe starting pot is $20, so S=$20\nThe value of M(maximum bet) is $165\n(35*3)+40+20=$165\nAfter some practice, it is not difficult to keep up with the action at the table.\nThere may be some variance between cash and tournament play in pot limit betting structures, which should be noted:\nBecause the calculations can be confusing, especially as tournament blind levels increase, major tournaments will include the amount of the small blind, big blind, minimum raise and maximum raise with the printed blind schedule and/or display them on the tournament timer.\nThere can be some confusion about the small blind. Some (usually home) games treat the small blind as dead money that is pulled into the center pot. In a $10/$25 pot limit game, the small blind puts $10 into the pot before the cards are dealt. Using the dead money reasoning, the small blind would put another $25 into the pot to call the big blind, for a total of $35. The big blind might then check for $25, which would enable that player to win out of proportion to their wager.\nThis is not equitable; it's simple enough to consider that the small blind has made a half bet and must complete that bet for $15 to call, or raise, or fold for $10.\nNo limit.\nA game played with a no-limit betting structure allows each player to raise the bet by any amount up to and including their entire remaining stack at any time (subject to the table stakes rules and any other rules about raising). There is generally a minimum opening bet, and raises usually must be at least the amount of the previous raise.\nCap limit.\nHands in a cap limit or \"capped\" structure are played exactly the same as in regular no limit or pot limit games until a pre-determined maximum per player is reached. Once the betting cap is reached, all players left in the hand are considered all-in, and the remaining cards dealt out with no more wagering.\nFor example, in a $1/$2 NL ($60 cap):\n\"Player A bets $2. Player B raises to $10. Player C can then raise to a max of $60, and players A &amp; B can call the $60 wager ($58 and $50 respectively). There would be no further wagering, and the winner would collect $180.\"\nCap limit games offer a similar action and strategy to no limit and pot limit games, but without risking an entire stack on a single hand.\nTable stakes rules.\nAll casinos and most home games play poker by what are called table stakes rules, which state that each player starts each deal with a certain stake, and plays that deal with that stake. A player may not remove money from the table or add money from their pocket during the play of a hand. In essence, table stakes rules creates a maximum and a minimum buy-in amount for cash game poker as well as rules for adding and removing the stake from play. A player also may not take a portion of their money or stake off the table, unless they opt to leave the game and remove their entire stake from play. Players are not allowed to hide or misrepresent the amount of their stake from other players and must truthfully disclose the amount when asked.\nIn casino games, an exception is customarily made for de minimis amounts such as tips paid out of a player's stack.\nCommon among inexperienced players is the act of \"going south\" after winning a big pot, which is to take a portion of one's stake out of play, often as an attempt to hedge one's risk after a win. This is also known as \"ratholing\" or \"reducing\" and, while totally permissible in most other casino games, is not permitted in poker. If a player wishes to \"hedge\" after a win, the player must leave the table entirely\u2014to do so immediately after winning a large pot is known as a \"hit and run\" and, although not prohibited, is generally considered in poor taste as the other players have no chance to \"win some of it back\".\nIn most casinos, once a player picks up their stack and leaves a table, they must wait a certain amount of time (usually an hour) before returning to a table with the same game and limits unless they buy in for the entire amount they left with. This is to prevent circumvention of the rule against \"ratholing\" by leaving the table after a large win only to immediately buy back in for a lesser amount.\nTable stakes are the rule in most cash poker games because it allows players with vastly different bankrolls a reasonable amount of protection when playing with one another. They are usually set in relation to the blinds. For example, in a $1/2 No Limit cash game, the minimum stake is often set at $40 while maximum stake is often set at $200, or 20 and 100 big blinds respectively.\nThis also requires some special rules to handle the case when a player is faced with a bet that they cannot call with their available stake. In fixed-limit and spread-limit games, most casinos limit the number of raises per betting round. For example, a casino might limit raises to three or four, not including the opening bet. \n\"All-in\".\nA player faced with a current bet who wishes to call but has insufficient remaining stake (folding does not require special rules) may bet the remainder of their stake and declare themselves all-in. They may now hold onto their cards for the remainder of the deal as if they had called every bet, but may not win any more money from any player above the amount of their bet. In no-limit games, a player may also go all in, that is, betting their entire stack at any point during a betting round.\nSide pots.\nA player who goes \"all-in\" effectively caps the main pot; the player is not entitled to win any amount from each player over their total stake. If only one other player is still in the hand, the other player simply matches the all-in (retracting any overage if necessary) and the hand is dealt to completion. However, if multiple players remain in the game and the bet rises beyond the all-in's stake, the overage goes into a side pot. Only the players who have contributed to the side pot have the chance to win it. In the case of multiple all-in bets, multiple side pots can be created. Players who choose to fold rather than match bets \"in the side pot\" are considered to fold with respect to the main pot as well.\nFor example, with three players in a game, Player A, with a large stack, opens the betting round for $20. Player B only has $10. They call the $10, going all-in. Player C has $30, and thus can either call the full $20, re-raise to $30, or fold. Player C decides to \"raise all-in\", betting their remaining stake. The bet is now $10 to Player A, who calls. Player A is the only player at the table with a remaining stake; they may not make any further bets this hand. Because Player B can only win $10 from each of the other two players' $30 bets, that $10 is taken from all players' bets and the $30 total is placed in the main pot. The $40 remaining, for which Players A and C are separately contesting, goes in a side pot. As no further bets can be made, the hand is now dealt to completion. It is found that Player B has the best hand overall, and wins the main pot. Player A has the second-best hand, and wins the side pot. Player C loses the hand, and must \"re-buy\" if they wish to be dealt in on subsequent hands.\nThere is a strategic advantage to being all-in: such a player cannot be bluffed, because they are entitled to hold their cards and see the showdown without risking any more money. Opponents who continue to bet after a player is all-in can still bluff each other out of the side pot, which is also to the all-in player's advantage since players who fold out of the side pot also reduce competition for the main pot. But these advantages are offset by the disadvantage that a player cannot win any more money than their stake can cover when they have the best hand, nor can an all-in player bluff other players on subsequent betting rounds when they do not have the best hand.\nSome players may choose to buy into games with a \"short stack\", a stack of chips that is relatively small for the stakes being played, with the intention of going all-in after the flop and not having to make any further decisions. However, this is generally a non-optimal strategy in the long term, since the player does not maximize their gains on their winning hands.\nAll-in before the deal.\nIf a player does not have sufficient money to cover the ante and blinds due, that player is automatically all-in for the coming hand. Any money the player holds must be applied to the ante first, and if the full ante is covered, the remaining money is applied towards the blind.\nSome cardrooms require players in the big blind position to have at least enough chips to cover the small blind (and ante if applicable) in order to be dealt in. In cash games with such a rule, any player in the big blind with insufficient chips to cover the small blind will not be dealt in unless they re-buy. In tournaments with such a rule, any player in the big blind with insufficient chips to cover the small blind will be eliminated with their remaining chips being removed from play.\nIf a player is all in for part of the ante, or the exact amount of the ante, an equal amount of every other player's ante is placed in the main pot, with any remaining fraction of the ante and all blinds and further bets in the side pot.\nIf a player is all in for part of a blind, all antes go into the main pot. Players to act must call the complete amount of the big blind to call, even if the all-in player has posted less than a full big blind. At the end of the betting round, the bets and calls will be divided into the main pot and side pot as usual.\nFor example, Alice is playing at a table with 10 players in a tournament with an ante of $1 and blinds of $4/$8. Alice is due the big blind but she only has $8. She must pay the $1 ante and apply the remaining $7 towards the big blind, and she is all in. Dianne, next to act, calls $8, the full big blind amount. Carol raises to $16 total. All remaining players fold, the small blind folds, and Dianne folds. The amount in the main pot is $10 (the sum of all antes) plus the full $4 small blind since Alice had this amount covered, plus $7 from Alice and every other player who called at least that amount, namely Dianne and Carol. The main pot is therefore $10 + $4 + 3 \u00d7 $7 = $35. The side pot of $10 ($1 in excess of Alice's all-in bet from Dianne, and $9 in excess of Alice's all-in bet from Carol) is paid immediately to Carol when Dianne folds.\nIncomplete bet or raise.\nIf a player goes all-in with a bet or raise rather than a call, another special rule comes into play. There are two options in common use: pot-limit and no-limit games usually use what is called the full bet rule, while fixed-limit and spread-limit games may use either the full bet rule or the half bet rule. The full bet rule states that if the amount of an all-in bet is less than the minimum bet, or if the amount of an all-in raise is less than the full amount of the previous raise, it does not constitute a \"real\" raise, and therefore does \"not\" reopen the betting action. The half bet rule states that if an all-in bet or raise is equal to or larger than half the minimum amount, it \"does\" constitute a raise and reopens the action.\nFor example, with the full bet rule in effect, a player opens the betting round for $20, and the next player has a total stake of $30. They may raise to $30, declaring themselves all-in, but this does not constitute a \"real\" raise, in the following sense: if a third player now calls the $30, and the first player's turn to act comes up, they may now call the additional $10, but they do not have the right to re-raise further. The all-in player's pseudo-raise was really just a call with some extra money, and the third player's call was just a call, so the initial opener's bet was simply called by both remaining players, closing the betting round (even though they must still equalize the money by putting in the additional $10). If the half bet rule were being used, then that raise would count as a genuine raise and the first player would be entitled to re-raise if they chose to (creating a side pot for the amount of their re-raise and the third player's call, if any).\nIn a game with a half bet rule, a player may complete an incomplete raise, if that player still has the right to raise (in other words, if that player has not yet acted in the betting round, or has not yet acted since the last full bet or raise). The act of completing a bet or raise reopens the betting to other remaining opponents.\nFor example, four players are in a hand, playing with a limit betting structure and a half bet rule. The current betting round is $20. Alice checks, and Dianne checks. Carol goes all-in for $5. Joane, still to act, has the following options: fold, call $5, or complete the bet to a total of $20. If Joane calls the $5, Alice and Dianne only have the option of calling or folding; neither can raise. But if Joane completes, either of them could raise.\nOpening all-in hands.\nWhen all players in the pot are all-in, or one player is playing alone against opponents who are all all-in, no more betting can take place. Some casinos and many major tournaments require that all players still involved open, or immediately reveal, their hole cards in this case\u2014the dealer will not continue dealing until all hands are flipped up. Likewise, any other cards that would normally be dealt face down, such as the final card in seven-card stud, may be dealt face-up. Such action is automatic in online poker. This rule discourages a form of tournament collusion called \"chip dumping\", in which one player deliberately loses their chips to another to give that player a greater chance of winning.\nOpen stakes.\nThe alternative to table stakes rules is called \"open stakes\", in which players are allowed to buy more chips during the hand and even to borrow money (often called \"going light\"). Open stakes are most commonly found in home or private games. In casinos, players are sometimes allowed to buy chips at the table during a hand, but are never allowed to borrow money or use IOUs. Other casinos, depending on protocol for buying chips, prohibit it as it slows gameplay considerably.\nOpen stakes is the older form of stakes rules, and before \"all-in\" betting became commonplace, a large bankroll meant an unfair advantage; raising the bet beyond what a player could cover in cash gave the player only two options; buy a larger stake (borrowing if necessary) or fold. This is commonly seen in period-piece movies such as Westerns, where a player bets personal possessions or even wagers property against another player's much larger cash bankroll.\nIn modern open-stakes rules, a player may go all in as in table stakes if they so choose, rather than adding to their stake or borrowing.\nBecause it is a strategic advantage to go all in with some hands while being able to add to one's stake with others, such games may strictly enforce a minimum buy-in that is several times the maximum bet (or blinds, in the case of a no-limit or pot-limit game).\nA player who goes all in and wins a pot that is less than the minimum buy-in may not then add to their stake or borrow money during any future hand until they re-buy an amount sufficient to bring their stake up to a full buy-in.\nIf a player cannot or does not wish to go all-in, they may instead choose to buy chips with cash out-of-pocket at any time, even during the play of a hand, and their bets are limited only by the specified betting structure of the game.\nFinally, a player may also borrow money by betting with an IOU, called a \"marker\", payable to the winner of the pot. To bet with a marker, \"all\" players still active in the pot must agree to accept the marker. Some clubs and house rules forbid IOUs altogether. If the marker is not acceptable, the bettor may bet with cash out-of-pocket or go all-in.\nA player may also borrow money from a player not involved in the pot, giving them a personal marker in exchange for cash or chips, which the players in the pot are then compelled to accept.\nA player may borrow money to call a bet during a hand, and later in the same hand go all-in due to further betting; but if a player borrows money to raise, they forfeit the right to go all-in later in that same hand\u2014if they are re-raised, they \"must\" borrow money to call, or fold. \nA player may also buy more chips or be bought back in by any other player for any given amount at any given time.\nJust as in table stakes, no player may remove chips or cash from the table once they are put in play (except small amounts for refreshments, tips, and such)\u2014this includes all markers, whether one's own or those won from other players.\nPlayers may agree before play on the means and time limits of settling markers, and a convenient amount below which all markers must be accepted to simplify play."}
{"id": "75692", "revid": "50410358", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75692", "title": "List of poker variants", "text": "The card game of poker has many variations, most of which were created in the United States in the mid-1800s through the early 1900s. The standard order of play applies to most of these games, but to fully specify a poker game requires details about which hand values are used, the number of betting rounds, and exactly what cards are dealt and what other actions are taken between rounds.\nPopular poker variants.\nThe most popular poker variants can be divided into three broad groups:\nSome common rule variations include:\nMixed poker games.\nPoker can be played in a mixed game format in which each variant will usually be played for a fixed number of hands or time and then the players will move on to the next game. There are many types of mixed poker games. The most notable mixed poker variation is HORSE poker, a mix of Texas hold 'em, Omaha high-low, razz, seven-card stud and seven-card stud eight-or-better.\nSpecific poker variant games.\nSome poker games don't fit neatly into the above categories, and some have features of more than one of these categories. These variants are most often played in home games, usually as part of a dealer's choice format.\nHigh Chicago or Low Chicago.\nEither of these two versions can be played in any stud high game. In High Chicago, or sometimes simply called Chicago, the player with the highest spade face down (referred to as \"in the hole\") receives half the pot. In Low Chicago, the player with the lowest spade in the hole receives half of the pot, with the A\u2660 being the lowest. If the player with the highest hand also has the highest/lowest spade in the hole, then that player receives the entire pot - having won both sides of the bet.\nFollow the Queen.\nThis 7-card stud game uses a wild-card designated as whichever card is immediately dealt (exposed, or \"face-up\") after any queen previously dealt (exposed). In the event that the final card dealt (exposed) is itself a queen, then all queens are wild. If no queens are dealt (exposed), then there are no wilds for that hand. Betting is the same as in normal 7-card stud games. Follow the Queen is a typical game variant in Dealer's Choice poker games.\nCountdown.\nA variant of 5-card draw with four rounds of betting. After the first round of betting, each player may choose to replace up to three cards. A second round of betting follows and then players may opt to replace up to two cards. Upon completing another round of betting, each player may replace one card of the cards in their hand. After a final round of betting, any remaining players show their hands, and the highest 5 card hand wins. When players draw cards to replace ones in their hand, they add the cost of the cards in the pot. The cost of cards doubles each round. For example, if the dealer says each replacement card costs $10 in the first round, then each card costs $20 in the second round, and $40 in the final round.\nGuts.\nGuts is a family of games that are cousins of poker rather than poker variants. They usually involve hands of 3 or fewer cards, ranked similarly to hands in poker, and multiple successive rounds of betting each of which consist of the decision to be \"in\" or \"out\", and each with its own showdown. The losers of rounds of guts generally match or double the pot, which grows rapidly.\nFive-O poker.\nFive-O Poker is a heads-up poker variant in which both players must play five hands of five cards simultaneously. Four of the five cards in each hand are face-up. Once all five hands are down, there is a single round of betting. The winner is determined by matching each hand to the corresponding hand of the opponent. The player with the stronger poker hand in three (or more) out of the five columns, wins, unless a player folds on a bet that was made. If a player beats their opponent with all five hands, this is called a \u201cFive-O\u201d win.\nChinese poker.\nChinese poker is a 2- to 4-player poker game with thirteen cards. The idea is to make three poker hands with increasing rank: two with five cards and one with three cards. If one of the hands does not adhere to increasing rank (i.e. is mis-set), the hand is declared dead and results in some sort of penalty.\nKuhn poker.\nKuhn poker, using a three card deck, is more of a game theory problem than an actual game people play, but it can be played by two players.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75693", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75693", "title": "List of miscellaneous Poker variants", "text": ""}
{"id": "75694", "revid": "1316035565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75694", "title": "Five-card stud", "text": "Early poker game\nFive-card stud is the earliest form of the card game stud poker, originating during the American Civil War, but is less commonly played today than many other more popular poker games. It is still a popular game in parts of the world, especially in Finland where a specific variant of five-card stud called (also known as Canadian stud or Scandinavian stud) is played. The word is also used for checking in Finland (\"I check\" = ).\nThe description below assumes that one is familiar with the general game play of poker, and with hand values (both high and low variations). The description also makes no assumptions about what betting structure is used. Five-card stud is sometimes played no limit and pot limit, though fixed limit and spread limit games are common (with higher limits in the later betting rounds). It is typical to use a small ante and a bring-in.\nDescription of play.\nPlay begins with each player being dealt one card face down, followed by one card face up (beginning, as usual, with the player to the dealer's left). If played with a bring-in, the player with the lowest-ranking upcard must pay the bring-in, and betting proceeds after that. If two players have equally ranked low cards, suit rankings may be used to break the tie. If there is no bring-in, then the first betting round begins with the player showing the highest-ranking upcard, who may check. In this case, suit should not be used to break ties; if two players have the same high upcard, the one first in clockwise rotation from the dealer acts first.\nAfter the first betting round is complete, another face-up card is dealt to each player (after a burn card, starting with the player to the dealer's left, as with all subsequent rounds). Betting now begins with the player whose upcards make the best poker hand (since fewer than five cards are face up, this means no straights, flushes, or full houses). On this and subsequent betting rounds, the player to act first may check or bet up to the game's limit. The second betting round is followed by a third upcard to each player and a third betting round, again starting with the player with the best poker hand showing (thus, the first player to act on each round may change). A fourth face-up card and fourth betting round is followed by a showdown, if necessary (it usually won't be \u2013 most deals of five-card stud end early when a player bets and gets no calls).\nExample.\nAssume that a game is being played by four players: Alice, who is dealing; Bob, who is sitting to her left; Carol to his left; David to Carol's left. Alice deals one card face down to each player, followed by one card face up to each player, beginning with Bob and ending with herself. Bob is dealt the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u2660, Carol the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;Q\u2666, David the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u2666, and Alice the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;9\u2663. Because they had earlier agreed to play with a $1 bring-in, David is required to start the betting with a $1 bring-in (his &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u2666 is lower than Bob's &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u2660 by suit). He has the option to open the betting for more, but he chooses to bet only the required $1. The bring-in sets the current bet amount to $1, so Alice cannot check. She decides to call. Bob folds, indicating this by turning his upcard face down and discarding his cards. Carol raises to $3. David folds (forfeiting his bring-in), and Alice calls.\nThird street.\nAlice now deals a second face-up card to each remaining player: Carol is dealt the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;J\u2663, and Alice the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;Q\u2665. Alice's two face-up cards make a poker hand of no pair, Q-9 high, and Carol has Q-J high, so it is Carol's turn to bet. She checks, as does Alice, ending the betting round.\nFourth street.\nAnother face-up card is dealt: Carol gets the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u2665, and Alice gets the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;Q\u2663. Alice now has a pair of queens showing, and Carol still has no pair, so Alice bets first. She bets $5, and Carol calls.\nFifth street.\nThe final card is dealt face up: Carol gets the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;A\u2666 and Alice gets the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u2665. Carol still only has no pair showing, thus resulting in Alice, with her pair of queens showing, set to start the betting. Alice bets $5 and is raised to $10 by Carol. Alice calls and the two must now enter into a showdown - where both players compare their best five-card poker hand. Since Carol was the last player to take aggressive action, she shows first - flipping over her hole card, the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\" /&gt;A\u2663 - thus giving her a pair of aces. Since she is the last to act, Alice is allowed to muck her cards and does so. Therefore, the pot of $37 goes to Carol.\nPopularity.\nSince its popularity during the American Civil War, five-card stud has seen a gradual decline in its popularity. Despite this drop in status, it is still enjoyed by many players.\nMajor tournaments.\nFive-card stud was one of the preliminary events in the World Series of Poker in 1971, 1972, 1973 and 1974. All four of these events were won by Bill Boyd (he won a total of $80,000 from these four events) \u2013 the only WSOP bracelets he won. Due to the declining popularity of five-card stud, it was left out of the 1975 World Series of Poker and has been absent from all subsequent World Series of Poker schedules. Although five-card stud has not been featured in major tournaments since the 70s, it was occasionally still offered in the 1990s in both Europe and North America.\nCash games.\nFive-card stud was limited to small home games and small casino games until becoming available at some online poker cardrooms.\nVariants.\nTraditional five-card stud involves one hole card with four cards face-up, making it simple for even a novice to read the possible hand strength of an opponent effectively. The transparency of a player's hand cuts out much of the element of uncertainty found in more popular games like Texas hold 'em, Omaha hold 'em and Seven-card stud. In order to enlarge that element of uncertainty variants increase the number of hole cards, add a high-low split, play with a stripped deck, introduce a twist round, enable the player to do a 'roll your own' game or even create new and interesting hand rankings.\nHigh-Low.\nThe game can be played with low hand values, in which case the best low hand showing starts each betting round instead of the best high hand showing. Also, the highest-ranking card must pay the bring-in if it is played with a bring-in. At the end of all betting rounds, the total pot is split into two - one for low-ranking hands, the other for high-ranking hands - and the hands are evaluated based on both low-ranking criteria (for the low pot) and high-ranking criteria (for the high pot). When playing High-Low it is common to use the Ace-to-five low hand ranking to evaluate the low hands and use the standard hand ranking when evaluating high hands. In the United Kingdom, however, the use of Ace-to-six low hand ranking is common when evaluating low hands.\nCanadian Stud/Scandinavian Stud/S\u00f6k\u00f6.\nThis variant of five-card stud is almost identical to the traditional format, the only difference being the introduction of two new hands into the hand ranking. Due to the sparse nature of flushes and straights in five-card stud, this variant counts four-card straights and four-card flushes as poker hands. A four-card straight is ranked higher than a pair, a four-card flush is ranked higher than a four-card straight, and a two-pair is ranked higher than a four-card flush.\nTwo Down, Three up/2-3.\nInstead of dealing the players one hole card and one upcard, in this variant the players are dealt two hole cards. All subsequent cards are dealt face up, resulting in the fairly self-explanatory name.\nThree Down, Two Up/3-2.\nInstead of dealing the players one hole card and one upcard, in this variant players are dealt three cards face down. The next two cards are dealt face up. As a result of the high number of cards dealt initially, this variant only has 3 rounds of betting and is thus best played with no limit or pot limit betting structure. The name is again fairly self-explanatory.\nOne Down, Three Up, One Down/1-3-1.\nThis variant differs from traditional five-card stud only in the way the final card is dealt. Rather than being face up, in this variant the river is dealt face down\u2014as a hole card. The name, yet again, derives from how a hand looks after all betting rounds are done. This is also a common variant in Finland, where the action of players looking to their hole river card secretly from the others is called \"pihist\u00e4minen\", (Engl. \"petty theft\").\nMexican stud/Stud Loco/Mexican poker.\nMexican stud is a roll your own game where the player receives five face-down cards, and has to reveal four of them. The player is dealt two cards (as in traditional five-card stud), and that he/she must expose one of them. The player then receives a third card, and must immediately expose another card in his/her hand. The player exposes another one after receiving a fourth card, and again after a fifth card. Sometimes a stripped deck is used. Mexican stud is also a variant of Seven-card stud, employing the same roll your own rules.https://\nShifting sands.\nThis game's only difference in relation to Mexican stud is that the player's hole card, and all cards of that rank, are considered wild cards for that player only.\nTelesina/Teresina.\nTelesina, with origins in Sanremo, is often described as a variant of five-card stud. The initial four rounds are identical to five-card stud, the players receiving two cards (one face down) and then 3 more face-up cards interspersed with betting rounds. However, a final round is added where all the players are dealt a single community card. The other main difference is the use of a stripped deck - with all cards of rank 2 to 6 inclusive taken out of the deck. As a result, this variant is often played shorthanded - usually with 6 players per table. As with most stripped deck games, in Telesina flushes are ranked above full-houses. In addition, unlike in traditional poker, suits are used to break ties. If players have an identical straight flush or straight, the high suit wins. If both players have the same pair or two pair, the suit of the highest kicker determines the winner. The order of suits, strongest to weakest, is hearts, diamonds, clubs, spades. Another unique rule states if two players have a flush the highest-ranking card is not used to determine a winner; instead, the Telesina suit order is used to resolve the situation. The final Telesina-specific rule states if there are only two players left in the pot, the highest straight flush (A, K, Q, J, T in hearts) is beaten by the lowest straight flush (T, 9, 8, 7, A in spades). Note that these rules are as the game has been played on several online poker sites, but Telesina may generically refer to any stripped deck five-card stud variation.\nAsian five-card stud / Americana.\nRegular five-card stud played with a stripped deck - with all cards of rank 2 to 6 inclusive removed from the deck. This variant has been played in a tournament format in California. Called Americana, the game has been available on online poker sites. As with other stripped deck games, a flush is ranked higher than a full house. This is different from the game Asian stud which is played against the house.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75695", "revid": "1749459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75695", "title": "Seven-card stud", "text": "Variant of card game poker\nSeven-card stud, also known as Seven-Toed Pete or Down-The-River, is a variant of stud poker. Before the 2000s surge of popularity of Texas hold 'em, seven-card stud was one of the most widely played poker variants in home games across the United States and in casinos in the eastern part of the country. Although seven-card stud is not as common in casinos today, it is still played online. The game is commonly played with two to eight players; however, eight may require special rules for the last cards dealt if no players fold. Playing with nine players is possible.\nIn casino play, it is common to use a small ante and bring-in. In home games, using only an ante is typical.\nSeven-card stud is the \"S\" game in HORSE and similar mixed game formats.\nRules.\nThe Poker game begins with each player being dealt two cards face down and one card face up. The player with the lowest-ranking up-card pays the bring-in, and betting proceeds after that in normal clockwise order. The bring-in is considered an open, so the next player in turn may not check. If two players have equally ranked low cards, the card's suit may be used to break the tie and assign the bring-in (see high card by suit). If there is no bring-in, then the first betting round begins with the player showing the highest-ranking up-card, who may check. In this case, suit is not used to break ties. If two players have the same high up-card, the one first in clockwise rotation from the dealer acts first.\nAfter the first betting round, another up-card is dealt to each player (after a burn card, and starting at the dealer's left as will all subsequent rounds), followed by a second betting round beginning with the player whose up-cards make the best poker hand. Since fewer than five cards are face up, this means no straights, flushes, or full houses will count for this purpose. On this and all subsequent betting rounds, the player whose face-up cards make the best poker hand will act first, and may check or bet up to the limit of the game.\nThe second round is followed by a third up-card and betting round, a fourth up-card and betting round, and finally a down-card, a fifth betting round, and showdown if necessary. Seven-card stud can be summarized therefore as \"two down, four up, one down\". Upon showdown, each player makes the best five-card poker hand they can out of the seven cards they were dealt.\nSeven cards to eight players with an additional four burn cards makes 60 cards, whereas there are only 52 in the deck: in most games, this is not a problem because several players will have folded in early betting rounds. In the event that the deck is exhausted during play, the four previously dealt burn cards can be used, but if these are not sufficient, then the final round will have a single community card (which can be used by everyone) dealt into the center of the table in lieu of a down-card to each player. Discarded cards from a folded hand are not reused.\nStud poker players use the information they get from face-up cards to make strategic decisions. A player who sees a certain card folded is able to make decisions knowing that the card will never appear in another opponent's hand.\nVariants.\nThere are several variations of Seven-Card Stud Poker in which each player is dealt a set number of cards. Not all of these variations can be found at poker rooms but they can be played at home. \nSample deal.\nThe sample deal below assumes that a game is being played by four players: Jimmy, who is dealing in the examples; Larry, who is sitting to his left; Craig to his left; and Katherine to Craig\u2019s left.\nAll players ante 25\u00a2. Jimmy deals each player two downcards and one upcard, beginning with Larry and ending with himself. Larry is dealt the 4\u2660, Craig the K\u2666, Katherine the 4\u2666, and Jimmy the 9\u2663. Because they are playing with a $1 bring-in, Katherine is required to start the betting with a $1 bring-in (her 4\u2666 is lower than 4\u2660 of Larry by suit). She had the option to open the betting for more, but she chose to bet only the required $1. The bring-in sets the current bet amount to $1, so Jimmy cannot check. He decides to call. Larry folds, indicating this by turning his upcard face down and discarding his cards. Craig raises to $3. Katherine folds, and Jimmy calls.\nJimmy now deals a second face-up card to each remaining player: Craig is dealt the J\u2663, and Jimmy the K\u2665. Jimmy\u2019s two upcards make a poker hand of no pair, K-9-high, and Craig has K-J-high, so it is Craig's turn to bet. He checks, as does Jimmy, ending the betting round.\nAnother face up card is dealt: Craig gets the 10\u2665 and Jimmy gets the K\u2663. Jimmy now has a pair of kings showing, and Craig still has no pair, so Jimmy bets first. He bets $5, and Craig calls.\nOn the next round, Craig receives the 10\u2666, making his upcards K-J-10-10. Jimmy receives the 3\u2660. Jimmy\u2019s upcards are 9-K-K-3; the pair of kings is still higher than Craig\u2019s pair of tens, so he bets $5 and Craig calls.\nEach player now receives a downcard. It is still Jimmy\u2019s turn to bet because the downcard did not change either hand. He checks, Craig bets $10, and Jimmy calls. That closes the last betting round, and both players remain, so there is a showdown.\nSince Jimmy called Craig\u2019s bet, Craig shows his cards first: Q\u2660 2\u2665 K\u2666 J\u2663 10\u2665 10\u2666 A\u2666. He can play A-K-Q-J-10, making an ace-high straight. Jimmy shows (or, seeing he cannot beat Craig\u2019s straight, mucks his cards): 9\u2665 5\u2666 9\u2663 K\u2665 K\u2663 3\u2660 5\u2660. The best five-card poker hand he can play is K-K-9-9-5, making two pair, kings and nines. Craig wins the pot.\nIn popular culture.\nAt the end of Tennessee Williams' play \"A Streetcar Named Desire\", the minor character Steve says \"This game is seven-card stud,\" seemingly a reference to the narrative's transactional, game-like nature and its lack of propensity to change.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75696", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75696", "title": "Testimony", "text": "Solemn attestation as to the truth of a matter\nTestimony is a solemn attestation as to the truth of a matter.\nEtymology.\nThe words \"testimony\" and \"testify\" both derive from the Latin word \"testis\", referring to the notion of a disinterested third-party witness.\nLaw.\nIn the law, testimony is a form of evidence in which a witness makes a \"solemn declaration or affirmation ... for the purpose of establishing or proving some fact\". According to Bryan A. Garner, the editor of \"Black's Law Dictionary\", the word \"testimony\" is properly used as a mass noun (that is, always uninflected regardless of number), and not a count noun.\nTestimony may be oral or written, and it is usually made by oath or affirmation under penalty of perjury. Historically, to be admissible in court and to ensure maximum reliability and validity, written testimony presented in the form of an affidavit (i.e., the witness would not be appearing in court at the hearing at which the affidavit was considered as evidence) was usually witnessed by another person (in many common law jurisdictions, a notary public) who had to also swear to or affirm its authenticity, also under penalty of perjury. In 1976, the United States Congress enacted a statute allowing for the use of an unsworn declaration under penalty of perjury in lieu of an affidavit in federal courts. In other words, the declarant's signature together with a statement that they were making the unsworn declaration under penalty of perjury were deemed as a matter of law to be sufficiently solemn to remind the declarant of their duty to speak the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth (meaning notarization was no longer required). As of 2006, about 20 states also had similar statutes allowing the use of unsworn declarations in their state courts.\nUnless a witness is testifying as an expert witness, testimony in the form of opinions or inferences is generally limited to those opinions or inferences that are rationally based on the perceptions of the witness and are helpful to a clear understanding of the witness' testimony.\nLegitimate expert witnesses with a genuine understanding of legal process and the inherent dangers of false or misleading testimony refrain from making statements of fact. They also recognize that they are in fact not witnesses to an alleged crime or other event in any way, shape or form. Their expertise is in the examination of evidence or relevant facts in the case. They should make no firm judgement or claim or accusation about any aspect of the case outside their narrow range of expertise. They also should not allege any fact they can not immediately and credibly prove scientifically.\nFor example, a hair sample from a crime scene entered as evidence by the prosecution should be described by an expert witness as \"consistent with\" a sample collected from the defendant, rather than being described as a \"match\". A wide range of factors make it physically impossible to prove for certain that two hair or tissue samples came from a common source.\nHaving not actually witnessed the defendant at the scene, the expert witness can not state for a fact that the sample is a match to the defendant, particularly when the samples were collected at different times and different places by different collectors using different collection methods. Ultimately, the testimony of expert witnesses is regarded as supportive of evidence rather than evidence in and of itself, and a good defense attorney will point out that the expert witness is not in fact a witness to anything, but rather an observer.\nWhen a witness is asked a question, the opposing attorney can raise an objection, which is a legal move to disallow or prevent an improper question to others, preferably before the witness answers, and mentioning one of the standard reasons, including:\nThere may also be an objection to the answer, including:\nUp until the mid-20th century, in much of the United States, an attorney often had to follow an objection with an exception to preserve the issue for appeal. If an attorney failed to \"take an exception\" immediately after the court's ruling on the objection, he waived his client's right to appeal the issue. Exceptions have since been abolished, due to the widespread recognition that forcing lawyers to take them was a waste of time.\nWhen a party uses the testimony of a witness to show proof, the opposing party often attempts to impeach the witness. This may be done using cross-examination, calling into question the witness's competence, or by attacking the character or habit of the witness. So, for example, if a witness testifies that he remembers seeing a person at 2:00 pm on a Tuesday and his habit is to be at his desk job on Tuesday, then the opposing party would try to impeach his testimony related to that event.\nGovernment.\nTestimony is given by those invited or compelled to speak at, or submit a written statement to, legislative hearings such as United States congressional hearings.\nTestimony may also be given to a regulatory agency as part of the process of making or changing regulations.\nReligion.\nChristians in general, especially within the Evangelical tradition, use the term \"to testify\" or \"to give one's testimony\" to mean \"to tell the story of how one became a Christian\". Commonly it may refer to a specific event in a Christian's life in which God did something deemed particularly worth sharing. Christians often give their testimony at their own baptism, church services, and at evangelistic events. Many Christians have also published their testimony on the internet.\nNew Testament.\nAfter the early church began to preach about the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, Peter and the other apostles asserted that \"we are witnesses of these things\". Pope Francis has commented on Peter being \"strong in his testimony\", describing \"testimony\" as the \"lifeblood\" of the church.\nTypes.\nIn addition to emphasizing faith and holiness, Methodism holds that \"Scripture does teach the necessity of confession of sins (1 Jn 1:0), repentance (Luk 13:3,5. Ac 2:38, Ac 3:19, 2 Co 7:10, 2 Pe 3:9), and a testimony that one has chosen to follow Christ (Ro 10:9-10).\" Methodist churches in the holiness tradition devote a portion of their Sunday evening service and/or mid-week Wednesday evening service of worship to allow members to give a personal testimony about their faith and experiences in living the Christian life:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;203. \"What do we mean by testimony?\"\nBy testimony we usually mean witnessing before others to the fact that God has forgiven our sins.\n204. \"Who is benefited by testimony?\"\nA testimony will help the one who makes it\u2014it will strengthen his faith. It is also an encouragement to those who hear.\n205. \"What does the Bible say about testimony?\"\n\"With the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation\" (Rom. 10:10).\n\"And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony\" (Rev. 12:11). \u2014Catechism of the Pillar of Fire Church\nIn the Religious Society of Friends, the word \"testimony\" is used to refer to the ways in which Friends \"testify\" or \"bear witness\" to their beliefs in their everyday lives. In this context, the word \"testimony\" refers not to the underlying belief, but the committed action which arises out of their beliefs, which \"testifies\" to their beliefs. Common areas in which modern Friends are said to testify include testimony towards peace, testimony to simplicity, testimony to truth and integrity, and testimony to equality.\n In some religions (most notably Mormonism and Islam) many adherents testify as a profession of their faith, often to a congregation of believers. In Mormonism, testifying is also referred to as \"bearing one's testimony\", and often involves the sharing of personal experience\u2014ranging from a simple anecdote to an account of personal revelation\u2014followed by a statement of belief that has been confirmed by this experience. Within Mormon culture, the word \"testimony\" has become synonymous with \"belief\". Although \"testimony\" and \"belief\" are often used interchangeably, they are inherently different. Most Mormons believe that when faith is acted upon, individuals can receive a spiritual witness which solidifies belief into testimony; that if the exercise of faith leads to good works, they can know their religious principles are true. An individual who no longer believes in the religion may be referred to as having \"lost their testimony\".\nLarge-group awareness training.\nIn the context of large-group awareness training, anecdotal testimony may operate in the forms of \"sharing\" or delivering a \"share\".\nLiterature.\nSome published oral or written autobiographical narratives are considered \"testimonial literature\" particularly when they present evidence or first person accounts of human rights abuses, violence and war, and living under conditions of social oppression. This usage of the term comes originally from Latin America and the Spanish term \"testimonio\" when it emerged from human rights tribunals, truth commissions, and other international human rights instruments in countries such as Chile and Argentina. One of the most famous, though controversial, of these works to be translated into English is \"I, Rigoberta Mench\u00fa\". The autobiographies of Frederick Douglass can be considered among the earliest significant English-language works in this genre. The biographies of marginalized women such as Jesusita Aragon and Maria Elena Lucas, made from recordings and transcriptions by oral historian Fran Leeper Buss, are more recent examples. \nPhilosophy.\nIn philosophy, testimony is a proposition conveyed by one entity (person or group) to another entity, whether through speech or writing or through facial expression, that is based on the entity's knowledge base. The proposition believed on the basis of a testimony is justified if conditions are met which assess, among other things, the speaker's reliability (whether her testimony is true often) and the hearer's possession of positive reasons (for instance, that the speaker is unbiased).\nWe can also rationally accept a claim on the basis of another person's testimony unless at least one of the following is found to be true:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75698", "revid": "47120006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75698", "title": "Texas hold 'em", "text": "Variation of the card game of poker\nTexas hold 'em (also known as Texas holdem, hold 'em, and holdem) is the most popular variant of the card game of poker. Two cards, known as hole cards, are dealt face down to each player, and then five community cards are dealt face up in three stages. The stages consist of a series of three cards (\"the flop\"), later an additional single card (\"the turn\" or \"fourth street\"), and a final card (\"the river\" or \"fifth street\"). Each player seeks the best five-card poker hand from any combination of the seven cards: the five community cards and their two hole cards. Players have betting options to check, call, raise, or fold. Rounds of betting take place before the flop is dealt and after each subsequent deal. The player who has the best hand and has not folded by the end of all betting rounds wins all of the money bet for the hand, known as the pot. In certain situations, a \"split pot\" or \"tie\" can occur when two players have hands of equivalent value. This is also called \"chop the pot\". \"Texas hold 'em\" is also the \"H\" game featured in HORSE and HOSE.\nObjective.\nIn Texas hold 'em, as in all variants of poker, individuals compete for an amount of money or chips contributed by the players themselves (called the pot). Because the cards are dealt randomly and outside the control of the players, each player attempts to control the amount of money in the pot based on the hand they are holding,\nand on their prediction as to what their opponents may be holding and how they might behave.\nThe game is divided into a series of hands (deals); at the conclusion of each hand, the pot is typically awarded to one player (an exception in which the pot is divided between two or more is discussed below). A hand may end at the showdown, in which case the remaining players compare their hands and the highest hand is awarded the pot; that highest hand is usually held by only one player, but can be held by more in the case of a tie. The other possibility for the conclusion of a hand occurs when all but one player have folded and have thereby abandoned any claim to the pot, in which case the pot is awarded to the player who has not folded.\nThe objective of winning players is not to win every individual hand, but rather to win over the longer term by making mathematically and psychologically better decisions regarding when and how much to bet, raise, call or fold. Winning poker players work to enhance their opponents' betting and maximize their own expected gain on each round of betting, to thereby increase their long-term winnings.\nHistory.\nAlthough little is known about the invention of Texas hold 'em, the Texas Legislature officially recognizes Robstown, Texas, as the game's birthplace, dating it to the early 20th century.\nAfter the game spread throughout Texas, hold 'em was introduced to Las Vegas in 1963 at the California Club by Corky McCorquodale. The game became popular and quickly spread to the Golden Nugget, Stardust and Dunes. In 1967, a group of Texan gamblers and card players, including Crandell Addington, Doyle Brunson, and Amarillo Slim were playing in Las Vegas. This is when \"ace high\" was changed from the original form in which aces were low. Addington said the first time he saw the game was in 1959. \"They didn't call it Texas hold 'em at the time, they just called it hold 'em.\u2026 I thought then that if it were to catch on, it would become the game. Draw poker, you bet only twice; hold 'em, you bet four times. That meant you could play strategically. This was more of a thinking man's game.\"\nFor several years the Golden Nugget Casino in Downtown Las Vegas was the only casino in Las Vegas to offer the game. At that time, the Golden Nugget's poker room was \"truly a 'sawdust joint,' with\u2026oiled sawdust covering the floors.\" Because of its location and decor, this poker room did not receive many rich drop-in clients, and as a result, professional players sought a more prominent location. In 1969, the Las Vegas professionals were invited to play Texas hold 'em at the entrance of the now-demolished Dunes Casino on the Las Vegas Strip. This prominent location, and the relative inexperience of poker players with Texas hold 'em, resulted in a very remunerative game for professional players.\nAfter a failed attempt to establish a \"Gambling Fraternity Convention\", Tom Moore added the first ever poker tournament to the Second Annual Gambling Fraternity Convention held in 1969. This tournament featured several games, including Texas hold 'em. In 1970, Benny and Jack Binion acquired the rights to this convention, renamed it the World Series of Poker, and moved it to their casino, Binion's Horseshoe, in Las Vegas. After its first year, a journalist, Tom Thackrey, suggested that the main event of this tournament should be no-limit Texas hold 'em. The Binions agreed and ever since no-limit Texas hold 'em has been played as the main event. Interest in the main event continued to grow steadily over the next two decades. After receiving only eight entrants in 1972, the numbers grew to over one hundred entrants in 1982, and over two hundred in 1991.\nDuring this time, B &amp; G Publishing Co., Inc. published Doyle Brunson's revolutionary poker strategy guide, \"Super/System\". Despite being self-published and priced at $100 in 1978, the book revolutionized the way poker was played. It was one of the first books to discuss Texas hold 'em, and is today cited as one of the most important books on this game. In 1983, Al Alvarez published \"The Biggest Game in Town\", a book detailing a 1981 World Series of Poker event. The first book of its kind, it described the world of professional poker players and the World Series of Poker. Alvarez's book is credited with beginning the genre of poker literature and with bringing Texas hold 'em (and poker generally) to a wider audience.\nAlvarez's book was not the first book about poker. \"The Education of a Poker Player\", by Herbert Yardley, a former U.S. government code breaker, was published in 1957.\nInterest in hold 'em outside of Nevada began to grow in the 1980s as well. Although California had legal card rooms offering draw poker, Texas hold 'em was deemed to be prohibited under a statute that made illegal the (now unheard of) game \"stud-horse\". But in 1988 Texas hold 'em was declared legally distinct from stud-horse in \"Tibbetts v. Van De Kamp\", and declared to be a game of skill. Almost immediately card rooms across the state offered Texas hold 'em. It is often presumed that this decision ruled that hold 'em was a game of skill, but the distinction between skill and chance has never entered into California jurisprudence regarding poker.\nAfter a trip to Las Vegas, bookmakers Terry Rogers and Liam Flood introduced the game to European card players in the early 1980s.\nPopularity.\nTexas hold 'em is currently the most popular form of poker. Texas hold 'em's popularity surged in the 2000s due to exposure on television, the Internet and popular literature. During this time, hold 'em replaced seven-card stud as the most common game in U.S. casinos. The no-limit betting form is used in the widely televised main event of the World Series of Poker (WSOP) and the World Poker Tour (WPT). \nHold 'em's simplicity and popularity have inspired a wide variety of strategy books that provide recommendations for proper play. Most of these books recommend a strategy that involves playing relatively few hands but betting and raising often with the hands one plays.\nIn the first decade of the twenty-first century, Texas hold 'em experienced a surge in popularity worldwide. Many observers attribute this growth to the synergy of five factors: the invention of online poker, the game's appearance in film and on television, invention and usage of the \"hole card cam\" (which allowed viewers to see hole cards played in the hand as a means of determining strategy and decision-making during gameplay), the appearance of television commercials advertising online cardrooms, and the 2003 World Series of Poker championship victory by online qualifier Chris Moneymaker. \nTelevision and film.\nPrior to poker becoming widely televised, the movie \"Rounders\" (1998), starring Matt Damon and Edward Norton, gave moviegoers a romantic view of the game as a way of life despite the poker portrayed being often criticized by more serious players. Texas hold 'em was the main game played during the movie and the no-limit variety was described, following Doyle Brunson, as the \"Cadillac of Poker\". A clip of the classic showdown between Johnny Chan and Erik Seidel from the 1988 World Series of Poker was also incorporated into the film. More recently, a high-stakes Texas hold 'em game was central to the plot of the 2006 James Bond film \"Casino Royale\", in place of baccarat, the casino game central to the novel of the same name on which the film was based. In 2008, an acclaimed short film called \"Shark Out of Water\" was released on DVD. This film is unique in that it deals with the darker, more addictive elements of the game, and features Phil Hellmuth and Brad Booth.\nHold 'em tournaments had been televised since the late 1970s, but they did not become popular until 1999, when hidden lipstick cameras were first used to show players' private hole cards on the \"Late Night Poker\" TV show in the United Kingdom. Hold 'em exploded in popularity as a spectator sport in the United States and Canada in early 2003, when the World Poker Tour adopted the lipstick cameras idea. A few months later, ESPN's coverage of the 2003 World Series of Poker featured the unexpected victory of Internet player Chris Moneymaker, an amateur player who gained admission to the tournament by winning a series of online tournaments. Moneymaker's victory initiated a sudden surge of interest in the series (along with internet poker), based on the egalitarian idea that anyone\u2014even a rank novice\u2014could become a world champion.\nIn 2003, there were 839 entrants in the WSOP main event, and triple that number in 2004. The crowning of the 2004 WSOP champion, Greg \"Fossilman\" Raymer, a patent attorney from Connecticut, further fueled the popularity of the event among amateur (and particularly Internet) players. In the 2005 main event, an unprecedented 5,619 entrants vied for a first prize of $7,500,000. The winner, Joe Hachem of Australia, was a semi-professional player. This growth continued in 2006, with 8,773 entrants and a first place prize of $12,000,000 (won by Jamie Gold).\nBeyond the series, other television shows\u2014including the long running \"World Poker Tour\"\u2014are credited with increasing the popularity of Texas hold 'em. In addition to its presence on network and general audience cable television, poker has now become a regular part of sports networks' programming in the United States.\nLiterature.\nThe English journalist and biographer Anthony Holden spent a year on the professional poker circuit from 1988 to 1989 and wrote about his experiences in \"\". The follow-up book, \"Bigger Deal: A Year Inside the Poker Boom\" covers the period 2005\u20132006 and describes a poker world \"changed beyond recognition\".\nTwenty years after the publication of Alvarez's groundbreaking book, James McManus\npublished a semi-autobiographical book, \"Positively Fifth Street\" (2003), which simultaneously describes the trial surrounding the murder of Ted Binion and McManus's own entry into the 2000 World Series of Poker. McManus, a poker amateur, finished fifth in the no-limit Texas hold 'em main event, winning over $200,000. In the book McManus discusses events surrounding the series, the trial of Sandy Murphy and Rick Tabish, poker strategy, and some history of poker and the world series.\nMichael Craig's 2005 book \"The Professor, the Banker, and the Suicide King\" details a series of high-stakes Texas hold 'em one-on-one games between Texas banker Andy Beal and a rotating group of poker professionals. As of 2006, these games were the highest stakes ever played, reaching $100,000\u2013$200,000 fixed limit.\nOnline poker.\nThe ability to play cheaply and anonymously online has been credited as a cause of the increase in popularity of Texas hold 'em. Online poker sites both allow people to try out games (in some cases the games are entirely free to play and are just for fun social experiences) and also provide an avenue for entry into large tournaments (like the World Series of Poker) via smaller tournaments known as satellites. The 2003 and 2004 winners (Chris Moneymaker and Greg Raymer, respectively) of the World Series no-limit hold 'em main event qualified by playing in these tournaments.\nAlthough online poker grew from its inception in 1998 until 2003, Moneymaker's win and the appearance of television advertisements in 2003 contributed to a tripling of industry revenues in 2004.\nRules.\nBetting structures.\nHold 'em is normally played using small and big blind bets\u2014forced bets by two players. Antes (forced contributions by all players) may be used in addition to blinds, particularly in later stages of tournament play. A dealer button is used to represent the player in the dealer position; the dealer button rotates clockwise after each hand, changing the position of the dealer and blinds. The \"small blind\" is posted by the player to the left of the dealer and is usually equal to half of the big blind. The \"big blind\", posted by the player to the left of the small blind, is equal to the minimum bet. In tournament poker, the blind/ante structure periodically increases as the tournament progresses. After one round of betting is done, the next betting round will start with the person in the small blind.\nWhen only two players remain, special \"head-to-head\" or \"heads up\" rules are enforced and the blinds are posted differently. In this case, the person with the dealer button posts the small blind, while their opponent places the big blind. The dealer acts first before the flop. After the flop, the dealer acts last and continues to do so for the remainder of the hand.\nThe three most common variations of hold 'em are \"limit\" hold 'em, \"no-limit\" hold 'em and \"pot-limit\" hold 'em. Limit hold 'em has historically been the most popular form of hold 'em found in casino live action games in the United States. In limit hold 'em, bets and raises during the first two rounds of betting (pre-flop and flop) must be equal to the big blind; this amount is called the \"small bet\". In the next two rounds of betting (turn and river), bets and raises must be equal to twice the big blind; this amount is called the \"big bet\".\nNo-limit hold 'em has grown in popularity and is the form most commonly found in televised tournament poker and is the game played in the main event of the World Series of Poker. In no-limit hold 'em, players may bet or raise any amount over the minimum raise up to all of the chips the player has at the table (called an all-in bet). The minimum raise is equal to the size of the previous bet or raise. If someone wishes to re-raise, they must raise at least the amount of the previous raise. For example, if the big blind is $2 and there is a raise of $6 to a total of $8, a re-raise must be at least $6 more for a total of $14. If a raise or re-raise is all-in and does not equal the size of the previous raise (or half the size in some casinos), the initial raiser cannot re-raise again (in case there are other players also still in the game). In pot-limit hold 'em, the maximum raise is the current size of the pot (including the amount needed to call).\nSome casinos that offer hold 'em also allow the player to the left of the big blind to post an optional live straddle, usually double the amount of the big blind. This causes that player to act as the big blind and the player has an option to raise when it comes to their turn again. (Some variations allow for straddle on the button). No-limit games may also allow multiple re-straddles, in any amount that would be a legal raise.\nPlay of the hand.\nFollowing a shuffle of the cards, play begins with each player being dealt two cards face down, with the player in the small blind receiving the first card and the player in the button seat receiving the last card dealt. (As in most poker games, the deck is a standard 52-card deck containing no jokers.) These cards are the players' \"hole\" or \"pocket\" cards. These are the only cards each player will receive individually, and they will (possibly) be revealed only at the showdown, making Texas hold 'em a closed poker game.\nThe hand begins with a \"pre-flop\" betting round, beginning with the player to the left of the big blind (or the player to the left of the dealer, if no blinds are used) and continuing clockwise. A round of betting continues until every player has folded, put in all of their chips, or matched the amount put in by all other active players. See betting for a detailed account. Note that the blinds are considered \"live\" in the pre-flop betting round, meaning that they are counted toward the amount that the blind player must contribute. If all players call around to the player in the big blind position, that player may either check or raise.\nAfter the pre-flop betting round, assuming there remain at least two players taking part in the hand, the dealer deals a flop: three face-up community cards. The flop is followed by a second betting round. This and all subsequent betting rounds begin with the player to the dealer's left and continue clockwise.\nAfter the flop betting round ends, a single community card (called the turn or fourth street) is dealt, followed by a third betting round. A final single community card (called the river or fifth street) is then dealt, followed by a fourth betting round and the showdown, if necessary.\nIn all casinos, the dealer will burn a card before the flop, turn, and river. Because of this burn, players who are betting cannot see the back of the next community card to come. This is done for traditional reasons, to avoid any possibility of a player knowing in advance the next card to be dealt due to its being marked.\nThe showdown.\nIf a player bets and all other players fold, then the remaining player is awarded the pot and is not required to show their hole cards. If two or more players remain after the final betting round, a showdown occurs. On the showdown, each player plays the best poker hand they can make from the seven cards comprising their two hole cards and the five community cards. A player may use both of their own two hole cards, only one, or none at all, to form their final five-card hand. If the five community cards form the player's best hand, then the player is said to be \"playing the board\" and can only hope to split the pot, because each other player can also use the same five cards to construct the same hand.\nIf the best hand is shared by more than one player, then the pot is split equally among them, with any extra chips going to the first players after the button in clockwise order. It is common for players to have closely valued, but not identically ranked hands. Nevertheless, one must be careful in determining the best hand; if the hand involves fewer than five cards (such as two pair or three of a kind), then kickers are used to settle ties (see the second example below). The card's \"numerical\" rank is of sole importance; suit values are irrelevant in hold 'em.\nHand values.\nThe following table shows the possible hand values in increasing order.\nMisdeal.\nIf the first or second card dealt is exposed, then this is considered a misdeal. The dealer then retrieves the card, reshuffles the deck, and again cuts the cards. However, if any other hole card is exposed due to a dealer error, the deal continues as usual. After completing the deal, the dealer replaces the exposed card with the top card on the deck, and the exposed card is then used as the burn card. If more than one hole card is exposed, a misdeal is declared by the dealer and the hand is dealt again from the beginning.\nA misdeal is also declared if a player receives more than two hole cards by mistake (e.g. two cards stuck together).\nExamples.\nSample showdown.\nHere is a sample showdown:\nEach player plays the best five-card hand they can make with the seven cards available. Below is the list of best hands each player has.\nIn this case, Ted wins as he has the best hand (full house). If arranged in order of hand strength from the strongest, it would be Ted's full house, Carol's flush, Alice's straight, and Bob's three of a kind.\nSample hand.\nHere is a sample game involving four players. The players' individual hands will not be revealed until the showdown, to give a better sense of what happens during play:\nCompulsory bets: Alice is the dealer. Bob, to Alice's left, posts a small blind of $1, and Carol posts a big blind of $2.\nPre-flop: Alice deals two hole cards face down to each player, beginning with Bob and ending with herself. Ted must act first, being the first player left to the big blind. Ted cannot check, because the $2 big blind plays as a bet, and so folds. Alice calls the $2. Bob adds an additional $1 to the $1 small blind to call the $2 total. Carol's blind is \"live\" (see blind), so there is the \"option\" to raise here, but Carol checks instead, ending the first betting round. The pot now contains $6, $2 from each of three players.\nFlop: Alice now burns a card and deals the flop of three face-up community cards, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;9\u2663\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;K\u2663\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;3\u2665. On this round, as on all subsequent rounds, the player on the dealer's left begins the betting. Bob checks, Carol opens for $2, and Alice raises another $2 (puts in $4, $2 to match Carol and $2 to raise), making the total bet now facing Bob $4. Bob calls (puts in $4, $2 to match Carol's initial bet and $2 to match Alice's raise). Carol calls as well, putting in $2. The pot now contains $18, $6 from the last round and $12 from three players this round.\nTurn: Alice now burns another card and deals the turn card face up. It is the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;5\u2660. Bob checks, Carol checks, and Alice checks; the turn has been \"checked around\". The pot still contains $18.\nRiver: Alice burns another card and deals the final river card, the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;9\u2666, making the final board &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;9\u2663\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;K\u2663\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;3\u2665\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;5\u2660\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;9\u2666. Bob bets $4, Carol calls, and Alice folds (Alice's holding was &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;A\u2663\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;7\u2663 and was hoping the river card would be a club to make a flush).\nShowdown: Bob shows his hand of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;Q\u2660\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;9\u2665, so the best five-card hand possible is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;9\u2663\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;9\u2666\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;9\u2665\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;K\u2663\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;Q\u2660, for three nines, with a king-queen kicker. Carol shows her cards of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;K\u2660\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;J\u2665, making a final hand &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;K\u2663\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;K\u2660\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;9\u2663\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;9\u2666\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;J\u2665 for two pair, kings and nines, with a jack kicker. Bob wins the showdown and the $26 pot.\nKickers and ties.\nBecause of the presence of community cards in Texas hold 'em, different players' hands can often run very close in value. As a result, it is common for kickers to be used to determine the winning hand and also for two hands (or maybe more) to tie. A kicker is a card that is part of the five-card poker hand, but is not used in determining a hand's rank. For instance, in the hand A-A-A-K-Q, the king and queen are kickers.\nThe following situation illustrates the importance of breaking ties with kickers and card ranks, as well as the use of the five-card rule. After the turn, the board and players' hole cards are as follows.\nAt the moment, Bob is in the lead with a hand of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;Q\u2660\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;Q\u2663\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;8\u2660\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;8\u2665\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;K\u2665, making two pair, queens and eights, with a king kicker. This beats Carol's hand of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;Q\u2665\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;Q\u2663\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;8\u2660\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;8\u2665\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;10\u2666 by virtue of the king kicker.\nSuppose the final card is the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;A\u2660, making the final board &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;8\u2660\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;Q\u2663\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;8\u2665\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;4\u2663\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;A\u2660. Bob and Carol still each have two pair (queens and eights), but both of them are now entitled to play the final ace as their fifth card, making their hands both two pair, queens and eights, with an ace kicker. Bob's king no longer plays, because the ace on the board plays as the fifth card in both hands, and a hand is only composed of the best five cards. They therefore tie and split the pot. However, if the last card is a jack or lower (except an eight, which would make a full house, or a ten, which would give Carol a higher second pair), Bob's king stays in the game and Bob wins.\nStrategy.\nMost poker authors recommend a tight-aggressive approach to playing Texas hold 'em. This strategy involves playing relatively few hands (tight), but betting and raising often with those that one does play (aggressive). Although this strategy is often recommended, some professional players successfully employ other strategies as well.\nAlmost all authors agree that where a player sits in the order of play (known as position) is an important element of Texas hold 'em strategy, particularly in no-limit hold'em. Players who act later have more information than players who act earlier. As a result, players typically play fewer hands from early positions than later positions.\nBecause of the game's level of complexity, it has received some attention from academics. One attempt to develop a quantitative model of a Texas hold'em tournament as an isolated complex system has had some success, although the full consequences for optimal strategies remain to be explored. In addition, groups at the University of Alberta and Carnegie Mellon University worked to develop poker playing programs utilizing techniques in game theory and artificial intelligence. In January 2015, the AAAS journal Science reported that the group at the University of Alberta had succeeded in coding a computer program called Cepheus that can learn from its playing experience to optimize its CFR algorithm and approach playing perfection when opposing strong players in the variant known as heads-up limit Texas Hold 'em, which involves only two players. Although it does not win every hand, it is unbeatable on average over a large number of hands. The program exhibits more variation in its tactics than professional players do, for instance bluffing with weak hands that professional players tend to fold. Public web access to observe and play against Cepheus is available.\nStarting hands.\nBecause only two cards are dealt to each player, it is easy to characterize all of the starting hands. There are (52 \u00d7 51)/2 = 1,326 distinct possible combinations of two cards from a standard 52-card deck. Because no suit is more powerful than another, many of these can be equated for the analysis of starting-hand strategy. For example, although &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;J\u2665\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;J\u2663 and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;J\u2666\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Cards/styles.css\"/&gt;J\u2660 are distinct combinations of cards by rank and suit, they are of equal value as starting hands.\nBecause of this equivalence, there are only 169 effectively different hole-card combinations. Thirteen of these are pairs, from deuces (twos) to aces. There are 78 ways to have two cards of different rank (12 possible hands containing one ace, 11 possible hands containing one king but no ace, 10 possible hands containing one queen but no ace or king, etc.). Both hole cards can be used in a flush if they are suited, but pairs are never suited, so there would be 13 possible pairs, 78 possible suited non-pairs, and 78 possible unsuited (\"off-suit\") non-pairs, for a total of 169 possible hands. Suited starting hands are stronger than their unsuited counterparts, although the magnitude of this strength advantage in different games is debated.\nBecause of the limited number of starting hands, most strategy guides include a detailed discussion of each of them. This distinguishes hold 'em from other poker games where the number of starting card combinations forces strategy guides to group hands into broad categories. Another result of this small number is the proliferation of colloquial names for individual hands.\nStrategic differences in betting structures.\nTexas Hold'em is commonly played both as a \"cash\" or \"ring\" game and as a tournament game. Strategy for these different forms can vary.\nCash games.\nBefore the advent of poker tournaments, all poker games were played with real money where players bet actual currency (or chips that represented currency). Games that feature wagering actual money on individual hands are still very common and are referred to as \"cash games\" or \"ring games\".\nThe no-limit and fixed-limit cash-game versions of hold 'em are strategically very different. Doyle Brunson claims that \"the games are so different that there are not many players who rank with the best in both types of hold 'em. Many no-limit players have difficulty \"gearing down\" for limit, while limit players often lack the courage and 'feel' necessary to excel at no-limit.\" Because the size of bets is restricted in limit games, the ability to bluff is somewhat curtailed. Because one is not (usually) risking all of one's chips in limit poker, players are sometimes advised to take more chances.\nLower-stakes games also exhibit different properties than higher-stakes games. Small-stakes games often involve more players in each hand and can vary from extremely passive (little raising and betting) to extremely aggressive (many raises). This difference of small-stakes games has prompted several books dedicated to only those games.\nTournaments.\nTexas hold 'em is often associated with poker tournaments largely because it is played as the main event in many of the famous tournaments, including the World Series of Poker's Main Event, and is the most common tournament overall. Traditionally, a poker tournament is played with chips that represent a player's stake in the tournament. Standard play allows all entrants to \"buy-in\" for a fixed amount and all players begin with an equal value of chips. Play proceeds until one player has accumulated all the chips in play or a deal is made among the remaining players to \"chop\" the remaining prize pool. The money pool is redistributed to the players in relation to the place they finished in the tournament. Only a small percentage of the players receive any money, with the majority receiving nothing. \"The percentages are not standardized, but common rules of thumb call for one table\" (usually nine players) \"to get paid for each 100 entrants,\" according to poker author Andrew Glazer, in his book, \"The Complete Idiot's Guide to Poker\". A good rule of thumb is that close to 10% of players will be paid in a tournament. As a result, the strategy in poker tournaments can be very different from a cash game.\nProper strategy in tournaments can vary widely depending on the amount of chips one has, the stage of the tournament, the amount of chips others have, and the playing styles of one's opponents. Although some authors still recommend a tight playing style, others recommend looser play (playing more hands) in tournaments than one would otherwise play in cash games. In tournaments the blinds and antes increase regularly, and can become much larger near the end of the tournament. This can force players to play hands that they would not normally play when the blinds were small, which can warrant both more loose and more aggressive play.\nEvaluating a hand.\nOne of the most important things in Texas hold'em is knowing how to evaluate a hand.\nThe strategy of playing each hand can be very different according to the strength of the hand. For example, on a strong hand, a player might want to try to appear weak in order to not scare off other players with weaker hands, while on a weak hand, a player might try to bluff other players into folding.\nThere are several ways to evaluate hand strength; two of the most common are counting outs and using calculators.\nCounting outs.\nThis method consists of counting the cards still in the deck, which in combination with the cards the player already has can give the player a potentially winning hand.\nSuch cards are called \"outs\", and hand strength can be measured by how many outs are still in the deck (if there are many outs then the probability to get one of them is high and therefore the hand is strong). The following chart determines the probability of hitting outs (bettering the player's hand) based on how many cards are left in the deck and the draw type.\nMultiplying the number of outs by two or four (the Two Times Rule or Four Times Rule) gives a reasonable approximation to the One Card % or Two Card %, respectively, in the above table. For example, an open straight draw on the flop has 8 outs so the odds to hit the straight on the turn is 16% (8 x 2) and the odds on the river is 32% (8 x 4).\nCalculators.\nCalculators are poker tools that calculate the odds of a hand (combined with the cards on the table if there are any) to win the game. Calculators provide precise odds but they cannot be used in live games and are therefore mostly used on Internet poker games. The first known commercial poker calculator was marketed by Mike Caro. Michael Shackleford, the Wizard of Odds, later made one available to the public free of charge on his website.\nSimilar games.\nThere are several other poker variants that resemble Texas hold 'em. Hold 'em is a member of a class of poker games known as community card games, where some cards are available for use by all the players. There are several other games that use five community cards in addition to some private cards and are thus like Texas hold 'em. Royal hold 'em has the same structure as Texas hold 'em, but the deck contains only Aces, Kings, Queens, Jacks, and Tens. Pineapple and Omaha hold 'em both vary the number of cards an individual receives before the flop (along with the rules regarding how they may be used to form a hand), but are dealt identically afterward. In Double Texas Hold'em, each player receives 3 hole cards and establishes a middle common card that plays with each of the other cards, but the outer cards don't play with each other (each player has two 2-card hands). Alternatively, in Double-board hold'em all players receive the same number of private cards, but there are two sets of community cards. The winner is either selected for each individual board with each receiving half of the pot, or the best overall hand takes the entire pot, depending on the rules agreed upon by the players.\nAnother variant is known as Greek hold 'em which requires each player to use both hole cards and only 3 from the board instead of the best five of seven cards.\nManila is a hold'em variant that was once popular in Australia. In Manila, players receive two private cards from a reduced deck (containing no cards lower than 7). A five-card board is dealt, unlike Texas hold 'em, one card at a time; there is a betting round after each card. Manila has several variations of its own, similar to the variants listed above.\nSix-plus hold 'em (also known as Short-deck hold 'em) is a community card poker game variant of Texas hold 'em, where cards 2 through 5 are removed. Each player is dealt two cards face down and seeks to make his or her best five-card poker hand using from any combination of the seven cards (five community cards and their own two hole cards).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75699", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75699", "title": "Texas hold'em", "text": ""}
{"id": "75702", "revid": "1136281", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75702", "title": "Sick Puppy", "text": "2000 novel by Carl Hiaasen\nSick Puppy is a 2000 novel by Carl Hiaasen.\nPlot summary.\nRobert Clapley, a former drug smuggler-turned-real estate developer, plans to build high-rise condominia on Toad Island, home to a large population of oak toads. The project requires the construction of a massive new bridge to the mainland to accommodate Clapley's cement trucks. On the recommendation of the corrupt Florida Governor Richard \"Dick\" Artemus, to whom he has given large campaign contributions, Clapley hires lobbyist Palmer Stoat to expedite government funding for the bridge construction. By random happenstance, Stoat becomes subject to the obsessive wrath of ecoterrorist Twilly Spree after he witnesses him litter the highway from his luxury Range Rover. Twilly tracks Stoat back to the Fort Lauderdale residence he shares with his wife, Desirata.\nTwilly arranges ironic pranks\u2013hijacking a garbage truck and dumping its load into Desi's convertible, and filling Stoat's Range Rover with dung beetles\u2013but is aggravated when Stoat continues to litter. When he breaks into Stoat's home, he is confronted by his massive Labrador Retriever and by Desi herself. Desi, who is increasingly unhappy with her marriage, tells Twilly that he is \"aiming low\" if he is trying to correct Stoat's misbehavior. She guides him to Toad Island, where Clapley's construction crew has deliberately buried thousands of oak toads to avoid later protest by environmentalists. Twilly orders Desi to tell Stoat that he will kill the dog if he doesn't stop the bridge project. Stoat dismisses the threat until Twilly sends him a roadkill Labrador's severed ear via FedEx. The actual dog becomes Twilly's companion after he changes his name to \"McGuinn.\"\nStoat convinces Artemus to veto funding for the bridge but has no intention of letting the project fail. He tells Clapley and Artemus that the funding can be put back into the budget later, through a special session of the Florida legislature. Clapley sends a hit man, Mr. Gash, to kill Twilly, while Artemus, in an effort to avoid the project being tainted by a violent death, locates ex-governor Clinton Tyree, a.k.a. \"Skink,\" who vanished in the mid-1970s after a short term of office and is said to be hiding in the remaining Florida wilderness. Artemus knows that Skink's mentally disturbed elder brother, Doyle, is still on the state's payroll as the keeper of an abandoned lighthouse and threatens to put him on the street if Skink doesn't apprehend Twilly. Artemus fails to realize the dire consequences of threatening Skink, or of putting him and Twilly in contact with each other.\nDesi becomes attracted to Twilly, and the two eventually develop a relationship. Stoat is disgusted and washes his hands of her and McGuinn, telling Twilly that the bridge is going up no matter what he does. A violent confrontation with Twilly, Desi and Skink on Toad Island leaves Mr. Gash mortally wounded. Twilly is left in Skink's care while Desi returns to her parents' home in Atlanta. Despite her pleadings, Twilly is still committed to stopping the Toad Island project. Accompanied by Skink, Twilly trails Stoat, Clapley and Artemus to a private canned hunting reserve in northern Florida, where Stoat has arranged for Clapley to shoot a black rhinoceros and win over Willie Vasquez-Washington, a crucial member of the Florida House who is opposed to the special session.\nTwilly is on the verge of shooting Clapley, but McGuinn runs into the preserve and nips playfully at the rhino's tail. The rhino\u2013so ancient that it has hardly moved since it arrived at the ranch\u2013goes berserk and charges at the hunting party. Clapley is gored to death on the rhino's horn, and Stoat is trampled flat. Artemus escapes the chaos but is mortified to learn that Willie snapped photos of the fiasco. Clapley's death dooms the Toad Island project. Apart from his many lobbying clients and crony politicians, only a few friends and family members show up at Stoat's funeral. Desi is among the mourners, during which she is approached by McGuinn, holding a note with Twilly's new address on it. Meanwhile, Twilly and Skink are driving along the highway when they see another group of litterbugs. They immediately agree they have to teach them a lesson.\nMajor themes.\nAlthough some of the themes of the novel may suggest an autobiographical element the author himself shrugs off at least one aspect of this parallel. The main character Twilly and himself both had attorney forebears who lived in Southern Florida, but the development in this area came as a surprise to him and his attorney father and grandfather.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now you have land use attorneys whose job it is to get around master plans and zoning restrictions, and they make good livings off finding loopholes or making loopholes so people can build something where they weren't intended to build it. A good example is Key West. . . . They live off the Hemingway mystique, they trade on the Hemingway mystique, constantly. If Hemingway were alive, he'd take a flame-thrower to Duval Street, and that's the truth. Fifty T-shirt shops? Give me a break.\nLiterary significance and criticism.\n\"Sick Puppy\" has been reviewed well and one example describes Hiaasen's skills thus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hiaasen is best known for serving up heaping helpings of just desserts [\"sic\"]. His bad guys are the baddest, and his good guys are anything but the Dudley Dorights of popular fiction. How does Hiaasen come up with his new means of doling out justice to the terminally greedy? Just when you think, \"they'll never get out of this mess,\" he devises a plan, and they're off and running.\nOther reviews praised the novel's harder edges.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sick Puppy is ultimately as unforgiving as nature's order. The characters are not likeable. There is no redemption or apology. But that's Hiaasen's design. In the end, we are treated to one of his favorite devices, the epilogue with thumbnail descriptions of the fates of many of his characters. Some of the scoundrels prosper, some don't. There's the sense that there is more work to be done. Sure, Hiaasen himself may not be ready to kidnap the dogs of unregenerate litterbugs or clobber drunken jet skiers, but it's the thought that counts.\nIn his review of Hiaasen's later novel \"Skinny Dip\", Michael Grunwald made several references to the characters of \"Sick Puppy\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Carl Hiaasen is South Florida's literary proctologist: he examines the region's assholes. The rapacious villains of Hiaasen's crime novels do not just commit murder, extortion, assault, fraud, and every conceivable variety of larceny; they also park in handicapped spaces, cheat on their trophy wives, tell racist jokes, flaunt their wealth in unusually obnoxious ways, and mangle the lyrics to good rock-and-roll songs. They do not just do bad things, like steal wheelchairs, shoot cops, and scam retirees; they are bad people, \"maggots,\" \"vermin,\" \"cretins,\" \"sleazeballs,\" \"sewer scum,\" \"reprobates,\" \"whorehoppers.\" They care more about their golf games than their families, and more about money than anything else on earth. They drive Range Rovers with \"COJONES\" on their vanity plates. They don't listen and they don't learn."}
{"id": "75704", "revid": "96240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75704", "title": "List of miscellaneous poker variants", "text": ""}
{"id": "75705", "revid": "34919316", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75705", "title": "Poker probability", "text": "Chances of card combinations in poker\nIn poker, the probability of each type of 5-card hand can be computed by calculating the proportion of hands of that type among all possible hands.\nHistory.\nProbability and gambling have been ideas since long before the invention of poker. The development of probability theory in the late 1400s was attributed to gambling; when playing a game with high stakes, players wanted to know what the chance of winning would be. In 1494, Fra Luca Pacioli released his work which was the first written text on probability. Motivated by Pacioli's work, Girolamo Cardano (1501\u20131576) made further developments in probability theory. His work from 1550, titled \"Liber de Ludo Aleae\", discussed the concepts of probability and how they were directly related to gambling. However, his work did not receive any immediate recognition since it was not published until after his death. Blaise Pascal (1623\u20131662) also contributed to probability theory. His friend, Chevalier de M\u00e9r\u00e9, was an avid gambler with the goal to become wealthy from it. De M\u00e9r\u00e9 tried a new mathematical approach to a gambling game but did not get the desired results. Determined to know why his strategy was unsuccessful, he consulted with Pascal. Pascal's work on this problem began an important correspondence between him and fellow mathematician Pierre de Fermat (1601\u20131665). Communicating through letters, the two continued to exchange their ideas and thoughts. These interactions led to the conception of basic probability theory. To this day, many gamblers still rely on the basic concepts of probability theory in order to make informed decisions while gambling.\nFrequencies.\n5-card poker hands.\nIn straight poker and five-card draw, where there are no hole cards, players are simply dealt five cards from a deck of 52.\nThe following chart enumerates the (absolute) frequency of each hand, given all combinations of five cards randomly drawn from a full deck of 52 without replacement. Wild cards are not considered. In this chart:\nThe \"nCr\" or \"nCk\" function on most scientific calculators can be used to calculate hand frequencies; entering with and , for example, yields formula_1 as above.\nThe royal flush is a case of the straight flush. It can be formed 4 ways (one for each suit), giving it a probability of 0.000154% and odds of 649,739 : 1.\nWhen ace-low straights and ace-low straight flushes are not counted, the probabilities of each are reduced: straights and straight flushes each become 9/10 as common as they otherwise would be. The 4 missed straight flushes become flushes and the 1,020 missed straights become no pair.\nNote that since suits have no relative value in poker, two hands can be considered identical if one hand can be transformed into the other by swapping suits. For example, the hand 3\u2663 7\u2663 8\u2663 Q\u2660 A\u2660 is identical to 3\u2666 7\u2666 8\u2666 Q\u2665 A\u2665 because replacing all of the clubs in the first hand with diamonds and all of the spades with hearts produces the second hand. So eliminating identical hands that ignore relative suit values, there are only 134,459 distinct hands.\nThe number of distinct poker hands is even smaller. For example, 3\u2663 7\u2663 8\u2663 Q\u2660 A\u2660 and 3\u2666 7\u2663 8\u2666 Q\u2665 A\u2665 are not identical hands when just ignoring suit assignments because one hand has three suits, while the other hand has only two\u2014that difference could affect the relative value of each hand when there are more cards to come. However, even though the hands are not identical from that perspective, they still form equivalent poker hands because each hand is an A-Q-8-7-3 high card hand. There are 7,462 distinct poker hands.\n7-card poker hands.\nIn some popular variations of poker such as Texas hold 'em, the most widespread poker variant overall, a player uses the best five-card poker hand out of seven cards.\nThe frequencies are calculated in a manner similar to that shown for 5-card hands, except additional complications arise due to the extra two cards in the 7-card poker hand. The total number of distinct 7-card hands is formula_3. It is notable that the probability of a no-pair hand is \"lower\" than the probability of a one-pair or two-pair hand.\nThe Ace-high straight flush or royal flush is slightly more frequent (4324) than the lower straight flushes (4140 each) because the remaining two cards can have any value; a King-high straight flush, for example, cannot have the Ace of its suit in the hand (as that would make it ace-high instead).\nSince suits have no relative value in poker, two hands can be considered identical if one hand can be transformed into the other by swapping suits. Eliminating identical hands that ignore relative suit values leaves 6,009,159 distinct 7-card hands.\nThe number of distinct 5-card poker hands that are possible from 7 cards is 4,824. Perhaps surprisingly, this is fewer than the number of 5-card poker hands from 5 cards, as some 5-card hands are impossible with 7 cards (e.g. 7-high and 8-high).\n5-card lowball poker hands.\nSome variants of poker, called lowball, use a low hand to determine the winning hand. In most variants of lowball, the ace is counted as the lowest card and straights and flushes don't count against a low hand, so the lowest hand is the five-high hand A-2-3-4-5, also called a \"wheel\". The probability is calculated based on formula_1, the total number of 5-card combinations. (The frequencies given are exact; the probabilities and odds are approximate.)\nAs can be seen from the table, just over half the time a player gets a hand that has no pairs, threes- or fours-of-a-kind. (50.7%)\nIf aces are not low, simply rotate the hand descriptions so that 6-high replaces 5-high for the best hand and ace-high replaces king-high as the worst hand.\nSome players do not ignore straights and flushes when computing the low hand in lowball. In this case, the lowest hand is A-2-3-4-6 with at least two suits. Probabilities are adjusted in the above table such that \"5-high\" is not listed\", \"6-high\" has one distinct hand, and \"King-high\" having 330 distinct hands, respectively. The Total line also needs adjusting.\n7-card lowball poker hands.\nIn some variants of poker a player uses the best five-card low hand selected from seven cards. In most variants of lowball, the ace is counted as the lowest card and straights and flushes don't count against a low hand, so the lowest hand is the five-high hand A-2-3-4-5, also called a \"wheel\". The probability is calculated based on formula_5, the total number of 7-card combinations.\nThe table does not extend to include five-card hands with at least one pair. Its \"Total\" represents the 95.4% of the time that a player can select a 5-card low hand without any pair.\nIf aces are not low, simply rotate the hand descriptions so that 6-high replaces 5-high for the best hand and ace-high replaces king-high as the worst hand.\nSome players do not ignore straights and flushes when computing the low hand in lowball. In this case, the lowest hand is A-2-3-4-6 with at least two suits. Probabilities are adjusted in the above table such that \"5-high\" is not listed, \"6-high\" has 781,824 distinct hands, and \"King-high\" has 21,457,920 distinct hands, respectively. The Total line also needs adjusting.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75706", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75706", "title": "Poker bluffing", "text": ""}
{"id": "75707", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75707", "title": "EGA", "text": ""}
{"id": "75708", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75708", "title": "Slow play", "text": "Type of deceptive play in poker\nSlow playing (also called sandbagging or trapping) is a deceptive play in poker where a player bets weakly or passively with a strong holding. It is the opposite of fast playing. A flat call can be a form of slow playing. The objective of slow playing is to lure opponents into a pot who might fold to a raise, or to cause them to bet more strongly than they would if the player had played aggressively (bet or raised). Slow playing sacrifices protection against hands that may improve and risks losing the pot-building value of a bet if the opponent also checks. \nDavid Sklansky defines the following conditions for profitable slow plays:\n\"Seven-card stud example\"\nIn a seven-card stud game, Ted's first three cards are all fours. Alice with a king showing bets first, Ted raises and Alice calls. On the next round, Alice catches another king, and Ted miraculously catches the last four (making four-of-a-kind). Ted suspects Alice has two pair or three kings, and Alice suspects that Ted has two pair or three fours. Alice bets again, and Ted just flat calls. Ted decides to just call for next round or two, and maybe even check if Alice doesn't bet, rather than raising, for several reasons. Ted's hand is so strong that the chance of getting beaten is negligible, so he doesn't need protection. If Alice just has two pair and Ted acts strongly, Alice may think Ted has three fours and fold if she doesn't improve. By allowing Alice to continue for smaller stakes, Ted hopes that Alice will improve to a very strong (but second best) hand that will induce her to bet, raise, or at least call in the later betting rounds.\nRelationship between slow playing and bluffing.\nAgainst observant opponents, the frequency of bluffing affects the effectiveness of slow playing, and vice versa. If a player's table image is that of an aggressive bluffer, slow playing is less important because his opponents will be more willing to call his usual bets and raises. Similarly, if a player is perceived as a \"trappy\" player (uses frequent slow plays), his bluffs are less likely to be respected (i.e., more likely to be called) because his opponents expect him to slow play his strong hands.\nCheck raising as a slow play.\nA check-raise is not necessarily a slow play. Often, the purpose of a check-raise is to drive out opponents from a pot, which is the opposite of the goal of a slow play. However, within the context of a single betting round, check-raising can be employed as a slow play.\n\"Draw poker example\"\nAlice, Bob, Carol, and David are playing draw poker. After anteing, Alice starts with a pair of aces, and opens the betting for $2. Bob raises an additional $2, bringing the bet to $4. Carol folds. David calls the $4, and Alice puts in an additional $2 to match the raise. Drawing three cards, she receives another ace, and a pair of fives. Since her aces-full is almost certain to be unbeatable, it does not need the protection of a bet. Also, Bob earlier raised, and David called a raise, so they likely have strong hands and one of them will bet if Alice doesn't. Finally, since Bob and David earlier showed strength, and they know that Alice knows this, Alice betting into them would be seen as a bold move likely to scare one or both of them off, especially if they weren't as strong as they seem. Alice decides conditions are right for a slow play: Alice checks. As she hoped, Bob bets $2. David thinks for a minute, then calls the $2. Alice now springs the trap and raises $2. Bob calls the additional $2, and David (who now realizes that he is probably beaten) folds. Bob reveals three sixes, and surrenders the pot to Alice. If Alice had just bet her hand on the second round, it is likely that Bob would just have called and David may or may not have called, earning Alice $2 to $4 on the second round. But with the slow play, she earned $6.\nEven in games (such as California lowball) where the check-raise is not allowed, one can make other sandbagging plays such as just flat calling instead of raising with a very strong hand and then later raising.\nFishing for the overcall.\n\"Fishing for the overcall\" occurs when the last card a player is dealt makes him a very strong hand, an opponent in front of him bets, and there are more opponents yet to act behind him. While the player might normally raise with his hand, just calling may encourage the opponents behind him to overcall when they would have folded to a raise. For this play to be used profitably, one or more conditions like the following must be met:\nA common example of fishing for overcalls occurs in High-low split games like Omaha hold 'em. If John is confident that Mary is betting a high hand, then John might flat call with his low hand to fish for overcalls rather than make it more difficult for opponents to call. If John were to raise, he and Mary would gain no profit at all if no other opponents called."}
{"id": "75709", "revid": "2477690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75709", "title": "Poker psychology", "text": ""}
{"id": "75710", "revid": "13568690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75710", "title": "Cheating in poker", "text": "Overview of poker cheating\nCheating in poker is any behavior outside the rules of poker that is intended to give an unfair advantage to one or more players.\nMinimal-skill methods.\nThe easiest and most common types of cheating require no skill of manipulation, but rather merely the nerve. Such methods include shorting the pot, avoiding house fees, and peeking at other players' cards. It is very difficult to prove because when confronted, at least the first time, the cheat often calls the cheating an honest mistake.\nOne minimal-skill method that occurs in non-casino and casino games happens when a player who has folded appoints themselves the tender of the pot, stacking chips, counting them, and delivering them to the winning player. \"Check-chopping\" is when such a \"helpful\" player palms a chip. Odorless adhesive can be used for this purpose.\nAnother minimal-skill method is going south (also known as \"ratholing\"), where a player covertly removes a portion of their chips from play while remaining in the game, normally in order to preserve the winnings as profit, or prevent a major loss in \"big bet\" games.\nSkilled methods.\nA cheat may \"hand-muck\" or palm one or more cards. When a cheat is \"mucking\" the cheat is cleverly hiding cards in their hand, to later switch their hand for. This may also be done with a confederate.\nA skilled cheat can deal the second card, the bottom card, the second from bottom card, and the middle card. The idea is to \"cull\", or to find the cards one needs, place them at the bottom, top, or any other place the cheat wants, then false deal them to oneself or one's confederate.\nOne sign of false dealing could be when a dealer grips the deck with the index finger in front of it or their pinky and pointing finger on both short sides of the deck while the other fingers support the deck while the cards are being beveled slightly. This is referred to as the \"Mechanic's grip\". It not only allows better control of the cards, but provides cover by showing the back of the top card, and without moving the hand holding the deck.\nA cheat can place certain cards in a position favorable to the card cheat. This is called \"stacking\". Stacking is more often done than \"false dealing\" because it doesn't look suspicious. There are a couple of techniques for \"stacking\" cards, the best known being riffle stacking and overhand stacking. In riffle stacking the cheat stacks the card(s) while doing a riffle shuffle. This form of stacking is the most difficult to master and the most respected under the card sharps and magicians. The overhand stacking method takes little practice, and is more likely to be done in a situation with a cheat. The cheat does (what looks like) a normal overhand shuffle. But while the cheat is shuffling they keep track of the cards they want to stack, and with a little practice they can manage to put the exact number of cards in between the cards they want to stack to make the next round of dealing favorable for the cheat. \nEven if a cheat deals themselves a powerful hand, they may not win much money if every other player has nothing, so often the cheat will stack two hands, with one player receiving a strong hand and the cheater getting an even stronger one. This is called a \"double duke\".\nA slight advantage for a cheat can be to know what cards are placed both on the top of the deck as well as the bottom card, so that information can then later be used to bottom deal or second deal themselves that card. The looking at the top or bottom card without the other players knowing or seeing it is called \"Glimpsing\" or \"Peeking\". There are a lot of methods for reaching the same goal. A method that is used most is called the \"Shiner\". A Shiner is a reflective object (such as coffee, a lighter, a blade etc.) that is placed under the deck, so when the cheat is looking into the shiner the bottom card is exposed, and every card that is dealt over the shiner can easily be peeked by looking in the shiner.\nOne method of cheating that involves both great risk and great potential pay-off is the cold deck\u2014so called because it has not been \"warmed up\" by play (and thus randomised). Such decks are usually pre-stacked, and are introduced either at the deal, after the real deck has been shuffled, or before the deal, where a card sharp will make a false shuffle using sleight of hand. The latter method may require collusion or a pass if the style of play or house rules call for a cut. The skill lies both in convincing other players that the shuffle is legitimate and in ensuring that other players receive hands that are good enough to entice them into play, but not too good to arouse suspicion.\nMarked cards.\nMarked cards are printed or altered so that the cheater can know the value of specific cards while only looking at the back. Ways of marking are too numerous to mention, but there are certain broad types. A common way of marking cards involves marks on a round design on the card so as to be read like a clock (an ace is marked at one o'clock, and so on until the king, which is not marked). Shading a card by putting it in the sun or scratching the surface with a razor are ways to mark an already printed deck.\n\"Juice\" and \"daub\" are two kinds of substances that can be used to mark cards in a subtle way so as to avoid detection, when done properly. While a \"juice\" deck is premarked and introduced into play by the cheater, \"daub\" is applied during play to any deck. Once trained, cheaters can read the cards from across the table.\nDecks can be marked while playing using fingernails, poker chips or by bending or \"crimping\" the cards in a position that the cheat can read from across the table. The practice of burning the top card, or cards, is to prevent a cheat from knowing that top card and dealing \"seconds\" to either give a confederate a card that helps their hand or an opponent a card that hurts theirs.\nCollusion.\nCollusion is two or more players acting with a secret, common strategy. Some common forms of collusion are: \"soft play\", that is, failing to bet or raise in a situation that would normally merit it, to avoid costing one's partner or friend money; \"whipsawing\", where partners raise and re-raise each other to trap players in between; \"dumping\", where a cheater will deliberately lose to a partner; and \"signalling\", or trading information between partners via signals of some sort, like arranging their chips in a certain manner.\nIn a poker tournament, when one player is all in and two or more other players are active in the pot, it is common for the players with chips left to \"check it down\", or check on each round of betting through the end of the hand. Unless they explicitly communicate an agreement about checking it down, this is not collusion in most circumstances.\nOnline specific.\nOnline play has allowed for new methods of cheating while other methods based on physical objects such as cards or chips are impossible.\nOne new form of cheating is the use of bots. These are programs that play instead of a real human. Though their accuracy and their ability to win are disputed, their use normally violates the rules of online cardrooms, so using them is, by definition, cheating.\nCollusion in online poker is relatively easy and much more difficult to immediately spot if executed well. Cheaters can engage in telephone calls or instant messaging, discussing their cards, since nobody can see them. Sometimes one person may be using two or more computers to play multiple hands at the same table under different aliases (since many broadband plans offer customers multiple IP addresses, this can conveniently and cheaply be done without the likelihood of immediate detection). Such tactics can give cheaters an advantage that is difficult to work against. Online poker cardrooms keep records of every hand played, and collusion can often be detected by finding any of several detectable patterns (such as folding good hands to a small bet, as it is known that another player has a better hand). Users who frequently sit at the same tables will be flagged by poker rooms and their play will be closely monitored. Often, such users will be warned they have been flagged, in an effort to deter collusion.\nAnother online method of cheating is \"multiaccounting\", where a player will register several accounts to their name (or, perhaps more commonly, to non-poker-playing friends and family members). This might be done to help enable the collusion previously mentioned, or perhaps to simply enable a well-known player to play incognito. Another common motive for multi-accounting is to facilitate chip dumping and other methods of equity maximization in online tournaments. A major difference between cash games and tournaments is that tournament winnings tend to be much less consistent over the short to medium term. Because tournaments tend to pay prize money only to the top ten percent of entrants on average and tend to pay the majority of prize money to a very small number of top finishers, in tournament play even the best players are prone to relatively long streaks of overall net losses (or even no winnings at all) between sizable wins. Therefore, for high-stakes players who specialize in tournament play, multi-accounting is one possible means to allow a player to play more entries in major tournaments than they would otherwise be able to, potentially multiplying the player's earnings and, just as importantly, making earnings more consistent over a shorter period of time. This risks a large win by a hitherto unknown \"player\" attracting scrutiny from the host (and other players), especially if the winner has no known previous poker experience but does have clear ties to a better-known player. In addition, some sites now offer multi-table tournaments where the same player can enter multiple times under their own name, so as to reduce the incentive to multi-account.\nAnother concern is datamining. This is the systematic collection of hand histories, enough of which can be used to profile opponents using specially designed software. Two or more players may agree to share their individual hand histories amongst themselves; alternatively some websites offer large quantities of previously-played hands (even millions) for a fee. Using software to analyze one's own histories is generally accepted. Acquiring histories of hands in which a player did not participate violates the rules of most cardrooms.\nPoker software, like all software, cannot be assumed to be reliable. It is always possible that a person is exploiting the software to win money from victims. The software may even contain a backdoor which allows a person, perhaps an employee, to view cards. Absolute Poker was engaged in such a scandal along with site consultant and notable poker player Russ Hamilton. As of 2007, Ultimate Bet faces a lawsuit with allegations of employees exploiting the software. The user agreement of the two online poker sites owned by Tokwiro Enterprises, \"Absolute Poker\" and \"UltimateBet,\" state they reserve the right to cancel an account if a player plays \"in a professional sense\" (and not for personal entertainment only). This is not a standard prohibition. For example, it is not in the end-user agreements of the three largest online cardrooms: PokerStars, PartyPoker, and Full Tilt Poker.\nAngle shooting.\nAngle shooting is engaging in actions that may technically be within the scope of the rules of the game, but that are considered unethical or unfair to exploit or take advantage of another player. For example, an angle shooter might motion as if they were folding their hand to induce other players to fold theirs out of turn.\nOne form of angle shooting which is exclusive to online poker is to abuse the disconnect protection (DP) rules most sites have in place. DP is a rule exclusive to online poker whereby if a player is disconnected from the site in the middle of the hand their hand is played out as if they were all-in without the player actually having to put any more money in the pot. The online poker rooms that offer DP usually have specific tables set aside for this so that all players at the table are aware that the special DP rules will apply.\nHow this is used by angle shooters is if a player is in a hand that they are unsure if they have the best cards and don't want to invest any more money to find out. They can unplug their internet connection and then wait for the hand to play itself out. On a DP table the remaining cards in the hand would be dealt and the pot would be awarded to the player with the best cards. If there were multiple opponents in the hand then they would be eligible for a side pot.\nAnother example is when a player says nothing when betting, pushes in a raise, then says he made an error (a/k/a \"misclick\") &amp; meant to just call. The opposing player(s) may take this as a sign of weakness and then re-raise or simply call when they shouldn't, as the player may actually have \"the nuts\" (the best possible hand based on the cards in play). This could be done in reverse via a bluff by betting without announcing the bet &amp; betting less than the minimum call, then when the underbet is realized by the dealer, the player can claim they thought they raised, but the player apparently miscounted and bet less than the required call, which is then required to be increased to become a call. This makes the player appear strong and may induce a fold to the player's weak hand.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75711", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75711", "title": "Poker collusion", "text": ""}
{"id": "75712", "revid": "10841396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75712", "title": "Conciergerie", "text": "Medieval building in Paris, France\nThe Conciergerie () () is a former courthouse and prison in Paris, France located on the west of the \u00cele de la Cit\u00e9 below the Palais de Justice. It was originally part of the former royal palace, the Palais de la Cit\u00e9, which also included the Sainte-Chapelle. Two large medieval halls remain from the royal palace. During the French Revolution, 2,781 prisoners, including Marie Antoinette, were imprisoned, tried and sentenced at the Conciergerie then sent to different sites to be executed by the guillotine. It\u2019s now a national monument and museum.\nGallo-Roman fortress to Royal Palace (1st\u201310th century).\nIn the 1st\u20133rd century AD, the Ile de la Cit\u00e9 became part of the Gallo-Roman city of Lutetia, on the opposite bank of the Seine. The island was surrounded by a wall, and a fortress of the Roman governor was built at the west end of the island. The Merovingian King Clovis installed his capital there, on the site of the Roman fortress, from 508 until his death in 511. The Carolingian monarchs moved their capital out of the city, but at the end of the 10th century, under Hugh Capet, Paris became the capital of the Kingdom of France. He constructed a large new fortified residence, the Palais de la Cit\u00e9, on the same site.\nCapetian Palace (11th\u201314th century).\nFrom the 11th\u201314th century, the palace was enlarged and embellished, and gained in importance in the administration of the kingdom. Before he departed on the Third Crusade, Philip II of France delegated his legal authority the Curia Regis, which had regular assemblies, called Parlements, in the Hall of the King, to dispense justice. He moved the royal archives to the building, giving it even greater importance, and named a Concierge, or custodian, to oversee the administration of the palace, which gave the building its name. Philip II created the towered fa\u00e7ade on the Seine river side and the great hall. The great hall, with its two side-by-side naves, was used for royal ceremonies and judicial sessions. At one end was an immense table of black marble from Germany, decorated with fleurs-de-lis emblems. A piece of the table is now displayed on the wall of the lower hall. The hall was also decorated with polychrome wooden statues of the kings of France. The \"Grand Chronicles of France\" by Jehan de Jandun described \"A new palace, a marvelous and costly work, the most beautiful that France has ever seen.\" The only surviving portions of the great hall are the Hall of the Men-at-arms and the Hall of the Guards below.\nPhilip IV continued the rebuilding between 1285 and 1314. The Grand Hall was built, replacing a smaller earlier hall. The Grand Chamber became the official seat of the Parliament; and he added the silver tower and the Tower of Caesar.\nUnder Charles V (1364\u201380), the role of the building changed. He decided to move his residence to the Louvre Castle, and the Hotel Saint-Pol. The concierge of the old palace was given greater authority over lower and middle courts. Prison cells were gradually added to the lower parts of the building, and it became known as the \"Conciergerie\". Its prisoners were a mixture of common criminals and political prisoners. In common with other prisons of the time, the treatment of prisoners was dependent on their wealth, status and associates. Wealthy or influential prisoners usually got their own cells with a bed, desk and materials for reading and writing. Less-well-off prisoners could afford to pay for simply furnished cells known as \"pistoles\", which would be equipped with a rough bed and perhaps a table. The poorest would be confined to dark, damp, vermin-infested cells known as \"oubliettes\" (literally \"forgotten places\"). In keeping with the name, they were left to live or die in conditions that were ideal for the plague and other infectious diseases, which were rife in the unsanitary conditions of the prison.\n15th\u201318th century.\nWithout the king as a permanent resident, the buildings underwent many changes to fit its judicial and prison role. Louis XII had the Chamber des Comptes reconstructed, and redecorated the Grand Chamber, used by the Parlement of Paris. A flood of the Seine in the winter of 1689\u20131690 caused damage to the lower building, while a fire in 1737 destroyed the Chamber des Comptes. It was rebuilt by Ange-Jacques Gabriel. Another fire within the palace in 1776 caused even greater damage, reaching the chamber of the king, the gallery of merchants, and the main tower. The reconstruction following the 1776 fire added new cells to the ground level of the Conciergerie, and replaced the 12th century oratory with the present Chapel.\nThe Conciergerie and the Reign of Terror.\nThe Palais de la Cit\u00e9 and the Conciergerie played a central role in the French Revolution. On May 5, 1788, The Parlement of Paris, meeting in the Great Hall in 1788, refused to accept King Louis XVI's order to turn over two of its members for questioning and refused to leave the building. As the Revolution unfolded, The Parlement itself soon became unpopular. It was dismissed in 1790 by the new Constituent Assembly and the gates of the Palais de la Cit\u00e9 were locked.\nThe first Paris Commune and Sans-culottes seized the Tuileries Palace on August 10, 1792 and took charge of the government and the Conciergerie. During the September Massacres, the Communard militants entered the city's prisons and in four days killed more than 1300 prisoners, including priests and others suspected of being upper class or hostile to the revolution. The victims included a large group executed in the Women's Courtyard of the Conciergerie on September 2\u20133, 1792.\nOf the 488 prisoners in the Conciergerie, 74 women and 36 men were released by the mob and 378 was killed, of whom Marie Gredeler was the only female victim. \nThe Revolutionary Tribunal was created on March 10, 1793 by the more radical Montagnard faction over the opposition of the more moderate Girondins. The Tribunal met in the Grand Chamber of Palace on the upper floor between the Silver and Caesar towers. It was renamed the \"Hall of Liberty.\" Antoine Quentin Fouquier-Tinville, a Montagnard, was named public prosecutor and installed his office and residence next to the Chamber. In September 1793, the Terror intensified. The National Convention, controlled by the Montagnards, enacted the Law of Suspects on September 17, 1793. This act declared that anyone considered a counter-revolutionary or enemy of the republic was guilty of treason and thus, condemned to death. The Tribunal had five judges and 12 selected jury members. Trials were public and rapid and attracted large crowds. Verdicts could not be appealed. The number of monthly executions grew from 11 a month before the Law of Suspects to 124 per month.\nThe Queen, Marie Antoinette, was arrested on August 3, 1792 and first held in the Temple Prison with her family. The King was tried between December 3 and December 26, 1792 and executed 21 January 1793. The Queen was transferred from the Temple to the Conciergerie on the night of August 1\u20132, 1793. She was confined in a single-bed cell on the ground floor overlooking the Women's Courtyard. She was not allowed any writing instruments and was continually watched by two gendarmes. After several unsuccessful plots to free her were discovered, she was transferred to a different cell, where the current memorial chapel is located, and held there for 44 days. She was questioned in her cell on October 12 and was charged with three crimes: collusion with Austria, excessive expenditure and opposing the Revolution. Another charge, having incestuous relations with her son, was added during the trial. Her trial began on October 14, 1793 in the former Great Hall of the Palace. She had two court-appointed lawyers but they were only allowed less than a day to prepare their case. The trial lasted for two days, in which 41 witnesses testified. The trial concluded on 16 October 1793 and she was, as expected, sentenced to death and taken in a cart later that day to the guillotine, set up on Place de la Revolution, now Place de la Concorde.\nDuring the period of 1793\u201394 at the height of the Reign of Terror, the prison held some 600 prisoners. Most were transferred to the Conciergerie from other prisons and spent only a few days before their trial and sentencing, or at most a few weeks. Political and criminal prisoners were mixed together. Poorer prisoners were confined in collective cells on the lowest level with straw-covered floors. These prisoners were called \"Pailleaux\", or \"Straw sleepers.\" Others were confined to a square cell six feet wide and six feet long, with a narrow barred window. A small number of wealthier prisoners were able to bribe guards to have cells with two folding beds. These prisoners could send and receive mail, have their clothes washed and sometime have visitors. These prisoners were called \"Pistoliers,\" because they bribed the guards with pistole coins. However, these privileges ceased as the prison became more crowded and the Terror reached its peak.\nIn the spring of 1794, the tribunal began judging the moderate revolutionary leaders, including Danton and Camille Desmoulins. In May they tried and sentenced \u00c9lisabeth of France, sister of Louis XVI, \"For belonging to the Family of the Tyrant.\" On June 10, 1794, the court procedure was modified to allow speedier trials, witnesses were no longer needed and the definition of \"suspect\" was enlarged. By the end of June, an average of 38 persons a day were being tried, sentenced and sent to the guillotine. Between 1793 and 1795, two-thirds of prisoners tried were sentenced to death. At the peak of the Reign of Terror, four out of five prisoners were sentenced to death,\nBy the end of July 1794, the more moderate revolutionaries, fearing their own safety, turned against Robespierre and the other radical leaders. On July 27, a majority of the Convention voted for the arrest of Robespierre. Robespierre tried to commit suicide, was wounded and then taken to the Conciergerie, where he was given the former cell of Marie Antoinette. On July 28 he was condemned to death by the Tribunal and guillotined on the Place de la Revolution.\nIn August, the head of the tribunal, Fouquier-Tinville, was arrested and tried. He argued that \"the execution of the laws, justice and humanity were always my sole rules of conduct\" but he was confined for nine months in the Conciergerie and went to the guillotine on May 7, 1795. The tribunal was abolished on May 31, 1795. In 780 days, the tribunal had sentenced and executed 2,780 prisoners.\nThe early revolutionary period continued the prison's tradition of interning prisoners based on wealth, such that wealthier prisoners could rent a bed for 27 livres 12 sous for the first month, 22 livres 10 sous for subsequent months. Even when the price was decreased to 15 livres, the commanders of the prison made a fortune and as the Terror escalated, a prisoner could pay for a bed and be executed a few days later, freeing the bed for a new inmate who would then pay as well. One memoirist termed the Conciergerie \"the most lucrative furnished lodgings in Paris\". For most prisoners, the cramped cells were infested with rats, and the stench of urine permeated every room. As the Terror reached its peak, the special privileges for wealthy prisoners were largely reduced and ceased.\nThe prisoners, except those locked in the dungeons, were allowed to walk about the prisoners' gallery from 8 a.m. to an hour before sunset. Roll call was always a tortuous proceeding because many of the jailers were illiterate and it could take hours for them to confirm that all of the prisoners were accounted for. A principal jailer, who sat by the door, determined whether visitors would be allowed inside the prison. His decision depended more on his mood than any set proceedings. He was also in charge of resolving disputes between jailers and their charges.\nEach evening, the prisoners gathered in the courtyard outside the Tour Bonbec to hear the reading of the list of prisoners who would be tried the following day. Once prisoners were tried and sentenced, they were taken to Salle de la Toilette, where their personal belongings were confiscated. They were put onto carts in the May Courtyard and taken to guillotines at sites throughout Paris. Some of the prisoners held at the Conciergerie were the poet Andr\u00e9 Ch\u00e9nier, Charlotte Corday, Madame \u00c9lisabeth, Madame du Barry and the 21 Girondins, a group of moderate deputies, arrested and executed in the early beginning of the Reign of Terror.\n19th century to present.\nAfter the Restoration of the Bourbons in 1814 and again in 1815, after the Hundred Days reign of Napoleon Bonaparte, the Conciergerie returned to its role as a courthouse and prison. Its prisoners included Marshal Ney, one of Napoleon's Generals, who was sentenced there for breaking an oath to King Louis XVIII and joining Napoleon's during the Hundred Days; Georges Cadoudal, leader of the Chouannerie Breton royalist uprising, and the anarchist Ravachol. Later prisoners included the future Napoleon III, who was tried there in 1840 after a failed attempt to seize power, and sentenced to prison for life in the prison of Ham, from which he escaped.\nBeginning in 1812, the palace and portions of the Conciergerie were restored and rebuilt by architect A.M. Peyrle. His additions included the memorial chapel to Marie Antoinette. In 1847, work began on an enlarged Palace of Justice, with a new Court of Summary Jurisdiction placed between the Silver Tower and the Tour Bombec. In 1862 the Conciergerie was granted the status of an historical monument, though it still continued to be used as a prison. Between 1847 and 1871 the architects Joseph-Louis Duc and \u00c9tienne Th\u00e9dore Dommey built a new fa\u00e7ade for the Ministry of Justice, facing the Boulevard du Palais; built a new building for the Correctional Police; reconstructed the historic Salle des Pas-Perdus and restored the clock tower, and built a new building next to the Conciergerie for the Cour de Cassation. At the same time they went to work restoring the medieval halls of the Conciergerie, and in 1870 raised the height of the clock tower. Their work was interrupted by the uprising of the Paris Commune in 1871. In the final days of the Commune, the Communards set fire to the new Palais de Justice, badly damaging the interiors. Restoration and reconstruction lasted for another twenty years. The palace was finally completed with the finishing of the Tribunal correctionnel between 1904 and 1914. Some sections of the Conciergerie were opened to tourist visits in 1914. The prison continued to function until 1934, when it was definitively closed.\nThe prison was one of the backdrops for the 2024 Summer Olympics opening ceremony, with a tableau that referenced the beheading of Marie Antoinette and the Reign of Terror, with performances by metal band Gojira and opera singer Marina Viotti.\nDescription.\nThe Towers and facades.\nThe four medieval towers of the north fa\u00e7ade, along the Quai de l'Horloge between the Cour de Cassation and the Boulevard du Palais, are the most prominent exterior vestiges of the old Conciergerie.\nThe Tour Bonbec is a circular tower with battlements and a conical slate roof located at the west end of the Conciergerie, next to the Cour de Cassation. It is the oldest of the towers, constructed in the 13th century under Louis IX. It was originally one level shorter than the other towers, but in the 19th century, under Napoleon III, it was raised to its present height and form. The name of the tower comes from \"Bon Bec,\" a slang word for a \"Good talker\". It is reference to the torture chamber, which during the Reign of Terror was located in this tower; it referred to those prisoners who spoke freely under torture.\nThe gateway on the north is flanked by two circular towers with conical roofs, but without battlements. The Caesar Tower, on the left facing the building, is named in honor of the Roman Emperors, particularly Julius Caesar who visited the island during the Gallic Wars to meet with the leaders of the Gallic tribes, and the later Emperors and Roman governors who lived on the island. The two towers were constructed in the early 14th century by Philippe IV. Later in the 14th century, the lower portions of the towers were connected to the prison of the Conciergerie, and were used as dungeons until the French Revolution. The Silver Tower on the right was used to store part of the royal treasury. After the court moved to Versailles, The upper parts of the two towers were attached to the Grand Chamber of the Parlement, and were used to store the civil and criminal registries of the kingdom. In 1793\u201394, at the height of the Terror, the chief prosecutor of the Revolutionary Tribunal, Antoine Fouquier-Tinville, had his offices in the two towers, close to the courtroom of the Tribunal.\nThe most recent tower is the Tour de l'Horloge, or clock tower, at the corner of the Boulevard du Palais and the Quai de l'Horloge. It was completed by John II of France, and finished in 1350. It is the tallest tower of the Conciergerie, five levels high, with battlements and a lantern tower at the top; it served as both a watchtower and clock tower. The clock was made by Henri de Vic and installed during the reign of Charles V of France, and was the first public clock in Paris. In 1585 King Henry III of France embellished the clock with a new face, set on a blue background with gold fleurs-de-lis, and framed by statues of law and justice by sculptor Germain Pilon. The decoration was vandalised during the Revolution, and the large bell in the lantern, which was rung to celebrate major events, was taken out and melted down. The tower had been restored several times, most recently in 2012.\nThe current fa\u00e7ades were built later than the towers. The north fa\u00e7ade between the towers was built in the 19th century in Gothic Revival style. The eastern section, around the entrance, was built during the Bourbon Restoration in the early 19th century, while the western section was built by Joseph-Louis Duc and \u00c9tienne Th\u00e9odore Dommey in the second half of the 19th century, under Emperor Napoleon III. They were almost completed in 1871, when the Paris Commune took charge of the city. The Communards set the building on fire in the last days of the Commune, badly damaging the interiors, but it was rebuilt in the late 19th century.\nThe Hall of the Men-at-Arms and the \"Rue de Paris\".\nThe Hall of the Men-at-Arms (Salle des Gens d'Armes) was built in early 14th century by Philip IV on the ground floor. Its great size (originally long, now , wide, and high to the vault), makes it the largest non-religious Gothic hall in Europe. It served as a dining room and gathering place for the armed guards and servants attached to the palace, who numbered between one and two thousand persons. During the reign of Philip IV parts of the hall were sometimes used for the meetings of special commissions appointed by the King to investigate problems in the royal institutions in the French provinces. These parts would be separated from the rest of the hall by partitions or tapestries during the meetings.\nThe hall particularly provided staff and services for the Great Hall, located directly above it on the first floor. The lower hall was connected with upper hall by spiral staircases; part of one stairway is still in place. The hall was divided into four naves by a row of massive pillars in the center, flanked by two rows of cylindrical columns. Heat was provided by four large fireplaces around the hall. Thanks to the support of the columns and pillars, the hall originally had large windows, which were mostly sealed off in the 17th century when the Galerie Dauphine was built, though traces of them are still visible on the south wall.\nIn 1364, when Charles V left the palace, the hall was modified for its new prison functions. the last bay on the west was raised in height and separated by bars from the rest of the hall. This became the \"Rue de Paris\", the secure route to the prison cells, named after \"Monsieur de Paris\", the nickname of the city's executioner.\nHall of the Guards.\nThe Hall of the Guards (Salle des Gardes) was built by Philip IV at the same time as the Hall of the Men-at-Arms, in the early 14th century. It is on the north or the old palace, between the Tower of Caesar and Silver Tower and the Seine, and the private garden of the King on the west. It was first occupied by The Royal Guard, and later was used as the antechamber of the Parliament, which was located directly above. It is smaller than the Hall of the Men-art-Arms, long, wide, and high. The rib-vaulted roof, supported by three massive pillars, divides it into two naves. Like the hall of the Men-at-Arms, it was connected with the room above by a spiral stairway.\nWhen King Charles V moved the royal residence from the City Palace to the Louvre, the Hall of the Guards was converted into a prison. It was divided into dungeons for destitute prisoners. called \"pailleux\" or \"Straw-sleepers\", who were fed with only bread and water, and slept on the floor. It was usually overcrowded, with prisoners sometimes required to sleep in shifts. From 1780 onwards, male prisoners were able to get some exercise in the neighbouring courtyard. During the Reign of Terror, the Hall was used to confine prisoners before their trials in the courtroom of the Revolutionary Tribunal, in the hall above. The cells became so crowded that a second level, built of wood and accessed by ladders, was put into place. The Hall was restored in the 19th century by architect Antoine Marie Peyrle, who added some decorative details, including sculpture on the capitals of the columns.\nKitchen.\nThe kitchen pavilion was added in about 1353, shortly after the other large halls. Placed in the northwest corner, it was set slightly apart from the rest of the building, to reduce the risk of fire. It was originally installed on two levels, with the food of the royal family and guests prepared on the upper level, and for the staff on the lower level. When the king was in residence, meals were prepared in a large hearth on the upper floor, or prepared in the lower kitchen and taken upstairs on an outside ramp, no longer extant. The kitchen originally had eight large windows, but all but two were walled up after it became a prison. Sometimes both the upper and lower kitchens were employed for an event, such as the Banquet of the Three Kings on 6 January 1378, held by Charles V to welcome his uncle, Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor, and his cousin Wenceslaus, King of the Romans. The upstairs and downstairs kitchens worked together to prepare a banquet of three courses with ten dishes in each course, served in the Grand Hall to the royal guests and to eight hundred German and French knights.\nPrisoners' Corridor.\nThe upper level of the Conciergerie was considerably rebuilt in the 19th and 20th century. Nearly all of the original cells, including that of Marie Antoinette, were demolished and replaced with new rooms. After the prison was closed and became a museum, some of the new rooms were turned into galleries. In 1989 three rooms were recreated to depict the administrative function of the prison. The first is the cell-like office of the registrar who received the incoming prisoners, enter their names into a large book, and take their belongings. This office was originally located on the ground floor, near the Cour du Mai, the main entrance of prison, where prisoners arrived. Prisoners were then taken to their cells along the Prisoner's Corridor, which extended the length of the building. Next to the recreated registrar's office is a recreation of the office of the Concierge, the warden of the prison. The third recreated room is the Grooming Room, where prisoners were taken on the day of their execution. They undressed and put on a special collarless tunic, and their hair was cut to make easier the passage of the guillotine blade through their neck.\nIn addition to these rooms, the corridor has three recreations of prison cells, and four rooms displaying objects and documents illustrating the history of the building and the major events of Revolution.\nHall of Names and Prisoner's Chapel.\nThe Hall of Names has walls covered with the names of more than four thousand persons who were tried and sentenced to death by the Revolutionary Tribunal. Most of the prisoners came from middle or lower class, though twenty percent were from the former nobility and clergy. Between spring 1793 and 1794, nearly half the prisoners tried by the Tribunal left the prison alive, but that number dropped to only twenty percent between spring 1793 and 1794, the period of the Reign of Terror. Visitors can use a touch screen to consult the biographies of fifty famous prisoners executed during the Terror.\nThe Prisoner's Chapel was rebuilt in 1776, after a fire that destroyed the earlier oratory. It is little changed from the time of the Revolution. The altar, confessional and the large crucifix date to the 18th century. Women could attend the services seated separately on the upper level, behind bars. Black curtains behind the altar cover the entrance to the memorial chapel dedicated to Marie Antoinette. The chapel was probably used as a cell during the Terror, when the prison was particularly overcrowded.\nMemorial Chapel or Marie Antoinette Chapel.\nThe original cell of Marie Antoinette was destroyed after the restoration of the monarchy and was replaced in 1815 by the Memorial Chapel, dedicated to her, on the site of her cell. It was commissioned by Louis XVIII, brother of the executed Louis XVI, It contains a marble monument dedicated to the Queen, with \"The Queen's Testament\", and three paintings of the Queen depicting her imprisonment. The only light in the chapel comes from a single stained glass window, and the black faux-marble walls are marked with stone teardrops.\nWomen's Courtyard.\nThe Women's courtyard, where Marie Antoinette and other women prisoners were allowed to exercise, is little changed from the time of the Revolution. The arcades, garden, stone table, and fountain where prisoners could wash their garments, date from that period. At the back of the garden, in the northeast corner, is a small triangular area separated from the women's courtyard by a gate. This area belonged to the men's prison, and was probably used for the secure transfer of prisoners.\nNotes and citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75714", "revid": "40459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75714", "title": "Lowball (poker)", "text": "Group of variations of poker\nLowball or low poker is a variant of poker in which the normal ranking of hands is inverted. Several variations of lowball poker exist, differing in whether aces are treated as high cards or low cards, and whether straights and flushes are used.\nLow-poker ranking.\nLowball inverts the normal ranking of poker hands. There are three methods of ranking low hands, called ace-to-five low, deuce-to-seven low, and ace-to-six low. The 'ace-to-five' method is most common. A sub-variant within this category is 'high-low poker', in which the highest and lowest hands split the pot, with the highest hand taking any odd chips if the pot does not divide equally. Sometimes straights and/or flushes count in determining which hand is highest but not in determining which hand is lowest, being reckoned as a no-pair hand in the latter instance, so that a player with such a holding can win both ways and thus take the entire pot.\nLowball variants.\nThe most popular forms of lowball are ace-to-five lowball (also known as California lowball), and deuce-to-seven lowball (also known as Kansas City lowball). Ace-to-five lowball gets its name because the best hand at that form is 5-4-3-2-A. In ace-to-five lowball straights and flushes do not prevent a hand from being low. You win by simply having the five lowest cards. Deuce-to-seven lowball gets its name because the best hand at that form is 7-5-4-3-2 (not of the same suit).\nAce-to-five.\nAce-to-five low is the most common method for evaluating low hands in poker, nearly universal in U.S. casinos, especially in high-low split games.\nAs in all low hand games, pairs count against the player. That is, any hand with no pair defeats any hand with a pair; one pair hands defeat two pair or three of a kind, etc. No-pair hands are compared starting with the highest-ranking card, just as in high poker, except that the high hand loses. In ace-to-five low, straights and flushes are ignored, and aces play as the lowest card.\nFor example, the hand 8-5-4-3-2 defeats 9-7-6-4-3, because eight-high is lower than nine-high. The hand 7-6-5-4-3 defeats both, because seven-high is lower still, even though it would be a straight if played for high. Aces are low, so 8-5-4-3-A defeats 8-5-4-3-2. Also, A-A-9-5-3 (a pair of aces) defeats 2-2-5-4-3 (a pair of deuces), but both of those would lose to any no-pair hand such as K-J-8-6-4. In the rare event that hands with pairs tie, kickers are used just as in high poker (but reversed): 3-3-6-4-2 defeats 3-3-6-5-A.\nThis is called ace-to-five low because the lowest (and therefore best) possible hand is 5-4-3-2-A, called a \"wheel\". The next best possible hand is 6-4-3-2-A, followed by 6-5-3-2-A, 6-5-4-2-A, 6-5-4-3-A, 6-5-4-3-2, 7-4-3-2-A, 7-5-3-2-A, etc.\nWhen speaking, low hands are referred to by their highest-ranking card or cards. Any nine-high hand can be called \"a nine\", and is defeated by any \"eight\". Two cards are frequently used: the hand 8-6-5-4-2 can be called \"an eight-six\" and will defeat \"an eight-seven\" such as 8-7-5-4-A.\nAnother common notation is calling a particular low hand \"smooth\" or \"rough\". A smooth low hand is one where the remaining cards after the highest card are themselves very low; a rough low hand is one where the remaining cards are high. For instance, 8-7-6-3-A would be referred to as a \"rough eight\", but 8-4-3-2-A would be referred to as a \"smooth eight\". Some players refer to a hand containing a 4-3-2-A (in ace-to-five low or ace-to-six low) or a 5-4-3-2 (in deuce-to-seven low) as a \"nut\" (thus, in ace-to-five or ace-to-six, a 7-4-3-2-A would be called a \"seven nut\").\nHigh-low split games with ace-to-five low are usually played cards speak, that is, without a declaration. Frequently a qualifier is required for low (typically 8-high or 9-high). Some hands (particularly small straights and flushes) may be both the low hand and the high hand, and are particularly powerful (or particularly dangerous if they are mediocre both ways). Winning both halves of the pot in a split-pot game is called \"scooping\" or \"hogging\" the pot. The perfect hand in such a game is called a \"steel wheel\", 5-4-3-2-A of one suit, which plays both as perfect low and a straight flush high. Note that it is possible\u2014though unlikely\u2014to have this hand and still lose money. If the pot has three players, and one other player has a mixed-suit wheel, and a third has better straight flush, the higher straight flush wins the high half of the pot, and the two wheels split the low half, hence the steel wheel wins only a quarter of a three-way pot.\nAce-to-five lowball, a five-card draw variant, is often played with a joker added to the deck. The joker plays as the lowest card not already present in the hand (in other words, it is a wild card): 7-5-4-Joker-A, for example, the joker plays as a 2. This can cause some interesting effects for high-low split games. Let's say that Alice has 6-5-4-3-2 (called a \"straight six\")--a reasonably good hand for both high and low. Burt has Joker-6-5-4-3. By applying the rule for wild cards in straights, Burt's joker plays as a 7 for high, giving him a seven-high straight to defeat Alice's six-high straight. For low, the joker plays as an ace\u2014the lowest card not in Burt's hand\u2014and his hand also defeats Alice for low, because his low hand is 6-5-4-3-A, lower than her straight six by one notch. Jokers are very powerful in high-low split games.\nWheel.\nA wheel or bicycle is the poker hand 5-4-3-2-A, regardless of suit, which is a five-high straight, the lowest-ranking of the straights.\nIn ace-to-five low poker, where aces are allowed to play as low and straights and flushes do not count against a hand's \"low\" status, this is the best possible hand. In high/low split games, it is both the best possible low hand and a competitive high hand. The best deuce-to-seven low hand, 7-5-4-3-2, is also sometimes called \"the wheel\".\nAce-to-six.\nAce-to-six low is not as commonly used as the ace-to-five low method, but it is common among home games in the eastern region of the United States, some parts of the mid-west, and also common in the United Kingdom (it is the traditional ranking of London lowball, a stud poker variant).\nAs in all lowball games, pairs and trips are bad: that is, any hand with no pair defeats any hand with a pair; one pair hands defeat two pair or trips, etc. No-pair hands are compared starting with the highest-ranking card, just as in high poker, except that the high hand loses. In ace-to-six low, straights and flushes are accounted for (as compared to Ace-to-five) and count as high (and are therefore bad), and aces play as the lowest card.\nFor example, the hand 8-5-4-3-2 defeats 9-7-6-4-3, because eight-high is lower than nine-high. The hand 7-6-5-4-2 defeats both, because seven-high is lower still. The hand 7-6-5-4-3 would lose, because it is a straight. Aces are low, so 8-5-4-3-A defeats 8-5-4-3-2. Also, A-A-9-5-3 (a pair of aces) defeats 2-2-5-4-3 (a pair of deuces), but both of those would lose to any no-pair hand such as K-J-8-6-4. In the rare event that hands with pairs tie, kickers are used just as in high poker (but reversed): 3-3-6-4-2 defeats 3-3-6-5-A.\nIt is called ace-to-six low because the best possible hand is 6-4-3-2-A (also known as a Chicago Wheel or a 64), followed by 6-5-3-2-A, 6-5-4-2-A, 6-5-4-3-A, 7-4-3-2-A, 7-5-3-2-A, etc.\nWhen speaking, low hands are referred to by their highest-ranking card or cards. Any nine-high hand can be called \"a nine\", and is defeated by any \"eight\". Two cards are frequently used: the hand 8-6-5-4-2 can be called \"an eight-six\" and will defeat \"an eight-seven\" such as 8-7-5-4-A.\nA wild card plays as whatever rank would make the lowest hand. Thus, in 6-5-Joker-2-A, the joker plays as a 3, while in Joker-5-4-3-2 it would play as a 7 (an ace or six would make a straight).\nHigh-low split games with ace-to-six low are usually played with a declaration.\nDeuce-to-seven.\nDeuce-to-seven low is often called Kansas City lowball (the no-limit single-draw variation) or just \"low poker\". It is almost the direct opposite of standard poker: high hand loses. It is not as commonly used as the ace-to-five low method.\nAs in all lowball games, pairs and trips are bad: that is, any hand with no pair defeats any hand with a pair; one pair hands defeat two pair or trips, etc. No-pair hands are compared starting with the highest-ranking card, just as in high poker, except that the high hand loses. In deuce-to-seven low, straights and flushes count as high (and are therefore bad). Aces are always high (and therefore bad).\nFor example, the hand 8-5-4-3-2 defeats 9-7-6-4-3, because eight-high is lower than nine-high. The hand 7-6-5-4-2 defeats both, because seven-high is lower still. The hand 7-6-5-4-3 would lose, because it is a straight. Aces are high, so Q-8-5-4-3 defeats A-8-5-4-3. In the rare event that hands with pairs tie, kickers are used just as in high poker (but reversed): 3-3-6-4-2 defeats 3-3-6-5-2.\nSince the ace always plays high, A-5-4-3-2 (also called the Nut Ace) is not considered a straight; is simply ace-high no pair (it would therefore lose to any king-high, but would defeat A-6-4-3-2).\nThe best possible hand is 7-5-4-3-2 (hence the name deuce-to-seven low), followed by 7-6-4-3-2, 7-6-5-3-2, 7-6-5-4-2, 8-5-4-3-2, 8-6-4-3-2, etc. Hands are sometimes referred to by their absolute rank, e.g. 7-5-4-3-2 (#1, said 'number one', see table).\nWhen speaking, low hands are referred to by their highest-ranking card or cards. Any nine-high hand can be called \"a nine\", and is defeated by any \"eight\". Two cards are frequently used: the hand 8-6-5-4-2 can be called \"an eight-six\" and will defeat \"an eight-seven\" such as 8-7-5-4-2.\nAnother common notation is calling a particular low hand \"smooth\" or \"rough\". A smooth low hand is one where the remaining cards after the highest card are themselves very low; a rough low hand is one where the remaining cards are high. For instance, 8-7-6-4-2 would be referred to as a \"rough eight\", but 8-5-4-3-2 would be referred to as a \"smooth eight\".\nWild cards are rarely used in deuce-to-seven games, but if used they play as whatever rank would make the lowest hand. Thus, in 7-6-Joker-3-2, the joker plays as a 4, while in Joker-5-4-3-2 it would play as a 7 (a six would make a straight).\nHigh-low split games with deuce-to-seven low are usually played with a declaration.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75715", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75715", "title": "High hand", "text": ""}
{"id": "75717", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75717", "title": "Zealot (StarCraft)", "text": ""}
{"id": "75718", "revid": "49895848", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75718", "title": "Jean-Pierre Jeunet", "text": "French filmmaker\nJean-Pierre Jeunet (; born 3 September 1953) is a French director and screenwriter. \nJeunet debuted as a director with the acclaimed 1991 black comedy \"Delicatessen,\" collaborating with Marc Caro. Jeunet then co-wrote and -directed with Caro again on \"The City of Lost Children\" (1995). His work with science fiction and horror led him to direct \"Alien Resurrection\" (1997), the fourth film in the \"Alien\" film series and his first and thus far only American film. In 2001, Jeunet achieved his biggest success with \"Am\u00e9lie\", which won him international acclaim; the film reached BBC's 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century.\nJeunet is widely regarded as one of the most influential and important directors in modern French cinema, and his critical and commercial success has earned him two Academy Award nominations.\nLife and career.\nJean-Pierre Jeunet was born in Roanne, France. He bought his first camera at the age of 17 and made short films while studying animation at Cin\u00e9mation Studios. He befriended Marc Caro, a designer and comic book artist who became his longtime collaborator and co-director. They met at an animation festival in Annecy in the 1970s.\nTogether, Jeunet and Caro directed award-winning animations. Their first live-action film was \"The Bunker of the Last Gunshots\" (1981), a short film about soldiers in a bleak futuristic world. Jeunet also directed numerous advertisements and music videos, such as Jean-Michel Jarre's \"Zoolook\" (together with Caro).\nJeunet's films often resonate with the late twentieth-century French film movement \"cin\u00e9ma du look\" and allude to themes and aesthetics involving German expressionism, French poetic realism, and the French New Wave.\nJeunet and Caro's first feature film was \"Delicatessen\" (1991), a melancholy comedy set in a famine-plagued post-apocalyptic world, in which an apartment building above a delicatessen is ruled by a butcher who kills people in order to feed his tenants.\nThey next made \"The City of Lost Children\" (1995), a dark, multi-layered fantasy film about a mad scientist who steals children's dreams so that he can live indefinitely. The success of \"The City of Lost Children\" led to an invitation to direct the fourth film in the \"Alien\" series, \"Alien Resurrection\" (1997). This is where Jeunet and Caro ended up going their separate ways, as Jeunet believed this to be an amazing opportunity whereas Caro was not interested in working on a big-budget Hollywood movie on which he would lack creative control. Caro ended up assisting for a few weeks with costumes and set design, but then he decided to start a solo career in illustration and computer graphics.\nJeunet directed \"Am\u00e9lie\" (2001), the story of a woman who takes pleasure in doing good deeds but has trouble finding love herself, which starred Audrey Tautou. \"Am\u00e9lie\" was a huge critical and commercial success worldwide and was nominated for several Academy Awards. For his work on the film, Jeunet won a European Film Award for Best Director.\nIn 2004, Jeunet released \"A Very Long Engagement\", an adaptation of the novel by S\u00e9bastien Japrisot. The film, starring Audrey Tautou and Jodie Foster, chronicled a woman's search for her missing lover after World War I.\nIn 2005 Jean-Pierre Jeunet was involved in the creation of a detailed history project about the life of French aviator Louis Bl\u00e9riot. After a year Jeunet felt the movie was too close in historic timeline to \"A Very Long Engagement\" and the project was abandoned.\nIn 2009, he released \"Micmacs\", which is about a man and his friends who come up with an intricate and original plan to destroy two big weapons manufacturers.\nJeunet has also directed numerous commercials, including a 2'25\" film for Chanel N\u00b0 5 featuring his frequent collaborator Audrey Tautou.\nIn 2013, Jeunet released \"The Young and Prodigious T. S. Spivet\", an adaptation of Reif Larsen's book \"The Selected Works of T.S. Spivet\" that starred Kyle Catlett.\nIn 2016, Jeunet and Romain Segaud co-directed the three-minute stop-motion animation film \"Deux escargots s'en vont\", based on a poem by Jacques Pr\u00e9vert.\nSince his last release, Jeunet has tried to get other projects funded but has found it impossible to find investors willing to take a risk on his quirky films. He stated in 2019 that he may go to Netflix \"as a last resort\", and indeed his next film, \"Bigbug\", was released by the streaming video company in 2022.\nFilmography.\nShort film\nFeature film\nMusic video\nAppearances\nAwards and nominations.\nAcademy Awards\nC\u00e9sar Awards\nEuropean Film Awards\nEdgar Awards\nAwards and nominations received by Jeunet's films\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75726", "revid": "49681265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75726", "title": "Lists of universities and colleges by country", "text": "This is a list of lists of universities and colleges by country, sorted by continent and region. The lists represent educational institutions throughout the world which provide higher education in tertiary, quaternary, and post-secondary education.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "75735", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75735", "title": "Concepci\u00f3n, Chile", "text": "Concepci\u00f3n (; originally: \"Concepci\u00f3n de la Madre Sant\u00edsima de la Luz\", \"Conception of the Blessed Mother of Light\") is a city and commune in south-central Chile, and the geographical and demographic core of the Greater Concepci\u00f3n metropolitan area, it is the second largest city in Chile by urban area and one of the three major conurbations in the country. It has a significant impact on domestic trade being part of the most heavily industrialized region in the country. It is the seat of the Concepci\u00f3n Province and the capital of the Biob\u00edo Region. It sits about 500\u00a0km south of the nation's capital, Santiago.\nThe city was first settled in the Bay of Concepci\u00f3n, in the zone that would later become the commune of Penco, now part of the Concepci\u00f3n conurbation. The city's demonym, , comes from the place of its original foundation. The city center and historic district is located in the Valle de la Mocha (La Mocha Valley), where it relocated after serious damage left by an earthquake in 1751.\nThe origin of Concepci\u00f3n dates back to 1550, when it was founded by Pedro de Valdivia as part of the Spanish Empire, under the name of \"Concepci\u00f3n de Mar\u00eda Pur\u00edsima del Nuevo Extremo\", and was the capital of the Kingdom of Chile between 1565 and 1573, retaining the unofficial position of military capital for the rest of the colonial period. The city was an important site in the struggle for Chile's independence, with the Chilean declaration of Independence being held at Concepci\u00f3n's \"Plaza de la Independencia\". Until the election of Manuel Montt in 1851 as president, executive power in independent Chile was dominated by Concepci\u00f3n elites.\nThe city is a known college town in Chile, as it is home to numerous educational institutions, including the University of Concepci\u00f3n, the University of the B\u00edo B\u00edo, and the Catholic University of the Most Holy Conception. The commune also contains various historical bridges, murals, parks and lakes, as well as important cultural venues such as the \"Teatro Biob\u00edo\", the \"Casa del Arte\", the local Natural History Museum, and the \"Teatro Universidad de Concepci\u00f3n\".\nHistory.\nConcepci\u00f3n was founded by Don Pedro de Valdivia in 1550 north of the B\u00edo B\u00edo River, at the site which is today known as Penco. At that time it was given the name \"Concepci\u00f3n de Mar\u00eda Pur\u00edsima del Nuevo Extremo\" (Mary Immaculate Conception of the New End). The new settlement of Concepci\u00f3n was just a few kilometers north of \"La Frontera\" (The Frontier), the boundary between Spanish territory and the land of the Mapuche, an American Indian ethnic group that remained independent until the 1870s. The settlement was formally recognized by the Spanish authorities as a town two years later by a royal decree. It was given a coat-of-arms that is still in use today.\nAt the time of the Spanish arrival to the Concepci\u00f3n area chronicler Jer\u00f3nimo de Vivar noted local Mapuches wore gold and silver bracelets and \"sort of crowns\". This is interpreted either as Incan gifts, war spoils from defeated Incas, or the adoption of Incan metallurgy.\nAlthough Concepci\u00f3n was a significant military settlement for the Captaincy General of Chile, it was overrun and destroyed by Mapuche armies in 1554, and once again after being refounded in 1555. Concepci\u00f3n was restored during the governorship of Garc\u00eda Hurtado de Mendoza when he landed there and built a fort on the Alto de Pinto in 1557. The town was refounded once more on January 6, 1558, by captain Jer\u00f3nimo de Villegas. It became the headquarters of the military forces engaged against the Mapuche in La Araucan\u00eda over the next two centuries, growing to a population of 10,000 despite a siege in 1564 and other attacks by the Mapuche. Concepci\u00f3n was the home of the Real Audiencia from 1565 to 1575.\nEarthquakes and tsunamis, which razed the town in 1570, 1657, 1687, 1730 and 1751, led the authorities to move the town to its current site in the Valle de la Mocha, alongside the B\u00edo B\u00edo River; the old site lay empty until March 29, 1842, when the present town of Penco was founded.\nThe new site for the town of Concepci\u00f3n became the main town of the Intendancy of Concepci\u00f3n, whose jurisdiction extended from the Maule River to La Frontera. The first Intendant of Concepci\u00f3n was the Irishman Ambrose O'Higgins, Marquis of Osorno, who later became Royal Governor of Chile and Viceroy of Peru.\nWhen the First National Government Board met in Santiago on September 18, 1810, citizens of Concepci\u00f3n joined up. Concepci\u00f3n was used as the point of entry by the Spanish Army in the attempt by the Viceroyalty of Peru to re-conquer Chile. Concepci\u00f3n politicians and soldiers became a significant political force in the newly independent country.\nOn January 1, 1818, Ambrose O'Higgins's son, Bernardo O'Higgins, proclaimed and took the oath of the Chilean War of Independence in the main square of Concepci\u00f3n, which since then has been known as \"Plaza de la Independencia\". Until the moment of independence, the city had been the scene of various engagements in its old and new settlements.\nOn February 20, 1835, the town again was largely destroyed by an earthquake and had to be rebuilt.\nBy 1875, a key British community and German colony existed within the province. By 1895, there was an even larger Spanish presence.\nThe Universidad de Concepci\u00f3n, founded in 1919, became the first secular private university in Chile. The neighboring harbor of Talcahuano is the site of the largest naval base in Chile.\nOn February 27, 2010, an 8.8 magnitude earthquake struck the city of Concepci\u00f3n, killing more than 521 people and injuring thousands nationwide. Following the earthquake, geologists relying on global positioning satellite (GPS) data concluded that the city had been displaced roughly to the west as a result of the event. The tsunami that followed missed the city.\nAfter the 2010 Chile earthquake, a prison riot began in Concepci\u00f3n's El Manzano prison following a failed escape attempt by the inmates. Different parts of the prison were set on fire and the riot was controlled only after the guards shot into the air and received help from military units. As of March 5, 2010, a Peruvian field hospital has been deployed to the city.\nSeismology.\nLike most of the Chilean territory, the Concepci\u00f3n region is seismically active, with much of Concepci\u00f3n destroyed by a violent earthquake in 1939. An earthquake in 1953 damaged 15% of the town's buildings. Another major earthquake in 1960 had a nearby epicenter.\nOn February 27, 2010, a magnitude 8.8 earthquake struck at 35.846\u00b0S, 72.719\u00b0W, NNE of the city. The United States Geological Survey said the earthquake struck at 0334 GMT on Saturday at a depth of . The effects were felt as far away as S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil\u2014 away.\nEducation.\nConcepci\u00f3n is known as \"the university city\" thanks to the numerous universities within the urban agglomeration, such as the Universidad de Concepci\u00f3n, Universidad Cat\u00f3lica de la Sant\u00edsima Concepci\u00f3n and Universidad del Biob\u00edo. This city also has numerous headquarters for many other universities. In addition, this metropolis has a large educational offer, focused on institutes, centers of technical formation and the universities aforementioned.\nUniversities.\nThe University Pencopolitana whose name was Pontificia Universidad Pencopolitana de La Concepci\u00f3n (Pontifical Pencopolitana University of The Conception) was an old university founded through a decree of the Bishop of Concepci\u00f3n, delivered to the administration of the Society of Jesus which functioned between the years 1724 and 1767. On May 24, 1751, an earthquake followed by a tsunami, ravaged the city causing serious damage, including the destruction of the library of the university and all of its funds. As a product of the fury of the waters, a rich collection of texts of the governance of southern Chile were lost, which resulted in a disaster for the culture and collective memory of the city. Due to the natural disasters, it was decided to relocate the city to the called Valle de la Mocha, location where it is currently situated. Slowly the seminary was revived in the new location, in a period of decline in academic activity in Chilean monastic universities after the creation of the Universidad de San Felipe, yet some degrees continued to be granted before the Suppression of the Society of Jesus in 1767.\nThe aforementioned University is considered to be the natural and legitimate predecessor of the Universidad Cat\u00f3lica de la Sant\u00edsima Concepci\u00f3n (UCSC), erected by the Archbishop of Concepci\u00f3n in 1991, from the Talcahuano Regional Headquarters of the Pontificia Universidad Cat\u00f3lica de Chile.\nThe image of the Pontifical University of Concepci\u00f3n Pencopolitana, is still valid, for His Majesty King Juan Carlos I of Spain in his 1990 speech on the occasion of his inauguration as Doctor Honoris Causa in the University of Chile, in Santiago de Chile, said: \"The work of the Pontifical University Pencopolitana should not be ignored, even before the creation of the University of San Felipe\" (Juan Carlos's account fails to acknowledge the existence of San Felipe's predecessor, the Dominican Universidad de Santo Tom\u00e1s de Aquino, from the sixteenth century in Santiago).\nMeanwhile, the University of Chile allowed schools in the city to teach courses in law which allowed men to obtain a law degree. Among its students was Henry Urrutia Manzano, who decades later became president of the Supreme Court of Chile.\nThe Universidad de Concepci\u00f3n was created in 1919 by a group of citizens including Enrique Molina Garmendia, its first rector.\nEventually, the university began to receive state support, becoming part of the traditional universities, becoming one of the three most important universities in the country, and the most important at the regional level.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nThe city has a French international school, the \"Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais Charles de Gaulle\" and a German school, the Colegio Alem\u00e1n de Concepci\u00f3n, and two British schools, the Saint John's School and the Wessex School. The French school is located in the city downtown, the Wessex in Concepcion (nearer to Penco) and the German school and the Saint John's both in the San Pedro de la Paz area.\nThe defunct Concepci\u00f3n College was a parochial girls' day school and boarding school, established in 1878 by the Methodist Episcopal Church.\nTransportation.\nThe city is served by Carriel Sur International Airport in Talcahuano. The metro area's public transportation comprises a number of bus lines that run through several avenues and streets of the communes belonging to the agglomeration, as well as the commuter rail system known as Biotr\u00e9n.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Concepci\u00f3n is classified as K\u00f6ppen: \"Csb, warm summer mediterranean\", with a dry mild summer. The cool waters of the Pacific Ocean help to maintain mild temperatures throughout the year. Temperatures rarely exceed or fall below . In the six-month period between May and October, the city receives approximately 83% of its total annual precipitation, which totals . The wettest month since records began in 1912 was June 2000 with , whilst all months from November to April have been rainless on occasions.\nAs might be expected for such a large urban area heavily dependent on wood-burning for heat and diesel for transport, the air in Concepci\u00f3n is third-most polluted in Chile, after Santiago and Temuco.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to data collected in 2002 in the Census of the National Institute of Statistics, the township has an area of and a population of 216,061 inhabitants, of whom 103,860 are men and 112,201 are women.\nAs a commune, Concepcion is home to 14.35% of the total population of the region. 1.88% (4,058 persons) is for the rural population and 98.12% (212,003) for the urban population. Moreover, 5.5% of the country's population lives in the Greater Concepci\u00f3n metro area.\nBetween 1970 and 1982 there is a large increase in the population. One reason is the inclusion of San Pedro, segregated from the municipality of Coronel.\nThe Concepci\u00f3n commune population sharply declined in 1996 as its territory was divided, creating Chiguayante and San Pedro de la Paz. The number of people living in these communes has grown quickly since they have become bedroom communities of \"Concepci\u00f3n\", i.e. residential cities that do not have a center with many shops, as is the case of Concepcion.\nThere is a significant percentage of foreign residents in the city, the most numerous are the Spanish, Italian and US expatriate communities. There are also smaller segments of German, French, British, Dutch, Greek, Portuguese, Croatian, Scandinavian, Arab and Australian descendants in a city settled by waves of immigration.\nCultural life.\nTo an outsider, there may be confusion between the demonyms of the inhabitants of Concepci\u00f3n and the nearby city of Penco. Due to the previous location of Concepci\u00f3n being where Penco currently stands, inhabitants of Concepci\u00f3n are called \"penquistas\" while inhabitants of Penco are known as \"pencones\". Additionally, the unofficial term \"pencopolitano\" has been coined to refer to locals of any commune belonging to the metropolis or, in a wider definition, to the Concepci\u00f3n province, although the term penquista can technically be used in this case as well.\nIn 2014, the \"Rock en Conce\" festival began to take shape. It would be held outdoors, in the city's \"Parque Bicentenario\" (Bicentennial Park), and access to it would be free. The aim of the festival would be to restore the musical spotlight that the city embodied and that earned it the reputation of being the \"cradle of Chilean rock\" and, at the same time, to establish itself as a major tourist attraction for the city. Its first edition took place on Saturday, March 7, 2015, and since then it has been held with great success every year at the end of each summer, bringing together emerging local bands with major and renowned artists from the national and international scene.\nMusic.\nConcepci\u00f3n has been described as the \"Chilean capital of rock\", since numerous bands of this genre have started their careers in the city, such as Los Tres, Los Bunkers, Emociones Clandestinas, Santos Dumont, De Saloon, Machuca and Julius Popper, among others. Numerous bands have played their first major concerts in the city, such as Los Prisioneros.\nThe city's music venues are a main feature of the tourist route, \"La Ruta de la M\u00fasica\", a project driven by the National Service of Tourism (SERNATUR), where besides the rock scene, the local jazz and folk scenes are also shown.\nSports.\nConcepci\u00f3n was one of the host cities of the official 1959 Basketball World Cup, where Chile won the bronze medal.\nToday, Concepci\u00f3n is home to three professional football teams:\nThe most notable professional basketball team is:\nEconomy.\nHistorically characterized by a strong manufacturing industry, Concepci\u00f3n has also been a major center for distribution and services and the financial basis of the regional economy.\nCommerce.\nTrade in the city is concentrated in the \"Plaza Independencia\" (Independence Square), the pedestrian street \"Alonso de Ercilla y Z\u00fa\u00f1iga\" (built in 1981), and along the major avenues. One such avenue is the \"Diego Barros Arana\" street which has developed into the commercial center of the city and the region was until 1907 even known as \"calle Comercio\" (\"Commerce Street\"). New commercial centers are being developed around the old central station and the new civic district as a part of the Chilean bicentennial (September 18, 2010). A considerable percentage of local trade is taking place in settlements around the city, in communes such as Hualp\u00e9n, Talcahuano and San Pedro de la Paz, where there are bustling shopping centers, such as Mall Plaza del Tr\u00e9bol, and where there is a constant commercial development.\nOther commercial spots, related to food, are the Vega Monumental and Mercado Central de Concepci\u00f3n (Central Market of Concepci\u00f3n) places offering various services and agricultural and livestock products.\nInternational Relations.\nThe city of Concepci\u00f3n hosts several international relations institutions, such as the Regional Unit of International Affairs (URAI) of the Regional Government of Biob\u00edo, responsible for analyzing and managing the region\u2019s bilateral and multilateral relations with Latin America and the rest of the world; the International Relations Commission of the Biob\u00edo Regional Council; and the regional office of the General Directorate for Export Promotion (ProChile).\nMigration Management.\nIn the area of international relations and migration management, the main actors in Concepci\u00f3n are the regional office of the National Migration Service, the Migration and International Police Department of the Investigations Police of Chile, and the Migrant Office of the Municipality of Concepci\u00f3n.\nInternationalization in Higher Education.\nIn the field of international relations and higher education, the main actors in Concepci\u00f3n include the Directorate of International Relations and the Center for European Studies (CEE) of the University of Concepci\u00f3n, the General Directorate of Institutional Relations of the University of B\u00edo-B\u00edo, the Directorate of International Relations of the Concepci\u00f3n campus of the University of Development, and both the International Relations Unit of the Directorate of Outreach and Institutional Relations and the Asia-Pacific Studies and Development Center (CEDAP) of the Catholic University of the Most Holy Conception.\nAdministration.\nAs a commune, Concepci\u00f3n is a third-level administrative division of Chile administered by a municipal council, headed by an alcalde who is directly elected every four years. The 2016\u20132020 mayor was \u00c1lvaro Ortiz Vera (Christian Democratic Party), who was first elected in 2012. The communal council has 10 seats, which are currently occupied (2016\u20132020) by three for Christian Democratic Party, two for National Renewal, two for Independent Democrat Union, one for Communist Party, one for Socialist Party, and one for Radical Party. The following members are:\nWithin the electoral divisions of Chile, Concepci\u00f3n is represented in the Chamber of Deputies by Gaston Saavedra (PS), Jos\u00e9 Miguel Ortiz (PDC), Jaime Toha (PS), Felix Gonzalez (PEV), Enrique Van Rysselberghe (UDI), Sergio Bobadilla (UDI), Francesca Mu\u00f1oz (RN) and Leonidas Romero (RN), as part of the 21st electoral district (Concepci\u00f3n Province without Lota). The commune is represented in the Senate by Alejandro Navarro Brain (MAS) and Jacqueline Van Rysselberghe (UDI) as part of the 12th senatorial constituency (Biob\u00edo-Costa).\nNotable events.\nA 23 year old Chilean forestry student named Jorge Matute disappeared mysteriously in a discotheque that was located close to Concepci\u00f3n on 20 November 1999. In February 2004 on a road in Santa Juana, Matute's remains were found and identified.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nConcepci\u00f3n's sister cities are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75743", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75743", "title": "ICL VME", "text": "Mainframe operating system by ICL\nVME (\"Virtual Machine Environment\") is a mainframe operating system developed by the UK company International Computers Limited (ICL, now part of the Fujitsu group). Originally developed in the 1970s (as VME/B, later VME 2900) to drive ICL's then new 2900 Series mainframes, the operating system is now known as OpenVME incorporating a Unix subsystem, and runs on ICL Series 39 and Trimetra mainframe computers, as well as industry-standard x64 servers.\nOrigins.\nThe development program for the New Range system started on the merger of International Computers and Tabulators (ICT) and English Electric Computers in 1968. One of the fundamental decisions was that it would feature a new operating system. A number of different feasibility and design studies were carried out within ICL, the three most notable being:\nThe chief architect of VME/B was Brian Warboys, who subsequently became professor of software engineering at the University of Manchester. A number of influences can be seen in its design, for example Multics and ICL's earlier George 3 operating system; however it was essentially designed from scratch.\nVME/B was viewed as primarily competing with the System/370 IBM mainframe as a commercial operating system, and adopted the EBCDIC character encoding.\nHistory.\nWhen New Range was first launched in October 1974, its operating system was referred to as \"System B\". By the time it was first delivered it had become \"VME/B\".\nVME/K (originally known internally as \"System T\" for \"Tiny\") was developed independently (according to Campbell-Kelly, \"on a whim of Ed Mack\"), and was delivered later with the smaller mainframes such as the 2960. At the time VME/B was still plagued with performance and reliability problems, and the mainly American management team had misgivings about it.\nThere was also a project known as System D, which was an advanced, highly modular operating system designed for configuring and building customized near real-time applications. Although it was used to bid on a system for British Rail it was subsequently cancelled because of engineering resource constraints.\nICL had sold a large system to the European Space Agency to process data from Meteosat at its operation centre in Darmstadt. A bespoke variant of VME/K, known as VME/ESA was developed on-site to meet the customer's requirements. \nFollowing a financial crisis in 1980, new management was brought into ICL: Christophor Laidlaw as Chairman, and Robb Wilmot as Managing Director. An early decision of the new management was to drop VME/K. Thus in July 1981, VME 2900 was launched. Although presented to the customer base as a merger of VME/B and VME/K, it was in reality the VME/B base with a few selected features from VME/K grafted on. This provided the opportunity to drop some obsolescent features, which remained available to customers who needed them in the form of the \"BONVME\" option.\nThe \"2900\" suffix was dropped at System Version 213 (SV213) when ICL launched Series 39 in 1985 as the successor to the original 2900 series, and the \"Open\" prefix was added after SV294. VME became capable of hosting applications written originally for Unix through a UNIX System V Release 3 based subsystem, called VME/X, adapted to run under VME and using the ASCII character encoding.\nIn 2007 Fujitsu announced a VME version run as a hosted subsystem, called superNova, within Microsoft Windows, or SUSE or Red Hat Enterprise Linux on x86-64 hardware.\nIn 2012 the VME user group, AXiS, announced that after almost 40 years it would be disbanding because of the reduced user base.\nFujitsu intended to support VME on customer computers until 2020.\nIn 2020 Fujitsu transferred 13 HM Revenue and Customs applications from their computers onto Fujitsu's virtual managed VME hosting platform.\nAs of 2021, the Department for Work and Pensions completely replaced its VME based systems, following the completion of its award winning VME-R replacement programme.\nArchitecture.\nVME is structured as a set of layers, each layer having access to resources at different levels of abstraction. Virtual resources provided by one layer are constructed from the virtual resources offered by the layer below. Access to the resources of each layer is controlled through a set of Access Levels: in order for a process to use a resource at a particular access level, it must have an access key offering access to that level. The concept is similar to the \"rings of protection\" in Multics. The architecture allows 16 access levels, of which the outer 6 are reserved for user-level code.\nOrthogonally to the access levels, the operating system makes resources available to applications in the form of a Virtual Machine (VM). A VM can run multiple processes. In practice, a VM in VME is closer to the concept of a process in other operating systems, while a VME process (or application-created sub-process) is more like a thread in other systems. However, processes running within a VM cannot run concurrently and thus resemble user threads found in other systems. A dedicated instruction is involved in the transfer of control between processes sharing the same VM.\nThe allocation of resources to a virtual machine uses a stack model: when the stack is popped, all resources allocated at that stack level are released. Calls from an application to the operating system are therefore made by a call that retains the same process stack, but with a change in protection level; the resulting efficiency of system calls is one of the features that makes the architecture competitive.\nCommunication between Virtual Machines is achieved by means of Events (named communication channels) and shared memory areas. The hardware architecture also provides semaphore instructions INCT (increment-and-test) and TDEC (test-and-decrement).\nFiles and other persistent objects are recorded in a repository called the Catalogue. The file naming hierarchy is independent of the location of a file on a particular tape or disk volume. In days where there was more need for offline storage, this made it easy to keep track of files regardless of their location, and to move files between locations without renaming them. As well as files, the Catalogue keeps track of users and user groups, volumes, devices, network connections, and many other resources. Metadata for files can be held in an object called a File Description. The Catalogue was probably the first example of what would later be called an entity-relationship database.\nInterrupts are handled by creating a new stack frame on the stack for the relevant process, handling the interrupt using this new environment, and then popping the stack to return to the interrupted process.\nRun-time exceptions, referred to as \"contingencies\", are captured by the Object Program Error Handler (OPEH), which can produce a report (equivalent to a stack trace), either interactively or written to a journal.\nOMF.\nCompiled object code is maintained in a format called OMF (Object Module Format), which is both the compiler output and the format used by the loader. Various compilers are available, as well as utilities, notably the Collector, which links the code in several OMF modules into a single module, for more efficient loading at run-time, and the Module Amender, which allows patching of the instructions in an OMF module to fix bugs, using assembly language syntax.\nSCL.\nThe command language for VME is known as SCL (System Control Language).\nThis is much more recognizably a typed high-level programming language than the job control or shell languages found in most other operating systems: it can be likened to scripting languages such as JavaScript, though its surface syntax is derived from Algol 68.\nSCL is designed to allow both line-at-a-time interactive use from a console or from a command file, and creation of executable scripts or programs (when the language is compiled into object module format in the same way as any other VME programming language). The declaration of a procedure within SCL also acts as the definition of a simple form or template allowing the procedure to be invoked from an interactive terminal, with fields validated according to the data types of the underlying procedure parameters or using the default procedure parameter values.\nThe built-in command vocabulary uses a consistent naming convention with an imperative verb followed by a noun: for example DELETE_FILE or DISPLAY_LIBRARY_DETAILS. The command can be written in full, or in an abbreviated form that combines standard abbreviations for the verb and noun: for example XF (X for DELETE, F for FILE) or DLBD (D for DISPLAY, LB for LIBRARY, D for DETAILS).\nSCL is block-structured, with begin/end blocks serving the dual and complementary roles of defining the lexical scope of variable declarations, and defining the points at which resources acquired from the operating system should be released. Variables in the language (which are accessible from applications in the form of environment variables) can have a number of simple types such as strings, superstrings (sequences of strings), booleans, and integers, and are also used to contain references to system resources such as files and network connections.\nIt is possible to \"disassemble\" an SCL program from OMF back into SCL source code using the READ_SCL (or RSCL) command. However the output is not always perfect, and will often include errors that would stop re-compilation without user intervention.\nA simple code example can be seen on the 99 bottles of beer website.\nA more realistic example, where SCL is used to compile a program written in S3, is shown below. This example is taken from the Columbia University Archive of implementations of Kermit.\nCommands illustrated in this fragment include WHENEVER (declares error handling policy), ASSIGN_LIBRARY (binds a local name for a file directory), DELETE_FILE (Makes a permanent file temporary, and it is then deleted at the END of the block), S3_COMPILE (compiles a program written in S3: this command breaks the usual verb-noun convention), NEW_MESSAGE_TEXT_MODULE (creates a module containing parameterized error messages suitable for localization) and COMPILE_SCL, which compiles an SCL program into object code.\nThe COLLECT command combines different object code modules into a single module, and is driven by its own local command file which is incorporated inline in the SCL between the delimiters \"----\" and \"++++\". The sub-commands INPUT and NEWMODULE identify the names of the input and output modules; SUPPRESS and RETAIN determine the external visibility of named procedures within the collected module; and LISTMODULE requests a report describing the output module.\nNote that \".\" is used to separate the parts of a hierarchic file name. A leading asterisk denotes a local name for a library, bound using the ASSIGN_LIBRARY command. The number in parentheses after a file name is a generation number. The operating system associates a generation number with every file, and requests for a file get the latest generation unless specified otherwise. Creating a new file will by default create the next generation and leave the previous generation intact; this program however is deliberately choosing to create generation 101, to identify a public release.\nEnhanced security variants.\nAs a result of ICL's heavy involvement with delivery of computer services to the UK Public Sector, in particular those with special security requirements such as OPCON CCIS, it was an early entrant into the market for Secure Systems.\nVME formed a core of ICL's activities in the Secure Systems arena. It had the advantage that as the last large-scale operating system ever designed, and one built from scratch, its underlying architecture encompassed many of the primitives needed to develop a Secure System, in particular the hardware assisted Access Control Registers (ACR) to limit to privileges that could be taken by any process (including Users).\nThis led to the UK Government's Central Computing and Telecommunications Agency (CCTA) funding \"Project Spaceman\" in the mid 1980s for ICL Defence Technology Centre (DTC) to develop an enhanced security variant of VME. ICL launched this as a pair of complementary products, with the commercial release being called High Security Option (HSO), and the public sector release, including Government Furnished Encryption (GFE) technologies, being called Government Security Option (GSO).\nHSO and GSO were formally tested under the CESG UK (Security) Evaluation Scheme, one of the predecessors to ITSEC and Common Criteria, and in doing so became the first mainstream operating system to be formally Certified.\nUnix and open systems interoperability.\nICL had originally announced a hosted Unix facility for VME in 1985, with availability and support for strategic applications to arrive within eighteen months. This facility, supporting SVR1, was reportedly in \"field trials\" and was to be upgraded to SVR2 prior to a general release in the summer of 1987. Limited availability was then announced to existing VME customers, with others being guided towards ICL's Clan range of Unix departmental systems.\nIn October 1987, ICL made the SV221 release of VME available with support for running SVR2 as a VME Unix System guest. This implementation, described as an \"unmarketed\" product also known as VNS, informed the design of VME/X, a largely new implementation that was itself released in 1991 and recognised as XPG3 compliant, with XPG4 base 1 compliance following in 1992. ICL's OpenVME promotional material noted that VME had been the first non-Unix operating system to gain XPG3 compliance, and the first operating system of any kind to gain XPG4 base compliance.\nIn 1995, ICL added support for the Internet protocol suite in the form of its UNIX Interworking Option for OpenVME, featuring implementations of TCP/IP, UDP/IP and support for the File Transfer Protocol, Telnet and Network File System (NFS) protocols. The NFS functionality included a server that enabled portions of the OpenVME filestore to be served to NFS clients, and the Telnet functionality allowed users on an OpenVME system to access Unix hosts, also supporting the provision of a login facility on OpenVME for remote users using the protocol. Alongside the Berkeley sockets programming interface, already widely used by Unix applications, the product also offered the X/Open Transport Interface for protocol independence and to support the OSI protocols customarily used by VME software.\nSeries 39.\nThe Series 39 range introduced Nodal Architecture, a novel implementation of distributed shared memory that can be seen as a hybrid of a multiprocessor system and a cluster design. Each machine consists of a number of nodes, and each node contains its own order-code processor (CPU) and main memory. Virtual machines are typically located (at any one time) on one node, but have the capability to run on any node and to be relocated from one node to another. Discs and other peripherals are shared between nodes. Nodes are connected using a high-speed optical bus, which is used to provide applications with a virtual shared memory. Memory segments that are marked as shared (public or global segments) are replicated to each node, with updates being broadcast over the inter-node network. Processes which use unshared memory segments (nodal or local) run in complete isolation from other nodes and processes.\nDevelopment process.\nVME was originally written almost entirely in S3, a specially designed system programming language based on Algol 68R (however, VME/K was written primarily in the SFL assembly language). Although a high-level language is used, the operating system is not designed to be independent of the underlying hardware architecture: on the contrary, the software and hardware architecture are closely integrated.\nFrom the early 1990s onwards, some entirely new VME subsystems were written partly or wholly in the C programming language.\nFrom its earliest days, VME was developed with the aid of a software engineering repository system known as CADES, originally designed and managed by David Pearson (computer scientist) and built for the purpose using an underlying IDMS database. CADES is not merely a version control system for code modules: it manages all aspects of the software lifecycle from requirements capture, design methodology and specification through to field maintenance. \nCADES was used in VME module development to hold separate definitions of data structures (Modes), constants (Literals), procedural interfaces and the core algorithms. Multiple versions ('Lives') of each of these components could exist. The algorithms were written in System Development Language (SDL), which was then converted to S3 source by a pre-processor. Multiple versions of the same modules could be generated.\nApplication development tools.\nThe application development tools offered with VME fall into two categories:\nThe toolset on VME is unusually homogeneous, with most customers using the same core set of languages and tools. As a result, the tools are also very well integrated. Third-party tools have made relatively little impression.\nFor many years the large majority of VME users wrote applications in COBOL, usually making use of the IDMS database and the TPMS transaction processing monitor. Other programming languages included Fortran, Pascal, ALGOL 68RS, Coral 66 and RPG2, but these served minority interests. Later, in the mid 1980s, compilers for C became available, both within and outside the Unix subsystem, largely to enable porting of software such as relational database systems. It is interesting that a PL/I subset compiler was written by the EEC, to assist in porting programs from IBM to ICL hardware.\nThe compilers developed within ICL share a common architecture, and in some cases share components such as code-generators. Many of the compilers used a module named ALICE [Assembly Language Internal Common Environment] and produced an early form of precompiled code (P-Code) termed ROSE, making compiled Object Module Format (OMF) libraries loadable on any machine in the range. .\nSystem Programming Languages: S3 and SFL.\nThe primary language used for developing both the VME operating system itself and other system software such as compilers and transaction processing monitors is S3. This is a high level language based in many ways on Algol 68, but with data types and low-level functions and operators aligned closely with the architecture of the 2900 series.\nAn assembly language SFL (System Function Language) is also available. This was used for the development of VME/K, whose designers were not confident that a high-level language could give adequate performance, and also for the Kernel of the IDMS database system on account of its origins as a third-party product. SFL was originally called Macro Assembler Programming LanguagE (MAPLE), but as the 2900 architecture was being positioned as consisting of high level language machines the name was changed at the request of ICL Marketing. It had been developed as a part of the toolkit for System D, which was subsequently cancelled. Related families of assemblers for other architectures (CALM-xx running under VME, PALM-xx developed in Pascal and running on various hosts) were developed for internal use.\nNeither S3 nor SFL was ever promoted as a commercial development tool for end-user applications, as neither were normally delivered as a standard part of the operating system, nor were they explicitly marketed as products in their own right. Both SFL and S3 were however available as options to user organisations and third parties who had a specific need for them.\nQuickBuild.\nThe QuickBuild application development environment on VME has been highly successful despite the fact that applications are largely locked into the VME environment. This environment is centred on the Data Dictionary System (DDS, also called OpenDDS), an early and very successful attempt to build a comprehensive repository supporting all the other tools, with full support for the development lifecycle. As well as database schemas and file and record descriptions, the dictionary keeps track of objects such as reports and queries, screen designs, and 4GL code; it also supports a variety of models at the requirements capture level, such as entity-relationship models and process models.\nThe QuickBuild 4GL is packaged in two forms: \nBoth are high-level declarative languages, using Jackson Structured Programming as their design paradigm. ApplicationMaster is unusual in its approach to application design in that it focuses on the user session as if it were running in a single conversational process, completely hiding the complexity of maintaining state across user interactions. Because the 4GL and other tools such as the screen designer work only with the DDS dictionary, which also holds the database schemas, there is considerable reuse of metadata that is rarely achieved with other 4GLs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75749", "revid": "86247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75749", "title": "Ewoks", "text": ""}
{"id": "75751", "revid": "2699102", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75751", "title": "James Cook University", "text": "Public university in North Queensland, Australia\nJames Cook University (JCU) is a public university in North Queensland, Australia. The second oldest university in Queensland, JCU is a teaching and research institution. The university's main campuses are located in the tropical cities of Cairns and Townsville, and one in the city state of Singapore. JCU also has study centres in Mount Isa, Mackay, Thursday Island and Rockhampton. A Brisbane campus, operated by Russo Higher Education, delivers undergraduate and postgraduate courses to international students. The university's main fields of research include environmental sciences, biological sciences, mathematical sciences, earth sciences, agricultural and veterinary sciences, technology and medical and health sciences.\nHistory.\nIn 1957, Professor John Douglas Story, vice chancellor of the University of Queensland, proposed a regional university college be established to cater to the people of North Queensland. At that time, the only higher education providers were located in the state capital, Brisbane. On 27 February 1961, the University College of Townsville was opened.\nThe university became the \"James Cook University of North Queensland\" with the passage of an act by the Queensland Parliament. It was assented by Queen Elizabeth II herself on 20 April 1970 during a royal visit to Queensland, with the Queen also officially opening the university.\nIn 2020, James Cook University celebrated its 50th anniversary with a Treasures exhibition, showcasing 50 collection items from Special Collections, Eddie Koiki Mabo Library, James Cook University, Townsville.\nThe rare collection item \u2013 'James Cook University Development: Pimlico to the First Chancellor archival footage, 1960 \u2013 1970' was one of the Treasures selected for the anniversary year. The 12min film preserved on NQHeritage, the University Library's Special Collections online repository, shows footage of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II arriving at the official ceremony and being introduced to the official party. Their Royal Highnesses first appear in the film at 6:06 minutes.\nThe namesake is British sea captain James Cook, who is best known for being the first European to explore the eastern coast of Australia. A year after JCU's proclamation, Cyclone Althea struck the Townsville region. This, together with the destruction caused by Cyclone Tracy in Darwin 1974, prompted the establishment of a cyclone research facility. The Cyclone Testing Station started out as a small project of Professor Hugh Trollope and began its operations on 1 November 1977 as \"James Cook Cyclone Structural Testing Station\". Its name was later changed to \"The Cyclone Testing Station\" in 2002. The Cyclone Testing Station operates as a self funded unit of the College of Science, Technology and Engineering.\nOn 1 January 1982, JCU amalgamated with The Townsville College of Advanced Education located adjacent to the main campus in Douglas. The university established a campus in Cairns in 1987 which moved to its current location in the suburb of Smithfield in 1995. On 1 January 1991, the School of Art and Design of the Townsville College of TAFE was transferred to JCU. The current name of \"James Cook University\" became official on 1 January 1998. In 2003 the university opened an international campus in Singapore. The university further expanded its presence by establishing another campus in Brisbane, Queensland in 2006.\nJCU Singapore moved campuses in February 2015. The Hon. Tony Abbott MP, Prime Minister of Australia officially opened the new JCU Singapore campus at 149 Sims Drive on 28 June 2015. In 2015, JCU opened the JCU Townsville City campus. In 2017, JCU opened the JCU Cairns, Bada-jali campus in Cairns CBD.\nJCU celebrated its 50th anniversary on 20 April 2020. To honour Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples' continuing contribution to the university, JCU gave Indigenous names to a number of its locations:\nAn Indigenous language name is still to be announced for the JCU Thursday Island campus.\nIn the early hours of 4 April 2019, a large fire broke out in the A Wing of University Hall requiring the evacuation of over 200 students. There were no serious injuries, although several students were treated for smoke inhalation. Immediately following the fire, the university rushed to find emergency housing for the residents affected. The renovation of the closed Clark Wing at St. Mark's College and construction of the new 'The Village' housing precinct began, and provided replacement housing for all residents from the A and B Wings of University Hall.\nCampuses and buildings.\nJames Cook University operates three main campuses, located in the tropical cities of Cairns and Townsville in Australia, and the international city of Singapore. JCU's Brisbane campus offers courses for international students. The university also operates study centres in Mackay, Mount Isa, Thursday Island and Rockhampton. These study centres provide programs and support for students living in rural and remote areas.\nJCU Cairns, Nguma-bada Campus, Smithfield.\nJCU's Cairns, Nguma-bada campus is located 15\u00a0kilometres north of the Cairns central business district, in the suburb of Smithfield. JCU moved to this location from its original inner-city site in 1995. About 3,000 students study at JCU Cairns, Nguma-bada campus, Smithfield, including 335 international students. Located on the campus grounds are the Australian Tropical Herbarium, JCU Dental and The Cairns Institute.\nThe JCU Ideas Lab was completed in July, 2020. The $30M eco-friendly building brings together students, staff and community entrepreneurs to progress Internet of Things Engineering and data science. In 2023, the first cohort of Medicine students commenced in Cairns.\nA second campus, JCU Cairns, Bada-jali campus, is located in Cairns' CBD. The campus delivers a diverse range of progressive facilities and services for the university.\nJCU Townsville, Bebegu Yumba Campus, Douglas.\nJCU's Townsville, Bebegu Yumba campus is the university's largest campus and is located on 386 hectares in the suburb of Douglas, near the army base and the lee of Mount Stuart. Originally located in the suburb of Pimlico, the university moved to its current site in 1967. Over 10,000 students study at the JCU Townsville, Bebegu Yumba campus, including over 1,300 international students. Adjacent to the university is the Townsville Hospital.\nThe Discovery Rise project was announced in September 2007. The $1 billion project, aimed at redeveloping the university's Townsville campus, was completed in 2015. The Eddie Koiki Mabo Library (built in 1968 and extended in 1990) has received the 25 Year Architecture Award presented by the Royal Australian Institute of Architects \u2013 Queensland Chapter. It also has been recognised as one of Australia's ten most iconic buildings alongside structures as the Sydney Opera House and the Shrine of Remembrance in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.\nIn 2015, the JCU Townsville City campus was opened in Townsville's CBD on Flinders Street. The campus delivers a diverse range of progressive facilities and services for the university, business and community organisations.\nConstruction of the Technology Innovation Complex (TIC) began in March 2021. The 94m, 9,400sqm facility \"will be the centrepiece of an innovation hub in which undergraduate and post-graduate engineering and IT students, industry partners and researchers will converge and collaborate\".\nTropiQ, Townsville's Tropical Intelligence and Health Precinct, is \"a community dedicated to helping the world access, understand and benefit from breakthroughs and solutions in health and tropical science\". Located on the Bebegu Yumba campus at JCU Townsville, it was developed in partnership between JCU, Townsville Hospital and Health Service and Townsville City Council.\nSingapore International Campus.\nJames Cook University's Singapore campus (JCUS) was opened in 2003. In January 2015, James Cook University Singapore relocated to a new campus at 149 Sims Drive, ceasing operations at its previous campus on Upper Thomson Road, where it had been operating since July 2008. In 2020 there were 3644 students studying with JCU Singapore. Courses offered include business, education, information technology, psychology, environmental science, and tourism and hospitality, to international and domestic students. All degrees awarded are accredited by JCU Australia. Unlike its parent institution in Australia, James Cook University Singapore is classified as a private institution under the Ministry of Education's Private Education Act and is accredited by both EduTrust and the Council for Private Education. JCUS was awarded two consecutive \"Edutrust Star\" ratings by EduTrust in 2015 and 2019, the first private school to attain this benchmark.\nOther facilities: Brisbane, Mackay, Mount Isa, Thursday Island, Rockhampton.\nJCU Brisbane, operated by Russo Higher Education, delivers undergraduate and postgraduate courses in accounting, business, education, hospitality and tourism and information technology to international students.\nJCU's Mackay Clinical School is located at Mackay Base Hospital. It offers Year 5 and Year 6 of Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS). Mackay Clinical School also offers Year 1 \u2013 4 in Pharmacy, allowing students to undertake their full course requirements locally. JCU Mackay, located at the Mater Hospital, offers the Bachelor of Nursing Science (Pre-Registration) and provides facilities for medical and dental placements.\nJCU's Mount Isa, Murtupuni campus provides training, development and support of the rural and remote health workforce and the management of key health issues in rural and remote settings. The centre offers the Bachelor of Nursing Science with an emphasis on rural, remote and Indigenous health care.\nJCU Rockhampton is located in a modern high rise building in the city. Postgraduate students can access the facilities as part of JCU's GP Training Program. The JCU GP Training Program \"provides clinicians the opportunity to expand their scope of practice through working in private clinics and in hospitals where they will gain experience treating a range of conditions in low-resource settings\".\nThere is also a study centre located in the Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine (AITHM) building on Thursday Island, providing teaching and learning facilities for nursing, education and diploma of higher education students in the Torres Strait region, including the northern tip of Australia. The Thursday Island study centre opened in 2003.\nGovernance and structure.\nCoat of arms.\nAs a corporate body, James Cook University bears arms comprising four main elements \u2013 shield, crest (Captain James Cook's ship, \"HMS Endeavour\", in full sail), supporters (a pair of brolgas with open wings), and motto.\nThe university motto is \"Cresente Luce\", which means \"light ever increasing\". This motto was first proposed by Professor Frederick Walter Robinson (Doc Robbie), professor of English at the University of Queensland, in 1962 for the then University College of Townsville. The university college was established as a college of the University of Queensland. Adopted in 1963, the motto remained unchanged after James Cook University of North Queensland was established and incorporated in April 1970, and later became James Cook University.\nAcademic profile.\nIn 2007 James Cook University became a member of Innovative Research Universities Australia (now called Innovative Research Universities). Innovative Research Universities (IRU) is a network of seven comprehensive universities committed to conducting research of national and international standing.\nMedicine.\nIn 2001 the university took in its first medical students in its newly formed School of Medicine. An undergraduate veterinary degree was added to the university for the first time in 2006 and in 2009 the Bachelor of Dental Surgery commenced. Today the university offers undergraduate and postgraduate degrees in science, including marine biology and environmental science; arts, humanities and social work; business, law and governance; creative media; education; engineering and planning; healthcare, rehabilitation and psychology; medicine, dentistry and pharmacy; public health; and veterinary science. Many courses are available online.\nAcademic reputation.\nIn the 2024 \"Aggregate Ranking of Top Universities\", which measures aggregate performance across the QS, THE and ARWU rankings, the university attained a position of #341 (24th nationally).\nIn the \"Australian Financial Review\" Best Universities Ranking 2025, the university was tied #17 amongst Australian universities.\nIn the 2026 \"Quacquarelli Symonds\" World University Rankings (published 2025), the university attained a tied position of #440 (25th nationally).\nIn the \"Times Higher Education\" World University Rankings 2026 (published 2025), the university attained a position of #351\u2013400 (tied 23\u201325th nationally).\nIn the 2025 \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\", the university attained a position of #401\u2013500 (tied 21\u201324th nationally).\nIn the 2025\u20132026 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Global Universities, the university attained a tied position of #416 (23rd nationally).\nIn the \"CWTS Leiden Ranking\" 2024, the university attained a position of #601 (24th nationally).\nStudent outcomes.\nThe Australian Government's QILT conducts national surveys documenting the student life cycle from enrolment through to employment. These surveys place more emphasis on criteria such as student experience, graduate outcomes and employer satisfaction than perceived reputation, research output and citation counts.\nIn the 2023 Employer Satisfaction Survey, graduates of the university had an overall employer satisfaction rate of 84.7%.\nIn the 2023 Graduate Outcomes Survey, graduates of the university had a full-time employment rate of 89.5% for undergraduates and 92.7% for postgraduates. The initial full-time salary was A$ for undergraduates and A$ for postgraduates.\nIn the 2023 Student Experience Survey, undergraduates at the university rated the quality of their entire educational experience at 74.9% meanwhile postgraduates rated their overall education experience at 76.7%.\nLecture Series.\nThe Eddie Koiki Mabo Lecture Series was established in 2004, in honour of Indigenous land rights campaigner Eddie Mabo, who was employed by the university as a groundsman from 1967 to 1971, and later enrolled as a student at the Townsville College of Advanced Education, which later amalgamated with JCU. Mabo famously spent ten years on the Mabo case, in which a landmark ruling that established the concept of native title in Australia was made in 1992. The lecture takes place on Mabo Day, 3 June each year, with an address given by an invited speaker. Speakers have included:\nStudent life.\nStudent demographics.\nIn 2021, JCU's student population was at 17,001, which includes 4,289 International students.\nResidential colleges.\nJames Cook University's Townsville, Bebegu Yuma campus, situated in the suburb of Douglas, has five on-campus residential halls and colleges, which can accommodate 1,158 students. Services offered by these facilities vary from self-catered to fully catered. James Cook University's Cairns, Nguma-bada campus, situated in the outer northern suburb of Smithfield, has one on-campus self-catered residential hall, John Grey Hall, which can accommodate 287 students.\nTownsville.\nAffiliated colleges.\nSaints Catholic College, first founded in 1964 and run by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Townsville, was formed in 2011 with the amalgamation of the Catholic Colleges of St Raphael and St Paul and the addition of a third wing, St Mary MacKillop Wing, in honour of Australia's first Saint. Saints Catholic College provides fully catered accommodation to 296 students. Saint Mark's College, run by the Anglican Diocese of North Queensland, accommodated 154 male and female students until its closure in 2017 due to financial difficulties. The John Flynn College was established in 1968 and is named after Australian Presbyterian minister John Flynn. The college provides fully catered accommodation for more than 253 students.\nHalls of Residence.\nJames Cook University manages three non-denominational halls in Townsville for 771 students. University Hall was the first residence to be established at the university in the 1960s and offered 241 fully catered rooms. University Hall opened for student accommodation in 1967 as a co-educational hall of residence and lays claim to being the first co-educational university hall of residence in Australia. University Hall officially closed at the end of the 2021 academic year. George Roberts Hall opened in 2002 with unit-style, fully-catered accommodation for 250 students. Rotary International House, containing 118 self-catered beds, was established in 1990 with the assistance of Rotary Clubs. Burralga Yumba opened at the beginning of the 2022 academic year. The new building contains 403 self-catered beds. Western Halls and Western Courts, former Halls of Residence colleges, closed in 2008 and 2018 respectively.\nCairns.\nJohn Grey Hall.\nJohn Grey Hall, named after Lt. Gen. John Grey, opened in 2018 to meet the need for on-campus accommodation in Cairns. The residential hall, which is managed by UniLodge, accommodates 287 students in self-catered accommodation with plans to expand to accommodate 1000 students.\nControversies.\nPeter Ridd sacking.\nIn November 2017, marine physicist Peter Ridd commenced proceedings in the Federal Circuit Court against the university alleging that by censuring and eventually dismissing him from his employment, JCU had breached the intellectual freedom provision in its enterprise agreement, in violation of the Fair Work Act. Ridd was a long-term professor who had been the head of the physics department from 2009 to 2016, and head of the Marine Geophysical Laboratory at JCU for 15 years. He had been critical of the accuracy of studies by the JCU marine studies centre. JCU maintained that \"it had never sought to silence Ridd, and his sacking was due to 'serious misconduct' and breaches of the university's code\".\nFollowing a hearing, the Federal Circuit Court found that the university's actions were unlawful, and in September 2019 ordered JCU to pay $1.2 million in compensation to Ridd. The Court found that JCU had failed to respect the rights to intellectual freedom under its enterprise agreement.\nIn July 2020, a Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia overturned the Federal Circuit Court's decision, finding that JCU's actions did not breach the Fair Work Act and that the enterprise agreement did not give Ridd an \"untrammelled right\" to express professional opinions beyond the standards imposed by the university's code of conduct. In February 2021, the High Court of Australia granted special leave to Ridd to appeal the decision. The High Court heard the matter in June 2021.\nOn October 13, 2021, the High Court unanimously dismissed the appeal brought by Ridd. Although the Court found that some of the university's censures of Ridd were in breach of its enterprise agreement, Ridd ran his case on an \"all or nothing\" basis, and the High Court found that the termination of his employment was ultimately justified in relying on 18 findings of serious misconduct which were not protected by the university's academic freedom clause.\nSexual harassment and assault.\nNine cases of sexual abuse or harassment were reported officially on campus between 2011 and 2016, resulting in one person being removed from a college. These included an allegation of a 2015 incident in which three unidentified males tried to gang-rape a female student.\nIn 2015 the university promoted a research officer to academic adviser despite his having pleaded guilty to raping a student. The then acting vice-chancellor said there was a failure of internal processes and that the staff member would have been dismissed immediately if senior management had been aware that he had pleaded guilty. However, whistleblowers said there had been a cover-up and that senior management, including the vice-chancellor and the university secretary, had been told of the guilty plea prior to the perpetrator's promotion.\nThe university began a review in 2017 which led to revised policies, mandatory online training for students and staff, first responder training for staff, and counselling for victims.\nScientific fraud claims.\nIn May 2021, the American publication Science Magazine made claims about scientific fraud involving 22 papers linked to James Cook University's Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies. The Australian Research Council, the US National Science Foundation, and JCU had been asked to investigate the allegations. The article supported by the international Science Fund for Investigative Reporting, is the culmination of years of research and contested claims over how fish behaviour is changed by rising levels of carbon dioxide in the oceans. Researchers claimed to have evidence of manipulation in publicly available raw data files for two papers, one published in Science Magazine, the other in \"Nature Climate Change\", combined with large and \"statistically impossible\" effects from CO2 reported in many of the other papers.\nScientific Misconduct.\nAn investigation by the UK scientific journal \"Nature\" published on 8 January 2020, found that eight James Cook University (JCU) studies on the effect of climate change on coral reef fish, one of which was authored by a JCU educated discredited scientist, had a 100 percent replication failure and thus none of the findings of the original eight studies were found to be correct. The Swedish scientists Josefin Sundin and Fredrik Jutfelt were the first to report their suspicions to Uppsala University. Their informal investigation, and the proofs they collected, lead to the formal investigation. Concerns raised about a study the scientist published while at JCU between 2010 and 2014 included an improbable number of lionfish claimed to have been used in this study, and images of 50 fish provided which appeared to include multiple images of some biological specimens, and two images that had been flipped making two fish appear to be four. The scientist had also been found guilty of fabricating data underpinning a study at Uppsala University in Sweden following her departure from JCU in Queensland, Australia. The study was subsequently retracted.\nUniversity response to medical student misconduct.\nIn 2025, James Cook University faced significant scrutiny and widespread public backlash following a controversial incident involving one of its medical students. The controversy erupted when it was disclosed that a student, who had been convicted of physically assaulting a former partner in a violent act motivated by jealousy, had received a character reference from a member of the university\u2019s staff. This revelation sparked intense criticism from various quarters, including the local community, medical professionals, and student organisations, who expressed profound concern over the university\u2019s handling of the situation and its implications for the integrity of its medical program.\nNotable people.\nThis is a list of alumni and former faculty and staff of James Cook University, including preceding institutions such as Townsville University College and Townsville College of Advanced Education.\nHonorary degrees.\nRecipients of honorary degrees include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75752", "revid": "26910586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75752", "title": "Folke Bernadotte", "text": "Swedish diplomat (1895\u20131948)\nFolke Bernadotte, Count of Wisborg (; 2 January 1895\u00a0\u2013 17 September 1948) was a Swedish nobleman and diplomat. In World War II, he negotiated the release of about 450 Danish Jews and 30,550 non-Jewish prisoners of many nations from the Nazi German Theresienstadt concentration camp. They were released on 14 April 1945. In 1945 he received a German surrender offer from Heinrich Himmler, though the offer was ultimately rejected by the allies.\nAfter the war, Bernadotte was unanimously chosen to be the United Nations Security Council mediator in the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict of 1947\u20131948. He was assassinated in Jerusalem in 1948 by the paramilitary Zionist group Lehi while pursuing his official duties. Upon his death, Ralph Bunche took up his work at the UN, successfully mediating the 1949 Armistice Agreements between Israel and Egypt.\nEarly life.\nFolke Bernadotte was born in Stockholm into the House of Bernadotte, the Swedish royal family. His father, Prince Oscar Bernadotte, Count of Wisborg (formerly Prince Oscar of Sweden, Duke of Gotland), was the second son of King Oscar II of Sweden; his mother, Ebba Munck af Fulkila, had been a lady-in-waiting to Victoria of Baden, the wife of Crown Prince Gustaf. Oscar had married Ebba without the consent of the King, and so was forced to renounce his Swedish titles; in 1892, he was granted the titles of Prince Bernadotte and Count of Wisborg by his uncle, Adolphe, Grand Duke of Luxembourg.\nBernadotte attended school in Stockholm, after which he entered training to become a cavalry officer at the Royal Military Academy. He took the officer's exam in 1915, was commissioned a lieutenant in 1918, and subsequently was promoted to the rank of major.\nBernadotte represented Sweden in 1933 at the Chicago Century of Progress Exposition, and later served as Swedish commissioner general at the New York World's Fair in 1939\u201340. Bernadotte had long been involved with the Swedish Boy Scouts (Sveriges Scoutf\u00f6rbund), and took over as director of the organization in 1937. At the outbreak of World War II, Bernadotte worked to integrate the scouts into Sweden's defense plan, training them in anti-aircraft work and as medical assistants. Bernadotte was appointed Vice Chairman of the Swedish Red Cross in 1943.\nDiplomatic career.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the autumns of 1943 and 1944, he organized prisoner exchanges which brought home 11,000 prisoners from Germany via Sweden. While Vice-President of the Swedish Red Cross in 1945, Bernadotte attempted to negotiate an armistice between Germany and the Allies. He also led several rescue missions in Germany for the Red Cross. In April 1945, Heinrich Himmler asked Bernadotte to convey a peace proposal to Prime Minister Winston Churchill and President Harry S. Truman without the knowledge of Adolf Hitler. The main point of the proposal was that Germany would surrender only to the Western Allies (the United Kingdom and the United States), but would be allowed to continue resisting the Soviet Union. According to Bernadotte, he told Himmler that the proposal had no chance of acceptance, but nevertheless he passed it on to the Swedish government and the Western Allies. It had no lasting effect.\nWhite Buses.\nUpon the initiative of the Norwegian diplomat Niels Christian Ditleff in the final months of the war, Bernadotte acted as the negotiator for a rescue operation transporting interned Norwegians, Danes and other western European inmates from German concentration camps to hospitals in Sweden.\nIn the spring of 1945, Bernadotte was in Germany when he met Heinrich Himmler, who was briefly appointed commander of an entire German army following the assassination attempt on Hitler the year before. Bernadotte had originally been assigned to retrieve Norwegian and Danish POWs in Germany. He returned on 1 May 1945, the day after Hitler's death. Following an interview, the Swedish newspaper \"Svenska Dagbladet\" wrote that Bernadotte succeeded in rescuing 15,000 people from German concentration camps, including about 8,000 Danes and Norwegians and 7,000 women of French, Polish, Czech, British, American, Argentinian, and Chinese nationalities. The missions took around two months, and exposed the Swedish Red Cross staff to significant danger, both due to political difficulties and by taking them through areas under Allied bombing.\nThe mission became known for its buses, painted entirely white except for the Red Cross emblem on the side, so that they would not be mistaken for military targets. In total it included 308 personnel (about 20 medics and the rest volunteer soldiers), 36 hospital buses, 19 trucks, seven passenger cars, seven motorcycles, a tow truck, a field kitchen, and full supplies for the entire trip, including food and gasoline, none of which was permitted to be obtained in Germany. A count of 21,000 people rescued included 8,000 Danes and Norwegians, 5,911 Poles, 2,629 French, 1,615 Jews, and 1,124 Germans.\nAfter Germany's surrender, the White Buses mission continued in May and June and about 10,000 additional liberated prisoners were thus evacuated.\nBernadotte recounted the White Buses mission in his book \"The End. My Humanitarian Negotiations in Germany in 1945 and Their Political Consequences\", published on June 15, 1945 in Swedish.\nPostwar controversy.\nFollowing the war, some controversies arose regarding Bernadotte's leadership of the White Buses expedition, some personal and some as to the mission itself. One aspect involved a long-standing feud between Bernadotte and Himmler's personal masseur, Felix Kersten, who had played a role in facilitating Bernadotte's access to Himmler, but whom Bernadotte resisted crediting after the war. The resulting feud between Bernadotte and Kersten came to public attention through British historian Hugh Trevor-Roper. In 1953, Trevor-Roper published an article based on an interview and documents originating with Kersten. The article stated that Bernadotte's role in the rescue operations was that of \"transport officer, no more\". Kersten was quoted as saying that, according to Himmler, Bernadotte was opposed to the rescue of Jews and understood \"the necessity of our fight against World Jewry\".\nShortly following the publication of his article, Trevor-Roper began to retreat from these charges. At the time of his article, Kersten had just been nominated by the Dutch government for the Nobel Peace Prize for thwarting a Nazi plan to deport the entire Dutch population, based primarily on Kersten's own claims to this effect. A later investigation by Dutch historian Louis de Jong concluded that no such plan had existed, however, and that Kersten's documents were partly fabricated. Following these revelations and others, Trevor-Roper told journalist Barbara Amiel in 1995 that he was no longer certain about the allegations, and that Bernadotte may merely have been following his orders to rescue Danish and Norwegian prisoners. Several other historians have also questioned Kersten's account, concluding that the accusations were based on a forgery or a distortion devised by Kersten.\nSome controversy regarding the White Buses trip has also arisen in Scandinavia, particularly regarding the priority given to Scandinavian prisoners. Political scientist Sune Persson judged these doubts to be contradicted by the documentary evidence. He concluded, \"The accusations against Count Bernadotte ... to the effect that he refused to save Jews from the concentration camps are obvious lies\" and listed many prominent eyewitnesses who testified on Bernadotte's behalf, including the World Jewish Congress representative in Stockholm in 1945.\nUN mediator.\nIn 1948, Bernadotte played a central but brief role in the expanding Arab-Israeli conflict, a role which culminated in his assassination.\nOn November 29, 1947, the United Nations passed Resolution 181 for the Partition of Palestine, endorsing an independent Jewish state. Violence immediately broke out between Zionist forces and Palestinian fighters; this first phase of conflict, known as the 1947\u20131948 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine, lasted until May 14, 1948, when the Zionist leadership proclaimed the independent State of Israel and Britain began the termination of its 27-year control of Palestine. Arab nations bordering Israel immediately joined the battle on the Palestinian side, marking the commencement of the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War. The United Nations Security Council demanded an immediate cease-fire, and the secretary general appointed Bernadotte as \"United Nations Mediator in Palestine.\"\nIt was the first official mediation in the UN's history - Bernadotte's assigment was to effect a cease-fire between the Zionist and Arab forces and then seek a peaceful resolution by proposing partition plans. Bernadotte succeeded in achieving an initial truce, which went into effect on June 11 and lasted until July 8.\nAchieving a satisfactory resolution to the conflict was significantly more difficult; Bernadotte wrote that \"in putting forward any proposal for the solution of the Palestine problem, one must bear in mind the aspirations of the Jews, the political difficulties and differences of opinion of the Arab leaders, the strategic interests of Great Britain, the financial commitment of the United States and the Soviet Union, the outcome of the war, and finally the authority and prestige of the United Nations.\"\nBernadotte's first proposal, which he submitted to the various parties at the end of June 1948, avoided granting statehood to either Israelis or Palestinians; this plan gained no traction. His final report, submitted to the United Nations in September, proposed that the Negev was to become Arab territory and the western Galilee, intended for the Arab state in the partition plan, would be included in the Jewish state. The disposition of the Arab part of Palestine was to be decided by the Arab states in consultation with the Palestinians, with a recommendation of a merger with Transjordan.\nAssassination.\nOn Friday 17 September 1948, four members of the Zionist paramilitary militant organization Lehi, sometimes referred to in the West as the Stern Gang, dressed in the uniforms of IDF soldiers and attacked Bernadotte's UN convoy as it drove through West Jerusalem, killing him as well as the French officer riding next to him, Colonel Andr\u00e9 Serot.\nPlanning and background.\nThe Stern Gang saw Bernadotte as a puppet of the British and the Arabs and therefore a serious threat to the emerging State of Israel. Since a truce was in force, Lehi feared that the Israeli leadership would agree to Bernadotte's peace proposals, which it considered disastrous. The group was unaware the Israeli government had already decided to reject Bernadotte's plan.\nThe killing was approved by the three-man 'center' of Lehi: Yitzhak Yezernitsky (the future Prime Minister of Israel Yitzhak Shamir), Nathan Friedmann (also called Natan Yellin-Mor) and Yisrael Eldad (also known as Scheib). A fourth leader, Emmanuel Strassberg (Hanegbi) was also suspected by the Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion of being part of the group that ordered the assassination.\nThe assassination was planned by Lehi's Jerusalem operations chief, Yehoshua Zettler.\nThe attack.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0In the Katamon quarter, we were held up by a Jewish Army type jeep placed in a road block and filled with men in Jewish Army uniforms. At the same moment, I saw an armed man coming from this jeep. I took little notice of this because I merely thought it was another checkpoint. However, he put a Tommy gun through the open window on my side of the car, and fired point blank at Count Bernadotte and Colonel Serot. I also heard shots fired from other points, and there was considerable confusion. [...]\u00a0Colonel Serot fell in the seat in back of me, and I saw at once that he was dead. Count Bernadotte bent forward, and I thought at the time he was trying to get cover. I asked him: 'Are you wounded?' He nodded, and fell back. [...]\u00a0When we arrived [at the Hadassah hospital] I carried the Count inside and laid him on the bed [...] I took off the Count's jacket and tore away his shirt and undervest. I saw that he was wounded around the heart and that there was also a considerable quantity of blood on his clothes about it.\u00a0When the doctor arrived, I asked if anything could be done, but he replied that it was too late. \nGeneral \u00c5ge Lundstr\u00f6m, who was in the UN vehicle\nA four-man team, consisting of Yehoshua Cohen, Yitzhak Ben-Moshe (Markovitz), Avraham Steinberg, and Meshulam Makover, ambushed Bernadotte's motorcade in Jerusalem's Katamon neighborhood. The team left a Lehi base in a Jeep and set up a makeshift roadblock at Ben Zion Guini Square, off Hapalmach Street, and waited in the jeep. When Bernadotte's motorcade approached, Cohen, Ben-Moshe, and Steinberg got out and approached it, while Makover, the driver, remained in the jeep. Captain Moshe Hillman, the motorcade's Israeli liaison officer, who was sitting in the leading UN vehicle, called out in Hebrew to let them through, but was ignored.\nCohen came up to Bernadotte's sedan and fired through an open window, pumping six shots into Bernadotte's chest, throat and arms and 18 into Colonel Andr\u00e9 Serot who was seated to his left, killing both. Serot had swapped places in the motorcade to join Bernadotte - they had become friends after Bernadotte was instrumental in saving Serot's wife's life in a German concentration camp. Ben-Moshe and Steinberg shot at the tires of the UN vehicles, while Cohen finished the magazine by firing at the radiator. The driver of the sedan, Colonel Frank M. Begley, got out and tried to grapple with Cohen as he fired his last shots, but was burned in the face by the gun flashes. Ben-Moshe and Steinberg then rushed back and mounted the jeep, which quickly accelerated down a side road, while Cohen ran away from the scene across a roadside field.\nAll four members of the hit team made it to the religious community of Shaarei Pina, where they hid with local Haredi sympathizers. After a few days in hiding, they fled to Tel Aviv in the back of a furniture truck.\nFollowing the shooting, Bernadotte's car sped to Hadassah Mount Scopus Hospital, despite damage to the radiator; the lead vehicle followed as its tires came apart. At the hospital, Bernadotte was pronounced dead. His body was moved to the YMCA, after which it was taken to Haifa and flown back to Sweden. Bernadotte was granted a state funeral, Abba Eban attended on behalf of Israel. Bernadotte was survived by a widow and two sons, a 12-year-old and a 17-year-old. He was buried in Prince Oscar Bernadotte's family tomb at the Northern Cemetery in Stockholm.\nInvestigation.\nThe Israel Police, along with the military police and security services, investigated the assassination, but failed to identify any of the participants in the assassination, and the case was eventually closed without any of the participants having been identified. It has been suggested that the reasons for the failure of the investigation were poor coordination between these bodies, which resulted in information that may have assisted the police not being turned over to them, and the lack of proficiency among police officers and investigators in the early days of the Israel Police. The murder case was identified as \"148/48\" in Israeli police records.\nLehi leaders initially denied responsibility for the attack. Only later did Lehi take responsibility for the killings in the name of \"Hazit Hamoledet\" (the Homeland Front), a name they copied from a war-time Bulgarian resistance group.\nIn the wake of universal condemnation of the killing, Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion moved to shut down Zionist paramilitary groups like the Lehi and the Irgun permanently. These groups were publicly discredited and disavowed, their members were forcibly disarmed, and many were arrested.\nYellin-Mor and another Lehi member, Mattityahu Shmulevitz, were charged with belonging to a terrorist organization. They were found guilty but immediately released and pardoned. Yellin-Mor had meanwhile been elected to the first Knesset. Betty Knut-Lazarus, a Lehi militant, and the granddaughter of composer Alexander Scriabin, was also imprisoned for being allegedly involved in the killing, before being subsequently released.\nYears later, Cohen's role was uncovered by David Ben-Gurion's biographer Michael Bar Zohar, while Cohen was working as Ben-Gurion's personal bodyguard. The first public admission of Lehi's role in the killing was made on the anniversary of the assassination in 1977. The statute of limitations for the murder had expired in 1971. In 1988, two years after Cohen's death, Zettler and Makover publicly confessed their role in the assassination and confirmed that Cohen had killed Bernadotte. In the late 1960s, Israeli journalist Baruch Nadel published a book in which he also claimed to have taken part in planning the murder.\nThe weapon which was used in the assassination (an MP 40, serial number 2581) was lost, and was only found again in 2018 during an inventory check in the Heritage House of the Israel Police, when an unidentified box was found to contain an MP 40 machine pistol and the curator, Shlomi Shitrit, decided to identify the history of the weapon. Prior to finding it, it was believed to have been destroyed.\nAftermath.\nThe day after the murders, by means of Security Council Resolution 57, the United Nations Security Council condemned the killing of Bernadotte as \"a cowardly act which appears to have been committed by a criminal group of terrorists in Jerusalem while the United Nations representative was fulfilling his peace-seeking mission in the Holy Land.\"\nThe Swedish government believed that Bernadotte had been assassinated by Israeli government agents. They publicly attacked the inadequacy of the Israeli investigation, and campaigned unsuccessfully to delay Israel's admission to the United Nations. In 1950, Sweden recognized Israel, but relations remained frosty despite Israeli attempts to mollify Sweden, such as through the planting of a Bernadotte Forest by the Jewish National Fund in Israel. At a ceremony in Tel Aviv in May 1995, attended by the Swedish deputy prime minister, Israeli Foreign Minister and Labor Party member Shimon Peres issued a \"condemnation of terror, thanks for the rescue of the Jews and regret that Bernadotte was murdered in a terrorist way\", adding that \"We hope this ceremony will help in healing the wound.\"\nRalph Bunche, Bernadotte's American deputy, succeeded him as UN mediator. Bunche was successful in bringing about the signing of the 1949 Armistice Agreements, for which he received the Nobel Peace Prize.\nAwards and memorials.\nIn 1998, Bernadotte was posthumously awarded one of the first three Dag Hammarskj\u00f6ld Medals, given to UN peacekeepers who are killed in the line of duty.\nThe university library at Gustavus Adolphus College in St. Peter, Minnesota, US is named after him.\nhttps://, South Remal, Gaza is named after him. \nThe Yad Vashem Holocaust museum in Jerusalem features one of the \"white buses\" of Bernadotte's mission to Nazi Germany, which it recognises as rescuing 25,000 prisoners including several thousand Jews. However, Yad Vashem did not award him the \"Righteous Among the Nations\" title.\nWife and children.\nIn 1928 in Pleasantville, New York, Folke Bernadotte married Estelle Romaine Manville (1904\u20131984), whose family had founded part of the Johns-Manville Corporation.\nThey had four sons, two of whom died in childhood.\nSeven grandchildren were all born after Folke Bernadotte's death. His widow Estelle Bernadotte remarried in 1973.\nIn September 2008, it became official that before his marriage Bernadotte had a daughter with actress Lillie Ericson-Udde (1892\u20131981):\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75753", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75753", "title": "Aprilia", "text": "Italian motorcycle manufacturer\nAprilia is an Italian motorcycle and scooter manufacturer in Noale, Italy, founded by Alberto Beggio.\nHistory.\nEarly days.\nAprilia, named after the pre-war Lancia Aprilia, was founded after the Second World War by Cavaliere Alberto Beggio as a bicycle production factory at Noale, Italy, in the province of Venice. Alberto's son, Ivano Beggio, took over the helm of the company in 1968 and constructed a 50 cc \"motorcycle\". The first production Aprilia mopeds were named Colibr\u00ec, Daniela, and Packi. Aprilia later produced a motocross bike in 1970 called the Scarabeo. Produced until the end of the 1970s, the Scarabeo came in 50 and 125 cc versions. \nIn 1977, Ivan Alborghetti from Milan, Italy won the Italian 125 and 250 cc motocross championships on Aprilia motorcycles. In 1978 125cc Motocross World Championship, Alborghetti closed the season with a third-place result in the Swiss Grand Prix and sixth place overall in the World Championship. In the 1980s, Aprilia added enduro, trials and road bikes of between 50 and 600 cc and in 1981, Aprilia introduced the TL320 trials machine. In 1983, Aprilia launched the St 125 road bike and in 1984, they launched an improved model called STX as well as an enduro, called the ET 50.\nIn 1985, Aprilia started outsourcing engines for some models to the Austrian company Rotax. In 1985 Aprilia launched a 125 STX and 350 STX. In 1986, Aprilia launched the AF1, a small sports model; and the Tuareg, a large tanked bike for African rallies like the Dakar Rally. Aprilia factory rider Philippe Berlatier contended for the trials world championship reaching fifth place, and Loris Reggiani rode an Aprilia GP 250 with Rotax engine to sixth place in the road racing World Championship. Two seasons later, on August 30, 1987, at San Marino Grand Prix in Misano Loris Reggiani's AF1 won the first World Speed Championship.\nIn 1990, Aprilia launched the Pegaso 600, a road bike derived from off-road mechanics. Later, in 1992 Aprilia rider Alessandro Gramigni won the World 125 Road Racing Championship title. Also in 1992, Tommy Ahvala won the World Trials Championship on an Aprilia Climber. Since then, Aprilia has 124 times won 125 and 250 cc class Grand Prix, 15 Road Racing World Championship titles, and 16 European speed titles. Many world champions started on Aprilia such as Biaggi, Capirossi, Gramigni, Locatelli, Sakata and Rossi.\nIn 1995, Aprilia commissioned Philippe Starck to design the Mot\u00f2 which was shown in New York's Modern Art Museum. Also in 1995, Aprilia launched the two stroke RS 125 and RS 250 sports bikes. In 1998, Aprilia launched the RSV Mille, a 1000cc V-Twin Superbike, and the Falco, a 1000cc V-Twin sport tourer with emphasis on sport. Both bikes used a variation of a Rotax 1000cc engine.\nIn 1999, Aprilia entered World Superbike Championship racing with its RSV Mille, and during 2000, Aprilia acquired Moto-Guzzi and Laverda, both historic heritage Italian marques. In 2000, Aprilia launched the 50\u00a0cc DiTech (Direct Injection Technology) two stroke engine for scooters which provides high mileage and low emissions, and also the RST Futura, a sport tourer, and the ETV 1000 Caponord; an adventure touring motorcycle. Both of these latter two motorcycles used a variation of the Rotax 1000\u00a0cc V-Twin.\nMost recently, in 2003, Aprilia launched the RSV Mille Tuono which was essentially an RSV Mille with motocross-style high handlebars and only a small headlight fairing. Most of the major motorcycle magazines picked it for the best bike of the year. In 2004, Aprilia was acquired by Piaggio &amp; C. SpA, to form the world's fourth largest motorcycle group with 1.5 billion Euro in sales, an annual production capacity of over 600,000 vehicles, and a presence in 50 countries.\nWith the acquisition by Piaggio, the new President of Aprilia is Roberto Colaninno (President of Piaggio &amp; C.), and the managing director is Rocco Sabelli. The son of the founder, Ivano Beggio, was the Honorary President and died on 13 March 2018. On 15 August 2010, Aprilia became the most successful motorcycle racing brand in history, surpassing fellow Italian MV Agusta with a record 276th victory.\nTimeline.\nMotorcycles.\nAlberto's son, Ivano Beggio, took over the helm of the company in 1968 and constructed a 50 cc \"motorcycle\". \nThe first production Aprilia mopeds were named \"Colibr\u00ec\", \"Daniela\", and \"Packi\". \nIn the 1980s, Aprilia added enduro, trials and road bikes of between 50 and 600 cc. \nIn 1981, Aprilia introduced the TL320 trials machine. \nIn 1983, Aprilia launched the St 125 road bike. \nIn 1984, they launched an improved model called STX, as well as an enduro, called the ET 50.\nIn 1985, Aprilia started outsourcing engines for some models to the Austrian company Rotax. \nIn 1985 Aprilia launched a 125 STX and 350 STX. \nIn 1990, Aprilia launched the Pegaso 600, a road bike derived from off-road mechanics.\nScooters.\nIn the 1990s, Aprilia entered the scooter market starting in 1990 with Italy's first all-plastic scooter, the Amico. \nIn 1992, Aprilia introduced the Amico LK and the two stroke Pegaso 125, both with catalytic converters. \nIn 1993, Aprilia launched a large diameter wheel scooter reusing the name Scarabeo with a four-stroke, four-valve engine. \nLater, Aprilia launched more scooters such as the Leonardo, the SR and the Gulliver.\nIn 1995, Aprilia commissioned Philippe Starck to design the Mot\u00f2 which was shown in New York's Modern Art Museum. \nAlso in 1995, Aprilia launched the two stroke RS 125 and RS 250 sports bikes. \nIn 1998, Aprilia launched the RSV Mille, a 1000cc V-Twin Superbike, and the Falco, a 1000cc V-Twin sport tourer with emphasis on sport. Both bikes used a variation of a Rotax 1000cc engine.\nIn 2000, Aprilia launched the 50\u00a0cc DiTech (Direct Injection Technology) two stroke engine for scooters which provides high mileage and low emissions, and also the RST Futura, a sport tourer, and the ETV 1000 Caponord; an adventure touring motorcycle. \nBoth of these latter two motorcycles used a variation of the Rotax 1000\u00a0cc V-Twin.\nMost recently, in 2003, Aprilia launched the RSV Mille Tuono which was essentially an RSV Mille with motocross-style high handlebars and only a small headlight fairing. Most of the major motorcycle magazines picked it for the best bike of the year. \nSportbikes.\nAprilia produced a motocross bike in 50 and 125 cc versions in the 1970s called the Scarabeo. \nSince in the 1980s, Aprilia has also produced large sportbikes such as the 1,000 cc V-twin RSV Mille and the V4 RSV4.\nIn 1986, Aprilia launched the AF1, a small sports model; and the Tuareg, a large tanked bike for African rallies like the Dakar Rally. \nOperation.\nAcquisition.\nDuring 2000, Aprilia acquired Moto Guzzi and Laverda, both historic heritage Italian marques.\nOwnership.\nIn 2004, Aprilia was acquired by Piaggio &amp; C. SpA, to form the world's fourth largest motorcycle group with 1.5 billion Euro in sales, an annual production capacity of over 600,000 vehicles, and a presence in 50 countries.\nWith the acquisition by Piaggio, the new President of Aprilia is Roberto Colaninno (President of Piaggio &amp; C.), and the managing director is Rocco Sabelli. The son of the founder, Ivano Beggio, was the Honorary President and died on 13 March 2018. \nRacing.\nDespite being a relatively small company by global motorcycling standards, Aprilia is very active in motorcycle sports. \nAprilia has contested many road racing formulae, including the now-defunct 125 cc, 250 cc and 500 cc Grand Prix classes of FIM World Championships. \nAprilia have also been in and out of the MotoGP and Superbike World Championship - as a factory team and a constructor, having partnered with Gresini Racing (from 2015 to 2021) and Trackhouse Racing (since 2024) - alongside other commitments.\nSuperbike World Championship (SBK).\nAprilia entered the Superbike World Championship in 1999 using a homologation special version of their V-twin road bike RSV Mille. \nThey were third in the riders' championship in 2000 with rider Troy Corser, and third in manufacturers' points and fourth in rider points both in 2001 with Corser and in 2002 with Noriyuki Haga. Aprilia retired from the series at the end of that season.\nIn February 2008, Aprilia debuted a V-4 superbike, the RSV4, for the 2009 Superbike World Championship.\nAprilia won its first Superbike world championship in 2010 with Max Biaggi, claiming both the riders and the manufacturers titles.\nSuperMoto World Championship.\nAprilia debuted in the FIM Supermoto World Championship in 2004 and since then it has won many titles in both S1 and S2 classes.\nMotocross World Championship.\nAprilia made their international racing debut in the Motocross World Championship competing in the 125cc class from 1976 until 1981 with a best result being a fifth place in the 1979 season with rider Corrado Maddi.\nModels.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAprilia models are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75754", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75754", "title": "Townsville, Australia", "text": ""}
{"id": "75756", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75756", "title": "Diego De Almagro", "text": ""}
{"id": "75757", "revid": "32579849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75757", "title": "Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada", "text": ""}
{"id": "75758", "revid": "3049367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75758", "title": "Jerry Garcia", "text": "American guitarist and singer (1942\u20131995)\nJerome John Garcia (August 1, 1942\u00a0\u2013 August 9, 1995) was an American musician who was the lead guitarist and a vocalist with the rock band Grateful Dead, which he co-founded and which came to prominence during the counterculture of the 1960s. Although he disavowed the role, Garcia was viewed by many as the leader of the band. He was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1994 as a member of the Grateful Dead.\nAs one of its founders, Garcia performed with the Grateful Dead for the band's entire 30-year career (1965\u20131995). Garcia also founded and participated in a variety of side projects, including the Saunders\u2013Garcia Band (with longtime friend Merl Saunders), the Jerry Garcia Band, Old &amp; In the Way, the Garcia/Grisman and Garcia/Kahn acoustic duos, Legion of Mary, and New Riders of the Purple Sage (which he co-founded with John Dawson and David Nelson). He also released several solo albums, and contributed to a number of albums by other artists over the years as a session musician. He was well known for his distinctive guitar playing, and was ranked 13th in \"Rolling Stone\"'s \"100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\" cover story in 2003. In the 2015 version of the list he was ranked at #46. In 2023, Garcia was ranked 34th by \"Rolling Stone\".\nGarcia was renowned for his musical and technical ability, particularly his ability to play a variety of instruments and sustain long improvisations. Garcia believed that improvisation took stress away from his playing and allowed him to make spur of the moment decisions that he would not have made intentionally. In a 1993 interview with \"Rolling Stone\", Garcia noted that \"my own preferences are for improvisation, for making it up as I go along. The idea of picking, of eliminating possibilities by deciding, that's difficult for me\". Originating from the days of the \"Acid Tests\", these improvisations were a form of exploration rather than playing a song already written.\nLater in life, Garcia struggled with diabetes. On July 10, 1986, he went into a diabetic coma and nearly died. Although his overall health improved somewhat after the incident, he continued to struggle with obesity, smoking, and long-standing heroin and cocaine addictions. He was staying in a California drug rehabilitation facility when he died of a heart attack in August 1995.\nEarly life.\nGarcia's ancestors on his father's side were from Galicia in northwest Spain. His mother's ancestors were Irish and Swedish. He was born in the Excelsior District of San Francisco, California, on August 1, 1942, to Jose Ramon \"Joe\" Garcia and Ruth Marie \"Bobbie\" (n\u00e9e Clifford) Garcia, who was herself born in San Francisco. His parents named him after composer Jerome Kern. Jerome John was their second child, preceded by Clifford Ramon \"Tiff\", who was born in 1937. Shortly before Clifford's birth, their father and a partner leased a building in downtown San Francisco and turned it into a bar, partly in response to Jose being blackballed from a musicians' union for moonlighting.\nGarcia was raised as a Catholic. He was influenced by music at an early age, taking piano lessons for much of his childhood. His father was a retired professional musician and his mother enjoyed playing the piano. His father's extended family\u2014which had immigrated from Spain in 1919\u2014would often sing during reunions.\nIn 1946, two-thirds of four-year-old Garcia's right middle finger was cut off by his brother in a wood splitting accident, while the family was vacationing in the Santa Cruz Mountains. Garcia later confessed that he often used it to his advantage in his youth, showing it off to other children in his neighborhood.\nLess than a year after this incident his father died in a fly fishing accident when the family was vacationing near Arcata in Northern California. He slipped after entering the Trinity River, part of the Six Rivers National Forest, and drowned before other fishermen could reach him. Although Garcia claimed he saw the incident, Dennis McNally, author of the book \"A Long Strange Trip: The Inside Story of the Grateful Dead\", argues Garcia formed the memory after hearing others repeat the story. Blair Jackson, who wrote \"Garcia: An American Life\", notes that a local newspaper article describing Jose's death did not mention Jerry being present when he died.\nExcelsior District.\nFollowing his father's death, Garcia's mother Ruth took over her husband's bar, buying out his partner for full ownership. She began working full-time there, sending Jerry and his brother to live nearby with her parents, Tillie and William Clifford. During the five-year period in which he lived with his grandparents, Garcia enjoyed autonomy and he attended Monroe Elementary School. At the school, Garcia was greatly encouraged in his artistic abilities by his third grade teacher: through her, he discovered that \"being a creative person was a viable possibility in life.\" According to Garcia, it was around this time that he was opened up to country and bluegrass music by his grandmother, whom he recalled enjoyed listening to the Grand Ole Opry. His elder brother, Clifford, however, staunchly believed the contrary, insisting that Garcia was \"fantasizing all [that] ... she'd been to Opry, but she didn't listen to it on the radio.\" It was at this point that Garcia started playing the banjo, his first stringed instrument.\nMenlo Park.\nIn 1953, Garcia's mother married Wally Matusiewicz. Subsequently, Garcia and his brother moved back home with their mother and new stepfather. However, due to the roughneck reputation of their neighborhood at the time, Garcia's mother moved their family to Menlo Park. During their stay in Menlo Park, Garcia became acquainted with racism and antisemitism, things he disliked intensely. The same year, Garcia was also introduced to rock and roll and rhythm and blues by his brother, and enjoyed listening to Ray Charles, John Lee Hooker, B. B. King, Hank Ballard, and, later, Chuck Berry. Clifford often memorized the vocals for his favorite songs, and would then make Garcia learn the harmony parts, a move to which Garcia later attributed much of his early ear training.\nIn mid-1957, Garcia began smoking cigarettes and was introduced to marijuana. Garcia would later reminisce about the first time he smoked marijuana: \"Me and a friend of mine went up into the hills with two joints, the San Francisco foothills, and smoked these joints and just got so high and laughed and roared and went skipping down the streets doing funny things and just having a helluva time\". During this time, Garcia also studied at what is now the San Francisco Art Institute. There he was taught by Wally Hedrick, an artist who came to prominence during the 1960s. During the classes he often encouraged Garcia to draw and paint, noting that Garcia had skill in both areas. Hedrick also introduced Garcia to the fiction of Jack Kerouac, whom Garcia later cited as a major influence.\nSan Francisco.\nIn June, Garcia graduated from the local Menlo Oaks school. He then moved with his family back to San Francisco, where they lived in an apartment above the family bar, a newly built replacement for the original, which had been torn down to make way for a freeway entrance. Two months later, on Garcia's fifteenth birthday, his mother bought an accordion for him, to his great disappointment. Garcia had long been captivated by many rhythm and blues artists, especially Chuck Berry, Elmore James and Bo Diddley, leaving him craving an electric guitar. After some pleading, his mother exchanged the accordion for a Danelectro with a small amplifier at a local pawnshop. Garcia's stepfather, who was somewhat proficient with instruments, helped tune his guitar to an unusual open tuning.\nCazadero.\nAfter a short stint at Denman Junior High School, Garcia attended tenth grade at Balboa High School in 1958, where he often got into trouble for skipping classes and fighting. Consequently, in 1959, Garcia's mother again moved the family to a safer environment, to Cazadero, a small town in Sonoma County, north of San Francisco. This turn of events did not sit well with Garcia, who had to travel by bus to Analy High School in Sebastopol, the nearest school. Garcia did, however, join a band at his school known as the Chords. After performing in and winning a contest, the band's reward was recording a song. They chose \"Raunchy\" by Bill Justis.\nRecording career.\nRelocation and band beginnings.\nGarcia stole his mother's car in 1960 and was given the option of joining the U.S. Army in lieu of prison. He received basic training at Fort Ord. After training, he was transferred to Fort Winfield Scott in the Presidio of San Francisco. Garcia spent most of his time in the army at his leisure, missing roll call and accruing many counts of being AWOL. As a result, Garcia was given a general discharge on December 14, 1960.\nIn January 1961, Garcia drove to East Palo Alto to see Laird Grant, an old friend from middle school. He had purchased a 1950 Cadillac sedan from a cook in the army, which barely made it to Grant's residence before it broke down. Garcia spent the next few weeks sleeping where friends would allow, eventually using his car as a home. Through Grant, Garcia met Dave McQueen in February, who, after hearing Garcia perform some blues music, introduced him to local people and to the Chateau, a rooming house located near Stanford University which was then a popular hangout.\nOn February 20, 1961, Garcia got into a car with Lee Adams, the house manager of the Chateau and driver; Paul Speegle, a sixteen-year-old artist and acquaintance of Garcia; and Alan Trist, a companion of theirs. After speeding past the Palo Alto Veterans Hospital, the driver encountered a curve and, speeding around , crashed into the guard rail, sending the car rolling turbulently. Garcia was hurled through the windshield of the car into a nearby field with such force that he came out of his shoes and had no memory of the ejection. Lee Adams, the driver, and Alan Trist, who was seated in the back, were thrown from the car as well, resulting in abdominal injuries and a spine fracture, respectively. Garcia escaped with a broken collarbone, while Speegle, still in the car, was fatally injured.\nLee's reckless driving and crash served as an awakening for Garcia, who later said, \"That's where my life began. Before then I was always living at less than capacity. I was idling. That was the slingshot for the rest of my life. It was like a second chance. Then I got serious.\" As a result, Garcia began playing the guitar in earnest\u2014a move which meant giving up his love of drawing and painting.\nIn April 1961, Garcia first met Robert Hunter, who would become a long-time friend of and lyricist for the Grateful Dead, collaborating principally with Garcia. The two involved themselves in the South Bay and San Francisco art and music scenes, sometimes playing at Menlo Park's Kepler's Books. Garcia performed his first concert with Hunter, each earning five dollars. Garcia and Hunter also played in bands (the Wildwood Boys and the Hart Valley Drifters) with David Nelson, who would later play with Garcia in the New Riders of the Purple Sage and contribute to several Grateful Dead album songs.\nIn 1962, Garcia met Phil Lesh, the eventual bassist of the Grateful Dead, during a party in Menlo Park's bohemian Perry Lane neighborhood (where author Ken Kesey lived). Lesh would later write in his autobiography that Garcia reminded him of pictures he had seen of the composer Claude Debussy, with his \"dark, curly hair, goatee, Impressionist eyes\". While attending another party in Palo Alto, Lesh approached Garcia to suggest they record Garcia on Lesh's tape recorder and produce a radio show for the progressive, community-supported Berkeley radio station KPFA. Using an old Wollensak tape recorder, they recorded \"Matty Groves\" and \"The Long Black Veil\", among several other tunes. The recordings became a central feature of a 90-minute KPFA special broadcast, \"The Long Black Veil and Other Ballads: An Evening with Jerry Garcia\". The link between KPFA and the Grateful Dead continues to this day, having included many fundraisers, interviews, live concert broadcasts, taped band performances and all-day or all-weekend \"Dead-only\" marathons.\nGarcia soon began playing and teaching acoustic guitar, as well as banjo. One of Garcia's students was Bob Matthews, who later engineered many of the Grateful Dead's albums. Matthews attended Menlo-Atherton High School and was friends with Bob Weir, and on New Year's Eve 1963, he introduced Weir and Garcia.\nBetween 1962 and 1964, Garcia sang and performed mainly bluegrass, old-time, and folk music. One of the bands Garcia performed with was the Sleepy Hollow Hog Stompers, a bluegrass act. The group consisted of Garcia on lead guitar, banjo, vocals, and harmonica, Marshall Leicester on banjo, rhythm guitar, and vocals, and Dick Arnold on fiddle and vocals. Soon after this, Garcia, Weir, Ron \"Pigpen\" McKernan, and several of their friends formed a jug band called Mother McCree's Uptown Jug Champions. Around this time, the psychedelic drug LSD was gaining popularity. Garcia first began using LSD in 1964; later, when asked how it changed his life, he remarked: \"Well, it changed everything [...] the effect was that it freed me because I suddenly realized that my little attempt at having a straight life and doing that was really a fiction and just wasn't going to work out. Luckily I wasn't far enough into it for it to be shattering or anything; it was like a realization that just made me feel immensely relieved.\"\nIn 1965, Mother McCree's Uptown Jug Champions evolved into the Warlocks, with the addition of Dana Morgan, Jr. (soon replaced by Phil Lesh) on bass guitar and Bill Kreutzmann on percussion. However, the band discovered a record by another group (possibly the future Velvet Underground or Z.Z. Top, both of which used the name in their early days) called The Warlocks. In response, Garcia came up with \"Grateful Dead\" by opening a Funk &amp; Wagnalls dictionary to an entry for \"Grateful dead\". The definition for \"Grateful dead\" was \"a dead person, or his angel, showing gratitude to someone who, as an act of charity, arranged their burial\". The band's first reaction was disapproval. Garcia later explained the group's reaction: \"I didn't like it really, I just found it to be really powerful. [Bob] Weir didn't like it, [Bill] Kreutzmann didn't like it and nobody really wanted to hear about it.\" Despite their dislike of the name, it quickly spread by word of mouth, and soon became their official title.\nCareer with the Grateful Dead.\nGarcia served as lead guitarist and one of the principal vocalists and songwriters of the Grateful Dead for the band's entire career. Garcia composed songs such as \"Uncle John's Band\", \"Dark Star\", \"Franklin's Tower\", and \"Scarlet Begonias\", among many others. Robert Hunter, an ardent collaborator with the band, wrote the lyrics to all but a few of Garcia's songs.\nGarcia was known for his \"soulful extended guitar improvisations\", which would frequently feature interplay between him and his fellow band members. His fame, as well as the band's, arguably rested on their ability to never play a song the same way twice. Often, Garcia would take cues from rhythm guitarist Bob Weir, remarking that \"there are some [...] kinds of ideas that would really throw me if I had to create a harmonic bridge between all the things going on rhythmically with two drums and Phil [Lesh's] innovative bass playing. Weir's ability to solve that sort of problem is extraordinary. [...] Harmonically, I take a lot of my solo cues from Bob.\"\nWhen asked to describe his approach to soloing, Garcia commented: \"It keeps on changing. I still basically revolve around the melody and the way it's broken up into phrases as I perceive them. With most solos, I tend to play something that phrases the way the melody does; my phrases may be more dense or have different value, but they'll occur in the same places in the song. [...]\"\nGarcia and the band toured almost constantly from their formation in 1965 until Garcia's death in 1995. Periodically, there were breaks due to exhaustion or health problems, often due to Garcia's drug use. During their three-decade span, the Grateful Dead played 2,314 shows.\nGarcia's guitar-playing was eclectic. He melded elements from the various kinds of music that influenced him. Echoes of bluegrass playing (such as Arthur Smith and Doc Watson) could be heard. There was also early rock (like Lonnie Mack, James Burton, and Chuck Berry), contemporary blues (Freddie King and Lowell Fulsom), country and western (Roy Nichols and Don Rich), and jazz (Charlie Christian and Django Reinhardt) to be heard in Garcia's style. Don Rich was the sparkling country guitar player in Buck Owens's \"the Buckaroos\" band of the 1960s, but besides Rich's style, both Garcia's pedal steel guitar playing (on Grateful Dead records and others) and his standard electric guitar work, were influenced by another of Owens's Buckaroos of that time, pedal steel player Tom Brumley. And as an improvisational soloist, John Coltrane was one of his greatest personal and musical influences.\nGarcia later described his playing style as having \"descended from barroom rock and roll, country guitar. Just 'cause that's where all my stuff comes from. It's like that blues instrumental stuff that was happening in the late Fifties and early Sixties, like Freddie King.\" Garcia's style could vary with the song being played and the instrument he was using, but his playing had a number of so-called \"signatures\". Among these were lead lines based on rhythmic triplets (examples include the songs \"Good Morning Little School Girl\", \"New Speedway Boogie\", \"Brokedown Palace\", \"Deal\", \"Loser\", \"Truckin'\", \"That's It for the Other One\", \"U.S. Blues\", \"Sugaree\", and \"Don't Ease Me In\").\nSide projects.\nIn addition to the Grateful Dead, Garcia participated in numerous musical side projects, including the Jerry Garcia Band. He was also involved with various acoustic projects such as Old &amp; In the Way and other bluegrass bands, including collaborations with noted bluegrass mandolinist David Grisman. The documentary film \"Grateful Dawg\", co-produced by Gillian Grisman and former NBC producer Pamela Hamilton chronicles the deep, long-term friendship between Garcia and Grisman. When Garcia and Grisman released \"Not For Kids Only\", Hamilton produced their interview and concert for NBC. After several years of producing stories on the Grateful Dead and band members' side projects, Hamilton interviewed Bob Weir for a feature on Garcia's death marking the end of an era.\nOther groups in which Garcia participated at one time or another include Jerry &amp; Sara (with his first wife), the Zodiacs (on bass), the Black Mountain Boys, Legion of Mary, Reconstruction, and the Jerry Garcia Acoustic Band. Garcia was also a fan of jazz artists and improvisation: he played with jazz keyboardists Merl Saunders and Howard Wales for many years in various groups and jam sessions, and he appeared on saxophonist Ornette Coleman's 1988 album, \"Virgin Beauty\". His collaboration with Merl Saunders and Muruga Booker on the world music album \"Blues From the Rainforest\" launched the Rainforest Band.\nGarcia spent a lot of time in the recording studio helping out fellow musician friends in session work, often adding guitar, vocals, pedal steel, sometimes banjo and piano and even producing. He played on over 50 studio albums, the styles of which were eclectic and varied, including bluegrass, rock, folk, blues, country, jazz, electronic music, gospel, funk, and reggae. Artists who sought Garcia's contribution included the likes of Jefferson Airplane (most notably \"Surrealistic Pillow\", Garcia being listed as their \"spiritual advisor\"). Garcia himself recalled in a mid-1967 interview that he'd played the high lead on \"Today\", played on \"Plastic Fantastic Lover\" and \"Comin' Back to Me\" on that album. Others include Tom Fogerty, David Bromberg, Robert Hunter (\"Liberty\", on Relix Records), Paul Pena, Peter Rowan, Warren Zevon, Country Joe McDonald, Pete Sears, Ken Nordine, Ornette Coleman, Bruce Hornsby, Bob Dylan, It's a Beautiful Day, and many more. In 1995 Garcia played on three tracks for the CD \"Blue Incantation\" by guitarist Sanjay Mishra, making it his last studio collaboration.\nThroughout the early 1970s, Garcia, Lesh, Grateful Dead drummer Mickey Hart, and David Crosby collaborated intermittently with MIT-educated composer and biologist Ned Lagin on several projects in the realm of early ambient music; these include the album \"Seastones\" (released by Ned Lagin on the Round Records subsidiary) and \"L\", an unfinished dance work composed by Ned Lagin. In 1970, Garcia participated in the soundtrack for the film \"Zabriskie Point\".\nGarcia also played pedal steel guitar for fellow-San Francisco musicians New Riders of the Purple Sage from their initial dates in 1969 to October 1971, when increased commitments with the Dead forced him to opt out of the group. He appears as a band member on their debut album \"New Riders of the Purple Sage\", and produced \"Home, Home on the Road\", a 1974 live album by the band. He also contributed pedal steel guitar to the enduring hit \"Teach Your Children\" by Crosby, Stills, Nash, &amp; Young. Garcia also played steel guitar licks on Brewer &amp; Shipley's 1970 album \"Tarkio\". Despite considering himself a novice on the pedal steel, Garcia routinely ranked high in player polls. After a long lapse from playing the pedal steel, he played it once more during several of the Dead's concerts with Bob Dylan in the summer of 1987.\nIn 1988, Garcia agreed to perform at several major benefits including the \"Soviet American Peace Walk\" concert at the Band Shell, in Golden Gate Park, San Francisco, that drew 25,000 people. He was asked to play by longtime friend and fellow musician, Pete Sears, who played piano with all the bands that day, and also procured all the other musicians. Garcia, Mickey Hart and Steve Parish played the show, then were given a police escort to a Grateful Dead show across the bay later that night. Garcia also played with Nick Gravenites and Pete Sears at a benefit given for Vietnam Veteran and peace activist Brian Willson, who lost both legs below the knee when he attempted to block a train carrying weapons to military dictatorships in El Salvador.\nHaving previously studied at the San Francisco Art Institute as a teenager, Garcia embarked on a second career in the visual arts in the late 1980s. He created a number of drawings, etchings, and water colors. Garcia's artistic endeavors were represented by the Weir Gallery in Berkeley, California from 1989 to 1996. During this period, Roberta Weir (unrelated to Garcia's bandmate Bob Weir) provided Garcia with new art techniques to use, sponsored his first solo show in 1990, and prepared blank etching plates for him to draw on. These would then be processed and printed by gallery staff and brought back to Garcia for approval and signature, usually with a passing of stacks of paper backstage at a Dead show. His annual shows at the Weir Gallery garnered much attention, leading to further shows in New York and other cities. Garcia was an early adopter of digital art media; his artistic style was as varied as his musical output, and he carried small notebooks for pen and ink sketches wherever he toured. Roberta Weir continues to maintain an archive of the artwork of Jerry Garcia. Perhaps the most widely seen pieces of Jerry Garcia's art are the many editions of men's neckties produced by Stonehenge Ltd. and Mulberry Neckware. Some began as etchings, other designs came from his drawings, paintings, and digital art. Garcia's artwork has since expanded into everything from hotel rooms, wet suits, men's sport shirts, a women's wear line, boxer shorts, hair accessories, cummerbunds, silk scarves and wool rugs.\nPersonal life.\nGarcia met his first wife, Sara Ruppenthal, in 1963. She was working at the coffee house in the back of Kepler's Books, where Garcia, Hunter, and Nelson regularly performed. They married on April 23, 1963, and on December 8 of that year, their daughter Heather was born. They divorced in 1967.\nCarolyn Adams, a Merry Prankster also known as \"Mountain Girl\" or \"M.G.,\" had a daughter, Sunshine, with Ken Kesey in 1966. Adams married another Prankster, George Walker, but they soon separated. She and Sunshine then moved into 710 Ashbury with Garcia in late 1966 where they would ultimately live together until 1975. Adams gave birth to Garcia's second and third daughters, Annabelle Walker Garcia (b. February 2, 1970) and Theresa Adams \"Trixie\" Garcia (b. September 21, 1974).\nIn August 1970, Garcia's mother Ruth was involved in a car crash near Twin Peaks in San Francisco. Garcia, who was recording the album \"American Beauty\" at the time, often left the sessions to visit his mother with his brother Clifford. She died on September 28, 1970.\nIn the midst of a March 1973 Grateful Dead engagement at Long Island's Nassau Coliseum, Garcia met Deborah Koons, an aspiring filmmaker from a wealthy Cincinnati, Ohio-based family who would much later marry him and become his widow. After a brief correspondence, he began his relationship with her in mid-1974. This gradually strained his relationship with Adams and culminated in Garcia leaving Adams for Koons in late 1975. The end of his relationship with Koons in 1977 precipitated a brief reconciliation with Adams, including the reestablishment of their household. However, she did not agree with the guitarist's persistent use of narcotics and moved with the children to the Eugene, Oregon, area, living near Kesey, in 1978.\nFollowing Adams' departure, Garcia had an affair with Amy Moore. She was a Kentucky-born member of the extended \"Grateful Dead family\", and the mistress of Texas oil heir Roy Cullen. Their affair lasted circa 1980\u20131981, and inspired the Garcia-Hunter song \"Run for the Roses.\"\nAdams and Garcia were married on December 31, 1981, largely as a result of mutual tax exigencies. Despite the legal codification of their union, she remained in Oregon, while Garcia continued to live near the Grateful Dead's offices in San Rafael, California. Garcia lived with a variety of housemates, including longtime Grateful Dead employee and Jerry Garcia Band manager Rock Scully. Scully, who co-managed the Grateful Dead throughout the mid-to-late 1960s before serving as the band's \"advance man\" and publicist, was dismissed by the group in 1984 for enabling Garcia's addictions and for allegedly embezzling the Garcia Band's profits. Another housemate was Nora Sage, a Deadhead who became Garcia's housekeeper while studying at the Golden Gate University School of Law. The exact nature of their relationship remains unclear, although it is believed to have been platonic due to Garcia's addictions. She later became his art representative.\nWhile they would briefly reunite following his diabetic coma, Garcia and Adams ultimately divorced in 1994. Phil Lesh has subsequently stated that he rarely saw Adams on any of the band tours. In a 1991 \"Rolling Stone\" interview, Garcia stated that \"we haven't really lived together since the Seventies\".\nDuring the autumn of 1978, Garcia developed a friendship with Shimer College student Manasha Matheson, an artist and music enthusiast. They remained friends over the following nine years before initiating a romantic relationship in Hartford, Connecticut, on the Grateful Dead's spring 1987 tour. Jerry and Manasha became parents with the birth of their daughter, Keelin Noel Garcia, on December 20, 1987. On August 17, 1990, Garcia and Matheson married at their San Anselmo, California, home in a spiritual ceremony free of legal convention. In 1991, Garcia expressed his delight in finding the time to \"actually be a father\" to Keelin in contrast to his past relationships with his children. A year later, Garcia dedicated his first art book, \"Paintings, Drawings and Sketches\", \"For Manasha, with love, Jerry.\"\nIn January 1993, Barbara \"Brigid\" Meier, a former girlfriend from the early 1960s, reentered Garcia's life for a brief period. Meier claimed that Garcia had considered her to be the \"love of his life\" and proposed to her during a Hawaiian vacation shortly after their relationship recommenced. Garcia's \"love of his life\" sentiment was not reserved for one lover, as he expressed the same feelings to several other women in his life. At Garcia's 1995 funeral, Koons declared that she was \"the love of his life\" while paying her final respects, whereupon Meier and Ruppenthal, who were both in attendance, simultaneously exclaimed, \"He said that to me!\"\nThe affair with Meier marked the breakup of Garcia's family life with Matheson and Keelin. Garcia ended the affair with Meier forty-five days later while on tour in Chicago with the Grateful Dead after she confronted him about his drug use.\nShortly thereafter, Garcia renewed his acquaintance with Deborah Koons in the spring of 1993. They married on February 14, 1994, in Sausalito, California. Garcia and Koons were married at the time of his death.\nLifestyle and health.\nBecause of their public profile, Garcia and his collaborators were occasionally singled out in the American government's war on drugs. On October 2, 1967, 710 Ashbury Street in San Francisco (where the Grateful Dead had taken up residence the year before) was raided after a police tip-off. Grateful Dead members Phil Lesh, Bob Weir, and Ron \"Pigpen\" McKernan were apprehended on marijuana charges which were later dropped, although Garcia himself was not arrested. The following year, Garcia's picture was used in a campaign commercial for Richard Nixon.\nMost of the band was arrested again in January 1970, after it flew to New Orleans from Hawaii. After returning to their hotel from a performance, the band checked into their rooms, only to be quickly raided by police. Approximately fifteen people were arrested on the spot, including many of the road crew, management, and nearly all of the Grateful Dead except for Garcia, who arrived later, outgoing keyboardist Tom Constanten, who abstained from all drugs as a member of the Church of Scientology, and McKernan, who eschewed illegal drugs in favor of alcohol.\nAccording to Bill Kreutzmann, the band's use of cocaine accelerated throughout the early 1970s. After using heroin in a brothel in 1974 (likely on the band's second European tour), Garcia was introduced to a smokeable form of the drug (initially advertised as refined opium) colloquially known as \"Persian\" or \"Persian Base\" during the group's 1975 hiatus. Influenced by the stresses of creating and releasing \"The Grateful Dead Movie\" and the acrimonious collapse of the band's independent record labels over the next two years, Garcia became increasingly dependent upon both substances. These factors, combined with the alcohol and drug abuse of several other members of the Grateful Dead, resulted in a turbulent atmosphere. By 1978, the band's chemistry began \"cracking and crumbling\", resulting in poor group cohesion. As a result, Keith and Donna Jean Godchaux left the band in February 1979.\nWith the addition of keyboardist/vocalist Brent Mydland that year amid the ongoing coalescence of the Deadhead subculture, the band reached new commercial heights as a touring group on the American arena circuit in the early 1980s, enabling them to forsake studio recording for several years. Nevertheless, this was offset by such factors as the band's atypically large payroll and Garcia's $700-a-day () drug addiction, resulting in the guitarist taking on a frenetic slate of solo touring outside of the Grateful Dead's rigorous schedule, including abbreviated acoustic duo concerts with Jerry Garcia Band bassist John Kahn that were widely rumored to be a funding conduit for their respective addictions.\nThough things seemed to be getting better for the band, Garcia's health was declining. By 1983, Garcia's demeanor onstage had appeared to change. Despite still playing the guitar with great passion and intensity, there were times that he would appear disengaged; as such, shows were often inconsistent. Years of heavy tobacco smoking had affected his voice, and he gained considerable weight. By 1984, he would often rest his chin on the microphone during performances. The so-called \"endless tour\"\u2014the result of years of financial risks, drug use, and poor business decisions\u2014had taken its toll.\nGarcia's decade-long heroin addiction culminated in the rest of the band holding an intervention in January 1985. Given the choice between the band or the drugs, Garcia agreed to check into a rehabilitation center in Oakland, California. A few days later, on January 19, before the start of his program in Oakland, Garcia was arrested for drug possession in Golden Gate Park; he subsequently attended a drug diversion program. Throughout 1985, he tapered his drug use on tour and at home with the assistance of Nora Sage; by the spring of 1986, he was completely abstinent.\nPrecipitated by an unhealthy weight, dehydration, bad eating habits, and a recent relapse on the Grateful Dead's first stadium tour, Garcia collapsed into a diabetic coma on July 10, 1986, waking up five days later. He later spoke about this period of unconsciousness as surreal: \"Well, I had some very weird experiences. My main experience was one of furious activity and tremendous struggle in a sort of futuristic, space-ship vehicle with insectoid presences. After I came out of my coma, I had this image of myself as these little hunks of protoplasm that were stuck together kind of like stamps with perforations between them that you could snap off.\" Garcia's coma had a profound effect on him: it forced him to have to relearn how to play the guitar, as well as other, more basic skills. Within a handful of months, he had recovered, playing with the Jerry Garcia Band and the Grateful Dead again later that year.\nAfter Garcia's recovery, the band released a comeback album \"In the Dark\" in 1987, which became their best-selling studio album. Inspired by Garcia's improved health, a successful album and the continuing emergence of Mydland as a third frontman, the band's energy and chemistry reached a new peak in the late 1980s.\nAmid a litany of personal problems, Mydland died of a speedball overdose in July 1990. His death greatly affected Garcia, leading him to believe that the band's chemistry would never be the same. Before beginning the fall tour, the band acquired keyboardists Vince Welnick and Bruce Hornsby. As the band continued through 1991, Garcia became concerned with the band's future. He was exhausted from five straight years of touring. He thought a break was necessary, mainly so that the band could come back with fresh material. The idea was put off by the pressures of management, and the touring continued. Garcia began using heroin again after several years of intermittent prescription opiate use. Though his relapse was brief, the band was quick to react. Soon after the last show of the tour in Denver, Garcia was confronted by the band with another intervention. After a disastrous meeting, Garcia invited Phil Lesh over to his home in San Rafael, California, where he explained that after the meeting he would start attending a methadone clinic. Garcia said that he wanted to clean up in his own way and return to making music.\nAfter returning from the band's 1992 summer tour, Garcia became sick, a throwback to his diabetic coma in 1986. Manasha Garcia nursed Garcia back to health and organized a team of health professionals which included acupuncturist Yen Wei Choong and Randy Baker, MD, a holistic family physician to treat him at home. Garcia recovered over the following days, despite the Grateful Dead having to cancel their fall tour to allow him time to recuperate. Garcia reduced his cigarette smoking and began losing weight. He also became a vegetarian.\nDespite these improvements, Garcia's physical and mental condition continued to decline throughout 1993 and 1994. He began to use narcotics again to dull the pain. In light of his second drug relapse and current condition, Garcia checked himself into the Betty Ford Center during July 1995. His stay was limited, lasting only two weeks. Motivated by the experience, he then checked into the Serenity Knolls treatment center in Forest Knolls, California, where he died.\nDeath.\nGarcia died in his room at the rehabilitation clinic on August 9, 1995. The cause of death was a heart attack, likely due to diabetes and his poor diet. Garcia had long struggled with diabetes, weight problems, sleep apnea, heavy smoking, and drug addiction\u2014all of which contributed to his physical decline. Lesh remarked that, upon hearing of Garcia's death, \"I was struck numb. I had lost my oldest surviving friend, my brother.\" Garcia's funeral was held on August 12, at St. Stephen's Episcopal Church in Belvedere. It was attended by his family, the remaining Grateful Dead members, and their friends, including Bill Walton and Bob Dylan. Deborah Koons barred two of Garcia's former wives from the ceremony.\nOn August 13, about 25,000 people attended a municipally sanctioned public memorial at the Polo Fields of San Francisco's Golden Gate Park. Crowds produced hundreds of flowers, gifts, images, and a bagpipe rendition of \"Amazing Grace\" in remembrance. In the Haight, a single white rose was reportedly tied to a tree near the Dead's former Haight-Ashbury house, where a group of followers gathered to mourn.\nOn the morning of April 4, 1996, after a total lunar eclipse earlier that day, Weir and Deborah Koons, accompanied by Sanjay Mishra, spread half of Garcia's ashes into the Ganges at the holy city of Rishikesh, India, a site sacred to Hindus. The remaining ashes were poured into the San Francisco Bay. Koons did not allow former wife Carolyn Garcia to attend the spreading of the ashes.\nMusical equipment.\nGarcia played many guitars during his career, which ranged from student and budget models to custom-made instruments. During his thirty-five-year career as a professional musician, Garcia used about 25 guitars.\nIn 1965, when Garcia was playing with the Warlocks, he used a Guild Starfire, which he also used on the d\u00e9but album of the Grateful Dead. Beginning in late 1967 and ending in 1968, Garcia played black or gold mid-1950s Gibson Les Paul guitars with P-90 pickups. In 1969, he picked up the Gibson SG and used it for most of that year and 1970, except for a small period in between where he used a sunburst Fender Stratocaster.\nDuring Garcia's \"pedal steel flirtation period\" (as Bob Weir referred to it in \"Anthem to Beauty\"), from approximately 1969 to 1972, he initially played a Fender instrument before upgrading to the ZB Custom D-10, especially in his earlier public performances. Although this was a double neck guitar, Garcia used the \"E9 neck and the three pedals to raise the tone and two levers to lower it.\" He employed an Emmons D-10 at the Grateful Dead's and New Riders of the Purple Sage's final appearances at the Fillmore East in April 1971.\nIn 1969, Garcia played pedal steel on three notable outside recordings: the track \"The Farm\" on the Jefferson Airplane album \"Volunteers\", the track \"Oh Mommy\" by Brewer and Shipley and the hit single \"Teach Your Children\" by Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young from their album \"D\u00e9j\u00e0 Vu\", released in 1970. Garcia played on the latter album in exchange for harmony lessons for the Grateful Dead, who were at the time recording \"Workingman's Dead\".\nIn 1971, Garcia began playing a sunburst Les Paul. In March and April 1971 \u2013 the time period during which the Grateful Dead recorded its second live album, \"Grateful Dead\" \u2013 Garcia played the \"Peanut,\" a guitar he had received from Rick Turner, who had custom built the guitar's body and incorporated the neck, pickups, and hardware from an early '60s Les Paul.\nIn May, Garcia began using a 1955 natural finish Stratocaster that had been given to him by Graham Nash in 1969. Garcia added an alligator sticker to the pickguard in the fall of 1971, and the thusly-named \"Alligator\" would remain Garcia's principal electric guitar until August 1973.\nIn the summer of 1971, Garcia also played a double-cutaway Les Paul TV Junior.\nWhile Alligator was in the shop in the summer of 1972, he briefly reverted to the sunburst Stratocaster; this can be seen in \"Sunshine Daydream\".\nIn late 1972, Garcia purchased the first guitar (\"Eagle\") made by Alembic luthier Doug Irwin for $850 (). Enamored of Irwin's talents, he immediately commissioned his own custom instrument. This guitar, nicknamed \"Wolf\" for a sticker Garcia added below the tailpiece, was delivered in May 1973 and replaced Alligator on stage in September. It cost $1,500 (), an extremely high price for the era.\nWolf was made with an ebony fingerboard and featured numerous embellishments like alternating grain designs in the headstock, ivory inlays, and fret marker dots made of sterling silver. The body was composed of western maple wood which had a core of purpleheart. Garcia later had Irwin (who ultimately left Alembic to start his own business) replace the electronics inside the guitar, at which point he added his own logo to the headstock alongside the Alembic logo. The system included two interchangeable plates for configuring pickups: one was made for strictly single coils, while the other accommodated humbuckers. Shortly after receiving the modified instrument, Garcia commissioned another custom guitar from Irwin with one caveat: \"Don't hold back.\"\nDuring the Grateful Dead's 1974 European tour, Wolf was dropped on several occasions, one of which caused a minor crack in the headstock. Following filming of \"The Grateful Dead Movie\" (in which the guitar is prominently visible) a month later, Garcia returned it to Irwin for repairs. Throughout its absence, Garcia predominantly played several Travis Bean guitars, including the TB1000A (1975) and the TB500 (1976-1977). On September 28, 1977, Irwin delivered the refurbished Wolf back to Garcia. The wolf sticker which gave the guitar its name had now been inlaid into the instrument; it also featured an effects loop between the pick-ups and controls (so inline effects would \"see\" the same signal at all times) which was bypassable. Irwin also put a new face on the headstock with only his logo (he later claimed to have built the guitar himself, though pictures through time clearly show the progression of logos, from Alembic, to Alembic &amp; Irwin, to only Irwin).\nThe Grateful Dead began using McIntosh Labs amplifiers in the mid-1960s at the insistence and funding of sound technician and prolific LSD chemist Owsley Stanley. Garcia began using a specific McIntosh MC 2300 in 1973, eventually christened with a Budweiser Budman sticker placed on the front in 1974 and making it a unique way of identifying Garcia's specific MC 2300 out of the many that powered the Wall of Sound. \"Budman\" was one of the only components from the Wall to continue traveling with Garcia until 1993 when it was replaced with a cab simulation system.\nThe Budman amp is the longest continuously used piece of gear in Grateful Dead history. On 14 October 2021 during a Sotheby's auction titled \"From the Vault: Property from the Grateful Dead and Friends\". Garcia's last stage rack containing a MC2300 sold for $226,800 USD. The MC2300 Budman sold for $378,000 USD.\nNearly seven years after he commissioned it, Garcia received his second custom guitar (\"Tiger\") from Irwin in the summer of 1979.\nHe first employed the instrument in concert at a Grateful Dead performance at the Oakland Auditorium Arena on August 4, 1979. Its name was derived from the inlay on the preamp cover.\nThe body of Tiger was of rich quality: the top layer was cocobolo, with the preceding layers being maple stripe, vermilion, and flame maple, in that order. The neck was made of western maple with an ebony fingerboard. The pickups consisted of a single coil DiMarzio SDS-1 and two humbucker DiMarzio Super IIs; these were easily removable, accommodating Garcia's preference for replacing his pickups every year or two. The electronics were composed of an effects bypass loop (which allowed Garcia to control the sound of his effects through the tone and volume controls on the guitar) and a preamplifier/buffer, which rested behind a plate in the back of the guitar. Fully outfitted, Tiger weighed . This was Garcia's principal guitar for the next eleven years, and his most played. Due to the ongoing repair and retrofitting of other instruments, Garcia played Tiger during the last song (\"Box of Rain\") of his final performance with the Grateful Dead at Chicago's Soldier Field on July 9, 1995.\nIn the late 1980s Garcia, Weir and CSN (along with many others) endorsed Alvarez Yairi acoustic guitars. There are many photographs circulating (mostly promotional) of Garcia playing a DY99 Virtuoso Custom with a Modulus graphite neck. He opted to play with the less decorated model but the promotional photo from the Alvarez Yairi catalog has him holding the \"tree of life\" model. This hand-built guitar was notable for the collaboration between Japanese luthier Kazuo Yairi and Modulus Graphite of San Rafael. Since Garcia's death, the DY99 model has remained highly valued among collectors.\nIn 1990, Irwin completed \"Rosebud\", Garcia's fourth custom guitar. While similar to Tiger in many respects, it featured different inlays and electronics in addition to a slightly lighter weight. Rosebud, unlike Tiger, was configured with three humbuckers; the neck and bridge pickups shared a tone control, while the middle had its own. Atop the guitar was a Roland GK-2 pickup which fed the controller set inside the guitar. The GK2 was used in conjunction with the Roland GR-50 rack mount synthesizer. In turn, the GR-50 synthesizer drove a Korg M1R synthesizer that produced MIDI effects during live performances of this period, as heard on the Grateful Dead's \"Without a Net\" (1990) and other contemporaneous recordings. Sections of the guitar were hollowed out to bring the weight down to . The inlay, a dancing skeleton holding a rose, covers a plate just below the bridge. The final cost of the instrument was $11,000 ().\nIn 1993, carpenter and aspiring luthier Stephen Cripe tried his hand at making a speculative instrument for Garcia. After researching Tiger through pictures and films, Cripe set out on what would soon become known as \"Lightning Bolt\", again named for its inlay. The guitar used Brazilian rosewood for the fingerboard and East Indian rosewood for the body, which, with admitted irony from Cripe, had been taken from a 19th-century bed used by opium smokers. Built purely from guesswork, Lightning Bolt was gifted by Cripe to Garcia, who began using the guitar exclusively. However, as Cripe had little background in electronics, Garcia hired San Francisco-based repairman Gary Brawer to reconfigure the pickups and make the instrument MIDI-compatible. Additionally, Cripe \"hadn't known that the oval-shaped body inlays on Tiger and Rosebud concealed their batteries, so Brawer had to remove his inlay and put it on a cover-plate.\" A new bridge also was installed during the final Grateful Dead tour.\nSoon after, Garcia requested that Cripe build a backup of the guitar. Cripe, who had not measured or photographed the original, was told simply to \"wing it.\" Cripe later delivered the backup, which was known by the name \"Top Hat\", in April 1995. Garcia bought it from him for $6,500, making it the first guitar that Cripe had ever sold. Still infatuated with Lightning Bolt, Garcia rarely used the backup.\nAfter Garcia's death, the ownership of Wolf and Tiger came into question. According to Garcia's will, his guitars were bequeathed to Doug Irwin, who had constructed them. The remaining Grateful Dead members disagreed \u2013 they considered his guitars to be property of the band, leading to a lawsuit between the two parties. In 2001, Irwin won the case. However, nearly having been left destitute from a traffic accident in 1998, he decided to place the guitars up for auction in hopes of being able to start another guitar workshop.\nOn May 8, 2002, Wolf and Tiger, among other memorabilia, were placed for auction at Studio 54 in New York City. Tiger was sold for $957,500, and Wolf for $789,500. Together, the pair sold for $1.74\u00a0million, setting a new world record. Wolf went into in the private collection of Daniel Pritzker who kept it in a secure climate controlled room in a private residence at Utica, New York. Tiger went to the private collection of Indianapolis Colts owner Jim Irsay. In May 2017, Wolf was again auctioned, but this time for charity. Pritzker decided to sell the guitar and donate all proceeds to the Montgomery, Alabama based Southern Poverty Law Center. Brian Halligan placed the winning bid totaling $1.9 million.\nFor the majority of 2019 Wolf and Tiger were included in the \"Play it Loud\" exhibit at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City. On June 23, 2019 John Mayer played Wolf with Dead &amp; Company at Citi Field.\nLegacy.\nGarcia was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of the Grateful Dead in 1994. He declined to attend the ceremony; the band jokingly brought a cardboard cutout of Garcia out on stage in his absence.\nIn 1987, Vermont ice cream maker Ben &amp; Jerry's introduced their Cherry Garcia flavor dedicated to him. It was the first ice cream flavor dedicated to a musician.\nShortly after Garcia's death, astronomers Simon Radford and Ed Olszewski named an asteroid that orbits between Mars and Jupiter after him in November 1995. Tom Gehrels, who had originally discovered the asteroid in 1985 but never named it, offered it to them for the occasion.\nIn 1998, a newly discovered species of roach was named \"Cryptocercus garciai\" after Garcia.\nIn 2000, the network NBC broadcast an animated sitcom, \"God, the Devil and Bob\", which featured a \"God\" character based on Garcia's appearance. Amid backlash from religious groups and low ratings, the series was cancelled after four episodes.\nIn 2003, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Jerry Garcia 13th in its list of the 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time.\nAccording to fellow Bay Area guitar player Henry Kaiser, Garcia is \"the most recorded guitarist in history. With more than 2,200 Grateful Dead concerts, and 1,000 Jerry Garcia Band concerts captured on tape \u2013 as well as numerous studio sessions \u2013 there are about 15,000 hours of his guitar work preserved for the ages.\"\nOn July 30, 2004, Melvin Seals was the first Jerry Garcia Band (JGB) member to headline an outdoor music and camping festival called \"The Grateful Garcia Gathering\". Jerry Garcia Band drummer David Kemper joined Melvin Seals and JGB in 2007. Other musicians and friends of Garcia include Donna Jean Godchaux, Mookie Siegel, Pete Sears, G.E. Smith, Chuck Hammer, Barry Sless, Jackie Greene, Brian Lesh, Sanjay Mishra, and Mark Karan.\nOn July 21, 2005, the San Francisco Recreation and Park Commission passed a resolution to name the amphitheater in McLaren Park the \"Jerry Garcia Amphitheater.\" The amphitheater is located in the Excelsior District, where Garcia grew up. The first show to happen at the Jerry Garcia Amphitheater was Jerry Day 2005 on August 7, 2005. Jerry's brother, Tiff Garcia, was the first person to welcome everybody to the \"Jerry Garcia Amphitheater.\" Jerry Day is an annual celebration of Garcia in his childhood neighborhood. The dedication ceremony (Jerry Day 2) on October 29, 2005, was officiated by mayor Gavin Newsom.\nOn September 24, 2005, the \"Comes a Time: A Celebration of the Music &amp; Spirit of Jerry Garcia\" tribute concert was held at the Hearst Greek Theatre in Berkeley, California. The concert featured Bob Weir, Bill Kreutzmann, Mickey Hart, Bruce Hornsby, Trey Anastasio, Warren Haynes, Jimmy Herring, Michael Kang, Jay Lane, Jeff Chimenti, Mark Karan, Robin Sylvester, Kenny Brooks, Melvin Seals, Merl Saunders, Marty Holland, Stu Allen, Gloria Jones, and Jackie LaBranch.\nGeorgia-based composer Lee Johnson released an orchestral tribute to the music of the Grateful Dead, recorded with the Russian National Orchestra, entitled \"Dead Symphony: Lee Johnson Symphony No. 6.\" Johnson was interviewed on NPR on the July 26, 2008 broadcast of \"Weekend Edition\", and gave much credit to the genius and craft of Garcia's songwriting. A live performance with the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Johnson himself, was held Friday, August 1.\nIn 2010, the Santa Barbara Bowl in California opened Jerry Garcia Glen along the walk up to the venue. There is a statue of Garcia's right hand along the way.\nSeattle rock band Soundgarden wrote and recorded the instrumental song \"Jerry Garcia's Finger\", dedicated to the singer, which was released as a b-side with their single \"Pretty Noose\".\nNumerous music festivals across the United States and Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK hold annual events in memory of Jerry Garcia.\nOn May 14, 2015, an all-star lineup held a tribute concert for Garcia at Merriweather Post Pavilion in Columbia, Maryland. The event was called \"Dear Jerry\".\nIn 2015, Hunter and Garcia were inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame. Hunter accepted the award along with Garcia's daughter, Trixie Garcia, who accepted on behalf of her father.\nIn 2015, Jerry Garcia's wife, Manasha Garcia and their daughter, Keelin Garcia launched The Jerry Garcia Foundation, a nonprofit charity that supports projects for artistic, environmental, and humanitarian causes. The Foundation's Board members are Bob Weir, Peter Shapiro, Glenn Fischer, Irwin Sternberg, Daniel Shiner, TRI Studios CEO, Christopher McCutcheon and Fender Music Foundation Executive Director, \nLynn Robison. Keelin Garcia said, \"It is a tremendous honor to participate in nonprofit work that is in accordance with my father's values.\"\nJerry Garcia Symphonic Celebrations have occurred over several years (2013, 2014, 2016, 2022, and 2025) and in numerous venues. In addition to various symphony orchestras, participating musicians have included Warren Haynes, Jeff Sipe, Lincoln Schleifer, Jasmine Muhammad, Jaclyn LaBranch, Melvin Seals, Duane Trucks, Lady Chi, Dave Schools, Tom Hamilton, Oteil Burbridge, and John Morgan Kimock.\nIn 2017 Garcia's music was featured in \"Red Roses, Green Gold\", an off-Broadway musical featuring the music of Garcia and Robert Hunter, with additional music by Phil Lesh, Bob Weir, Mickey Hart, and Hunter's longtime collaborator Greg Anton. The production was directed and choreographed by Rachel Klein, featured a book by Michael Norman Mann, had Jeff Chimenti serving as music supervisor, and was performed at the Minetta Lane Theatre in New York City.\nIn 2018, Jerry Garcia family members, Keelin Garcia and Manasha Garcia launched the Jerry Garcia Music Arts independent music label.\nOn November 18, 2021, it was announced Jonah Hill would portray Garcia in a forthcoming Grateful Dead biopic written by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski directed by Martin Scorsese for Apple TV+.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75760", "revid": "20155832", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75760", "title": "Toronto, Canada", "text": ""}
{"id": "75761", "revid": "50477309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75761", "title": "List of cities in Canada", "text": "Communities by provinces and territories of Canada\nThis is a list of incorporated cities in Canada, in alphabetical order categorized by province or territory. More thorough lists of communities are available for each province.\nAlberta.\nTo qualify as a city in Alberta, a sufficient population size (10,000 people or more) must be present and a majority of the buildings must be on parcels of land less than . A community is not always incorporated as a city even if it meets these requirements. The urban service areas of Fort McMurray and Sherwood Park are hamlets recognized as equivalents of cities, but remain unincorporated. Ten towns are also eligible for city status but remain incorporated as towns.\nAlberta has 19 cities. Beaumont is Alberta's newest city, incorporating from town status on January 1, 2019.\n\"Notes:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBritish Columbia.\nIn British Columbia, a community can be incorporated as a city if its population exceeds 5,000. Once so incorporated, a city does not lose this status even if its population later declines; the once-larger City of Greenwood, for example, now has a population of just 665 people.\nBritish Columbia has 53 cities.\n\"Notes:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nManitoba.\nA community in Manitoba may seek city status once reaching a population of 7,500. Manitoba's newest city is Morden, which changed from town to city status on August 24, 2012.\nManitoba has 10 cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Notes:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNew Brunswick.\nNew Brunswick has eight cities.\n\"Notes:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNewfoundland and Labrador.\nNewfoundland and Labrador has three cities.\n\"Notes:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNorthwest Territories.\nAs in the other two Canadian territories, the only incorporated city in the Northwest Territories is its capital, Yellowknife.\nNova Scotia.\nNova Scotia no longer has any incorporated cities, as they were amalgamated into regional municipalities in the 1990s.\nNunavut.\nAs in the other two Canadian territories, the only incorporated city in Nunavut is its capital, Iqaluit.\nOntario.\nOntario has 52 cities. In Ontario, city status is conferred by the provincial government, generally upon the request of the incorporated municipality. A municipality may apply for city status anytime after its population surpasses 10,000. This status is not \"automatically\" conferred on a community that reaches this population target, but must be requested by the municipality and granted by the provincial Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing. Not all municipalities which reach this population target have pursued city designation. For example, Ajax, Oakville, and Whitby, which all had populations greater than 100,000 in 2011, are still designated as towns. Once designated a city, however, a municipality does not lose this status even if its population later falls back below 10,000 (as, for example, Dryden). Ontario's newest city is Richmond Hill, which changed from town to city status on March 25, 2019.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Notes:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrince Edward Island.\nPrince Edward Island has two cities.\n\"Notes:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nQuebec.\nIn Quebec, provincial law does not contain any \"cities\" at the current time, although the designation exists. \u2014 A \"ville\", though legally a \"township\", may be informally referred to as a town or a city in English, but this is an arbitrary and subjective distinction. Quebec municipal types are \"cities\" (cit\u00e9s), \"townships\" (villes), and \"municipalit\u00e9s\" (municipalit\u00e9s).\nQuebec has 223 villes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Notes:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSaskatchewan.\nIn Saskatchewan, Section 39(1) of \"The Cities Act\" indicates a town must have a population of 5,000 or more and meet other criteria in order to incorporate as a city, although in the early 20th century several centres such as Saskatoon and Regina were granted city status despite having a smaller population. The City of Melville retains its city status despite dropping below 5,000 people in the 1990s. Kindersley has expressed an interest in applying for city status upon reaching the 5,000 milestone. Saskatchewan's newest city is Warman, which changed from town to city status on October 24, 2012.\nSaskatchewan has 16 cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Notes:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nYukon.\nAs in the other two Canadian territories, the only incorporated city in the Yukon is its capital, Whitehorse. Dawson was also previously incorporated as a city, but when the criteria were changed in the 1980s, its status was reduced to that of a town due to population. Through special provision, however, it was officially the town of the city of Dawson until 2001.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75762", "revid": "41625025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75762", "title": "Calgary (disambiguation)", "text": "Calgary is a city in Alberta, Canada.\nCalgary may also refer to:\nOther places.\nDefunct Canadian administrative areas:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75763", "revid": "46509153", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75763", "title": "Provinces and territories of Canada", "text": "Top-level subdivisions of Canada\nCanada has ten provinces and three territories that are sub-national administrative divisions under the jurisdiction of the Canadian Constitution. In the 1867 Canadian Confederation, three provinces of British North America\u2014New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and the Province of Canada (which upon Confederation was divided into Ontario and Quebec)\u2014united to form a federation, becoming a fully independent country over the next century. Over its history, Canada's international borders have changed several times as it has added territories and provinces, making it the world's second-largest country by area.\nThe major difference between a Canadian province and a territory is that provinces receive their power and authority from the \"Constitution Act, 1867\" (formerly called the \"British North America Act, 1867\"). Territories are federal territories whose territorial governments have powers delegated to them by the Parliament of Canada. Powers are divided between the Government of Canada (the federal government) and the provincial governments by the \"Constitution Act\", either exclusively or concurrently. A change to the division of powers between the federal government and the provinces requires a constitutional amendment. A similar change affecting the territories can be performed unilaterally by the government or Parliament of Canada.\nIn modern Canadian constitutional theory, the provinces are considered to be co-sovereign, based on the division of responsibility between the provincial and federal governments within the \"Constitution Act, 1867\"; each province thus has its own representative, the lieutenant governor, of the Canadian Crown. The territories are not sovereign but have their authorities and responsibilities devolved from the federal level; as a result, each has a commissioner who represents the federal government.\nTerritories.\nThere are three territories in Canada. Unlike the provinces, the territories of Canada have no inherent sovereignty and have only those powers delegated to them by the federal government. They include all of mainland Canada north of latitude 60\u00b0 north and west of Hudson Bay, and all islands north of the Canadian mainland, from those in James Bay to the Queen Elizabeth Islands. They cover 40% of Canada's land, but contain only 0.3% of the population.\nAnother territory, the District of Keewatin, existed from October 7, 1876, to September 1, 1905, when it rejoined the Northwest Territories and became the Keewatin Region. It occupied the area that is now the Kenora District of Ontario, northern Manitoba, and mainland Nunavut. The government of Keewatin was based in Winnipeg, Manitoba. The territory did not have any representation in federal parliament.\nThe Northwest Territories has varied in size substantially through the years. In 1880, it covered , and from 1925 to 1999, it covered .\nPopulation.\nThe vast majority of Canada's population is concentrated in areas close to the Canada\u2013US border. Its four largest provinces by area (Quebec, Ontario, British Columbia and Alberta) are (with Quebec and Ontario switched in order) its most populous. Together they account for 86% of Canada's population. The territories (the Northwest Territories, Nunavut and Yukon) account for over a third of Canada's area but are only home to 0.3% of its population, which skews the national population density value.\nCanada's population grew by 5.0% between the 2006 and 2011 censuses. Except for New Brunswick, all territories and provinces increased in population during this time. In terms of percent change, the fastest-growing province or territory was Nunavut with an increase of 12.7% between 2011 and 2016, followed by Alberta with 11.6% growth, while New Brunswick's population decreased by 0.5%.\nGenerally, Canadian provinces have steadily grown in population along with Canada. However, some provinces such as Saskatchewan, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland and Labrador have experienced long periods of stagnation or population decline. Ontario and Quebec have always been the two biggest provinces in Canada, with together over 60% of the population at any given time. The population of the West relative to Canada as a whole has steadily grown over time, while that of Atlantic Canada has declined.\nTerritorial evolution.\nOntario, Quebec, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia were the original provinces, formed when three British North American colonies federated on July 1, 1867, into the Dominion of Canada and by stages began accruing the indicia of sovereignty from the United Kingdom. (Ontario and Quebec had been united as the Province of Canada from 1841 to 1867.) Over the next six years, Manitoba (1870), British Columbia (1871), and Prince Edward Island (1873) joined as provinces.\nThe British Crown had claimed two large areas, known as Rupert's Land and the North-Western Territory, northwest of the original Dominion and assigned them to the Hudson's Bay Company. In 1870, the company relinquished its claims for \u00a3300,000 (CND$1.5\u00a0million), assigning the vast territory to the government of Canada. The area entered confederation as the Province of Manitoba and the North-West Territories. \nThe North-West Territories encompassed all of current northern and western Canada except for the British holdings in the Arctic islands, the Colony of British Columbia, and the original Province of Manitoba, a small area in the south of today's province (which expanded to its present size in 1912). It also included the northern two-thirds of Ontario and Quebec.\nIn 1880, the British claims to the Arctic islands were transferred to Canada, adding to the size of the North-West Territories. In 1898, the Yukon Territory, renamed \"Yukon\" in 2003, was carved from the area surrounding the Klondike gold fields. In September 1905, a portion of the North-West Territories south of the 60th parallel north became the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan. In 1912, the boundaries of Quebec, Ontario, and Manitoba were expanded northward: Manitoba's to the 60\u00b0 parallel, Ontario's to Hudson Bay and Quebec's to encompass the District of Ungava.\nIn 1869, the people of Newfoundland voted to remain a British colony over fears that taxes would increase with Confederation, and that the economic policy of the Canadian government would favour mainland industries. In 1907, Newfoundland acquired dominion status. In the middle of the Great Depression in Canada, Newfoundland underwent a prolonged economic crisis, and the legislature turned over political control to the Newfoundland Commission of Government in 1933. Following Canada's participation in the Second World War, in a 1948 referendum, a narrow majority of Newfoundland citizens voted to enter into Confederation, and on March 31, 1949, Newfoundland became Canada's tenth province. The province was renamed Newfoundland and Labrador in 2001.\nBermuda, the last British North American colony, which had been somewhat subordinated to Nova Scotia, was one of two Imperial fortress colonies in British North America\u00a0\u2013 the other being Nova Scotia, and more particularly the city of Halifax. Halifax and Bermuda were the sites of the Royal Navy's North America Station main bases, dockyards, and Admiralty Houses (called variously the \"River St. Lawrence and Coast of America and North America and West Indies Station\", the \"North America and Newfoundland Station\", the \"North America and West Indies Station\", and the \"America and West Indies Station\"). The squadron of the station was based at Royal Naval Dockyard, Halifax, during the summers and Royal Naval Dockyard, Bermuda, in the winters. In the 1820s, Bermuda, which was better located to control the Atlantic Seaboard of the United States, impossible to attack over land, and almost impregnable against attack over water, became the main base year round. \nA large British Army garrison in Bermuda, which fell under the commander-in-chief in Nova Scotia, existed to defend the colony as a naval base, and to prevent it becoming as useful a base to the navy of an adversary, and to support amphibious operations throughout the region, such as the Chesapeake campaign during the American War of 1812. Bermuda was consequently the most important British naval and military base in the Americas. \nCanadian confederation resulted in the Canadian Militia becoming responsible for the defence of the Maritimes, the abolition of the British Army's commander-in-chief there, and the reduction of British military forces in the Maritimes to a small garrison for the protection of the Halifax dockyard, which was withdrawn when the dockyard was handed over to the Dominion government in 1905 for use by the new Canadian naval service. Britain retained control of Bermuda as an imperial fortress, with the governor and commander-in-chief of Bermuda (a military officer previously ranking between lieutenant-colonel and major-general) becoming a lieutenant-general termed a \"general officer commanding\" and the Bermuda garrison becoming a command in its own right. \nBermuda was consequently left out of Canadian confederation. It retained naval links with Halifax. The state church (or \"established church\"), the Church of England, continued to place Bermuda under the bishop of Newfoundland until 1919. Bermuda also remained linked to the Maritimes under the Methodist and Roman Catholic churches.\nIn 1903, resolution of the Alaska Panhandle Dispute fixed British Columbia's northwestern boundary, the first of only two provincial reductions in Canada. In 1927, the second reduction occurred when a boundary dispute between Canada and the Dominion of Newfoundland saw Labrador (part of the Dominion of Newfoundland) enlarged at Quebec's expense. (In 1949, this land returned to Canada as part of the province of Newfoundland.) In 1999, Nunavut was created from the northern and eastern portions of the Northwest Territories.\nThe three territories are the most sparsely populated region in Canada, combined covering in land area. They are often referred to as a single region, the North, for organizational and economic purposes. For much of the Northwest Territories' early history, it was divided into several districts for ease of administration. The District of Keewatin was created as a separate territory from 1876 to 1905, after which, as the Keewatin Region, it became an administrative district of the Northwest Territories. In 1999, it was dissolved when it became part of Nunavut.\nGovernment.\nTheoretically, provinces have a great deal of power relative to the federal government, with jurisdiction over many public goods such as health care, education, welfare, and intra-provincial transportation. They receive \"transfer payments\" from the federal government to pay for these, as well as exacting their own taxes. In practice, however, the federal government can use these transfer payments to influence these provincial areas. For instance, in order to receive healthcare funding under Medicare, provinces must agree to meet certain federal mandates, such as universal access to required medical treatment.\nProvincial and territorial legislatures have no second chamber like the Canadian Senate. Originally, most provinces had such bodies, known as legislative councils, with members titled councillors. These upper houses were abolished one by one, Quebec's being the last in 1968. In most provinces, the single house of the legislature is known as the Legislative Assembly. The exceptions are Nova Scotia and Newfoundland and Labrador, where the chamber is called the House of Assembly, and Quebec where it is called the National Assembly. Ontario has a legislative assembly but its members are called members of the Provincial Parliament or MPPs. \nThe legislative assemblies use a procedure similar to that of the House of Commons of Canada. The head of government of each province, called the premier, is generally the head of the party with the most seats. This is also the case in Yukon, but the Northwest Territories and Nunavut have no political parties at the territorial level. The King's representative in each province is the lieutenant governor. In each of the territories there is an analogous commissioner, but they represent the federal government rather than the monarch.\nProvincial political parties.\nMost provinces have rough provincial counterparts to major federal parties. However, these provincial parties are not usually formally linked to the federal parties that share the same name. For example, no provincial Conservative or Progressive Conservative Party shares an organizational link to the federal Conservative Party of Canada, and neither do provincial Green Parties to the Green Party of Canada.\nProvincial New Democratic Parties, on the other hand, are fully integrated with the federal New Democratic Party\u2014meaning that provincial parties effectively operate as sections, with common membership, of the federal party.\nThe Liberal Party of Canada shares such an organizational integration with Atlantic Canada provincial Liberals in New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. Other provincial Liberal parties are unaffiliated with their federal counterpart.\nSome provinces have provincial political parties with no clear federal equivalent, such as the Alberta Party and Saskatchewan Party.\nThe provincial political climate of Quebec is different: the main split is between sovereignty, represented by the Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois and Qu\u00e9bec solidaire, and federalism, represented primarily by the Quebec Liberal Party. The , meanwhile, takes an abstentionist position on the question and does not support or oppose sovereignty.\nCeremonial territory.\nThe Canadian National Vimy Memorial, near Vimy, Pas-de-Calais, and the Beaumont-Hamel Newfoundland Memorial, near Beaumont-Hamel, both in France, are ceremonially considered Canadian territory. In 1922, the French government donated the land used for the Vimy Memorial \"freely, and for all time, to the Government of Canada the free use of the land exempt from all taxes\". \nIn 1921, the site of the Somme battlefield near Beaumont-Hamel site was purchased by the people of the Dominion of Newfoundland. These sites do not enjoy extraterritorial status and are subject to French law.\nProposed provinces and territories.\nSince Confederation in 1867, there have been several proposals for new Canadian provinces and territories. The Constitution of Canada requires an amendment for the creation of a new province. The creation of a new territory requires only an act of Parliament, a legislatively simpler process.\nIn late 2004, Prime Minister Paul Martin surprised some observers by expressing his personal support for all three territories gaining provincial status \"eventually\". He cited their importance to Canada as a whole and the ongoing need to assert sovereignty in the Arctic, particularly as global warming could make that region more open to exploitation, leading to more complex international waters disputes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75767", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75767", "title": "Etch", "text": "Etch may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75768", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75768", "title": "Computer Chess", "text": ""}
{"id": "75773", "revid": "42964511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75773", "title": "Palenque", "text": "Ancient Mayan city-state in Chiapas, Mexico\nPalenque (; Yucatec Maya: ), also anciently known in the Itza Language as Lakamha (\"big water\" or \"big waters\"), was a Maya city-state in southern Mexico that perished in the 8th century. The Palenque ruins date from ca. 226 BC to ca. 799 AD. After its decline, it was overgrown by the jungle of cedar, mahogany, and sapodilla trees, but has since been excavated and restored. It is located near the Usumacinta River in the Mexican state of Chiapas, about south of Ciudad del Carmen, above sea level. It is adjacent to the modern town of Palenque, Chiapas. It averages a humid with roughly of rain a year.\nPalenque is a medium-sized site, smaller than Tikal, Chichen Itza, or Cop\u00e1n, but it contains some of the finest architecture, sculpture, roof comb and bas-relief carvings that the Mayas produced. Much of the history of Palenque has been reconstructed from reading the hieroglyphic inscriptions on the many monuments; historians now have a long sequence of the ruling dynasty of Palenque in the 5th century and extensive knowledge of the city-state's rivalry with other states such as Calakmul and Tonin\u00e1. The most famous ruler of Palenque was K\u02bcinich Janaab\u02bc Pakal, or Pacal the Great, whose tomb has been found and excavated in the Temple of the Inscriptions. By 2005, the discovered area covered up to , but it is estimated that less than 10% of the total area of the city is explored, leaving more than a thousand structures still covered by jungle. Palenque received 920,470 visitors in 2017.\nHistory.\nMythological beings using a variety of emblem glyphs in their titles suggests a complex early history. For instance, K\u02bcuk\u02bc Bahlam I, the supposed founder of the Palenque dynasty, is called a \"Toktan Ajaw\" in the text of the Temple of the Foliated Cross.\nThe famous structures that we know today probably represent a rebuilding effort in response to the attacks by the city of Calakmul and its client states in 599 and 611. One of the main figures responsible for rebuilding Palenque and for a renaissance in the city's art and architecture is also one of the best-known Maya \"Ajaw\", K\u02bcinich Janaab\u02bc Pakal (Pacal the Great), who ruled from 615 to 683. He is known through his funerary monument dubbed the Temple of the Inscriptions, after the lengthy text preserved in the temple's superstructure. At the time Alberto Ruz Lhuillier excavated Pakal's tomb, it was the richest and best preserved of any scientifically excavated burial then known from the ancient Americas. It held this position until the discovery of the rich Moche burials at Sip\u00e1n, Peru and the recent discoveries at Cop\u00e1n and Calakmul.\nBeside the attention that K\u02bcinich Janaab' Pakal's tomb brought to Palenque, the city is historically significant for its extensive hieroglyphic corpus composed during the reigns of Janaab\u02bc Pakal, his son K\u02bcinich Kan Bahlam II, and his grandson K\u02bcinich Akal Mo\u02bc Naab\u02bc, and for being the location where Heinrich Berlin and later Linda Schele and Peter Mathews outlined the first dynastic list for any Maya city. The work of Tatiana Proskouriakoff as well as that of Berlin, Schele, Mathews, and others, initiated the intense historical investigations that characterized much of the scholarship on the ancient Maya from the 1960s to the present. The extensive iconography and textual corpus has also allowed for study of Classic period Maya mythology and ritual practice.\nRulers.\nA list of possible and known Maya rulers of the city, with dates of their reigns:\nEarly Classic period.\nThe first \"ajaw\", or king, of B\u02bcaakal that we know of was K\u02bcuk Balam (Quetzal Jaguar), who governed for four years starting in the year 431. After him, a king came to power, nicknamed \"Casper\" by archaeologists. The next two kings were probably \"Casper\"'s sons. Little was known about the first of these, B\u02bcutz Aj Sak Chiik, until 1994, when a tablet was found describing a ritual for the king. The first tablet mentioned his successor Ahkal Mo\u02bc Naab I as a teenage prince, and therefore it is believed that there was a family relation between them. For unknown reasons, Akhal Mo\u02bc Naab I had great prestige, so the kings who succeeded him were proud to be his descendants.\nWhen Ahkal Mo\u02bc Naab I died in 524, there was an interregnum of four years, before the following king was crowned at Tokt\u00e1n in 529. K\u02bcan Joy Chitam I governed for 36 years. His sons Ahkal Mo\u02bc Naab II and K\u02bcan B\u02bcalam I were the first kings who used the title \"Kinich\", which means \"the great sun\". This word was used also by later kings. B\u02bcalam was succeeded in 583 by Yohl Ik\u02bcnal, who was supposedly his daughter. The inscriptions found in Palenque document a battle that occurred under her government in which troops from Calakmul invaded and sacked Palenque, a military feat without known precedents. These events took place in 599.\nA second victory by Calakmul occurred some twelve years later, in 611, under the government of Aj Ne' Yohl Mat, son of Yohl Iknal. In this occasion, the king of Calakmul entered Palenque in person, consolidating a significant military disaster, which was followed by an epoch of political disorder. Aj Ne' Yohl Mat was to die in 612.\nLate Classic period.\nB\u02bcaakal began the Late Classic period in the throes of the disorder created by the defeats before Calakmul. The glyphic panels at the Temple of the Inscriptions, which records the events at this time, relates that some fundamental annual religious ceremonies were not performed in 613, and at this point states: \"Lost is the divine lady, lost is the king.\" Mentions of the government at the time have not been found.\nIt is believed that after the death of Aj Ne' Yohl Mat, Janaab Pakal, also called Pakal I, took power thanks to a political agreement. Janaab Pakal assumed the functions of the \"ajaw\" (king) but never was crowned. He was succeeded in 612 by his daughter, the queen Sak K\u02bcuk\u02bc, who governed for only three years until her son was old enough to rule. It is considered that the dynasty was reestablished from then on, so B\u02bcaakal retook the path of glory and splendor.\nThe grandson of Janaab Pakal is the most famous of the Mayan kings, K\u02bcinich Janaab' Pakal, also known as Pakal the Great. He began rule at the age of 12 years after his mother Sak Kuk resigned as queen after three years, thus passing power on to him. Pakal the Great reigned in Palenque from 615 to 683, and his mother remained an important force for the first 25 years of his rule. She may have ruled jointly with him. Known as the favorite of the gods, he carried Palenque to new levels of splendor, in spite of having come to power when the city was at a low point. Pakal married the princess of Okt\u00e1n, Lady Tzakbu Ajaw (also known as Ahpo-Hel) in 624 and had at least three children.\nMost of the palaces and temples of Palenque were constructed during his government; the city flourished as never before, eclipsing Tikal. The central complex, known as The Palace, was enlarged and remodeled on various occasions, notably in the years 654, 661, and 668. In this structure, is a text describing how in that epoch Palenque was newly allied with Tikal, and also with Yaxchilan, and that they were able to capture the six enemy kings of the alliance. Not much more had been translated from the text.\nAfter the death of Pakal in 683, his older son K\u02bcinich Kan B\u02bcalam assumed the kingship of B\u02bcaakal, who in turn was succeeded in 702 by his brother K\u02bcinich K\u02bcan Joy Chitam II. The first continued the architectural and sculptural works that were begun by his father, as well as finishing the construction of the famous tomb of Pakal. Pakal's sarcophagus, built for a very tall man, held the richest collection of jade seen in a Mayan tomb. A jade mosaic mask was placed over his face, and a suit made of jade adorned his body, with each piece hand-carved and held together by gold wire.\nFurthermore, K\u02bcinich Kan B\u02bcalam I began ambitious projects, including the Group of the Crosses. Thanks to numerous works begun during his government, now we have portraits of this king, found in various sculptures. His brother succeeded him continuing construction and art with the same enthusiasm, reconstructing and enlarging the north side of the Palace. Thanks to the reign of these three kings, B\u02bcaakal had a century of growth and splendor.\nIn 711, Palenque was sacked by the realm of Tonin\u00e1, and the old king K\u02bcinich K\u02bcan Joy Chitam II was taken prisoner. It is not known what the final fate of the king was, and it is presumed that he was executed in Tonin\u00e1. For 10 years there was no king. Finally, K\u02bcinich Ahkal Mo\u02bc Nab' III was crowned in 722. Although the new king belonged to the royalty, there is no evidence that he was the direct inheritor of K\u02bcinich K\u02bcan Joy Chitam II. It is believed, therefore, that this coronation was a break in the dynastic line, and probably K\u02bcinich Ahkal Nab' arrived to power after years of maneuvering and forging political alliances. This king, his son, and grandson governed until the end of the 8th century. Little is known about this period, except that, among other events, the war with Tonin\u00e1 continued, where there are hieroglyphics that record a new defeat of Palenque.\nOccasionally city-state lords . Lady Sak Kuk ruled at Palenque for at least three years starting in 612 CE, before she passed her title to her son. However, these female rulers were accorded male attributes. They were presented as more masculine, since they had assumed roles that were typically held by men.\nAbandonment.\nDuring the 8th century, B\u02bcaakal came under increasing stress, in concert with most other Classic Mayan city-states, and there was no new elite construction in the ceremonial center sometime after 800. An agricultural population continued to live here for a few generations, then the site was abandoned and was slowly grown over by the forest. The district was very sparsely populated when the Spanish first arrived in the 1520s.\nArt and architecture.\nImportant structures at Palenque include:\nTemple of the Inscriptions.\nThe Temple of the Inscriptions had begun perhaps as early as 675 as the funerary monument of Hanab-Pakal. The temple superstructure houses the second longest glyphic text known from the Maya world (the longest is the Hieroglyphic Stairway at Copan). The Temple of the Inscriptions records approximately 180 years of the city's history from the 4th through 12th K\u02bcatun. The focal point of the narrative records K\u02bcinich Janaab\u02bc Pakal's K\u02bcatun period-ending rituals focused on the icons of the city's patron deities prosaically known collectively as the Palenque Triad or individually as GI, GII, and GIII.\nThe pyramid measures 60 meters wide, 42.5 meters deep and 27.2 meters high. The summit temple measures 25.5 meters wide, 10.5 meters deep and 11.4 meters high. The largest stones weigh 12 to 15 tons. These were on top of the pyramid. The total volume of pyramid and temple is 32,500 cu. meters.\nIn 1952 Alberto Ruz Lhuillier removed a stone slab in the floor of the back room of the temple superstructure to reveal a passageway (filled in shortly before the city's abandonment and reopened by archeologists) leading through a long stairway to Pakal's tomb. The tomb itself is remarkable for its large carved sarcophagus, the rich ornaments accompanying Pakal, and for the stucco sculpture decorating the walls of the tomb. Unique to Pakal's tomb is the psychoduct, which leads from the tomb itself, up the stairway and through a hole in the stone covering the entrance to the burial. This psychoduct is perhaps a physical reference to concepts about the departure of the soul at the time of death in Maya eschatology where in the inscriptions the phrase \"ochb'ihaj sak ik\u02bcil\" (the white breath road-entered) is used to refer to the leaving of the soul. A find such as this is greatly important because it demonstrated for the first time the temple usage as being multifaceted. These pyramids were, for the first time, identified as temples and also funerary structures.\nThe much-discussed iconography of the sarcophagus lid depicts Pakal in the guise of one of the manifestations of the Maya maize god emerging from the maws of the underworld.\nThe temple also has a duct structure that still is not completely understood by archaeologists. It has been suggested that the duct aligns with the winter solstice and that the sun shines down on Pakal's tomb.\nTemples of the Cross group.\nThe Temple of the Cross, Temple of the Sun, and Temple of the Foliated Cross are a set of graceful temples atop step pyramids, each with an elaborately carved relief in the inner chamber depicting two figures presenting ritual objects and effigies to a central icon. Earlier interpretations had argued that the smaller figure was that of K\u02bcinich Janaab\u02bc Pakal while the larger figure was K\u02bcinich Kan B\u02bcahlam. However, it is now known based on a better understanding of the iconography and epigraphy that the central tablet depicts two images of Kan B\u02bcahlam. The smaller figure shows K\u02bcinich Kan B\u02bcahlam during a rite of passage ritual at the age of six (9.10.8.9.3 9 Akbal 6 Xul) while the larger is of his accession to kingship at the age of 48. These temples were named by early explorers; the cross-like images in two of the reliefs actually depict the tree of creation at the center of the world in Maya mythology.\nPalace.\nThe Palace, a complex of several connected and adjacent buildings and courtyards, was built by several generations on a wide artificial terrace during four century period. The Palace was used by the Mayan aristocracy for bureaucratic functions, entertainment, and ritualistic ceremonies. The Palace is located in the center of the ancient city.\nWithin the Palace there are numerous sculptures and bas-relief carvings that have been conserved. The Palace most unusual and recognizable feature is the four-story tower known as The Observation Tower. The Observation Tower like many other buildings at the site exhibit a mansard-like roof. The A-shaped corbel arch is an architectural motif observed throughout the complex. The Corbel arches require a large amount of masonry mass and are limited to a small dimensional ratio of width to height providing the characteristic high ceilings and narrow passageways. The Palace was equipped with numerous large baths and saunas which were supplied with fresh water by an intricate water system. An aqueduct, constructed of great stone blocks with a three-meter-high vault, diverts the Otulum River to flow underneath the main plaza. The Palace is the largest building complex in Palenque measuring 97 meters by 73 meters at its base.\nOther notable buildings.\nThe site also has a number of other temples, tombs, and elite residences, some a good distance from the center of the site, a court for playing the Mesoamerican ballgame, and an interesting stone bridge over the Otulum River some distance below the Aqueduct.\nModern investigations.\nAfter de la Nada's brief account of the ruins, no attention was paid to them until 1773 when one Don Ramon de Ordo\u00f1ez y Aguilar examined Palenque and sent a report to the Capitan General in Antigua Guatemala, a further examination was made in 1784 saying that the ruins were of particular interest, so two years later surveyor and architect Antonio Bernasconi was sent with a small military force under Colonel Antonio del R\u00edo to examine the site in more detail. Del Rio's forces smashed through several walls to see what could be found, doing a fair amount of damage to the Palace, while Bernasconi made the first map of the site as well as drawing copies of a few of the bas-relief figures and sculptures. Draughtsman Luciano Casta\u00f1eda made more drawings in 1807, and a book on Palenque, \"Descriptions of the Ruins of an Ancient City, discovered near Palenque\", was published in London in 1822 based on the reports of those last two expeditions together with engravings based on Bernasconi and Casta\u00f1edas drawings; two more publications in 1834 contained descriptions and drawings based on the same sources.\nJuan Galindo visited Palenque in 1831, and filed a report with the Central American government. He was the first to note that the figures depicted in Palenque's ancient art looked like the local Native Americans; some other early explorers, even years later, attributed the site to such distant peoples as Egyptians, Polynesians, or the Lost Tribes of Israel.\nStarting in 1832 Jean-Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Waldeck spent two years at Palenque making numerous drawings, but most of his work was not published until 1866. Meanwhile, the site was visited in 1840 first by Patrick Walker and Herbert Caddy on a mission from the governor of British Honduras, and then by John Lloyd Stephens and Frederick Catherwood who published an illustrated account the following year which was greatly superior to the previous accounts of the ruins.\nD\u00e9sir\u00e9 Charnay took the first photographs of Palenque in 1858, and returned in 1881\u20131882. Alfred Maudslay encamped at the ruins in 1890\u20131891 and took extensive photographs of all the art and inscriptions he could find, and made paper and plaster molds of many of the inscriptions, and detailed maps and drawings, setting a high standard for all future investigators to follow. Maudslay learned the technique of making the papier mache molds of the sculptures from Frenchman Desire Charnay.\nSeveral other expeditions visited the ruins before Frans Blom of Tulane University in 1923, who made superior maps of both the main site and various previously neglected outlying ruins and filed a report for the Mexican government on recommendations on work that could be done to preserve the ruins.\nFrom 1949 through 1952 Alberto Ruz Lhuillier supervised excavations and consolidations of the site for Mexico's National Institute of Anthropology and History (INAH); it was Ruz Lhuillier who was the first person to gaze upon Pacal the Great's tomb in over a thousand years. Ruz worked for four years at the Temple of the Inscriptions before unearthing the tomb. Further INAH work was done in lead by Jorge Acosta into the 1970s.\nIn 1973, the first of the very productive Palenque \"Mesa Redonda\" (Round table) conferences was held here on the inspiration of Merle Greene Robertson; thereafter every few years leading Mayanists would meet at Palenque to discuss and examine new findings in the field. Meanwhile, Robertson was conducting a detailed examination of all art at Palenque, including recording all the traces of color on the sculptures.\nThe 1970s also saw a small museum built at the site.\nIn the last 15 or 20 years, a great deal more of the site has been excavated, but currently archaeologists estimate that only 5% of the total city has been uncovered.\nIn 2010, Pennsylvania State University researchers, Christopher Duffy and Kirk French, identified the Piedras Bolas Aqueduct as a pressurised aqueduct, the earliest known in the New World. It is a spring-fed conduit located on steep terrain that has a restricted outlet that would cause the water to exit forcefully, under pressure, to a height of . They were unable to identify the use for this man-made feature.\nIn June 2022, archaeologists from the Mexico's National Institute of Anthropology and History (INAH) announced the discovery of a 1,300-year-old nine-inch-tall stucco head statue in a pond, believed to be a young Hun Hunahpu, the Maya's mythological maize god. The figure's semi-shaved haircut that resembles ripe corn was the reason they identified it as a young maize god. Researchers assume that the Mayan inhabitants of Palenque possibly placed a large stone statuette over a pond to represent the entrance to the underworld. According to archaeologist Arnoldo Gonz\u00e1lez Cruz, the Mayan people symbolically shuttered the pool by breaking up some of the stucco and filling it with animal remains, including pottery fragments, carved bone remains, shells, obsidian arrowheads, beads, vegetables, and other items.\nPaleontological significance.\nResearch inside the temples of Palenque has revealed the presence of numerous extremely well-preserved fossils of marine fish and invertebrates in the limestone slabs used to build the temples, as well as in the former quarries that this limestone was mined in. The existence of these fossils was known since the 19th century, but they only received significant scientific and archeological attention since the 2000s. These fossils have been dated to the Tenejapa-Lacand\u00f3n Formation of the Early Paleocene, shortly after the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event, and document the recovery of marine ecosystems following the extinction, including the development of modern coral reefs. Fossils include some of the earliest representatives of modern reef fish, such as serranids (\"Paleoserranus\"), damselfish (\"Chaychanus\"), and syngnathiforms (\"Eekaulostomus\"), in addition to some of the last members of extinct groups such as pycnodontids. This diverse ecosystem existed despite the area being relatively close to the impact site of the Chicxulub meteor, which caused the extinction in the first place. The Mayan residents of the area appear to have been well aware of these fossils and actively collected them, including by using fossil shark teeth and ray spines from the nearby Miocene Tulij\u00e1 Formation as cutting tools, painting some of the fish skeletons, and cutting the slabs to display the fossils better, making them among the earliest known paleontologists.\nPalenque National Park.\n\"'Palenque National Park\u02bc\" was designated in 1981 by the Mexican government. It covers an area of 17.72\u00a0km2, which encompasses the ancient city and the hills to the south. The park includes a family camp site.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75776", "revid": "48734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75776", "title": "Virginia Katherine McMath", "text": ""}
{"id": "75777", "revid": "140154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75777", "title": "Kuro5hin", "text": "Technology-related discussion website (1999\u20132016)\nKuro5hin (K5; read \"corrosion\") was a collaborative discussion website founded by Rusty Foster in 1999, having been inspired by Slashdot. Articles were created and submitted by users and submitted to a queue for evaluation. Site members could vote for or against publishing an article and once the article had reached a certain number of votes, it was published to the site or deleted from the queue. The site has been described as \"a free-for-all of news and opinion written by readers\". Around 2005, its membership numbered in the tens of thousands.\nOn May 1, 2016, the site was closed down permanently with all content taken offline. Foster stated at the time that it might return in the form of a static archive at a later date.\nOverview.\nAll content was generated and selected by the users themselves, with the exception of site news written by the administrators. Registered users would submit stories to the \"submissions queue\" where other users would vote +1 FP (\"front page\"), +1, 0, or \u22121. If the story reached a predetermined threshold score, it was posted to the front page or to the relevant section, depending on the proportion of \"FP votes\". If it failed to make the threshold, other factors (such as number of comments, type of comments, and their ratings) could still cause the story to be posted to a section or to the front page. Otherwise, it was dropped.\nOne feature of the story queue was \"edit mode\", in which a story was protected from voting for a period of time during which the author could make changes. Comments could still be made on the story to suggest changes before voting began. These comments were distinguished as being \"editorial\" or \"topical\".\nA further section was known as the \"diaries\". Having no editing or moderation vetting, diaries were essentially weblogs. and formed the source of most of Kuro5hin's content by volume. However, unlike the edited article sections, they were not widely syndicated. Other users would also comment on these diaries in the same way as stories but without the editorial or topical stipulation.\nHistory.\nFoster named Kuro5hin\u2014pronounced \"corrosion\"\u2014as a pun on his first name. The site was powered by the Scoop collaborative system, originally written by Foster himself, with the motto \"Technology and Culture, from the Trenches\".\nIn July 2000, the site was temporarily closed due to comment spam and denial-of-service attacks.\nIn January 2002, OSDN ended the advertising affiliate agreement with Kuro5hin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75778", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75778", "title": "List of comic books", "text": "This is a list of comic books, by country.\nKuwait.\nTeshkeel Comics\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "75779", "revid": "17760150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75779", "title": "Party game", "text": "Games played for entertainment at social gatherings\nParty games are games that are played at social gatherings to facilitate interaction and provide entertainment and recreation. Categories include (explicit) icebreaker, parlour (indoor), picnic (outdoor), and large group games. Other types include pairing off (partnered) games, and parlour races. Different games will generate different atmospheres so the party game may merely be intended as an icebreakers, or the sole purpose for or structure of the party. As such, party games aim to include players of various skill levels and player-elimination is rare. Party games are intended to be played socially, and are designed to be easy for new players to learn.\nCharacteristics.\nThe characteristics of party games tend to include:\nChildren's party games.\nTraditional children's party games include:\nVideo games.\nParty video games are commonly designed as a collection of simple minigames, designed to be intuitive and easy to control, and allow for competition between many players. Some games are played on simulated game boards, like the \"Itadaki Street\" series, \"Mario Party\" series and \"Sonic Shuffle\".\n\"BYTE\" in 1981 called the Olympic sports game \"Olympic Decathlon\" (1980) \"the first true party game for microcomputers\". Another early example is Starpath's \"Party Mix\". \nModern examples include \"Tower Unite\" (2016), a virtual community party game played online, and \"The Jackbox Party Pack\" series which offers minigames that can be played both online and with people in the same room. \nLarge group games.\nLarge group games are played by many participants and are often used as planned activities in structured environments, especially as educational activities. They are similar to party games, except that large group games are typically planned for larger numbers (perhaps even hundreds) as part of an event.\nLarge group games can take a variety of forms and formats.\nSome are physical games such as Buck buck.\nSome are modeled on the TV game show format, offering points for teams who can answer questions the fastest. Trivia-type games might have questions posed from the stage and each tabletop writing their answers to be collected and scored. Others may take on some of the qualities of Open Space environments and allow participants to wander in a less structured way.\nSome are modeled on TV reality shows such as \"The Amazing Race\" or \"Survivor\". Participants compete as individuals or in teams to complete challenges that move them towards victory in a competition spanning the entire party. The TV shows on which such parties are based are normally competitions involving elimination, so such events require significant planning to avoid exclusion or boredom.\nThere are also now electronic party games such as Cards Against Humanity that can be played on the phone or computer.\nGroup board games can take on the design of small groups of players, seated at tables of 4 to 6 people, who work together on a problem. There can be large numbers of people (and thus many tables). If properly designed, these scalable exercises can be used for small groups (12 to 20 people) as well as very large events (600 people or 100 tables).\nGenerally, for these larger exercises, multimedia projectors, large screens and microphones are required for instructions and communications.\nA search for team building events can turn up millions of links to exercises, companies, and various offerings ranging from paintball competitions to fire walks to outdoor climbing or whitewater adventures. The impact on actual team building can vary widely - a golf outing for corporate executives does not generally accomplish much in the way of organizational improvement while a business simulation might be directly focused on linking the play of the game to issues for corporate improvement.\nHoliday groups use a gift exchange party game such as white elephant gift exchange for socializing and sharing gifts. New online party games, based on these holiday games, allow larger groups to gather on the internet to save travel expenses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75780", "revid": "833510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75780", "title": "Suih\u014d Tagawa", "text": "Japanese manga artist (1899\u20131989)\n, better known by the pen name Suih\u014d Tagawa (\u7530\u6cb3 \u6c34\u6ce1, \"Tagawa Suih\u014d\"), was a Japanese manga artist.\nBiography.\nBorn in Sumida, Tokyo, Nakatar\u014d Takamizawa grew up an orphan: his mother died upon his birth, his father and his uncle (who served as one of his stepparents) both died several years afterwards. He graduated from Fukagawa's municipal \"Rinkai Jinj\u014d\" elementary school in 1911. In 1919, he was conscripted into the Imperial Japanese Army, serving in Korea and Manchuria, and left in 1922. In 1925, he graduated from \"Nihon Bijutsu Gakk\u014d\" (\"Japan School of Art\"); during his time at the school, he participated in the radical avant-garde movement Mavo, under the pen name Takamizawa Michinao . \nIn 1926, he became a \"rakugo\" author. He began producing manga in 1927. He gained a regular assignment selling manga stories and adopted the pen name , which was later corrupted into : literally means \"water bubble\". In 1928 he married (younger sister of Hideo Kobayashi) in a church ceremony.\nIn 1931, he began the long-running series \"Norakuro\" in Kodansha's anthology magazine \"Sh\u014dnen Kurabu\", about an anthropomorphic black and white dog in an army of dogs. Although at first intended to have only a brief lifespan, its immense popularity urged Tagawa to continue producing the strip until 1941\".\" Tagawa has won numerous awards and is recognized as one of the pioneers of the Japanese manga industry. He mentored Machiko Hasegawa, who would become the creator of the popular comic series Sazae-san, and he was an influence to Osamu Tezuka, the \"God of Manga\". Some other comics by Tagawa are \"Tako no Yacchan\" and \"Gasorin Oyoshi.\"\nAfter World War II he became a \"bona fide\" Christian; he credited the faith in helping him overcome alcoholism after several failed attempts. In 1988, he produced the autobiographical \"Watashi no Rirekisho\" (\"My R\u00e9sum\u00e9\") for the Japanese \"Sankei Shimbun\" newspaper. He died in 1989 at the age of 90.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75781", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75781", "title": "Picometer", "text": ""}
{"id": "75782", "revid": "989931537", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75782", "title": "Party games", "text": ""}
{"id": "75783", "revid": "43618068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75783", "title": "Meter per second", "text": ""}
{"id": "75784", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75784", "title": "Watt per metre-kelvin", "text": ""}
{"id": "75785", "revid": "13904982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75785", "title": "Bernie Wrightson", "text": "American comic artist (1948\u20132017)\nBernard Albert Wrightson (October 27, 1948 \u2013 March 18, 2017) was an American artist, known for co-creating the Swamp Thing, his adaptation of the novel \"Frankenstein\" illustration work, and for his other horror comics and illustrations, which feature his trademark intricate pen and brushwork.\nWrightson began his career as an illustrator for \"The Baltimore Sun\" newspaper in 1966. In 1968, he was hired by DC Comics and was a regular artist on the \"House of Mystery\" and \"House of Secrets\" horror titles. Wrightson and writer Len Wein created Swamp Thing in \"House of Secrets\" #92 (July 1971). The character soon received its own monthly series, for which Wrightson drew the first ten issues.\nIn 1974, Wrightson began working for Warren Publishing magazines. Wrightson illustrated adaptions of works by well-known horror writers, including \"The Black Cat\" by Edgar Allan Poe and \"Cool Air\" by H. P. Lovecraft. He drew comic book adaptations of Stephen King's screenplay for \"Creepshow\" in 1982, which led to several more collaborations with King. Wrightson spent several years creating an illustrated edition of Mary Shelley's novel \"Frankenstein\", which was released in 1983. Later in his career, Wrightson provided concept art for various films and television series.\nEarly life.\nWrightson was born October 27, 1948, in Dundalk, Maryland. He received training in art from watching Jon Gnagy on television, reading comics, particularly those of EC, as well as through a correspondence course from the Famous Artists School. His artistic influences were Frank Frazetta, Al Williamson, Al Dorne, Graham Ingels, Jack Davis and Howard Pyle. He published a piece of fan art, containing a headstone bearing the inscription \"Berni Wrightson, Dec. 15, 1965\", on page 33 of Warren Publishing's \"Creepy\" #9 (cover-dated June 1966).\nCareer.\nIn 1966, Wrightson began working for \"The Baltimore Sun\" newspaper as an illustrator. The following year, after meeting artist Frank Frazetta at a comic-book convention in New York City, he was inspired to produce his own stories. In 1968, he showed copies of his sequential art to DC Comics editor Dick Giordano and was given a freelance assignment. Wrightson began spelling his name \"Berni\" in his professional work to distinguish himself from an Olympic diver named Bernie Wrightson, but later restored the final \"e\" to his name.\nIn 1968, he drew his first professional comic book story, \"The Man Who Murdered Himself\", which appeared in \"House of Mystery\" #179 (cover-dated March\u2013April 1969). He continued to work on a variety of mystery and anthology titles for both DC and, a few years later, its principal rival, Marvel Comics. It was for Marvel's \"Chamber of Darkness\" and \"Tower of Shadows\" titles where he was first encouraged to slightly simplify his intricate pen-and-ink drawing, and where his lush brushwork, a hallmark of his comics inking in the 1970s, was first evidenced.\nLike many artists in the 1970s and 1980s, Wrightson moved to New York in hopes of finding work with comics publishers. At one point Wrightson lived in the same Queens apartment building as artists Allen Milgrom, Howard Chaykin and Walter Simonson. Simonson recalls, \"We'd get together at 3 a.m. They'd come up and we'd have popcorn and sit around and talk about whatever a 26, 27 and 20-year-old guys talk about. Our art, TV, you name it. I pretty much knew at the time, 'These are the good ole days.'\"\nSwamp Thing.\nWith writer Len Wein, Wrightson co-created the muck creature Swamp Thing in \"House of Secrets\" #92 (July 1971) in a standalone horror story set in the Victorian era. Wein later recounted how Wrightson became involved with the story: \"Bernie Wrightson had just broken up with a girlfriend, and we were sitting in my car just talking about life \u2013 all the important things to do when you're 19 and 20 years old. [\"Laughs\"] And I said, 'You know, I just wrote a story that actually kind of feels like the way you feel now.' I told him about Swamp Thing, and he said, 'I gotta draw that.'\"\nIn summer 1972, Wrightson published \"Badtime Stories\", a horror/science fiction comics anthology featuring his own scripts and artwork (from the period 1970\u20131971), each story being drawn in a different medium, including ink wash, tonal pencil drawings, duoshade paper, and screen tones, along with traditional pen-and-ink and brushwork. He and writer Marv Wolfman co-created Destiny in \"Weird Mystery Tales\" #1 (July\u2013Aug. 1972), a character which would later be used in the work of Neil Gaiman.\nIn the fall of 1972, the Swamp Thing returned in his own series, set in the contemporary world and in the general DC continuity. Wrightson drew the first ten issues of the series. Abigail Arcane, a major supporting character in the Swamp Thing mythos was introduced by Wrightson and Wein in issue #3 (Feb.-March 1973).\nWrightson had originally been asked by DC to handle the art for its revival of The Shadow, but he left the project early on when he realized he could not produce the necessary minimum number of pages on time, along with his work on \"Swamp Thing\". Michael Kaluta illustrated the series, but Wrightson did contribute much to the third issue in both pencils and inks, as well as inking the splash page of issue #4.\nWarren and The Studio.\nIn the summer of 1973, Wrightson saw the Tod Browning horror film \"Freaks\" for the first time; in the years immediately afterward, the film influenced much of Wrightson's creative output.\nIn January 1974, Wrightson left DC to work at Warren Publishing, for whose black-and-white horror-comics magazines he produced a series of original work as well as short story adaptations. As with \"BadTime Stories\", Wrightson experimented with different media in these black-and-white tales: Edgar Allan Poe's \"The Black Cat\" featured intricate pen-and-ink work which stood in direct contrast with his brush-dominated \"Swamp Thing\" panels. \"Jenifer\", scripted by Bruce Jones, was atmospherically rendered with gray markers. \"The Pepper Lake Monster\" was a synthesis of brush and pen-and-ink, whereas H.P. Lovecraft's \"Cool Air\" was a foray into duotone paper. \"Nightfall\" was an exercise in ink wash. \"Clarice\" was also drawn in pen, brush, and ink, and with ink wash.\nIn 1975, Wrightson joined with fellow artists Jeff Jones, Michael Kaluta, and Barry Windsor-Smith to form The Studio, a shared loft in Manhattan where the group would pursue creative products outside the constraints of comic book commercialism. Though he continued to produce sequential art, Wrightson at this time began producing artwork for numerous posters, prints, calendars, and even a highly detailed coloring book, \"The Monsters\". He also drew sporadic comics stories and single illustrations for \"National Lampoon\" magazine from 1973 to 1983.\nWrightson spent seven years drawing approximately 50 detailed pen-and-ink illustrations to accompany an edition of Mary Shelley's novel \"Frankenstein\". The illustrations themselves are not based upon the Boris Karloff or Christopher Lee films, but on the actual book's descriptions of characters and objects. Wrightson also used a period style, saying \"I wanted the book to look like an antique; to have the feeling of woodcuts or steel engravings, something of that era\" and basing the feel on artists like Franklin Booth, J.C. Coll and Edwin Austin Abbey. \"Frankenstein\" was an unpaid project, Wrightson describing it as a \"labor of love\" he worked on over seven years.\nLater career.\nThe \"Captain Sternn\" segment of the animated film \"Heavy Metal\" is based on a character created by Wrightson (first appearing in the June 1980 issue of \"Heavy Metal\" magazine). The \"Freakshow\" graphic novel, written by Bruce Jones and illustrated (via pen, brush, and ink with watercolors) by Wrightson, was published in Spain in 1982 and serialized in \"Heavy Metal\" magazine in the early 1980s.\nIn 1982 Bernie Wrightson illustrated the comic book adaptation of the Stephen King-penned horror film \"Creepshow\". This led to several other collaborations with King, including illustrations for the novella \"Cycle of the Werewolf\", the restored edition of King's apocalyptic horror epic, \"The Stand\", and \"Wolves of the Calla\", the fifth installment of King's \"Dark Tower\" series. He would later illustrate the cover for \"TV Guide\" magazine's April 26 \u2013 May 2, 1997, issue, illustrating the TV miniseries of King's \"The Shining\".\nDuring production on the 1984 film \"Ghostbusters\", Wrightson was among the artists hired by associate producer Michael C. Gross to provide concept art envisioning the ghosts and other psychic phenomena encountered by that film's characters. The artwork he contributed included images of the \"escapees\" from the Ghostbusters' electrically powered ghost storage facility, which run amok after the facility's electricity is turned off.\nJim Starlin and Wrightson produced \"Heroes for Hope\", a 1985 one-shot designed to raise money for African famine relief and recovery. Published in the form of a \"comic jam\", the book featured an all-star lineup of comics creators as well as a few notable authors from outside the comic book industry, such as Stephen King, George R. R. Martin, Harlan Ellison, and Edward Bryant. In 1986, Wrightson and writer Susan K. Putney collaborated on the \"Spider-Man: Hooky\" graphic novel. That same year saw Wrightson and Starlin produce a second benefit comic, \"Heroes Against Hunger\" featuring Superman and Batman which was published by DC and like the earlier Marvel project featured many top comics creators. Starlin and Wrightson collaborated on two miniseries in 1988, \"The Weird\" and \"\", as well as \"Marvel Graphic Novel\" #29 (featuring the Hulk and the Thing) and \"Punisher P.O.V.\" for Marvel.\nWrightson brought back his Captain Sternn character in 1993 for the \"Captain Sternn: Running Out of Time\" miniseries, published by Kitchen Sink Press. In 1997, Wrightson and Ron Marz collaborated on \"Batman/Aliens\", a crossover between the \"Batman\" and \"Aliens\" franchises. Wrightson again worked with Punisher for the \"Punisher: Purgatory\" limited series from 1998 to 1999. The series was unusual for incorporating supernatural elements in a Punisher story.\nHe illustrated and contributed album covers for a number of bands and musical artists, including Meat Loaf. Wrightson did concept art for film and television, working on productions including \"The Faculty\", \"Galaxy Quest\", \"Spider-Man\", \"The Mist\", \"Land of the Dead\", and \"Serenity\". In 2012, Wrightson collaborated with Steve Niles on \"Frankenstein Alive, Alive!\" published by IDW Publishing, for which he won a National Cartoonists Society's award.\nPersonal life.\nWrightson's first wife Michele Wrightson was involved in underground comix, contributing stories to such publications as \"It Ain't Me, Babe\", \"Wimmen's Comix\", and \"Arcade\". She died in 2015. Wrightson and Michelle had two sons together, John and Jeffrey. Wrightson lived with his second wife Liz Wrightson and his stepson Thomas Adamson in Austin, Texas.\nWrightson and his wife announced in January 2017 that he was retiring due to having limited body function after multiple brain surgeries. He died on March 18, 2017, at the age of 68. The next day, Liz Wrightson confirmed that his death followed a long diagnosis with brain cancer. \"The First Day of the Rest of Your Life\", the April 2, 2017, season 7 finale of the TV series \"The Walking Dead\", was dedicated to Wrightson's memory.\nCreative legacy.\nWrightson's death met with a series of testimonials and tributes by colleagues and professional admirers that included Joss Whedon, Neil Gaiman, Guillermo del Toro, Walter Simonson, and Mike Mignola. Whedon called Wrightson \"a star by which other pencillers chart their course\", while Gaiman stated that Wrightson was the first comics artist whose work he loved. Horror connoisseur del Toro took a 24-hour pledge of silence in honor of Wrightson, writing, \"As it comes to all of us, the end came for the greatest that ever lived: Bernie Wrightson. My North dark star of youth. A master.\" Hellboy creator Mike Mignola said of Wrightson, \"He was a genius, and not just a monster guy. Everything Bernie did had soul.\"\nWrightson's former neighbor Walter Simonson, who lived in the same building as Wrightson in the 1980s, recalled, \"Even at an early age, we were all really in awe of his work, it was so good.\" Analyzing Wrightson's skill in depth, Simonson explained that in addition to his ability to draw anything, Wrightson was a master of value, able to effect a precise command over the depth and tones of the colors and shades of gray in his work, stating, \"'Frankenstein' is a complete masterpiece of value, using incredibly complex pictures, and yet you always see exactly what you are supposed to see. He drives the eye right where it needs.\" Regarding the famously reproduced two-page spread from that work depicting Frankenstein's laboratory, Simonson said of that image, \"It's so complicated and yet he's able to show you what he wants you to see. In some ways [the lab scene is] the core of the story. It's where Frankenstein breaks the laws of God.\" Comics analyst and historian Scott McCloud called that image a \"riot of detail\", saying, \"It might take a moment before you even notice the corpse laying at the bottom of the composition on the left. That makes it a bit more of a treasure map. Bit more of a 'Where Is Waldo?'\"\nDuring a 2016 tour of his extensive library of art and pop culture memorabilia, Del Toro named Wrightson's \"Frankenstein\" as the work whose original artwork was the hardest to find, saying, \"They are very rare. The people that have them don't let them go. It's taken me years to get that. I have nine out of the 13 favorite plates of the Frankenstein book that Bernie Wrightson ever did. The other four: one of them, no one knows where it is, and the other three are, I would say, very hard to pry away from the people that have them.\"\nBibliography.\nComics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFPG.\nBernie Wrightson: MASTER OF THE MACABRE (1993, Trading Card Series), MORE MACABRE (1994, Second Trading Card Series)\nMagazines.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75787", "revid": "30856069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75787", "title": "Pictionary", "text": "Word guessing game\nPictionary (, , ) is a charades-inspired word-guessing game invented by Robert Angel with graphic design by Gary Everson and first published in 1985 by Angel Games Inc. Angel Games licensed Pictionary to Western Publishing. Hasbro purchased the rights in 1994 after acquiring the games business of Western Publishing. Mattel acquired ownership of Pictionary in 2001. The game is played in teams with players trying to identify specific words from their teammates. Its name is a portmanteau of \"picture\" and \"dictionary\".\nHistory.\nThe concept of \"Pictionary\" was first created by Robert Angel and his friends in 1981. Angel and his roommates came up with the concept of the game, which proved to be very popular between them. While originally hesitant to pitch the idea, Angel was inspired by \"Trivial Pursuit\", the gameplay of which was similar to his concept and proved to him that such gameplay could work and be successful.\nAngel and his business partners Terry Langston and Gary Everson first published \"Pictionary\" in 1985 through Angel Games. They gathered 35,000$ and a thousand copies were printed. A week before \"Pictionary\" was first launched, Angel Games' printing company called to inform them that they could not sort through the 500,000 cards they had printed out. Angel and his partners had to sort through the cards themselves over the course of six days. They managed to sell 6,000 copies in one year at $35 each.\nAngel Games licensed the game in 1986 in a joint venture between The Games Gang and Western Publishing. \"Pictionary\"'s sales rose drastically the next year - during which it also started being marketed nationally. By the end of 1987, 3 million copies of \"Pictionary\" had been sold; the game's retail sales were worth 75 million dollars in 1987. It was rated the United States' second best-selling diversion in November 1987 by Toy and Hobby World magazine. Except a three-week national television advertising campaign, publicity for the board game was spread by word of mouth and news stories. By the end of 1988, nearly 10 million copies had been sold. By the end of 1989, 13 million copies had been sold.\nIn 1994, Hasbro took over publishing after acquiring the games business of Western Publishing.\nIn 2001, \"Pictionary\" was sold to Mattel. At that time they were in 60 countries and 45 languages, with 11 versions just in the US and a total of 32,000,000 games sold worldwide.\nObjective.\nEach team moves a piece on a game board consisting of a sequence of squares. Each square has a letter or shape indicating the type of picture to be drawn. To advance to a new square, a player must guess the word or phrase being drawn by their partner. If a player lands on an \"all play\" square, one player from each team attempts to illustrate the same concept simultaneously, with both teams racing to guess first. The first team to land on the last square and guess correctly wins.\nGameplay.\nTeams must first be formed; between two and four teams can be formed, with no limits on the number of player per team. Once formed, the teams must choose a colored playing piece. An odd amount of players may play; in which case one person always draws for both teams. Each team rolls the die, and the team with the highest roll plays first. \nThe team chooses one person to begin drawing (\"the picturist\"); this position rotates with each word. The drawer chooses a card out of a deck of special \"Pictionary\" cards, examine it for up to five seconds and tries to draw pictures which suggest the word printed on the card. The pictures cannot contain any numbers or letters, nor can the drawers use spoken clues about the subjects they are drawing. One may not point or gesture to an object. The teammates try to guess the word the drawing is intended to represent. A one-minute timer, usually a sand timer, is used to compel players to rapidly complete their drawing and guessing.\nIf the sand timer expires before the team guesses the word, the team does not advance and the turn passes to the team on the left. If the team successfully guesses the word, they roll the dice, advance and pick a new card. To win, a team must reach the Finish square on the gameboard and correctly guess the word in the ensuing round.\nThere are five types of squares on the board, and each \"Pictionary\" card has a list of five words printed on it. Players must then draw the word which corresponds to the square their playing piece landed on:\nTelevision series.\nIn 2022, an American television debuted a game show based on the game, entitled simply \"Pictionary\" hosted by Jerry O'Connell. In 2024, a British version of the show, hosted by Mel Giedroyc, launched on ITV1.\nPreviously, the television adaptations of \"Pictionary\" were presided over by Brian Robbins and Alan Thicke.\nReception.\n\"Games\" included \"Pictionary\" in its top 100 games of 1986, saying, \"The frequent All Play rounds, in which all teams try to identify the same word, are especially exciting. Artistic talent is not a requirement; ingeniously simple drawings almost always win. The 2,500 color-coded words provide real tests of imagination.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75788", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75788", "title": "Booker Prize for Fiction", "text": ""}
{"id": "75790", "revid": "7865237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75790", "title": "Pertti M\u00e4kinen", "text": "Finnish sculptor\nPertti Kalervo M\u00e4kinen, born 16 September 1952 in Tyrv\u00e4\u00e4, is a Finnish sculptor who is the designer of the Finnish 1 euro coin. He has also designed several commemorative coins for the Mint of Finland.\nM\u00e4kinen worked as a metal worker before entering an art school in the Finnish town Kankaanp\u00e4\u00e4 in 1976. After his graduation in 1979, M\u00e4kinen has worked as a sculptor. He lives and works in Lavia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75791", "revid": "44127043", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75791", "title": "Raimo Heino", "text": "Finnish designer of coins, relief figures and medallions\nRaimo Heino (September 13, 1932 \u2013 November 30, 1995) was a Finnish designer of coins, relief figures and medallions.\nHe was the designer of the Finnish 2 euro coin. All designs feature the 12 stars of the EU and the year of imprint on the front side and a national design on the other; Heino's work shows cloudberry, the golden berry of northern Finland. He was also the designer of the Nevanlinna Prize medal, named after the Finnish mathematician Rolf Nevanlinna. He made sculpture of steel and stone.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75792", "revid": "50538797", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75792", "title": "Synod", "text": "Council of a church, convened to resolve issues of doctrine or administration\nA synod () is a council of a Christian denomination, usually convened to decide an issue of doctrine, administration or application. The word \"synod\" comes from the Ancient Greek () 'assembly, meeting'; the term is analogous with the Latin word 'council'. Originally, synods were meetings of bishops, and the word is still used in that sense in Catholicism, Oriental Orthodoxy and Eastern Orthodoxy. In modern usage, the word often refers to the governing body of a particular church, whether its members are meeting or not. It is also sometimes used to refer to a church that is governed by a synod.\nSometimes the phrase \"general synod\" or \"general council\" refers to an ecumenical council. The word \"synod\" also refers to the standing council of high-ranking bishops governing some of the autocephalous Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches. Similarly, the day-to-day governance of patriarchal and major archiepiscopal Eastern Catholic Churches is entrusted to a permanent synod.\nUsages in different Communions.\nEastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox.\nIn Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches, synods of bishops are meetings of bishops within each autonomous Church and are the primary vehicle for the election of bishops and the establishment of inter-diocesan ecclesiastical laws.\nA \"sobor\" () is a formal gathering or council of bishops together with other clerical and lay delegates representing the church to deal with matters of faith, morality, rite, and canonical and cultural life. The synod in the Western churches is similar, but it is distinguished by being usually limited to an assembly of bishops.\nThe term is found among those Eastern Orthodox Churches that use Slavic languages (the Russian, Ukrainian, Bulgarian, Serbian and Macedonian Orthodox Churches), along with the Romanian Orthodox Church.\nAssembly.\nThe presence of clerical and lay delegates is for the purpose of discerning the consensus of the church on important matters; however, the bishops form an upper house of the sobor, and the laity cannot overrule their decisions.\nKievan Rus' chronicles record the first known East Slavic church sobor as having taken place in Kiev in 1051. Sobors were convened periodically from then on; one notable assembly held in 1415 formed a separate metropoly for the church in the Grand Duchy of Lithuanian lands.\nImportant sobors in the history of the Russian Orthodox Church are:\nA bishop may also call a sobor for his diocese, which again would have delegates from the clergy, monasteries and parishes of his diocese, to discuss important matters. Such diocesan sobors may be held annually or only occasionally.\nRoman Catholic.\nIn Roman Catholic usage, \"synod\" and \"council\" are theoretically synonymous as they are of Greek and Latin origins, respectively, both meaning an authoritative meeting of bishops for the purpose of church administration in the areas of teaching (faith and morals) or governance (church discipline or law). However, in modern use, synod and council are applied to specific categories of such meetings and so do not really overlap. A synod generally meets every three years and is thus designated an \"Ordinary General Assembly\". However, \"Extraordinary\" synods can be called to deal with specific situations. There are also \"Special\" synods for the Church in a specific geographic area such as the one held November 16 \u2013 December 12, 1997, for the Church in America.\nSynod of Bishops.\nWhile the words \"synod\" and \"council\" usually refer to a transitory meeting, the term \"Synod of Bishops\" or \"Synod of the Bishops\", is also applied to a permanent body established in 1965 as an advisory body of the pope. It holds assemblies at which bishops and religious superiors, elected by bishops conferences or the Union of Superiors General or appointed by the Pope vote on proposals (\"propositiones\") to present for the pope's consideration, and which in practice the pope uses as the basis of \"post-synodal apostolic exhortations\" on the themes discussed. While an assembly of the Synod of Bishops thus expresses its collective wishes, it does not issue decrees, unless in certain cases the pope authorizes it to do so, and even then an assembly's decision requires ratification by the pope. The pope serves as president of an assembly or appoints the president, determines the agenda, and summons, suspends, and dissolves the assembly.\nModern Catholic synod themes:\nCouncils.\nMeetings of bishops in the Roman empire are known from the mid-third century and already numbered twenty by the time of the First Council of Nicaea (325). Thereafter they continued by the hundreds into the sixth century. Those authorized by an emperor and often attended by him came to be called ecumenical, meaning throughout the world (as the world was thought of in Western terms). Today, \"Council\" in Roman Catholic canon law typically refers to an irregular meeting of the entire episcopate of a nation, region, or the world for the purpose of legislation with binding force. Those contemplated in canon law are the following:\nPlenary and provincial councils are categorized as particular councils. A particular council is composed of all the bishops of the territory (including coadjutors and auxiliaries) as well as other ecclesiastical ordinaries who head particular churches in the territory (such as territorial abbots and vicars apostolic). Each of these members has a vote on council legislation. Additionally, the following persons by law are part of particular councils but only participate in an advisory capacity: vicars general and episcopal, presidents of Catholic universities, deans of Catholic departments of theology and canon law, some major superiors elected by all the major superiors in the territory, some rectors of seminaries elected by the rectors of seminaries in the territory, and two members from each cathedral chapter, presbyterial council, or pastoral council in the territory (can. 443). The convoking authority can also select other members of the faithful (including the laity) to participate in the council in an advisory capacity.\nMeetings of the entire episcopate of a supra-national region have historically been called councils as well, such as the various Councils of Carthage in which all the bishops of North Africa were to attend.\nDuring the Middle Ages, some councils were legatine, called by a papal legate rather than the pope or bishop.\nSynods.\nSynods in Eastern Catholic Churches are similar to synods in Orthodox churches in that they are the primary vehicle for election of bishops and establishment of inter-diocesan ecclesiastical laws. The term \"synod\" in Latin Church canon law, however, refers to meetings of a representative, thematic, non-legislative (advisory) or mixed nature or in some other way do not meet the qualifications of a \"council\". There are various types.\nDiocesan synods are irregular meetings of the clergy and laity of a particular church summoned by the diocesan bishop (or other prelate if the particular church is not a diocese) to deliberate on legislative matters. Only the diocesan bishop holds legislative authority; the other members of the diocesan synod act only in an advisory capacity. Those who must be invited to a diocesan synod by law are any coadjutor or auxiliary bishops, the vicars general and episcopal, the \"officialis\", the vicars forane plus an additional priest from each vicariate forane, the presbyterial council, canons of the cathedral chapter (if there is one), the rector of the seminary, some of the superiors of religious houses in the diocese, and members of the laity chosen by the diocesan pastoral council, though the diocesan bishop can invite others to attend at his own initiative. (can. 463)\nEpiscopal conferences.\nNational episcopal conferences are another development of the Second Vatican Council. They are permanent bodies consisting of all the Latin Church bishops of a nation and those equivalent to diocesan bishops in law (i.e. territorial abbots). Bishops of other \"sui juris\" churches and papal nuncios are not members of episcopal conferences by law, though the conference itself may invite them in an advisory or voting capacity (can. 450).\nWhile councils (can. 445) and diocesan synods (can. 391 &amp; 466) have full legislative powers in their areas of competence, national episcopal conferences may only issue supplementary legislation when authorized to do so in canon law or by decree of the Holy See. Additionally, any such supplemental legislation requires a two-thirds vote of the conference and review by the Holy See (can. 455) to have the force of law. Without such authorization and review, episcopal conferences are deliberative only and exercise no authority over their member bishops or dioceses.\nAnglican.\nIn the Anglican Communion, synods are elected by clergy and laity. In most Anglican churches, there is a geographical hierarchy of synods, with \"General Synod\" at the top; bishops, clergy and laity meet as \"houses\" within the synod.\n\"Diocesan synods\" are convened by a bishop in his or her diocese, and consist of elected clergy and lay members.\n\"Deanery synods\" are convened by the \"Rural Dean\" (or \"Area Dean\") and consist of all clergy licensed to a benefice within the deanery, plus elected lay members.\nPresbyterian.\nIn the Presbyterian system of church governance the synod is a level of administration between the local presbytery and the national general assembly. Some denominations use the synod, such as the Presbyterian Church in Canada, Uniting Church in Australia, and the Presbyterian Church USA. However some other churches do not use the synod at all, and the Church of Scotland dissolved its synods in 1993, see List of Church of Scotland synods and presbyteries. The Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church is considered a Synod since there is no national church in the United States. (see establishment principle)\nReformed.\nIn Swiss and southern German Reformed churches, where the Reformed churches are organized as regionally defined independent churches (such as Evangelical Reformed Church of Zurich or Reformed Church of Berne), the synod corresponds to the general assembly of Presbyterian churches. In Reformed churches, the synod can denote a regional meeting of representatives of various classes (\"regional synod\"), or the general denominational meeting of representatives from the regional synods (\"general\" or \"national synod\"). Some churches, especially the smaller denominations, do not have the regional synod tier (for example, the Reformed Church in the United States (RCUS)). Historically, these were meetings such as the Synod of Homberg.\nChurch of Christ in Congo.\nIn the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the vast majority of Protestant denominations have regrouped under a religious institution named the Church of Christ in Congo or CCC, often referred to \u2013 within the Congo \u2013 simply as The Protestant Church. In the CCC structure, the \"national synod\" is the general assembly of the various churches that constitutes the CCC. From the Synod is drawn an executive committee, and a secretariat. There are also synods of the CCC in every province of the Congo, known appropriately as \"provincial synods\". The CCC regroups 62 Protestant denominations.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75793", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75793", "title": "A village murder mystery game", "text": ""}
{"id": "75794", "revid": "98886", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75794", "title": "Blackridge", "text": "Blackridge or Black Ridge may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "75795", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75795", "title": "Juan Carlos I", "text": "King of Spain from 1975 to 2014\nJuan Carlos I (; born Juan Carlos Alfonso V\u00edctor Mar\u00eda de Borb\u00f3n y Borb\u00f3n-Dos Sicilias, 5 January 1938) is a member of the Spanish royal family who reigned as King of Spain from 22 November 1975 until his abdication on 19 June 2014. In Spain, since his abdication, Juan Carlos has usually been referred to as the ('king emeritus') by the press.\nJuan Carlos is the son of Infante Juan, Count of Barcelona, and grandson of Alfonso XIII, the last king of Spain before the abolition of the monarchy in 1931 and the subsequent declaration of the Second Spanish Republic. Juan Carlos was born in Rome, Italy, during his family's exile. General Francisco Franco took over the government of Spain after his victory in the Spanish Civil War in 1939, yet in 1947 Spain's status as a monarchy was affirmed and a law was passed allowing Franco to choose his successor. Juan Carlos's father assumed his claims to the throne after King Alfonso XIII died in February 1941. However, Franco saw Juan Carlos's father to be too liberal and in 1969 declared Juan Carlos his successor as head of state.\nJuan Carlos spent his early years in Italy and came to Spain in 1947 to continue his studies. After completing his secondary education in 1955, he began his military training and entered the General Military Academy at Zaragoza. Later, he attended the Naval Military Academy and the General Academy of the Air, and finished his tertiary education at the University of Madrid. In 1962, Juan Carlos married Princess Sophia of Greece and Denmark in Athens. The couple have three children: Elena, Cristina, and Felipe. Due to Franco's advanced age and declining health amid his struggle with Parkinson's disease, Juan Carlos first began periodically acting as Spain's head of state in the summer of 1974. In November the following year, Franco died and Juan Carlos became king.\nJuan Carlos was expected to continue Franco's legacy, but instead introduced reforms to dismantle the Francoist regime and to begin the Spanish transition to democracy soon after his accession. This led to the approval of the Spanish Constitution of 1978 in a referendum which re-established a constitutional monarchy. In 1981, Juan Carlos played a major role in preventing a coup that attempted to revert to Francoist government in the King's name. In 2008, he was considered the most popular leader across all Ibero-America. Hailed for his role in Spain's transition to democracy, the King and the monarchy's reputation began to suffer after controversies surrounding his family arose, exacerbated by the public controversy centering on an elephant-hunting trip he undertook during a time of financial crisis in Spain.\nIn June 2014, Juan Carlos abdicated in favour of his son, who acceded to the throne as Felipe VI. Since August 2020, Juan Carlos has lived in self-imposed exile from Spain over allegedly improper ties to business deals in Saudi Arabia. The \"New York Times\" estimated in 2014 that Juan Carlos's fortune was around \u20ac1.8 billion ($2.3 billion).\nEarly life.\nJuan Carlos Alfonso V\u00edctor Mar\u00eda was born to Infante Juan, Count of Barcelona, and Princess Mar\u00eda de las Mercedes of Bourbon-Two Sicilies in their family home in Rome, where his grandfather King Alfonso XIII and other members of the Spanish royal family lived in exile following the proclamation of the Second Spanish Republic in 1931. He was baptized as Juan Carlos Alfonso V\u00edctor Mar\u00eda de Borb\u00f3n y Borb\u00f3n-Dos Sicilias by Cardinal Eugenio Pacelli, the future Pope Pius XII.\nJuan Carlos's early life was dictated largely by the political concerns of his father and General Francisco Franco. He moved to Spain in 1948 to be educated there after his father persuaded Franco to allow it. He began his studies in San Sebasti\u00e1n and finished them in 1954 at the Instituto San Isidro in Madrid. He then joined the army, doing his officer training from 1955 to 1957 at the Military Academy of Zaragoza.\nAccording to his sister Pilar, he had difficulty in his studies because of dyslexia.\nJuan Carlos has two sisters: Infanta Pilar, Duchess of Badajoz (1936\u20132020); and Infanta Margarita, Duchess of Soria (born 1939). He also had a younger brother, Alfonso (1941\u20131956). The rendering of his name as \"Juan Carlos\" (the first and second particles of his baptismal name) was a modification by choice of Franco. He was always known in his familiar circle simply as \"Juan\" or \"Juanito\".\nTogether with his parents and his sister Pilar, he took part in the ship tour organized by Queen Frederica and her husband King Paul of Greece in 1954, which became known as the \u201cCruise of the Kings\u201d and was attended by over 100 royals from all over Europe. On this trip, Juan Carlos met the hosts' 15-year-old daughter, Sofia, his future wife, for the first time.\nBrother's death.\nOn the evening of Holy Thursday, 29 March 1956, Infante Alfonso died in a gun accident at the family's home Villa Giralda in Estoril, on the Portuguese Riviera. The Spanish Embassy in Portugal then issued the following official communiqu\u00e9:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whilst His Highness Prince Alfonso was cleaning a revolver last evening with his brother, a shot was fired hitting his forehead and killing him in a few minutes. The accident took place at 20.30 hours, after the Infante's return from the Maundy Thursday religious service, during which he had received holy communion.\nAlfonso had won a local junior golf tournament earlier in the day, then went to evening Mass and rushed up to the room to see Juan Carlos who had come home for the Easter holidays from military school. Both Juan Carlos, age 18, and Alfonso, age 14, had been apparently playing with a .22LR Star Bonifacio Echeverria Automatic pistol owned by Alfonso. As they were alone in the room, it is unclear how Alfonso was shot, but according to Josefina Carolo, dressmaker to Juan Carlos's mother, Juan Carlos pointed the pistol at Alfonso and pulled the trigger, unaware that it was loaded. Bernardo Arnoso, a Portuguese friend of Juan Carlos, also said that Juan Carlos had told him he had fired the pistol not knowing that it was loaded, and adding that the bullet ricocheted off a wall, hitting Alfonso in the face. Helena Matheopoulos, a Greek author who spoke with the infantes' sister Pilar, said that Alfonso had been out of the room and when he returned and pushed the door open, the door knocked Juan Carlos in the arm, causing him to fire the pistol.\nAfter learning this news, the Count of Barcelona reportedly grabbed Juan Carlos by the neck and shouted at him angrily, \"Swear to me that you didn't do it on purpose!\" Two days later, the Count sent his son back to the military academy. Following a later declaration of Juan Carlos's mother, Paul Preston argues that the content of the former testimony implies that Juan Carlos had pointed the gun at Alfonso, apparently not knowing that the gun was loaded, and pulled the trigger.\nEducation.\nIn 1957, Juan Carlos spent a year in the naval school at Mar\u00edn, Pontevedra, and another in the Air Force school in San Javier in Murcia. In 1960\u201361, he studied law, international political economy and public finance at the Complutense University of Madrid. He then went to live in the Palace of Zarzuela and began carrying out official engagements.\nPrince of Spain.\nThe dictatorial regime of Francisco Franco came to power during the Spanish Civil War, which pitted a government of democrats, anarchists, socialists, and communists, supported by the Soviet Union and international volunteers, against a rebellion of conservatives, monarchists, nationalists, and fascists, supported by both Hitler and Mussolini, with the rebels ultimately winning. Franco's authoritarian government remained dominant in Spain until the 1960s. With Franco's increasing age, left-wing protests increased, while at the same time, the far right factions demanded the return of a hardline absolute monarchy. At the time, the heir to the throne of Spain was Infante Juan, Count of Barcelona, the son of King Alfonso XIII. However, Franco viewed him with extreme suspicion, believing him to be a liberal who was opposed to his regime.\nJuan Carlos's first cousin Alfonso, Duke of Anjou and C\u00e1diz, was also briefly considered as a candidate. Alfonso was known to be an ardent Francoist and married Franco's granddaughter, Do\u00f1a Mar\u00eda del Carmen Mart\u00ednez-Bordi\u00fa y Franco, in 1972.\nUltimately, Franco decided to skip a generation and name Infante Juan Carlos as his personal successor. Franco hoped the young prince could be groomed to take over the nation while still maintaining the ultraconservative and authoritarian nature of his regime. In 1969, Juan Carlos was officially designated heir apparent and was given the new title of Prince of Spain (not the traditional Prince of Asturias). As a condition of being named heir apparent, he was required to swear loyalty to Franco's Movimiento Nacional, which he did with little outward hesitation. His choice was ratified by the Spanish parliament on 22 July 1969.\nJuan Carlos met and consulted Franco many times while heir apparent and often took part in official and ceremonial state functions, standing alongside the dictator, much to the anger of hardline republicans and more moderate liberals, who hoped that Franco's death would bring in an era of reform. During 1969\u20131975, Juan Carlos publicly supported Franco's regime. Although Franco's health worsened during those years, whenever he did appear in public, from state dinners to military parades, it was in Juan Carlos's company. However, as the years progressed, Juan Carlos began meeting secretly with political opposition leaders and exiles, who were fighting to bring liberal reform to the country. He also had secret conversations with his father over the telephone. Franco, for his part, remained largely oblivious to the prince's actions and denied allegations from his ministers and advisors that Juan Carlos was in any way disloyal to his vision of the regime.\nDuring periods of Franco's temporary incapacity in 1974 and 1975, Juan Carlos was acting head of state. On 30 October 1975, Franco gave full control to Juan Carlos. According to declassified CIA reports, during this time Juan Carlos secretly acquiesced and arranged with King Hassan II of Morocco the terms of the so-called Green March, the partial invasion of the Spanish Sahara by Moroccan civilians, followed by the Madrid Accords handing over the control of the territory to Morocco and Mauritania.\nReign.\nFranco died on 20 November 1975, and two days later on 22 November the Cortes Espa\u00f1olas proclaimed Juan Carlos King of Spain. In his address to the Cortes, Juan Carlos spoke of three factors: historical tradition, national laws, and the will of the people, and in so doing referred to a process dating back to the Civil War of 1936\u201339. He swore using the following formula: \"I swear to God and the Gospels to comply and enforce compliance to the Fundamental Laws of the Realm and to remain loyal to the Principles of the National Movement\".\nOn 27 November, a Mass of the Holy Spirit was celebrated in the church of San Jer\u00f3nimo el Real in Madrid to inaugurate his reign. He opted not to call himself Juan III or Carlos V, but Juan Carlos I. Juan Carlos is reported to have been pressured by Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing to personally tell Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet, who had traveled to Spain for Franco's funeral, not to attend his inauguration. In the end Pinochet did participate of the proclamation at the Palacio de las Cortes, Madrid but not in the follow-up Te Deum. In private Pinochet expressed later his disapproval of what he saw as a lack of recognition of Franco by Juan Carlos I in his speech at the Cortes.\nTransition.\nJuan Carlos's accession met with relatively little parliamentary opposition. Some members of the Movimiento Nacional voted against recognizing him, and even more voted against the 1976 Law for Political Reform. But a majority of Movimiento members supported both measures. Juan Carlos quickly instituted reforms, to the great displeasure of Falangist and conservative (monarchist) elements, especially in the military, who had expected him to maintain the authoritarian state.\nIn July 1976, Juan Carlos dismissed prime minister Carlos Arias Navarro, who had been attempting to continue Francoist policies in the face of the King's attempts at democratization. He instead appointed Adolfo Su\u00e1rez, a former leader of the Movimiento Nacional, as prime minister.\nFurther legitimacy was restored to Juan Carlos's position on 14 May 1977, when his father (whom many monarchists had recognized as the legitimate, exiled King of Spain during the Franco era) formally renounced his claim to the throne and recognized his son as the sole head of the Spanish Royal House, transferring to him the historical heritage of the Spanish monarchy, thus making Juan Carlos both \"de facto\" and \"de jure\" king in the eyes of the traditional monarchists.\nOn 20 May 1977, the leader of the only recently legalized Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE), Felipe Gonz\u00e1lez, accompanied by Javier Solana, visited Juan Carlos in the Zarzuela Palace. The event represented a key endorsement of the monarchy from Spain's political left, who had been historically republican. Left-wing support for the monarchy had grown when the Communist Party of Spain was legalized on 9 April 1977, a move Juan Carlos had pressed for, despite enormous right-wing military opposition at that time, during the Cold War.\nOn 15 June 1977, Spain held its first post-Franco democratic elections. Juan Carlos had played a role as middleman in order to channel $10\u00a0million from the Shah of Iran to Adolfo Su\u00e1rez's election campaign, reportedly asking the Shah for the money to \"save Spain from Marxism\". Su\u00e1rez went on to win the election and become the first democratically elected leader of the new regime.\nIn 1978, the government promulgated a new constitution that acknowledged Juan Carlos as rightful heir of the Spanish dynasty and king; specifically, Title II, Section 57 asserted Juan Carlos's right to the throne of Spain by dynastic succession in the Bourbon tradition, as \"the legitimate heir of the historic dynasty\" rather than as the designated successor of Franco. The Constitution was passed by the democratically elected Constituent Cortes, ratified by the people in a referendum (6 December) and then signed into law by the King before a solemn meeting of the Cortes.\n1981 coup d'\u00e9tat attempt.\nAn attempted military coup, known as 23-F, occurred on 23 February 1981, when the Cortes were seized by members of the Guardia Civil in the parliamentary chamber. During the coup, the King, wearing his uniform as Captain-General of the Armed Forces, gave a public television broadcast calling for unambiguous support for the legitimate democratic government. The broadcast is believed to have been a major factor in foiling the coup. The coup leaders had promised many of their potential supporters that they were acting in the King's name and with his approval, but were unable to demonstrate either, and the broadcast \u2014 coming just after midnight on the night of the coup \u2014 definitively showed the King's opposition to the coup makers.\nWhen Juan Carlos became king, Communist leader Santiago Carrillo had nicknamed him \"Juan Carlos the Brief\", predicting that the monarchy would soon be swept away with the other remnants of the Franco era. After the collapse of the attempted coup however, in an emotional statement, Carrillo remarked: \"Today, we are all monarchists.\" Public support for the monarchy among democrats and leftists, which had been limited before 1981, increased significantly following the king's handling of the coup.\nHowever, this event remains controversial and has led to several alternative theories that cast doubt on the sincerity of the King's defense of democracy. The King had close ties with the leader of the rebellion, who had served him as Secretary General of the Royal Household. Above all, Juan Carlos and the main political parties were aware of a plan to put General Alfonso Armada in charge of the government, particularly in order to crack down on the Basque independence organization Euskadi ta Askatasuna (ETA). Although Juan Carlos strongly condemned the coup attempt \u2014 more than six hours after the armed guards invaded Congress \u2014 it is still difficult to establish whether he acted out of democratic conviction or because the operation was not going as well as expected, with little support. The reasons for the trial of the coup plotters are still classified. Antonio Tejero will claim that Juan Carlos knew about the coup.\nLater role in Spanish politics.\nThe victory of the PSOE in 1982 under Gonz\u00e1lez marked the effective end of the King's active involvement in Spanish politics. Gonz\u00e1lez governed for 14 years, longer than any other democratically elected Prime Minister. His administration helped consolidate Spanish democracy and thus maintained the stability of the nation.\nOn paper, Juan Carlos retained fairly extensive reserve powers. He was the guardian of the Constitution and was responsible for ensuring that it was obeyed. In practice, since the passage of the Constitution (and especially since 1982), he took a mostly non-partisan and representative role, acting almost entirely on the advice of the government. However, he commanded great moral authority as an essential symbol of the country's unity.\nUnder the Constitution, the King has immunity from prosecution in matters relating to his official duties. Consequently, he exercised most of his powers through the ministers; his acts as King (and not as a citizen) were not valid unless countersigned by a minister, who became politically responsible for the act in question.\nAs head of the Spanish state, Juan Carlos \"held political power, gave his opinion and exerted his influence in the economic sphere, for example, in the area of company mergers or public policy during the transition period,\" analyses journalist Ana Pardo.\nThe honour of the royal family is specifically protected from insult by the Spanish Penal Code. Under this protection, Basque independentist Arnaldo Otegi and cartoonists from \"El Jueves\" were tried and punished.\nThe King gave an annual speech to the nation on Christmas Eve and was, as King, the commander-in-chief of the Spanish armed forces.\nIn October 1990, Juan Carlos visited the Chilean city of Valdivia amidst the beginning of the Chilean transition to democracy. While he and the Queen were cheered by some, groups of indigenous Mapuches approached the king some to protest past colonialism and others to have the King ratify past Mapuche-Spanish treaties. According to \"El Pa\u00eds\" political infighting between Mapuches prevented Juan Carlos from hosting an official meeting with Mapuche representatives.\nIn July 2000, Juan Carlos was the target of an enraged protester when former priest Juan Mar\u00eda Fern\u00e1ndez y Krohn, who had once attacked Pope John Paul II, breached security and attempted to approach the king.\nWhen the media asked Juan Carlos in 2005 whether he would endorse the bill legalising same-sex marriage that was then being debated in the \"Cortes Generales\", he answered \"Soy el Rey de Espa\u00f1a y no el de B\u00e9lgica\" (\"I am the King of Spain, not of Belgium\")\u00a0\u2013 a reference to King Baudouin of Belgium, who had refused to sign the Belgian law legalising abortion. The King gave his Royal Assent to Law 13/2005 on 1 July 2005; the law legalising same-sex marriage was gazetted in the \"Bolet\u00edn Oficial del Estado\" on 2 July, and came into effect on 3 July.\nAccording to a poll in the newspaper \"El Mundo\" in November 2005, 77.5% of Spaniards thought Juan Carlos was \"good or very good\", 15.4% \"not so good\", and only 7.1% \"bad or very bad\". Even so, the issue of the monarchy re-emerged on 28 September 2007 as photos of the king were burned in public in Catalonia by small groups of protesters wanting the restoration of the Republic.\n2007 Ibero-American Summit.\nIn November 2007, at the Ibero-American Summit in Santiago, during a heated exchange, Juan Carlos interrupted Venezuelan President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez, saying, \"\u00bfPor qu\u00e9 no te callas?\" (\"Why don't you shut up?\"). Ch\u00e1vez had been interrupting the Spanish Prime Minister, Jos\u00e9 Luis Rodr\u00edguez Zapatero, while the latter was defending his predecessor and political opponent, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Aznar, after Ch\u00e1vez had referred to Aznar as a fascist and \"less human than snakes\". The King shortly afterwards left the hall when President Daniel Ortega of Nicaragua accused Spain of intervention in his country's elections and complained about some Spanish energy companies working in Nicaragua. This was an unprecedented diplomatic incident and a rare display of public anger by the King.\nBudget of the royal house.\nJuan Carlos detailed for the first time in 2011 the yearly royal budget of \u20ac8.3\u00a0million, excluding expenses such as the electricity bill, paid by the State.\nBotswana hunting trip.\nIn April 2012, Juan Carlos faced criticism for an elephant-hunting trip in Botswana. The public found out about the trip only after the King injured himself and a special aircraft was sent to bring him home. Spanish officials stated that the expenses of the trip were not paid by taxpayers or by the palace, but by Mohamed Eyad Kayali, a businessman of Syrian origin. Cayo Lara Moya of the United Left party said the King's trip \"demonstrated a lack of ethics and respect toward many people in this country who are suffering a lot\" while Tom\u00e1s G\u00f3mez of the Socialist party said Juan Carlos should choose between \"public responsibilities or an abdication\". In April 2012, Spain's unemployment was at 23% and nearly 50% for young workers. \"El Pa\u00eds\" estimated the total cost of a hunting trip at \u20ac44,000, about twice the average annual salary in Spain. A petition called for the king to resign from his position as honorary president of the Spanish branch of the World Wide Fund for Nature. The WWF itself responded by asking for an interview with the King to resolve the situation. In July 2012, WWF Spain held a meeting in Madrid and decided with 226 votes to 13 to remove the King from its honorary presidency. He later apologised for the hunting trip.\nUp until the Botswana elephant trip, Juan Carlos had enjoyed a high level of shielding from media scrutiny, described as \"rare among Western leaders\".\nInterfaith work.\nOn the 500th anniversary of the Alhambra Decree in 1992, King Juan Carlos I and Queen Sofia visited the Beth Yaacov Synagogue in Madrid, led by Chief Rabbi of Madrid Yehuda Benasouli to commemorate the occasion. While Sofia had been to the synagogue in the 1970s, the occasion marked the first time that the king had visited a synagogue in Spain. The Spanish royals were joined by Israeli President Chaim Herzog, Herzog's predecessor Yitzhak Navon, Rabbi Solomon Gaon and other Israeli and Spanish officials. Also present were descendants of Abraham Senior and Isaac Abarbanel, who had unsuccessfully petitioned King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella to retract the edict.\nIn 2008, Juan Carlos spoke at the opening of a 3-day Saudi-sponsored World Conference on Dialogue interfaith conference at the Royal Palace of El Pardo outside Madrid. The conference was attended by King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, Rabbi David Rosen, and former British Prime Minister Tony Blair.\nAbdication.\nSpanish news media started to speculate about the King's future in 2013, following public criticism over his taking an elephant hunting safari in Botswana and an embezzlement scandal involving his daughter, Infanta Cristina, Duchess of Palma de Mallorca, and her husband I\u00f1aki Urdangarin. The King's private secretary, Rafael Spottorno, denied in a briefing that the \"abdication option\" was being considered.\nOn the morning of 2 June 2014, Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy made a televised announcement that the King had told him of his intention to abdicate. Later, the King delivered a televised address and announced that he would abdicate the throne in favour of the Prince of Asturias. Royal officials described the King's choice as a personal decision which he had been contemplating since his 76th birthday at the start of the year. The King reportedly said, \"No quiero que mi hijo se marchite esperando como Carlos.\" (English: \"I do not want my son to wither waiting like Charles.\")\nAs required by the Spanish constitution, any abdication would be settled by means of an organic law. A draft law was passed in parliament with 299 in favour, 19 against and 23 abstaining. On 18 June, he signed the organic law, which made the abdication effective when it was published in the Bolet\u00edn Oficial del Estado at midnight. Felipe was enthroned the following morning, and Juan Carlos's granddaughter Leonor became the new Princess of Asturias. Juan Carlos was the fourth European monarch to abdicate in just over a year, following Pope Benedict XVI (28 February 2013), Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands (30 April 2013), and King Albert II of Belgium (21 July 2013).\nThe Spanish constitution at the time of the abdication did not grant an abdicated monarch the legal immunity of a head of state, but the government changed the law to allow this. However, unlike his previous immunity, the new legislation left him accountable to the supreme court, in a similar type of protection afforded to many high-ranking civil servants and politicians in Spain. The legislation stipulates that all outstanding legal matters relating to the former king be suspended and passed \"immediately\" to the supreme court.\nReactions.\nThe Spanish press gave the announcement a broadly positive reception, but described the moment as an \"institutional crisis\" and \"a very important moment in the history of democratic Spain\". Around Spain and in major cities (including London) the news was met by republican celebration and protests, calling for the end of the monarchy.\nCatalan leader Artur Mas said that the news of the King's abdication would not slow down the process of independence for Catalonia. I\u00f1igo Urkullu, the President of the Basque government, concluded that the King's reign was \"full of light yet also darkness\" and said that his successor Felipe should remember that \"the Basque Question has not been resolved\". Other regional leaders had more positive evaluations of Juan Carlos following his decision to abdicate: Alberto N\u00fa\u00f1ez Feij\u00f3o of Galicia called him \"the King of Democracy\" who \"guaranteed the continuation of constitutional monarchy\" and Alberto Fabra of the Valencian Community said that Spaniards are proud of their king who had been \"at the forefront of protecting our interests inside and outside of our borders\".\nBritish Prime Minister David Cameron stated: \"I would like to use this opportunity to make a tribute to King Juan Carlos, who has done so much during his reign to aid the successful Spanish transition to democracy, and has been a great friend of the United Kingdom.\" The President of the European Commission, Jos\u00e9 Manuel Barroso, said that Juan Carlos was a \"believer in Europeanism and modernity...without whom one could not understand modern Spain\".\nThe Spanish public also gave a broadly positive opinion not only of the abdication but of his reign as a whole. According to a poll taken by \"El Mundo\", 65% saw the King's reign as either good or very good, up from 41.3%. Overall, 55.7% of those polled in the 3\u20135 June survey by Sigma Dos supported the institution of the monarchy in Spain, up from 49.9% when the same question was posed six months prior. 57.5% believed the Prince could restore the royal family's lost prestige. An overwhelming majority of Spaniards believed the new King, Felipe VI, would make a good monarch and more than three-quarters believed King Juan Carlos had been right to hand over the throne to his son.\nPost-abdication.\nAfter abdication, Juan Carlos continued to have a role as institutional representative of the Crown.\nFrom June 2014 to June 2019, he attended several Latin American presidential inaugurations such as the second inauguration of Juan Manuel Santos as president of Colombia, the inauguration of Tabar\u00e9 V\u00e1zquez as president of Uruguay, and the inauguration of Mauricio Macri as president of Argentina. He also represented the Crown in different cultural and sports events, funerals, and awards ceremonies. Finally, the former sovereign was also present in the events about the 40th anniversary of the Spanish Constitution of 1978.\nOn 27 May 2019, King Juan Carlos announced by a letter to his son Felipe his intention to retire from public life on 2 June 2019, five years after he announced his abdication.\nCorruption investigations.\n2020 Saudi rail deal.\nRecordings of the former King's alleged mistress Corinna zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Sayn speaking with a former police chief were leaked to the press in mid-2018. Sayn-Wittgenstein claimed that Juan Carlos received kick-backs from commercial contracts in the Gulf States \u2013 particularly in the late-2000s construction of the \u20ac6.7\u00a0billion Haramain high-speed railway in Saudi Arabia \u2013 and maintained these proceeds in a bank account in Switzerland. She alleged that he purchased properties in Monaco under her name to circumvent the tax treatment of lawful residents, stating \"[not] because he [loved] me a lot, but because I reside in Monaco.\" She further claimed the head of the Spanish intelligence service warned her that her life, and those of her children, would be at risk if she spoke of their association. The allegations drew demands for Juan Carlos to be investigated for corruption in early June 2019.\nSwiss authorities began investigating Juan Carlos in March 2020 in relation to a $100\u00a0million gift to Sayn-Wittgenstein in 2012. This donation was linked to alleged kick-back fees from Saudi Arabia. Sayn-Wittgenstein reportedly told the head Swiss prosecutor on 19 December 2018 that Juan Carlos had given her \u20ac65\u00a0million out of \"gratitude and love\", to guarantee her future and her children's, because \"he still had hopes to win her back\". A letter written by Juan Carlos to his Swiss lawyers in 2018 stated the gift was irrevocable, despite his having asked in 2014 for the return of the money. On 14 March 2020, \"The Telegraph\" reported that his son Felipe, King of Spain since 2014, appeared as second beneficiary (after Juan Carlos) of the Lucum Foundation, which had received a \u20ac65\u00a0million donation by King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia. On 15 March 2020, the Royal Household declared that Felipe VI would renounce any inheritance from his father. Additionally, the Household announced that the former king would lose his public stipend from the State's General Budget.\nIn June 2020, the public prosecutor's office of the Supreme Court of Spain agreed to investigate Juan Carlos's role as facilitator in Phase II of the high speed rail connecting Mecca and Medina, intending to determine the criminal relevance of events that took place after his abdication in June 2014. As King of Spain, Juan Carlos was immune from prosecution from 1975 to 2014 by sovereign immunity.\nA further investigation by Swiss authorities was undertaken regarding \u20ac3.5 million paid from the Lucum Foundation to the Bahamas-based bank Pictet &amp; Ciein for a society called Dolphin, which was controlled by the lawyer Dante Can\u00f3nica, who also controlled Lucum.\nIn December 2021, the Swiss prosecutors dropped all cases due to the impossibility of proving any illegality.\nCredit cards and bank accounts.\nSpanish prosecutors opened an investigation into the use by Juan Carlos and other members of the royal family of credit cards used between 2016 and 2018 which were paid for by an overseas account to which neither Juan Carlos nor any member of the royal family were signatories, leading to accusations that the funds are undisclosed assets of Juan Carlos, and as the card drawings exceeded \u20ac120,000 in one year, comprised undisclosed income and was therefore a tax offence in Spain. Mexican millionaire and investment banker Allen Sangin\u00e9s-Krause has been named as the owner of the cards, a friend of Juan Carlos to whom he donated sums of money using Air Force Colonel Nicol\u00e1s Murga Mendoza as an intermediary.\nIn December 2020, Juan Carlos reportedly paid \u20ac678,393.72 to Spain's tax agency for the concept of defrauded money in an affair of \"opaque credit cards\" used between 2016 and 2018 by himself, his wife and some grandchildren, intending to avoid further scrutiny from the Supreme Court's prosecutor, the payment being an admission of fraud.\nSwiss and Spanish prosecutors also investigated several accounts related to the former King, such as an account in Switzerland with almost \u20ac8 million and an attempt to withdraw nearly \u20ac10 million from Jersey, possibly from a trust set up by or for Juan Carlos in the 1990s. Juan Carlos claims he is \"not responsible for any Jersey trust and never has been, either directly or indirectly\".\nIn March 2022, Spanish prosecutors closed all cases against him following the same decision from Swiss prosecutors in December 2021.\nZagatka Foundation.\nFounded in Liechtenstein in 2003 and owned by \u00c1lvaro de Orleans-Borb\u00f3n, a distant cousin of Juan Carlos who lives in Monaco, the foundation received a large sum of money from Switzerland; Juan Carlos is named as the third beneficiary. In 2009 \u00c1lvaro de Orleans-Borb\u00f3n paid a cheque from Mexico for \u20ac4.3 million into the account which the Swiss adjudicated belonged to Juan Carlos. Juan Carlos appears to have drawn down funds from the Zagatka foundation to spend \u20ac8 million between 2009 and 2018 on private flights, with Air Partner receiving around \u20ac6.1 million. Zagatka used commissions due to Juan Carlos and paid to Zagatka to invest millions, mainly in Ibex35 companies between 2003 and 2018.\nOn 25 February 2021, Juan Carlos paid 4 million euros to the Spanish Tax Agency to avoid new tax offenses in relation with these flights.\nLucum foundation.\nA Panamanian Lucum foundation had Juan Carlos as the first beneficiary and King Felipe VI as a named second beneficiary, although Felipe has subsequently relinquished any inheritance from his father Juan Carlos. Lucum received $100 million from the Saudi royal house in 2008. Swiss prosecutors are concerned about who at the Swiss bank Mirabaud &amp; Cie knows who the account was for and what was discovered about the source of the funds from the Ministry of Finance of Saudi Arabia. They are also concerned about a transfer of \u20ac3.5m from Lucum to an account held by Dante Can\u00f3nica in the Bahamas. In 2012 the Mirabaud bank, which had concealed from its employees the beneficial owner of the account, asked for the account to be closed, due to possible adverse publicity; this was when the bulk of the funds were transferred to Corinna zu Sayn-Wittgenstein-Sayn.\nClaims of harassment.\nIn 2020, Sayn-Wittgenstein, resident in the United Kingdom, filed an harassment case in London against Juan Carlos, claiming he'd pressured her to return the money given to her after their break up in 2012. In 2022, Juan Carlos won an appeal that he had immunity from those allegations relating to 2012\u20132014 when he was still King.\nIn 2023, the High Court of England and Wales threw out the case on the grounds that it had no jurisdiction in the matter, but made no judgement as to the substance of the allegations.\nRelocation abroad.\nOn 3 August 2020, the Royal Household announced Juan Carlos wished to relocate from Spain because of increased media press about his business dealings in Saudi Arabia, and he had left a letter to his son saying so. By the time the letter had been made public, he had already left the country. Journalists speculated that he might have fled to the Dominican Republic, Portugal, France, and Italy, and, later, as of 7 August, the Emirates Palace in Abu Dhabi. The Royal Household initially declined requests to publicly disclose Juan Carlos's location; on 17 August, the Royal Household confirmed that, since 3 August, Juan Carlos had been in the United Arab Emirates, where he arrived by taking a private plane from Vigo Airport.\nSince then, he has visited Spain regularly, mainly the town of Sanxenxo, in the north of Spain, to do one of his favorite activities, sailing. He was also present at the private celebration that the Spanish royal family made at the Royal Palace of El Pardo to celebrate Leonor's 18th birthday.\nFamily and private life.\nJuan Carlos was married on 14 May 1962, to Princess Sophia of Greece and Denmark, daughter of King Paul of Greece, firstly in a Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St. Denis, followed by a Greek Orthodox ceremony at the Metropolitan Cathedral of Athens. She converted from Greek Orthodoxy to Roman Catholicism. They have three children:\nJuan Carlos is also allegedly the father of Albert Sol\u00e0, born in Barcelona in 1956, also of a woman born in Catalonia in 1964, and of Ingrid Sartiau, a Belgian woman born in 1966 who has filed a paternity suit, but complete sovereign immunity prevented that suit prior to his abdication.\nJuan Carlos is alleged to have had several extramarital affairs, which adversely affected his marriage. In 2021, the former police official Jos\u00e9 Manuel Villarejo testified that Juan Carlos was given hormones to reduce his sex drive, as it was seen as a state problem.\nIn 1972, Juan Carlos, a keen sailor, competed in the Dragon class event at the Olympic Games, finishing 15th. During their summer holidays, the whole family spends time at Marivent Palace (Palma de Mallorca) and on the yacht \"Fortuna\", where they would take part in sailing competitions. The king has manned the Brib\u00f3n series of yachts. In winter, the family often went skiing in Baqueira-Beret and Candanch\u00fa (Pyrenees). At present, his hobbies include classic sailing boats. He also hunts bears; in October 2004, he angered environmental activists by killing nine bears in central Romania, one of which was pregnant. It was alleged by the Russian regional authorities that in August 2006 Juan Carlos shot a drunken tame bear (Mitrofan the Bear) during a private hunting trip to Russia; the Office of the Spanish Monarchy denied this claim.\nHe is a member of the World Scout Foundation and of the Sons of the American Revolution.\nHealth.\nA benign 17\u201319\u00a0mm tumour was removed under general anaesthetic from King Juan Carlos's right lung in an operation carried out in the Hospital Cl\u00ednic de Barcelona in May 2010. The operation followed an annual check-up, and Juan Carlos was not expected to need any further treatment. He was treated in Clinica Planas.\nIn April 2012, the King underwent surgery for a triple fracture of the hip at the San Jose Hospital, Madrid, following a fall on a private elephant-hunting trip to Botswana. He also underwent a hip operation in September 2013 at Madrid's Quir\u00f3n hospital. In April 2018, Juan Carlos was admitted to hospital for a surgery on his right knee.\nOn 24 August 2019 he had heart surgery.\nIn popular culture.\nHis life between 1948 and 1993 is covered in the 2014 miniseries \"El rey\".\nAs of 2021, there are four television projects in development set to portray the former king, some of which span along a wider time period of the Royal Household: \"Palacio real. Brillo y tragedia de la monarqu\u00eda espa\u00f1ola\" (Diagonal TV), \"El rey\" (The Mediapro Studio), \"El em\u00e9rito\" (Mandarina Producciones) and \"XRey\" (Starzplay, Sony Pictures TV and The Weekend Studio).\nTitles, styles, honours and arms.\nIn 1969, Juan Carlos was named as General Franco's successor and was given the title of 'Prince of Spain'. Upon the death of Franco in 1975, Juan Carlos acceded to the throne of Spain. The current Spanish constitution refers to the monarch by the simple title \"King of Spain\". Aside from this title, the constitution allows for the use of other historic titles pertaining to the Spanish monarchy, without specifying them. This was also reiterated by a decree promulgated on 6 November 1987 concerning titles of members of the royal family. Since his abdication in 2014, King Juan Carlos has retained, by courtesy, the title of king and style of \"majesty\" that he enjoyed during his reign. Likewise, he maintains his military rank in reserve.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75796", "revid": "18130370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75796", "title": "Roanoke, Virginia", "text": "Independent city in Virginia, United States\nRoanoke ( ) is an independent city in Virginia, United States. It lies in Southwest Virginia, along the Roanoke River, in the Blue Ridge range of the greater Appalachian Mountains. Roanoke is about north of the Virginia\u2013North Carolina border and southwest of Washington, D.C., along Interstate 81. At the 2020 census, Roanoke's population was 100,011, making it the most populous city in Virginia west of the state capital, Richmond. It is the primary population center of the Roanoke metropolitan area, which had a population of 315,251 in 2020.\nThe Roanoke Valley was originally home to members of the Siouan-speaking Tutelo tribe. In the 17th and 18th centuries, Scotch-Irish and later German American farmers gradually drove those Native Americans out of the area as the American frontier pressed westward. In 1882, the Norfolk and Western Railway (N&amp;W) chose the small town of Big Lick as the site of its corporate headquarters and railroad shops. Within two years, the town had become the City of Roanoke. In the 1880s, the population grew by 22 times and the young city experienced the advantages and disadvantages of its boomtown status. During the 20th century, Roanoke's boundaries expanded through annexations of surrounding Roanoke County, and it became Southwest Virginia's economic and cultural hub. The 1982 decision by N&amp;W to move its headquarters out of the city, along with other manufacturing closures, led Roanoke to a primarily service economy. In the 21st century, a robust healthcare industry and the development and increased marketing of the city's outdoor amenities have helped reverse population decline.\nRoanoke is known for the Roanoke Star, an illuminated star that sits atop a mountain within the city's limits and is the origin of its nickname, \"The Star City of the South\". Other points of interest include the Hotel Roanoke, a 330-room Tudor Revival structure built by N&amp;W in 1882, the Taubman Museum of Art, designed by architect Randall Stout, and the city's farmer's market, the oldest continuously operating open-air market in the state. The Roanoke Valley features of greenways with bicycle and pedestrian trails, and the city's location in the Blue Ridge Mountains provides access to numerous outdoor recreation opportunities.\nHistory.\nEarly history and incorporation.\nThe current site of Roanoke lies near the intersection of the Great Wagon Road and the Carolina Road, two branches of a network of early colonial roads that developed from Native American trails in the Appalachian region. While the name \"Roanoke\" is said to have originated from a Native American word for shell beads used as currency, that word was first used away, where the Roanoke River empties into the Atlantic Ocean near Roanoke Island. The Roanoke Valley itself was originally home to members of the Tutelo tribe, a Siouan-speaking people who were gradually pushed out of the area by advancing European settlers.\nMany of those settlers were Scotch-Irish who arrived in the region during the 18th and early 19th centuries following the Plantation of Ulster. They were followed by significant numbers of Germans from Pennsylvania via the Great Wagon Road.3 By 1838, the area was populated enough that Roanoke County was created out of parts of Botetourt and Montgomery Counties, and the area's first railroad, the Virginia and Tennessee, arrived in 1852.\nThe railroad built its new depot just south of a small town named Gainesborough, but named the depot after Big Lick, another small community located just to the east, which itself was named after the salt deposits that had drawn game to the area for years.492 Gainesborough increasingly became referred to as Big Lick (and later as Old Lick) once development drifted farther south towards the depot. Growth in the area was stalled by the Civil War; Roanoke County voted 850\u20130 in favor of secession and lost many of its men in the subsequent fighting.53 The burgeoning tobacco trade helped the region's recovery during Reconstruction. Within a decade of the war's end, there were no fewer than six tobacco factories near the Big Lick Depot.58\nIn 1874, the community surrounding the depot applied for and received a town charter, and the Town of Big Lick was formally established.71 Eight years later, efforts by town boosters succeeded in securing Big Lick as the junction of the Shenandoah Valley Railroad and the Norfolk and Western Railway (N&amp;W).65 The two companies also relocated their respective headquarters to the town (the two lines would officially merge in 1890).70204 Big Lick's relatively small size compared to the nearby county seat, Salem, worked in its favor as a draw for the companies. Big Lick's ample farmland and nearby water sources were well suited to the railroads' goal of building much of the town from scratch, including railroad shops, offices, a hotel, and suitable housing for their many employees.868\nIn the early 1880s, Big Lick's residents voted to rename the town \"Kimball\" after Frederick J. Kimball, an executive for the two railroad companies who played a significant role in their new location.10 Kimball turned down the honor, saying, \"On the Roanoke River in Roanoke County\u00a0\u2013 name it Roanoke.\"90 The town obliged, officially becoming the Town of Roanoke on February 3, 1882.65 The new charter also annexed nearly of additional land, including the Town of Gainesborough (later shortened to Gainsboro), which by that point had already become the center of the area's African American community. Kimball chose a wheat field north of the railroad tracks and east of Gainsboro for the N&amp;W's new hotel,66 and the 69-room Hotel Roanoke \u2013 designed originally in the Queen Anne style before numerous rebuilds and expansions gave it its current Tudor Revival appearance \u2013 opened its doors in 1882.12\nWith the rapid influx of railroad employees and others in associated industries, Roanoke's population soared and, by the end of 1883, had passed 5,000.71 That milestone made the town eligible for a city charter, and on January 31, 1884, the town became the City of Roanoke.135\nWith a population that ballooned from under 700 residents in 1880 to over 16,000 in 1890 \u2013 and earning itself the nickname \"The Magic City\" in the process1 \u2013 Roanoke suffered many of the same difficulties that affected other 19th century boomtowns. Its infrastructure was essentially nonexistent, and a lack of sewers combined with the area's marshy terrain contributed to regular outbreaks of diphtheria and cholera.37 Bond initiatives designed to alleviate these and other issues highlighted racial tensions in the city, as the African American community \u2013 roughly 30 percent of Roanoke's population in 1891105 \u2013 opposed the measures because the money would only be used to improve white neighborhoods.42 Black neighborhoods in Roanoke typically received public amenities such as running water and paved roads only after their white counterparts, and Roanoke was among the first to adopt the Jim Crow laws that were becoming increasingly popular in the South.108 The local press, for its part, stoked the white population's fears and anxiety with near-constant reports of African American \"savagery\".125\nIn September 1893, tensions boiled over when a white woman was allegedly robbed and beaten by an African-American man, Thomas Smith, near the city's market.78 Smith was held in the city jail; a mob of hundreds surrounded the building and demanded \"lynch justice\".135 A shootout between the mob and an undermanned militia ensued, leaving eight dead and thirty-one more injured. Included among the wounded was the city's mayor, the previously widely admired Henry S. Trout,134 who had vowed protection of the prisoner.79 The rioting mob was eventually successful in gaining control of Smith. They proceeded to hang him and mutilate his body, which was eventually burned when the mob was deterred from its initial plan to bury it in Mayor Trout's front yard.140 The mayor himself was forced to flee the city out of fear for his life and only returned a week later after the national press condemned the riot and praised Trout's courage during the event.145\n20th century \u2013 present.\nDespite these and other setbacks, the city grew through the early 20th century, both in area and population.84 In addition to the land gained in its 1882 town charter, relatively unopposed annexations occurred five more times by 1926, though Roanoke County would become less agreeable to later attempts. Mill Mountain became a popular entertainment locale for early residents; an observation tower and the Rockledge Inn each opened atop the mountain in 1892.250 Mountain Park, an early amusement center complete with a casino and roller coaster, opened at the foot of the mountain in 1903,205 and beginning in 1910 visitors could pay a quarter to ride an incline railway to the top of Mill Mountain and back.473\nAnother mainstay at the base of the mountain was Roanoke Memorial Hospital. Completed in 1900 as Roanoke Hospital,341 the building has undergone many expansions and today is the flagship of the Carilion Clinic healthcare group. The hospital joined some manufacturing operations that were established along the banks of the Roanoke River in the early 20th century, including the American Viscose Corporation. That company built a plant in 1917 that by a decade later employed 5,000 and was reportedly the largest rayon producing mill in the world.96\nThe city leased land for an airfield beginning in 1929.570 Still, its development into the region's primary airport did not begin until its designation as a defense project provided federal funding in 1940.103 That same year, N&amp;W donated the fairground, Maher Field, to the city to build a stadium and armory.103 Victory Stadium \u2013 optimistically named upon its completion in 1942 \u2013 played host to the annual Thanksgiving Day football game between Virginia Tech and Virginia Military Institute for years afterward.\nBy the mid-20th century, Roanoke was increasingly losing population and businesses to a Roanoke County that had become less rural and more suburban in nature and consequently more resistant to annexation attempts by the city.109 The city was nevertheless successful in annexing additional land in 1943, 1949, three small acquisitions in 1965, 1967, and 1968, and once more in 1976. The county won immunity from further annexations in 1980, but by then, the city had grown from its original size of to .\nIn 1949, the local merchants association erected an illuminated star at the top of Mill Mountain in celebration of the upcoming Christmas shopping season. The star was an immediate hit among the city's population, leading to its illumination year-round and earning the city its nickname of \"Star City of the South\". Despite the popularity boost for the merchants association, shopping habits in Roanoke were becoming more fractured as suburban shopping centers drew patrons away from an increasingly vacant downtown. Crossroads Mall, the first enclosed shopping center in Virginia, and Towers Mall, at the time one of the largest shopping centers in the state, were each completed in 1961. In later years, Tanglewood Mall (1973) and Valley View Mall (1985) contributed to Roanoke's status as the region's retail hub.\nMid-century change to the city came in the form of a massive \"urban renewal\" effort that saw the construction of both the Roanoke Civic Center (now Berglund Center) as well as an interstate spur into downtown Roanoke. Much of the land for these projects was in Northeast Roanoke, a community of primarily African American citizens who had been largely redlined from the rest of the city. City officials gained the land through eminent domain and proceeded to clear over 1,000 buildings, often through widescale burning. Later projects in the largely black Gainsboro neighborhood removed hundreds of homes and businesses there as well, and late-20th and early-21st century revitalization efforts by the city's government have been met with distrust and varied success.\nThe second half of the 20th century ushered in a change of identity for Roanoke. In 1982, the N&amp;W completed a merger with the Southern Railway to form the Norfolk Southern Railway, which then relocated their headquarters from Roanoke to Norfolk, Virginia. The company closed their regional headquarters in Roanoke in 2015, and in 2020 shuttered the locomotive shops. The railroad's departure and a string of manufacturing plant closures left a hole in the city's economic base.\nIn 1987, however, the merger of two of the area's largest hospitals created the forerunner of Carilion Clinic, a medical group that is the largest employer in the state west of Richmond. The group's partnerships with Virginia Tech and Radford University have created two colleges and a research facility in what was formerly an industrial brownfield area, but has since been termed the city's \"innovation corridor\". These developments, along with the city's decision to improve its parks and recreation amenities and market itself as an outdoor tourism hotspot, have helped reverse its decades-long loss of young adults, and in 2020 Roanoke's population passed 100,000 for the first time since 1980.\nGeography.\nRoanoke is the largest city in Virginia west of Richmond and is located in the Blue Ridge Mountains, a range which is part of the greater Appalachian Mountains. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (0.8%) is water. It is located in the center of the greater Roanoke Valley and is bisected by the Roanoke River, which flows west-to-east through the city. Within the city limits is Mill Mountain, a mountain and 500-acre municipal park which stands detached from the surrounding ranges.\nRoanoke's location in the Blue Ridge Mountains makes it proximate to hundreds of species of plants and wildlife. The area is home to at least 43 species of salamander, and the Poor Mountain Natural Area Preserve in neighboring Roanoke County protects the world's largest collection of piratebush, an exceedingly rare parasitic plant endemic to the Appalachians.\nRoanoke is the largest city along both the Appalachian Trail, which runs through Roanoke County just north of the city, and the Blue Ridge Parkway, which runs just south of the city. Carvins Cove, the third-largest municipal park in America at , lies in northeast Roanoke County and southwest Botetourt County. Smith Mountain Lake is several miles southeast of the city, and the George Washington and Jefferson National Forests are nearby. Outdoor pursuits in the region include hiking, mountain biking, cross-country running, canoeing, kayaking, fly fishing, and disc golf.\nNeighborhoods.\nRoanoke is divided into 49 separate neighborhoods. The city has incorporated into its comprehensive plan the goal of developing these neighborhoods into \"villages\", each with their own village center, and with the Downtown neighborhood acting as the village center for the city as a whole. The Raleigh Court neighborhood has been cited as a model for such development, consisting of a variety of residential settings located around Grandin Village, an active commercial hub anchored by the Grandin Theatre, the city's only surviving historic theater. That commercial district is one of the city's nine neighborhoods (or portions thereof) that have been listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nClimate.\nThough located along the Blue Ridge Mountains at elevations exceeding , Roanoke lies in the humid subtropical climate zone (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfa\"), with four distinct, but generally mild, seasons. It is located in USDA hardiness zone 7b, with the suburbs falling in zone 7a. Extremes in temperature have ranged from (as recently as August 21, 1983) down to on December 30, 1917. However, neither nor are reached in most years; the most recent occurrence of each is July 20, 2020, and February 20, 2015, respectively. More typically, the area records an average of 6.1 days where the temperature stays at or below freezing and 30.5 days with + highs annually. The monthly mean temperature ranges from in January to in July.\nBased on the 1991\u22122020 period, the city averages of snow per winter. Roanoke experienced a mild snow drought in the 2000s, which ended in December 2009 when of snow fell on Roanoke in a single storm. Winter snowfall has ranged from trace amounts in 1918\u201319 and 1919\u201320 to in 1959\u201360; unofficially, the largest single storm dumped approximately three feet (0.9\u00a0m) from December 16\u221218, 1890.\nHistorically, flooding has been the primary weather-related hazard faced by Roanoke. Heavy rains, most frequently from the remnants of a hurricane, drain from surrounding areas to the narrow Roanoke Valley. The most recent significant flood was in the fall of 2018, when the remains of Hurricane Michael dumped over five inches of rain on the area in the span of only a few hours. The most severe flooding in the city's history occurred on November 4, 1985, when heavy storms from Hurricane Juan stalled over the area. Ten people drowned in the Roanoke Valley and others were saved by rescue personnel. That incident prompted a major flood reduction effort completed in 2012 by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, which has limited the damage caused by subsequent storms.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAt the 2020 census, there were 100,011 people residing in 44,411 households in the city, 21,199 of which housed families. The population density was . The racial makeup of the city was 55.94% White, 27.07% African American, 0.21% Native American, 2.46% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.52% from other races, and 5.26% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8.48% of the population.\nAmong the city's households, 25.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them. 30.4% were married couples living together, while 37.4% had a female householder with no spouse or partner present. In total, 42.3% were non-families. 38.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. 24.0% of the population were under the age of 20, and 17.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39.1 years.\nAccording to the unofficial American Community Survey, the median household income in Roanoke was $45,664, and the median family income was $55,345. The per capita income was $29,585. About 20.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 29.2% of those under age 18 and 12.3% of those age 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nRoanoke's economy was long closely linked to its status as the headquarters for the Norfolk and Western Railway. As time progressed, manufacturing and mining businesses contributed to the region's growth. After the N&amp;W's merger with the Southern Railway created the Norfolk Southern Railway in 1982, Norfolk Southern continued to operate maintenance facilities and a rail yard in Roanoke but moved its headquarters to Norfolk, Virginia, and in 2015 moved out of its downtown Roanoke office building. On May 18, 2020, after 139 years of production, Norfolk Southern shut down its locomotive shops and moved all operations to the Juniata Locomotive Shops in Altoona, Pennsylvania. With Norfolk Southern's departure, Roanoke's economy has since the mid-1990s shifted to become dominated by the healthcare industry. \nAs of 2023[ [update]] the city's top employer \u2013 and the largest private employer west of Richmond\u2013 is Carilion Clinic, which developed from the 1987 merger of two of the area's largest hospitals. The non-profit group employs over 13,000 people. It operates nine hospitals in Western Virginia, along with public-private partnerships with Virginia Tech (Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine and Research Institute) and Radford University (Radford University Carilion). The clinic's expansions have spurred considerable development in the former brownfields located south of Roanoke's downtown, turning the once-abandoned industrial sites into an area called the \"innovation corridor\" by the city.\nAnother driving factor in the region's economy has been a push during the 21st century to market the area's outdoor recreation potential. The Roanoke Regional Partnership, an economic development group representing the area's municipalities, has created a division called the Roanoke Outside Foundation that seeks to recruit businesses and talent based on the strength of the region's natural amenities. The organization also puts on annual events such as the Blue Ridge Marathon and the GO Outside Festival.\nOther areas of strength in the region's economy include manufacturing and retail, each comprising over ten percent of the valley's industry. Transportation manufacturers such as Yokohama Tire, Volvo, Mack Trucks, Metalsa, and Altec contribute to the thousands of people employed in that field regionally. Night-vision device makers Elbit Systems and the fiber optics company Luna Innovations are among the advanced manufacturers in the area.\nTop employers.\nAccording to Roanoke's 2024 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city are:\nArts and culture.\nServing as a hub for arts and culture in Southwest Virginia, Roanoke is home to several museums and cultural institutions in addition to being the host of several festivals, many centering around Elmwood Park in downtown Roanoke.\nMuseums.\nCenter in the Square, an arts and culture organization located near downtown's historic market building and farmers' market, was developed alongside the city's \"Design '79\" downtown revitalization effort and opened in 1983. The center, located in a converted warehouse, originally housed the city's arts council and museum, history and science museums, and the Mill Mountain Theatre. It has since expanded to five buildings, providing space to twelve institutions, including the Science Museum of Western Virginia and Hopkins Planetarium, the Harrison Museum of African American Culture, and the Roanoke Pinball Museum.\nOne of the original tenants of Center in the Square, the Art Museum of Western Virginia, moved to a downtown Salem Avenue facility in 2008. The move was made with the help of a $15.2 million donation from Nicholas and Jenny Taubman, whose family had established Advance Auto Parts in Roanoke in the 1930s. As a result, the museum was renamed the Taubman Museum of Art. The art museum features 19th and 20th century American art, contemporary and modern art, decorative arts, and works on paper. The facility was designed by Los Angeles-based architect Randall Stout, who earlier in his career worked under Frank Gehry. Though the building's avant-garde design was controversial, it has since won international praise for its architecture.\nAlso located downtown is the Virginia Museum of Transportation, which houses many locomotives that were built in Roanoke by the Norfolk &amp; Western Railway, including the 1218 and 611 steam engines. A 2013 fundraising campaign led to the engine's refurbishment, and it now does tourist excursion runs when not home at the museum. In addition to its rail exhibits, the museum also displays a US Army Jupiter rocket and houses exhibits covering aviation as well as automobiles. The museum is located in the former Norfolk and Western freight depot which is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nThe former Norfolk and Western Passenger Station hosts two museums: the O. Winston Link Museum, dedicated to the late steam-era railroad photography of O. Winston Link, and the History Museum of Western Virginia. Originally built in 1905, the station underwent a 1949 renovation in the Moderne style by designer Raymond Loewy, and is one of four contributing structures to the Norfolk and Western Railway Company Historic District listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nArts.\nThe Berglund Performing Arts Theatre is a 2,150-seat venue within the larger Berglund Center complex. It regularly hosts concerts, touring Broadway theatre performances, stand-up comedy shows, and the Miss Virginia pageant. The city's first permanent artwork funded by the Percent for Art ordinance \u2013 a law stating that the city must set aside 1% of its capital improvements budget for the purchasing of public art \u2013 stands before the theater. Dedicated in 2008 to celebrate the city's 150th anniversary, the stainless steel sculpture, \"In My Hands\", is one of over 160 public works of art in Roanoke.\nThe Jefferson Center is a former city high school that saw extensive renovation during the 1990s, turning it into a mixed-use building including office space for non-profits and city departments, event space for meetings and receptions, and the Shaftman Performance Hall, a 925-seat theatre created from the original high school's auditorium.\nIn 2006, the former Dumas Hotel was reopened as the Dumas Center for Artistic and Cultural Development. The center is located on Henry Street, which served as the commercial and cultural center of Roanoke's African-American community before a mid-20th century urban renewal project that saw much of the historic Gainsboro neighborhood razed or relocated. The Dumas Hotel hosted such guests as Louis Armstrong, Ethel Waters, Count Basie, Duke Ellington and Nat King Cole when they performed in Roanoke. The renovated Dumas Center features an auditorium with more than 200 seats, and the building is a contributing structure to the Henry Street Historic District, listed in 2004 to the National Register of Historic Places.\nSince 1964, the Roanoke Valley has hosted performances by the Mill Mountain Theatre, a regional theatre that has been located in Center in the Square since its original home atop Mill Mountain burned down in 1976. The theatre has both a main stage for mainstream performances and a smaller black box theatre called Waldron Stage, which hosts both newer and more experimental plays along with other live events.\nRoanoke has been home to the Showtimers Community Theatre since 1951, and since 2008, the Virginia Children's Theatre has presented shows aimed at a younger audience, often based on children's literature. Originally formed as Roanoke Children's Theatre and housed in the Taubman Museum at that building's opening, the theatre expanded into the Dumas Center in 2013, and in 2016 moved to its current home in the Jefferson Center.\nOpera Roanoke is Southwest Virginia's only professional opera company, established in 1976 as the Southwest Virginia Opera Society. It has performed under its current name since 1991, and its official orchestra since 2004 has been the Roanoke Symphony Orchestra. That group was established in 1953. The orchestra performs out of the Berglund Performing Arts Theatre, Salem Civic Center, and Shaftman Performance Hall at Jefferson Center.\nPoints of interest.\nRoanoke is the largest metropolitan area on the Blue Ridge Parkway, a 469-mile-long scenic road that is the most-visited element of the National Park System. The Mill Mountain Parkway exit off of the Blue Ridge Parkway leads to the Roanoke Star, an illuminated star sitting atop a mountain inside the city's limits. Also on the mountain's summit is Mill Mountain Zoo, a Zoological Association of America-accredited facility housing over 170 animals.\nThe Basilica of St. Andrew rests on a hill overlooking downtown and has been called \"one of Virginia's foremost examples of the High Victorian Gothic\". The church dates to 1900, and was listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) in 1973. Just below the church lies the Hotel Roanoke, a historic 330-room Tudor Revival hotel originally built by the Norfolk and Western Railway in 1882 and rebuilt and expanded many times since. Nicknamed the \"Grand Old Lady\", the hotel was listed on the NRHP in 1995.\nA pedestrian bridge leads from the Hotel Roanoke to the city's historic market building and farmers' market, the latter of which dates to 1882 and is the oldest continuously operating open-air market in Virginia. Near the terminus of the market is Fire Station No. 1, which for a time was the oldest continuously operating station in the state. The Georgian Revival structure was listed on the NRHP in 1973, and currently houses a local furniture showroom, restaurant, and boutique hotel. Two blocks west on the same street is Texas Tavern, an \"iconic\" ten-seat greasy spoon restaurant that the same family has operated since its establishment in 1930.\nFestivals.\nRoanoke features several annual festivals and events of various types. A parade for St. Patrick's Day occurs every March, and Pride in the Park is an LGBTQ+ community celebration that draws thousands of visitors every April. Several events occur in May, including the Local Colors festival celebrating the cultures of the area's diverse ethnicities, the city's Strawberry Festival, the Down by Downtown music festival which coincides with the Blue Ridge Marathon, and Memorial Day weekend's Festival in the Park, which brings music and vendors to downtown Elmwood Park.\nLater in the year, Elmwood Park hosts the Henry Street Heritage Festival, the primary fundraiser for the Harrison Museum of African American Culture. The event's popularity necessitated the move from its eponymous location. The Go Outside Festival, also known as GO Fest, is a free three-day event every October that celebrates the region's outdoor recreation opportunities, and the city holds the multi-week Dickens of a Christmas each December. This Victorian era-themed event includes a Christmas tree lighting, parade, and horse-drawn carriage rides through downtown.\nSports.\nThe 1971\u20131972 Virginia Squires of the American Basketball Association were the only major league sports team to play home games in Roanoke regularly. During that season, the Squires split home games between Richmond, Norfolk, Hampton Roads and Roanoke. Julius Erving played his professional rookie season with the Squires that year before being sent to the New York Nets.\nMinor league baseball has had a long history in the Roanoke Valley. In the 1940s and early 1950s, Roanoke was home to a class B farm team of the Boston Red Sox. Since 1955, neighboring Salem has hosted the local minor league baseball team, which as of 2023[ [update]] is the Salem Red Sox of the Low-A Carolina League. The team had previously been affiliated with the Houston Astros and Colorado Rockies and known as the Avalanche until becoming an affiliate of the Boston Red Sox, whose ownership group purchased the Avalanche after the 2007 season.\nThe history of minor league hockey in the Roanoke Valley goes back to 1967. The Roanoke Express of the ECHL built a loyal following in the mid-1990s, but a combination of financial turmoil due to mismanagement and declining attendance from a lack of post-season success led to the ECHL ending their franchise in 2004. An attempt at a revival in 2005\u201306 by the UHL's Roanoke Valley Vipers failed after one season. In 2016, professional ice hockey returned to Roanoke after ten years when the Roanoke Rail Yard Dawgs of the SPHL began to play, and the team won its first-ever President's Cup title in 2023.\nWhile the Roanoke area is not home to any NCAA Division I schools, its proximity to Virginia Tech has led it to host some collegiate athletic events. Beginning in 1977, Roanoke, along with Richmond, was one of the primary neutral sites for the annual basketball game between Virginia Tech and the Virginia Cavaliers. In 2000 the schools started holding these games in campus facilities.\nFrom 1913, Roanoke played host to an annual football game between Virginia Tech and the Virginia Military Institute, first at Maher Field and then in the newly constructed Victory Stadium starting in 1942. The game was moved to Thanksgiving Day beginning in the early 1920s and was a holiday mainstay in the city until 1971.\nRoanoke's location among the Blue Ridge Mountains makes it a destination for other sporting events. Every year since 2010 (barring 2020, when it was held virtually due to the COVID-19 pandemic), the Roanoke Outside Foundation has put on the Blue Ridge Marathon, which is regarded as difficult due to its considerable elevation changes. The USA Cycling Amateur Road National Championships were held in the city and surrounding areas in 2022 and 2023, and an Ironman 70.3 triathlon event brought competitors to the region from 2021\u20132023.\nParks and recreation.\nThere are 60 parks within Roanoke's city limits, and its parks and recreation department is responsible for nearly 14,000 acres of public land. Highland Park in the historic Old Southwest neighborhood is the city's oldest, having been purchased in 1902 when the former farm was still distant from the settled part of the city.370 Elmwood Park in downtown Roanoke became the city's second in 1911.370 It features a Japanese magnolia tree that was acquired by Commodore Matthew Perry during an expedition to Japan and donated in 1857 to the former owner of the park. As of 2023[ [update]] Elmwood holds the city's main library branch as well as an art walk and a 4,000-seat amphitheater.\nRoanoke features an extensive network of paved greenways for walkers, runners, and cyclists. Though the idea for a publicly owned greenway system can be traced back to a 1907 comprehensive plan for the city, it was not until 1995 that an intergovernmental committee was formed to plan and develop the project. Since that time, of greenways have been built across the Roanoke Valley. As of 2023,[ [update]] the longest continuous stretch runs along the Roanoke River from Salem through Roanoke City to Vinton. Roanoke County is also in the planning stages of extending that same stretch westward into Montgomery County. As of 2023,[ [update]] Roanoke contained over of trails and greenways.\nGovernment.\nLike most cities in Virginia, Roanoke has a council-manager form of government. The city manager maintains the day-to-day operation of the city's government and has the authority to hire and fire city employees. The mayor has little executive authority and is essentially the \"first among equals\" on the Roanoke City Council, though the position wields influence through public appearances and annual State of the City addresses.\nThe city council has six members, not counting the mayor, all of whom are elected on an at-large basis. A proposal for a ward-based council was rejected by Roanoke voters in 1997, but ward system advocates still contend that the at-large system results in a disproportionate number of council members coming from affluent neighborhoods and that electing some or all council members on a ward basis would result in a more equal representation of all areas of the city. The four-year terms of city council members are staggered, with three members elected every two years. The candidate who receives the most votes is designated the vice mayor for the following two years.\nOn June 27, 2016, Sherman P. Lea Sr. took the office of mayor, and he was re-elected to the same position in 2020. The current city manager, Bob Cowell, has been in that position since 2017. Joseph L. Cobb is serving his second term as the city's vice mayor.\nThe city has adopted a budget for the 2024 fiscal year that includes revenues and expenditures totaling $355.4 million, representing a 9.4% increase over the previous year. Local taxes, including real estate, personal property, and sales taxes, are the government's largest source of revenue at over 70% of its intake.\nRoanoke is represented by two members of the Virginia House of Delegates, Sam Rasoul (D-11th) and Chris Head (R-17th), and one member of the Virginia Senate, John Edwards (D-21st). In February 2023, Edwards announced his intention to retire after 28 years in the state senate. The city lies within Virginia congressional district, which also includes Lynchburg and much of the Shenandoah Valley. Since 2019 the district has been represented by Republican Ben Cline.\nRoanoke is one of the few Democratic pockets in the otherwise heavily Republican Southwest Virginia. It has supported the Democratic Party nominee in every election since 1988 and in all but one election since 1976.\nEducation.\nTwo four-year private institutions are situated in neighboring localities \u2013 Roanoke College in the city of Salem, and Hollins University in Roanoke County. Virginia Tech and Radford University's main campuses are located in the nearby New River Valley, and both of those schools have partnered with Carilion Clinic, the regional nonprofit health care organization based in Roanoke, to create medical colleges in the city. Virginia Tech Carilion School of Medicine and Research Institute was founded in 2007, and Radford University Carilion was established in 2019. The Roanoke Higher Education Center opened in 2000 in the former Norfolk and Western General Office Building\u2013North, and provides over 150 programs ranging from high school equivalent degrees to doctorates. Virginia Western Community College is located in the city and provides associate degrees as well as facilitated transfers to many four-year colleges in the area. ECPI University, a private for-profit institution, also has a campus located in Roanoke.\nThe local public school division is Roanoke City Public Schools. The two general enrollment public high schools in the city are Patrick Henry High School, located in the Raleigh Court area, and William Fleming High School, located in Northwest Roanoke.\nA prominent parochial school in the city is Roanoke Catholic, which dates to 1889 and shares its campus with the Basilica of St. Andrew. Private non-parochial schools in Roanoke include Community High School of Arts and Academics. The school was first housed in the Jefferson Center before moving to its current location in downtown Roanoke in 2011.\nMedia.\nThe city's daily newspaper, \"The Roanoke Times\", has been published since 1886. As of 2023,[ [update]] weekday and Sunday circulation both average around 25,000. In 2013 the paper was sold to Berkshire Hathaway, which in turn sold its BH Media holdings \u2013 \"The Roanoke Times\" included \u2013 to Lee Enterprises in 2020. Beth Macy, author of the bestselling book \"Dopesick\" which was adapted into a 2021 Hulu miniseries of the same name, was a reporter at \"The Roanoke Times\" for 25 years. \"The Roanoke Star\" and \"Cardinal News\" are independent digital newspapers that have sought to fill the local news coverage gap resulting from the purchase of \"The Roanoke Times\" by an out-of-state publisher and its subsequent reduction in staff.\nThe weekly \"Roanoke Tribune\" covers the city's African-American community. The publication was founded in 1939 by the Rev. Fleming Alexander and since 1971 has been owned and edited by his daughter. \"The Roanoker\" is the area's bi-monthly lifestyle magazine and has been published since 1972 by Leisure Publishing, which also puts out the bi-monthly \"Blue Ridge Country\" magazine.\nRoanoke and Lynchburg are grouped in the same television market, which as of 2022[ [update]] ranks #71 in the United States with 456,390 households. The city's major network stations include NBC affiliate WSLS-TV 10, CBS affiliate WDBJ 7, Fox affiliate WFXR, PBS member WBRA-TV, and ION Television affiliate WPXR-TV. ABC affiliate WSET-TV 13 and CW affiliate WWCW are licensed to Lynchburg; MyNetworkTV affiliate WZBJ is licensed to Danville. The Roanoke-Lynchburg radio market has a population of 451,600 and is ranked number 122 in the United States as of 2022[ [update]]. iHeartMedia owns many stations in the area, including WROV, WJJS, WYYD, and WSTV.\nThe reality television show \"Salvage Dawgs\" was based out of Roanoke. The show, which ran for 11 seasons on the DIY Network, followed the owners and employees of the architectural salvage company Black Dog Salvage as they located and acquired pieces for their store. Some of the company's projects in Roanoke itself were highlighted on the show, including their part in the renovation of Fire Station No. 1.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nInterstate 581, the primary north\u2013south roadway in the city, connects Roanoke to Interstate 81 to the north. Interstate 581 is a concurrency with U.S. Route 220, which continues as the Roy L. Webber Expressway from downtown Roanoke, where the I-581 designation ends, south to State Route 419. Route 220 continues south to connect Roanoke to Martinsville, Virginia, and Greensboro, North Carolina; a proposed extension of Interstate 73 into Roanoke from North Carolina, running partially concurrent with and parallel to US 220, has long been stalled due to funding issues.\nThe primary east\u2013west roadway through the city is U.S. Route 460, named Melrose Avenue and Orange Avenue. Route 460 connects Roanoke to Lynchburg to the east and Christiansburg to the west. U.S. Route 11 passes through the city, primarily as Brandon Avenue and Williamson Road, which was a center of automotive-based commercial development after World War II. Other major roads include U.S. Route 221, State Route 117 (known as Peters Creek Road) and State Route 101 (known as Hershberger Road). The Blue Ridge Parkway also briefly runs adjacent to the city border.\nThe Roanoke\u2013Blacksburg Regional Airport is located in the northern part of the city. It is the primary passenger and cargo airport for Southwest Virginia. The airport is served by American Airlines, United Airlines, Delta and Allegiant Air. Due to the facility's size, location in the mountains, and proximity to Andrews Air Force Base, it is often used as a pilot training destination for the Special Air Mission fleet that serves as Air Force One and Two when the nation's leaders are aboard.\nWhile Roanoke is known for its rail history, low ridership numbers led Amtrak to discontinue passenger rail service to the city in 1979. Beginning in 2011, Roanoke funded a bus service, the Smart Way Connector, to connect riders to the Amtrak station in Lynchburg as well as to show Amtrak that there was once again a demand for the service in Roanoke. In August 2013, it was announced that Amtrak's \"Northeast Regional\" service would be extended from Lynchburg by 2017. On October 31, 2017, after 38 years without passenger rail service, Amtrak resumed service to Roanoke. The service has been successful enough that a second daily train to Roanoke was added in 2022.\nDespite Norfolk Southern's relocation of its corporate headquarters out of the city, Roanoke is still a major hub in the company's freight rail system. The railway's Pocahontas Division, consisting of over of track, is headquartered just outside of downtown Roanoke, and though the volume of coal passing through the city has declined in recent decades, 70 million tons of freight are shipped on the area's railroads annually.\nThe Valley Metro provides bus service to the city of Roanoke and surrounding areas. In June 2023, the service began operating out of a new facility on Third Street in downtown Roanoke, built to replace the aging Campbell Court station. Valley Metro also offers bus service to Blacksburg, Christiansburg and Virginia Tech via its Smart Way service, as well as the Ferrum Express, a free shuttle that runs between downtown Roanoke and Ferrum College in nearby Rocky Mount.\nThe 21st century has seen Roanoke put considerable resources towards improving its cycling infrastructure. In addition to its extensive paved greenway network, Roanoke has added 43 miles of marked bike lanes along its major roads. In recent years, the city has put millions of dollars towards pedestrian safety improvements, including lane reductions on busy roads, audible signals, and additional street lighting. Roanoke is served by RIDE Solutions, a regional transportation demand management agency that provides carpool matching, cycling advocacy, transit assistance and remote work assistance to businesses and citizens in the region.\nUtilities.\nRoanoke is supplied electricity by the Appalachian Power Company, an American Electric Power division. Appalachian Power serves roughly 500,000 people in Western Virginia and another 500,000 in West Virginia and Tennessee. The area's water and wastewater operations are managed by the Western Virginia Water Authority. That organization was founded in 2004 with the consolidation of the water utilities of Roanoke City and Roanoke County, under the logic that the location of watersheds should determine the management of local resources rather than government boundaries. The Water Authority has since taken on the water-based utilities of Franklin and Botetourt Counties as well as the towns of Boones Mill and Vinton.\nHealthcare.\nRoanoke is the primary center for healthcare in Western Virginia, serving an estimated one million people. Carilion Clinic, a non-profit healthcare group, is the region's largest provider with over 750 physicians spread across eight hospitals. The region is also served by the Lewis-Gale Medical Center, a 521-bed facility established in Roanoke in 1911 and now located in Salem,309 as well as a Veterans Affairs Medical Center serving over 100,000 military veterans in the region, also located in Salem.\nSister cities.\nRoanoke has six sister cities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn February 2023, it was announced that the city was officially pausing its sister city affiliation with Pskov, Russia, due to the continuing Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75797", "revid": "1318572326", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75797", "title": "Pacific Northwest National Laboratory", "text": "Research institute\nPacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) is one of the United States Department of Energy national laboratories, managed by the Department of Energy's (DOE) Office of Science. The main campus of the laboratory is in Richland, Washington, with additional research facilities around the country.\nOriginally named the Pacific Northwest Laboratory, PNL was established in 1965 when research and development at the Hanford Site was separated from other Hanford operations. In 1995, the laboratory was renamed the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL).\nResearch facilities.\nThe Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory (EMSL) is a U.S. Department of Energy national scientific user facility. EMSL provides researchers around the world with integrated capabilities in oxide and mineral interface chemistry, high-performance computing and computational chemistry software, mass spectrometry, high-field magnetic resonance, and subsurface flow and transport research.\nThe Bioproducts, Sciences, and Engineering Laboratory (BSEL) is a joint effort between Washington State University and PNNL, and is located on the WSU-Tri-Cities campus. Within BSEL, researchers are developing technology for converting agricultural byproducts into chemicals for products like plastics, solvents, fibers, pharmaceuticals, and fuel additives.\nResearchers at PNNL's Radiochemical Processing Laboratory are developing processes to advance the cleanup of radiological and hazardous wastes; the processing and disposal of nuclear fuels; and the production and delivery of medical isotopes.\nThree research facilities were constructed on PNNL's Richland, Washington campus to partially replace laboratory and office space PNNL had been using on the south end of the nearby Hanford Site.\nThe Physical Sciences Facility, a federally funded research complex, houses research in materials science, radiation detection, and ultra-trace analysis.\nThe privately funded Computational Sciences Facility and Biological Sciences Facility house about 310 staff who support PNNL's energy, environmental, national security, and fundamental science research missions. These two new facilities opened in 2009. The CSF contains scientific capabilities in information analytics, high-performance computing, cyber security and bioinformatics. The BSF focuses on bioenergy, environmental and soil remediation and includes systems biology, microbial and cellular biology and analytical interfacial chemistry.\nThe Electricity Infrastructure Operations Center at PNNL combines software, real-time power grid data and computation into a control room setting. The ideas and technologies developed in the EIOC address better management of the power grid. The EIOC also is available to utilities, vendors, government agencies and universities interested in research, development or training.\nPNNL-Sequim (2022\u2013present), previously known as the Marine and Coastal Research Laboratory (2021) and the Marine Sciences Laboratory (1966\u20132021), located at Sequim, Washington, is the DOE's only marine laboratory. PNNL-Sequim provides analytical and general-purpose laboratories, as well as wet or support laboratories supplied with heated and cooled freshwater and seawater. More than 20 engineers and scientists work on coastal restoration and security projects, from reviving salmon habitat to research on how shellfish could detect a bioterrorist attack. PNNL-Sequim also operates a research vessel.\nOther PNNL research facilities include the following:\nAwards and honors.\nPNNL staff have received numerous awards and recognition. These achievements include 126 R&amp;D100 Awards, 102 Federal Laboratory Consortium Awards, seven E.\u00a0O.\u00a0Lawrence Awards, and two Department of Energy Office of Science Distinguished Scientist Fellowships. PNNL staff serve as editors-in-chief for scientific journals, hold office in national and international technical societies, and have been granted Guggenheim fellowships, Humboldt Research Awards, and society medals. Staff have been elected to the rank of fellow in national societies including, but not limited to, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, American Physical Society, the Materials Research Society, and the American Chemical Society.\nHistory.\nPNNL was established in 1965 but traces its origins to World War II, in the establishment of the Hanford Site in 1943. Plutonium production for the Manhattan Project required extensive research and development activities at the Hanford Site. The General Electric Company began operating the site in 1946 and consolidated R&amp;D into the new Hanford Laboratory in 1953. After GE ended its contract in 1963 to avoid conflicts with its growing commercial nuclear business, the Atomic Energy Commission split the Hanford contract among several organizations, awarding the laboratory contract to Ohio-based Battelle Memorial Institute. Battelle took over operations on January 4, 1965, and named it the Pacific Northwest Laboratory.\nInitially, PNL's research emphasized nuclear energy and non-destructive uses for nuclear materials, including the design for the Fast Flux Test Facility to test fuels and materials for the AEC's commercial nuclear power program. However, PNL scientists and engineers also worked on nongovernment projects. Jim Russell patented a method for optical digital recording and playback, eventually used in compact discs and digital video discs, while a Senior Scientist at PNL in the 1960s and 1970s. In 1969, NASA chose PNL to measure the concentration of both solar and galactic cosmic-ray-produced radionuclides in lunar material collected from the entire Apollo program.\nIn the 1970s, PNL expanded into energy, environment, health and national security research. The shift occurred as the AEC was replaced by the Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA) in 1974 and the Department of Energy in 1977. During this period, researchers at PNL developed vitrification, a process to lock hazardous waste inside glass, and an acoustic holography technique allowing medical personnel to view internal organs, detect fetal abnormalities, and locate blood clots without an operation.\nIn the 1980s, PNL researchers introduced the first portable blood irradiator for leukemia treatments, and worked with the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle under a cooperative research and development agreement to develop safe and effective protocols for its use. In the mid-1980s, PNL became one of the U.S. Department of Energy's multiprogram laboratories.\nIn 1995, the laboratory was renamed the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. The Laboratory's global environmental and nuclear nonproliferation work moved to the forefront during the 1990s. The Pacific Northwest Center for Global Security was established to coordinate nuclear nonproliferation programs, research and policy work within the Laboratory and throughout the region. The Material Identification System and the Ultrasonic Pulse Echo instrument, technologies developed at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, were provided to customs inspectors in Eastern Europe and former Soviet Union republics to reduce smuggling and terrorism. Researchers also studied global climate models, including cloud formation and radiative properties of clouds. In addition, the Laboratory created energy efficiency centers to promote economic growth while mitigating its harmful effects and participating on the United Nations panel on climate change assessments.\nIn 2007, more than 20 PNNL scientists were recognized for their contributions to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) that received the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize in equal parts with former Vice President Al Gore.\nTechnologies to counter acts of terrorism have progressed at PNNL in this decade with the expansion of radiation portal monitoring technology developed at the Laboratory. This technology is used at ports of entry around the country to scan for and detect the presence of nuclear and radiological materials. In 2004, The U.S. Department of Homeland Security established the National Visualization and Analytics Center (NVAC) to advance visualization research using computer technology to enable humans to visually synthesize and derive insight from massive amounts of information to help the nation predict and respond to manmade and natural disasters and terrorist incidents.\nPNNL scientists are designing catalysts to use solar energy to power reactions that turn water into hydrogen. They are incorporating the concepts of energy matching and proton relays to design inexpensive nickel and cobalt containing molecular complexes that catalyze that reaction. DOE has awarded $22.5 million over five years for PNNL's new Center for Molecular Electrocatalysis, where scientists will study catalysts that convert electrical energy into chemical bonds and back again.\nDirectors.\nThe following persons served as the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory director:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75798", "revid": "1315785910", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75798", "title": "Roanoke College", "text": "Private liberal arts college in Salem, Virginia, US\nRoanoke College is a private liberal arts college in Salem, Virginia. It has approximately 2,000 students who represent approximately 40 states and 30 countries. The college offers 35 majors, 57 minors and concentrations, and pre-professional programs. Roanoke awards bachelor's degrees in arts, science, and business administration and is one of 280 colleges with a chapter of the Phi Beta Kappa honor society.\nRoanoke is an NCAA Division III school competing in the Old Dominion Athletic Conference. The college fields varsity teams in eleven men's and ten women's sports. Roanoke's athletic nickname is Maroons and the mascot is Rooney, a maroon-tailed hawk.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nA boys' preparatory school was founded by Lutheran pastors David F. Bittle and Christopher C. Baughmann. Originally located in Augusta County near Staunton, the school was named Virginia Institute until chartered on January 30, 1845, as Virginia Collegiate Institute. In 1847, the institute moved to Salem which was developing into a center of commerce and transportation in the region; the school moved all of its possessions in a single covered wagon. The Virginia General Assembly granted a college charter on March 14, 1853 and approved the name Roanoke College, chosen in honor of the Roanoke Valley. Bittle then served as the college's first president.\nRoanoke was one of the few Southern colleges that remained open throughout the American Civil War. The student body was organized into a corps of cadets and fought with Confederate forces near Salem in December 1863. The students were outmatched and quickly forced to surrender, but the Union commander paroled them and allowed them to return to their studies. The college company was formally mustered into the Confederate Army, Virginia Reserves, on September 1, 1864, but the students did not see combat before the war ended.\nInternational students.\nRoanoke enrolled its first international students in the late 19th century; the first Mexican student in 1876 and the first Japanese student in 1888. The first Korean to graduate from an American college or university, Surh Beung Kiu, graduated in 1898.\nCoeducation.\nRoanoke became coeducational in 1930. A small number of non-degree-seeking women, mostly from Elizabeth College in Salem, were previously enrolled. Originally named Roanoke Women's College, Elizabeth was a sister Lutheran women's college destroyed by fire in 1921 and closed; the female students finished the 1921\u201322 academic year at Roanoke.\nRoanoke opened its first women's residence hall, Smith Hall, in 1941; it has a prominent position on the John R. Turbyfill Front Quad. The Roanoke Women's College campus is its Elizabeth Campus, located approximately two miles from the Roanoke main campus.\nRoanoke adopted the alumnae of Marion College, a sister Lutheran women's college in Marion, Virginia, when it closed in 1967. Marion Hall, a residence hall constructed in 1968, honors the college and its alumnae.\nNational championships.\nRoanoke athletic teams have won two national championships: the 1972 NCAA College Division men's basketball championship and the 1978 Division II men's lacrosse championship. Roanoke's third national championship occurred in 2001 when student Casey Smith won an individual championship in the Division III women's 10,000m track and field event. In 2009, student Robin Yerkes secured Roanoke's fourth national championship when she won an individual championship in the Division III women's 400m track and field event.\nMark Samuel won a D3 National Wrestling Championship in March 2025\nSesquicentennial.\nRoanoke experienced exceptional growth in the 1980s and 1990s. Two campaign plans, the 1992 Sesquicentennial Campaign and the 2002 Plan, also known as \"The Difference\", were successfully completed with over $150 million raised. The campaigns financed the renovation and construction of numerous facilities including the library, the student center, and the arts and performance center.\nRoanoke's tenth president, and first female president, Sabine O'Hara, took office in 2004.\nLutheran heritage.\nEstablished in 1842, Roanoke is the second-oldest (Gettysburg College is the oldest) Lutheran-affiliated college in the United States and is associated with three synods of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America: the Virginia Synod, the Metropolitan Washington, D.C. Synod, and the West Virginia\u2013Western Maryland Synod. The Virginia Synod is headquartered in Bittle Hall, the college's first library now occupied by the Bishop of the Virginia Synod.\nHistorically, the college has had a small Lutheran population. Roanoke's student body represents numerous religious denominations; Roman Catholicism is the most prevalent, and Lutherans total less than ten percent.\nAcademics.\nAdmissions.\n\"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" evaluates Roanoke admissions as \"selective\". For 2023, the middle range scores of enrolled students were 3.1 to 4.0 GPA, 1150\u20131270 SAT, and 22\u201328 ACT. In 2023, Roanoke awarded $36 million in merit-based scholarships, awarded financial aid for those completing the FAFSA in an average of $32,000 for each student, and awards scholarships in music, theater, art, as well as fellowships in areas of student interest.\nRankings.\nFor 2024, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranked Roanoke tied for #130 out of 211 National Liberal Arts Colleges and #167 in Top Performers on Social Mobility.\nAccreditation and courses of study.\nRoanoke is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools to award bachelor's degrees in arts, science, and business administration. In addition, the business administration program is accredited by the Association of Collegiate Business Schools and Programs; the chemistry program is accredited by the American Chemical Society; the teacher licensure program is accredited by the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation; and the athletic training program is accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs.\nRoanoke offers 35 majors with 57 minors and concentrations. The college also offers a dual degree engineering program that leads to a Roanoke liberal arts degree and an engineering degree from Virginia Tech.\nDepartments and programs.\nRoanoke has 16 academic departments:\nPre-Professional programs.\nRoanoke has eight pre-professional programs:\nHonors program.\nEach year, Roanoke accepts approximately 35 incoming freshmen and first-term sophomores to become members of the Honors Program. These students complete the Honors Curriculum in lieu of the Roanoke College Core Curriculum. Honors students are offered numerous special learning experiences including plays, lectures, concerts, and service projects.\nRoanoke College Seal.\nThe blue shield on the seal emblazoned with a gold cross represents the College's strong history and relationship with the Christian church. The white dogwood flower represents the Commonwealth of Virginia. The Lamp above symbolizes the lamp of knowledge. The motto, \"Palmam Qui Meruit Ferat\", means in English, \"Let he who earns the palm bear it\". The palm is symbolic of the honor-laden palm leaf given during antiquity in Greece.\nStudent body.\nRoanoke has approximately 2,000 students who represent approximately 40 states and 30 countries. Approximately 50% of the student body is from Virginia; the majority of out-of-state students are from Connecticut, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, and Pennsylvania.\nFaculty.\nRoanoke has a tenure-track faculty of 164 (95% hold the highest degrees in their fields) plus a variety of adjunct professors selected from the business, political, and other communities for their subject matter expertise.\nLibrary.\nRoanoke's Fintel Library, named after Norman Fintel, eighth president of the college, has a collection of over half a million items. Roanoke and nearby Hollins University have a reciprocal borrowing agreement, expanding the size of the library collection by another 300,000 items.\nStudent life.\nStudent organizations.\nRoanoke has over 100 student organizations that provide learning experiences outside the classroom. Students may choose from academic, cultural, religious, service, and social organizations including nine Greek organizations.\nThe Student Government Association at Roanoke exists to give students a voice in the administration. It is the highest level student organization. It is made up of an executive board (President, Vice President, Secretary, Treasurer, and Attorney General) and the Senate (41 members).\nStudent publications and media opportunities include the \"Brackety-Ack\" campus newspaper, a literary magazine titled \"On Concept's Edge\", the \"Roanoke Review\" literary journal, and the student-operated radio station named WRKE-LP. Intramural sports are also offered.\nGreek life.\nRoanoke has recognized chapters of nine social and two service Greek organizations. The Greek organizations operate in college-owned housing. Roanoke's original fraternity row has been converted into residence halls. Roanoke's Greek organizations have a prominent role on campus, but are not dominant; approximately 25% of the Roanoke student body participates in Greek life. Aside from the formal and official fraternities, undergrounds are also present.\nCampus.\nQuadrangles.\nRoanoke's main campus is relatively self-contained with most academic buildings and residence halls built around three quadrangles: the John R. Turbyfill Front Quad, the Back Quad (central campus), and the Athletic Quad, which surrounds the college's newest athletic facilities and residence halls. The campus is lined with brick sidewalks and has been recognized for its landscaping and views of the surrounding mountains. The largest Rock Elm in the United States is located near the library. The only Alice Aycock sculpture in Virginia is on the Back Quad.\nArchitecture.\nThe campus architecture is a blend of traditional collegiate and modern styles. The Administration Building, constructed in 1848 with bricks made on-site, and six other buildings, Miller Hall, Trout Hall, Bittle Hall, Monterey House, West Hall, and the Old Salem Post Office are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nNational Register of Historic Places.\nSeven college buildings are listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The buildings, with year of construction, are:\nResidence halls.\nApproximately 70% of the student body resides on campus.\nPresident's House.\nThe President's House is in a residential district approximately one-half-mile north of the Roanoke campus on North Market Street. The colonial revival mansion, one of the largest private homes in the area, was constructed in the late 1930s. It was purchased in the mid-1950s by John P. Fishwick, president of the Norfolk and Western Railway and a Roanoke &amp; Harvard Law School alumnus, and was acquired by the college in 1968.\nIn April 2011, the President's House and its garden were opened to the public during Virginia's Historic Garden Week. Selection of sites to participate is very competitive; only five Roanoke Valley residences were featured in 2011.\nElizabeth Campus.\nAdditional college facilities, mostly residence halls and athletic fields, are located on the site of Elizabeth College, a Lutheran women's college that closed in 1922. The area, approximately two miles east of the main campus, is referred to as Elizabeth Campus. Houses for Kappa Alpha Order, Pi Kappa Alpha, Pi Lambda Phi and Sigma Chi are on Elizabeth Campus along with Elizabeth Hall, a large residence hall with apartments for non-freshman students.\nCollege Avenue \u2013 Main Street.\nRoanoke acquired three office buildings on College Avenue across from West Hall in 2005\u201306. The buildings have been renovated to provide classroom and office space for various college departments.&lt;ref name=\"http://roanoke.edu/x19936.xml\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; With the acquisitions, the Roanoke campus occupies both sides of College Avenue from Main Street north to the traditional campus entrance.\nIn 2013, Roanoke purchased two Main Street buildings: the Bank Building, located on the corner of College Avenue and Main Street across from West Hall, and the Old Salem Post Office, located on the corner of Main and Market Streets. Roanoke had leased the bank building for several years preceding the purchase and will continue to use it for academic purposes. The post office building, listed on the National Register of Historic Places, is the seventh building on the Roanoke campus listed on the national register; it will be renovated for academic use.\nRecent construction.\nRoanoke opened a new 200-bed residence hall in 2012; the building, the college's second LEED-certified building, completes the third quadrangle along with Kerr Stadium and Caldwell, Beamer, and Ritter Halls. The college previously completed an eight-court competition tennis complex on the Elizabeth Campus and a large parking lot on the main campus; the projects replaced existing facilities and made land available for the new residence hall. In addition, McClanahan Hall on the Elizabeth Campus reopened in 2012 as the Sigma Chi house; the Sigma Chi house on the main campus was razed and is now green space.\nRoanoke's most recent major project opened in 2016; the Morris M. Cregger Center is a multi-purpose athletic and recreation center with a 2,500 seat performance arena (basketball and volleyball), a 200-meter indoor track and field facility, athletic department and faculty offices, classrooms, fitness facilities, and a sports medicine clinic. The center is on the north side of campus; Bowman Hall, a large residence hall that opened in 1965, was razed to make land available. Kerr Stadium was incorporated as a part of the western facade so the two facilities form a unified complex; the center overlooks the stadium.\nRoanoke, in anticipation of future growth, has purchased a significant number of private homes on Market Street adjacent to campus, which will provide land for expansion.\nAthletics.\nRoanoke athletic teams are the Maroons. The college is a member of the Division III level of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), primarily competing in the Old Dominion Athletic Conference (ODAC) since the 1976\u201377 academic year.\nRoanoke competes in 23 intercollegiate varsity sports: Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, golf, lacrosse, soccer, swimming, tennis, track &amp; field (indoor and outdoor), volleyball (starting in 2022\u201323) and wrestling; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, field hockey, lacrosse, soccer, softball, swimming, tennis, track &amp; field (indoor and outdoor) and volleyball.\nThe college's athletic colors are maroon and gray. Roanoke is particularly noted for the strength of its men's and women's lacrosse programs and women's track and field.\nIn June 2023, it was announced that Roanoke would be reinstating the college's football program, which has not played since 1942. The Maroons will begin play as NCAA Division III Independents in 2024 becoming full ODAC members in 2025.\nAccomplishments.\nRoanoke teams have won two national championships: the 1972 NCAA College Division men's basketball championship and the 1978 Division II men's lacrosse championship. In 2001, Roanoke student Casey Smith won an individual national championship in the Division III women's 10,000m track and field event. In 2009, student Robin Yerkes secured Roanoke's fourth national championship when she won an individual championship in the Division III women's 400m track and field event. Yerkes is the most decorated athlete ever to graduate from Roanoke, earning 12 All-American honors in multiple events. In 2025, Mark Samuel won the NCAA Division III Wrestling Championship.\nRoanoke teams have won 101 conference championships as of May 2013 (47 in men's sports, 54 in women's sports) since the college joined the ODAC as a founding member in 1976. Roanoke has won more conference championships than any other ODAC school in men's lacrosse with 18 titles and women's basketball with 13 titles. Roanoke, Hampden\u2013Sydney College, and Randolph-Macon College are tied for the most conference championships in men's basketball with 10 titles each.\nRoanoke and the railway.\nThe Norfolk and Western Railway, now Norfolk Southern Corporation, has provided career opportunities for many Roanoke alumni; the NWR was headquartered in Roanoke until 1982 and is a major employer in western Virginia. Roanoke graduates who have advanced to leadership positions include Stuart T. Saunders and John Fishwick, former presidents of the NWR; John R. Turbyfill, retired vice-chairman, NSC; John S. Shannon, retired executive vice president, NSC; and William T. Ross Sr., retired assistant vice president, NWR.\nRoanoke has strong historic ties to the railway due in part to its alumni connections. The NWR named a Pullman car \"Roanoke College\" in honor of the college and Fishwick's Salem residence is now the college President's House. Saunders and Turbyfill served as chairman of Roanoke's board of trustees. In 2007, David R. Goode, retired chairman, NSC, endowed Roanoke's Center for Learning and Teaching in honor of his father, sister, and brother-in-law, all Roanoke graduates.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75799", "revid": "20468248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75799", "title": "Metropolitan statistical area", "text": "Type of geographical region in the United States\nIn the United States, a metropolitan statistical area (MSA) is a geographical region with a relatively high population density at its core and close economic ties throughout the region. Such regions are not legally incorporated as a city or town would be and are not legal administrative divisions like counties or separate entities such as states. As a result, sometimes the precise definition of a given metropolitan area will vary between sources. The statistical criteria for a standard metropolitan area were defined in 1949 and redefined as a metropolitan statistical area in 1983.\nDue to suburbanization, the typical metropolitan area is polycentric rather than being centered around a large historic core city such as New York City or Chicago. Some metropolitan areas include more than one large historic core city; examples include the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex, Virginia Beach\u2013Norfolk\u2013Newport News (Hampton Roads), Riverside\u2013San Bernardino (Inland Empire), and Minneapolis\u2013Saint Paul (Twin Cities). \nMSAs are defined by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), which is part of the Executive Office of the President, and are used by the U.S. Census Bureau and other U.S. federal government agencies for statistical purposes.\nDefinitions.\nThe U.S. Office of Management and Budget defines a set of core-based statistical areas (CBSAs) throughout the country, which are composed of counties and county equivalents. \nCBSAs are delineated on the basis of a central contiguous area of relatively high population density, known as an urban area. The counties containing the core urban area are known as the \"central counties\" of the CBSA; these are defined as having at least 50% of their population living in urban areas of at least 10,000 in population. Additional surrounding counties, known as \"outlying counties\", can be included in the CBSA if these counties have strong social and economic ties to the central county or counties as measured by commuting and employment. Outlying counties are included in the CBSA if 25% of the workers living in the county work in the central county or counties, or if 25% of the employment in the county is held by workers who live in the central county or counties.\nAdjacent CBSAs are merged into a single CBSA when the central county or counties of one CBSA qualify as an outlying county or counties to the other CBSAs. One or more CBSAs may be grouped together or combined to form a larger statistical entity known as a combined statistical area (CSA) when the employment interchange measure (EIM) reaches 15% or more.\nCBSAs are subdivided into MSAs (formed around urban areas of at least 50,000 in population) and micropolitan statistical areas (\u03bcSAs), which are CBSAs built around an urban area of at least 10,000 in population but less than 50,000 in population. Some metropolitan areas may include multiple cities below 50,000 people, but combined have over 50,000 people. Previous terms that are no longer used to describe these regions include \"standard metropolitan statistical area\" (SMSA) and \"primary metropolitan statistical area\" (PMSA). Metropolitan statistical areas containing over 2.5 million people can also be further divided into metropolitan divisions.\nOn January 19, 2021, OMB submitted a regulation for public comment that would increase the minimum population needed for an urban area population to be a metropolitan statistical area to be increased from 50,000 to 100,000. It ultimately decided to keep the minimum at 50,000 for the 2020 cycle.\nOn July 21, 2023, the Office of Management and Budget released revised delineations of the various CBSAs in the United States.\nHistory.\nThe Census Bureau created the metropolitan district for the 1910 census as a standardized classification for large urban centers and their surrounding areas. The original threshold for a metropolitan district was 200,000, but was lowered to 100,000 in 1930 and 50,000 in 1940. The metropolitan districts were replaced by standard metropolitan areas (SMAs) in the 1950 census, which were defined by the Bureau of the Budget (now the Office of Management and Budget) and later renamed to standard metropolitan statistical areas (SMAs) in 1959. The modern metropolitan statistical area was created in 1983 amid a large increase in the number of eligible markets, which grew from 172 in 1950 to 288 in 1980; the core based statistical area (CBSA) was introduced in 2000 and defined in 2003 with a minimum population of 10,000 required for micropolitan areas and 50,000 for urban areas.\nUnited States.\nThe 387 MSAs in the United States, including those in all 50 states and the national capital of Washington, D.C. are ranked, including: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPuerto Rico.\nThis lists the six metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) of Puerto Rico including:\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75800", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75800", "title": "United States metropolitan areas", "text": ""}
{"id": "75801", "revid": "44329014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75801", "title": "Denver Metropolitan Area", "text": ""}
{"id": "75802", "revid": "5846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75802", "title": "Consistency", "text": "Non-contradiction of a theory\nIn deductive logic, a consistent theory is one that does not lead to a logical contradiction. A theory formula_1 is consistent if there is no formula formula_2 such that both formula_2 and its negation formula_4 are elements of the set of consequences of formula_1. Let formula_6 be a set of closed sentences (informally \"axioms\") and formula_7 the set of closed sentences provable from formula_6 under some (specified, possibly implicitly) formal deductive system. The set of axioms formula_6 is consistent when there is no formula formula_2 such that formula_11 and formula_12. A \"trivial\" theory (i.e., one which proves every sentence in the language of the theory) is clearly inconsistent. Conversely, in an explosive formal system (e.g., classical or intuitionistic propositional or first-order logics) every inconsistent theory is trivial. Consistency of a theory is a syntactic notion, whose semantic counterpart is satisfiability. A theory is satisfiable if it has a model, i.e., there exists an interpretation under which all axioms in the theory are true. This is what \"consistent\" meant in traditional Aristotelian logic, although in contemporary mathematical logic the term \"satisfiable\" is used instead.\nIn a sound formal system, every satisfiable theory is consistent, but the converse does not hold. If there exists a deductive system for which these semantic and syntactic definitions are equivalent for any theory formulated in a particular deductive logic, the logic is called complete. The completeness of the propositional calculus was proved by Paul Bernays in 1918 and Emil Post in 1921, while the completeness of (first order) predicate calculus was proved by Kurt G\u00f6del in 1930, and consistency proofs for arithmetics restricted with respect to the induction axiom schema were proved by Ackermann (1924), von Neumann (1927) and Herbrand (1931). Stronger logics, such as second-order logic, are not complete.\nA consistency proof is a mathematical proof that a particular theory is consistent. The early development of mathematical proof theory was driven by the desire to provide finitary consistency proofs for all of mathematics as part of Hilbert's program. Hilbert's program was strongly impacted by the incompleteness theorems, which showed that sufficiently strong proof theories cannot prove their consistency (provided that they are consistent).\nAlthough consistency can be proved using model theory, it is often done in a purely syntactical way, without any need to reference some model of the logic. The cut-elimination (or equivalently the normalization of the underlying calculus if there is one) implies the consistency of the calculus: since there is no cut-free proof of falsity, there is no contradiction in general.\nConsistency and completeness in arithmetic and set theory.\nIn theories of arithmetic, such as Peano arithmetic, there is an intricate relationship between the consistency of the theory and its completeness. A theory is complete if, for every formula \u03c6 in its language, at least one of \u03c6 or \u00ac\u03c6 is a logical consequence of the theory.\nPresburger arithmetic is an axiom system for the natural numbers under addition. It is both consistent and complete.\nG\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems show that any sufficiently strong recursively enumerable theory of arithmetic cannot be both complete and consistent. G\u00f6del's theorem applies to the theories of Peano arithmetic (PA) and primitive recursive arithmetic (PRA), but not to Presburger arithmetic.\nMoreover, G\u00f6del's second incompleteness theorem shows that the consistency of sufficiently strong recursively enumerable theories of arithmetic can be tested in a particular way. Such a theory is consistent if and only if it does \"not\" prove a particular sentence, called the G\u00f6del sentence of the theory, which is a formalized statement of the claim that the theory is indeed consistent. Thus the consistency of a sufficiently strong, recursively enumerable, consistent theory of arithmetic can never be proven in that system itself. The same result is true for recursively enumerable theories that can describe a strong enough fragment of arithmetic\u2014including set theories such as Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory (ZF). These set theories cannot prove their own G\u00f6del sentence\u2014provided that they are consistent, which is generally believed.\nBecause consistency of ZF is not provable in ZF, the weaker notion &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;relative consistency is interesting in set theory (and in other sufficiently expressive axiomatic systems). If \"T\" is a theory and \"A\" is an additional axiom, \"T\" + \"A\" is said to be consistent relative to \"T\" (or simply that \"A\" is consistent with \"T\") if it can be proved that\nif \"T\" is consistent then \"T\" + \"A\" is consistent. If both \"A\" and \u00ac\"A\" are consistent with \"T\", then \"A\" is said to be independent of \"T\".\nFirst-order logic.\nNotation.\nIn the following context of mathematical logic, the turnstile symbol formula_13 means \"provable from\". That is, formula_14 reads: \"b\" is provable from \"a\" (in some specified formal system).\nHenkin's theorem.\nLet formula_75 be a set of symbols. Let formula_15 be a maximally consistent set of formula_75-formulas containing witnesses.\nDefine an equivalence relation formula_78 on the set of formula_75-terms by formula_80 if formula_81, where formula_82 denotes equality. Let formula_83 denote the equivalence class of terms containing formula_84; and let formula_85 where formula_86 is the set of terms based on the set of symbols formula_75.\nDefine the formula_75-structure formula_89 over formula_90, also called the term-structure corresponding to formula_15, by:\nDefine a variable assignment formula_101 by formula_102 for each variable formula_41. Let formula_104 be the term interpretation associated with formula_15.\nThen for each formula_75-formula formula_2:\nformula_108 if and only if formula_109\nSketch of proof.\nThere are several things to verify. First, that formula_78 is in fact an equivalence relation. Then, it needs to be verified that (1), (2), and (3) are well defined. This falls out of the fact that formula_78 is an equivalence relation and also requires a proof that (1) and (2) are independent of the choice of formula_112 class representatives. Finally, formula_113 can be verified by induction on formulas.\nModel theory.\nIn ZFC set theory with classical first-order logic, an inconsistent theory formula_1 is one such that there exists a closed sentence formula_2 such that formula_1 contains both formula_2 and its negation formula_118. A consistent theory is one such that the following logically equivalent conditions hold\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
