{"id": "74567", "revid": "16904820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74567", "title": "Dynamic random-access memory", "text": "Type of computer memory\nDynamic random-access memory (dynamic RAM or DRAM) is a type of random-access semiconductor memory that stores each bit of data in a memory cell, usually consisting of a tiny capacitor and a transistor, both typically based on metal\u2013oxide\u2013semiconductor (MOS) technology. While most DRAM memory cell designs use a capacitor and transistor, some only use two transistors. In the designs where a capacitor is used, the capacitor can either be charged or discharged; these two states are taken to represent the two values of a bit, conventionally called 0 and 1. The electric charge on the capacitors gradually leaks away; without intervention the data on the capacitor would soon be lost. To prevent this, DRAM requires an external memory refresh circuit which periodically rewrites the data in the capacitors, restoring them to their original charge. This refresh process is the defining characteristic of dynamic random-access memory, in contrast to static random-access memory (SRAM) which does not require data to be refreshed. Unlike flash memory, DRAM is volatile memory (as opposed to non-volatile memory), since it loses its data quickly when power is removed. However, DRAM does exhibit limited data remanence.\nDRAM typically takes the form of an integrated circuit chip, which can consist of dozens to billions of DRAM memory cells. DRAM chips are widely used in digital electronics where low-cost and high-capacity computer memory is required. One of the largest applications for DRAM is the \"main memory\" (colloquially called the RAM) in modern computers and graphics cards (where the main memory is called the \"graphics memory\"). It is also used in many portable devices and video game consoles. In contrast, SRAM, which is faster and more expensive than DRAM, is typically used where speed is of greater concern than cost and size, such as the cache memories in processors.\nThe need to refresh DRAM demands more complicated circuitry and timing than SRAM. This complexity is offset by the structural simplicity of DRAM memory cells: only one transistor and a capacitor are required per bit, compared to four or six transistors in SRAM. This allows DRAM to reach very high densities with a simultaneous reduction in cost per bit. Refreshing the data consumes power, causing a variety of techniques to be used to manage the overall power consumption. For this reason, DRAM usually needs to operate with a memory controller; the memory controller needs to know DRAM parameters, especially memory timings, to initialize DRAMs, which may be different depending on different DRAM manufacturers and part numbers.\nDRAM had a 47% increase in the price-per-bit in 2017, the largest jump in 30 years since the 45% jump in 1988, while in recent years the price has been going down. In 2018, a \"key characteristic of the DRAM market is that there are currently only three major suppliers \u2014 Micron Technology, SK Hynix and Samsung Electronics\" that are \"keeping a pretty tight rein on their capacity\". There is also Kioxia (previously Toshiba Memory Corporation after 2017 spin-off) which doesn't manufacture DRAM. Other manufacturers make and sell DIMMs (but not the DRAM chips in them), such as Kingston Technology, and some manufacturers that sell stacked DRAM (used e.g. in the fastest supercomputers on the exascale), separately such as Viking Technology. Others sell such integrated into other products, such as Fujitsu into its CPUs, AMD in GPUs, and Nvidia, with HBM2 in some of their GPU chips.\nHistory.\nPrecursors.\nThe cryptanalytic machine code-named \"Aquarius\" used at Bletchley Park during World War II incorporated a hard-wired dynamic memory. Paper tape was read and the characters on it \"were remembered in a dynamic store.\" The store used a large bank of capacitors, which were either charged or not, a charged capacitor representing cross (1) and an uncharged capacitor dot (0). Since the charge gradually leaked away, a periodic pulse was applied to top up those still charged (hence the term 'dynamic')\".\nIn November 1965, Toshiba introduced a bipolar dynamic RAM for its electronic calculator Toscal BC-1411. In 1966, Tomohisa Yoshimaru and Hiroshi Komikawa from Toshiba applied for a Japanese patent of a memory circuit composed of several transistors and a capacitor, in 1967 they applied for a patent in the US.\nThe earliest forms of DRAM mentioned above used bipolar transistors. While it offered improved performance over magnetic-core memory, bipolar DRAM could not compete with the lower price of the then-dominant magnetic-core memory. Capacitors had also been used for earlier memory schemes, such as the drum of the Atanasoff\u2013Berry Computer, the Williams tube and the Selectron tube.\nSingle MOS DRAM.\nIn 1966, Dr. Robert Dennard invented modern DRAM architecture in which there's a single MOS transistor per capacitor, at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, while he was working on MOS memory and was trying to create an alternative to SRAM which required six MOS transistors for each bit of data. While examining the characteristics of MOS technology, he found it was capable of building capacitors, and that storing a charge or no charge on the MOS capacitor could represent the 1 and 0 of a bit, while the MOS transistor could control writing the charge to the capacitor. This led to his development of the single-transistor MOS DRAM memory cell. He filed a patent in 1967, and was granted U.S. patent number https:// in 1968. MOS memory offered higher performance, was cheaper, and consumed less power, than magnetic-core memory. The patent describes the invention: \"Each cell is formed, in one embodiment, using a single field-effect transistor and a single capacitor.\"\nMOS DRAM chips were commercialized in 1969 by Advanced Memory Systems, Inc., of Sunnyvale, CA. This 1024 bit chip was sold to Honeywell, Raytheon, Wang Laboratories, and others.\nThe same year, Honeywell asked Intel to make a DRAM using a three-transistor cell that they had developed. This became the Intel 1102 in early 1970. However, the 1102 had many problems, prompting Intel to begin work on their own improved design, in secrecy to avoid conflict with Honeywell. This became the first commercially available DRAM, the Intel 1103, in October 1970, despite initial problems with low yield until the fifth revision of the masks. The 1103 was designed by Joel Karp and laid out by Pat Earhart. The masks were cut by Barbara Maness and Judy Garcia. MOS memory overtook magnetic-core memory as the dominant memory technology in the early 1970s.\nThe first DRAM with multiplexed row and column address lines was the Mostek MK4096 4\u00a0Kbit DRAM designed by Robert Proebsting and introduced in 1973. This addressing scheme uses the same address pins to receive the low half and the high half of the address of the memory cell being referenced, switching between the two halves on alternating bus cycles. This was a radical advance, effectively halving the number of address lines required, which enabled it to fit into packages with fewer pins, a cost advantage that grew with every jump in memory size. The MK4096 proved to be a very robust design for customer applications. At the 16\u00a0Kbit density, the cost advantage increased; the 16\u00a0Kbit Mostek MK4116 DRAM, introduced in 1976, achieved greater than 75% worldwide DRAM market share. However, as density increased to 64\u00a0Kbit in the early 1980s, Mostek and other US manufacturers were overtaken by Japanese DRAM manufacturers, which dominated the US and worldwide markets during the 1980s and 1990s.\nEarly in 1985, Gordon Moore decided to withdraw Intel from producing DRAM.\nBy 1986, many, but not all, United States chip makers had stopped making DRAMs. Micron Technology and Texas Instruments continued to produce them commercially, and IBM produced them for internal use.\nIn 1985, when 64K DRAM memory chips were the most common memory chips used in computers, and when more than 60 percent of those chips were produced by Japanese companies, semiconductor makers in the United States accused Japanese companies of export dumping for the purpose of driving makers in the United States out of the commodity memory chip business. Prices for the 64K product plummeted to as low as 35 cents apiece from $3.50 within 18 months, with disastrous financial consequences for some U.S. firms. On 4 December 1985 the US Commerce Department's International Trade Administration ruled in favor of the complaint.\nSynchronous dynamic random-access memory (SDRAM) was developed by Samsung. The first commercial SDRAM chip was the Samsung KM48SL2000, which had a capacity of 16Mb, and was introduced in 1992. The first commercial DDR SDRAM (double data rate SDRAM) memory chip was Samsung's 64Mb DDR SDRAM chip, released in 1998.\nLater, in 2001, Japanese DRAM makers accused Korean DRAM manufacturers of dumping.\nIn 2002, US computer makers made claims of DRAM price fixing.\nPrinciples of operation.\nDRAM is usually arranged in a rectangular array of charge storage cells consisting of one capacitor and transistor per data bit. The figure to the right shows a simple example with a four-by-four cell matrix. Some DRAM matrices are many thousands of cells in height and width.\nThe long horizontal lines connecting each row are known as word-lines. Each column of cells is composed of two bit-lines, each connected to every other storage cell in the column (the illustration to the right does not include this important detail). They are generally known as the \"+\" and \"\u2212\" bit lines.\nA sense amplifier is essentially a pair of cross-connected inverters between the bit-lines. The first inverter is connected with input from the + bit-line and output to the \u2212 bit-line. The second inverter's input is from the \u2212 bit-line with output to the + bit-line. This results in positive feedback which stabilizes after one bit-line is fully at its highest voltage and the other bit-line is at the lowest possible voltage.\nTo write to memory.\nTo store data, a row is opened and a given column's sense amplifier is temporarily forced to the desired high or low-voltage state, thus causing the bit-line to charge or discharge the cell storage capacitor to the desired value. Due to the sense amplifier's positive feedback configuration, it will hold a bit-line at stable voltage even after the forcing voltage is removed. During a write to a particular cell, all the columns in a row are sensed simultaneously just as during reading, so although only a single column's storage-cell capacitor charge is changed, the entire row is refreshed (written back in), as illustrated in the figure to the right.\nRefresh rate.\nTypically, manufacturers specify that each row must be refreshed every 64\u00a0ms or less, as defined by the JEDEC standard.\nSome systems refresh every row in a burst of activity involving all rows every 64\u00a0ms. Other systems refresh one row at a time staggered throughout the 64\u00a0ms interval. For example, a system with 213\u00a0=\u00a08,192 rows would require a staggered refresh rate of one row every 7.8\u00a0\u03bcs which is 64\u00a0ms divided by 8,192 rows. A few real-time systems refresh a portion of memory at a time determined by an external timer function that governs the operation of the rest of a system, such as the vertical blanking interval that occurs every 10\u201320\u00a0ms in video equipment.\nThe row address of the row that will be refreshed next is maintained by external logic or a counter within the DRAM. A system that provides the row address (and the refresh command) does so to have greater control over when to refresh and which row to refresh. This is done to minimize conflicts with memory accesses, since such a system has both knowledge of the memory access patterns and the refresh requirements of the DRAM. When the row address is supplied by a counter within the DRAM, the system relinquishes control over which row is refreshed and only provides the refresh command. Some modern DRAMs are capable of self-refresh; no external logic is required to instruct the DRAM to refresh or to provide a row address.\nUnder some conditions, most of the data in DRAM can be recovered even if the DRAM has not been refreshed for several minutes.\nMemory timing.\nMany parameters are required to fully describe the timing of DRAM operation. Here are some examples for two timing grades of asynchronous DRAM, from a data sheet published in 1998:\nThus, the generally quoted number is the /RAS low to valid data out time. This is the time to open a row, settle the sense amplifiers, and deliver the selected column data to the output. This is also the minimum /RAS low time, which includes the time for the amplified data to be delivered back to recharge the cells. The time to read additional bits from an open page is much less, defined by the /CAS to /CAS cycle time. The quoted number is the clearest way to compare between the performance of different DRAM memories, as it sets the slower limit regardless of the row length or page size. Bigger arrays forcibly result in larger bit line capacitance and longer propagation delays, which cause this time to increase as the sense amplifier settling time is dependent on both the capacitance as well as the propagation latency. This is countered in modern DRAM chips by instead integrating many more complete DRAM arrays within a single chip, to accommodate more capacity without becoming too slow.\nWhen such a RAM is accessed by clocked logic, the times are generally rounded up to the nearest clock cycle. For example, when accessed by a 100\u00a0MHz state machine (i.e. a 10\u00a0ns clock), the 50\u00a0ns DRAM can perform the first read in five clock cycles, and additional reads within the same page every two clock cycles. This was generally described as \"5-2-2-2\" timing, as bursts of four reads within a page were common.\nWhen describing synchronous memory, timing is described by clock cycle counts separated by hyphens. These numbers represent \"t\"CL-\"t\"RCD-\"t\"RP-\"t\"RAS in multiples of the DRAM clock cycle time. Note that this is half of the data transfer rate when double data rate signaling is used. JEDEC standard PC3200 timing is 3-4-4-8 with a 200\u00a0MHz clock, while premium-priced high performance PC3200 DDR DRAM DIMM might be operated at 2-2-2-5 timing.\nMinimum random access time has improved from \"t\"RAC\u00a0=\u00a050\u00a0ns to \"t\"RCD + \"t\"CL = 22.5\u00a0ns, and even the premium 20\u00a0ns variety is only 2.5 times faster than the asynchronous DRAM. CAS latency has improved even less, from \"t\"CAC = 13\u00a0ns to 10\u00a0ns. However, the DDR3 memory does achieve 32 times higher bandwidth; due to internal pipelining and wide data paths, it can output two words every 1.25\u00a0ns , while the EDO DRAM can output one word per \"t\"PC\u00a0=\u00a020\u00a0ns (50\u00a0Mword/s).\nMemory cell design.\nEach bit of data in a DRAM is stored as a positive or negative electrical charge in a capacitive structure. The structure providing the capacitance, as well as the transistors that control access to it, is collectively referred to as a \"DRAM cell\". They are the fundamental building block in DRAM arrays. Multiple DRAM memory cell variants exist, but the most commonly used variant in modern DRAMs is the one-transistor, one-capacitor (1T1C) cell. The transistor is used to admit current into the capacitor during writes, and to discharge the capacitor during reads. The access transistor is designed to maximize drive strength and minimize transistor-transistor leakage (Kenner, p.\u00a034). \nThe capacitor has two terminals, one of which is connected to its access transistor, and the other to either ground or VCC/2. In modern DRAMs, the latter case is more common, since it allows faster operation. In modern DRAMs, a voltage of +VCC/2 across the capacitor is required to store a logic one; and a voltage of \u2212VCC/2 across the capacitor is required to store a logic zero. The resultant charge is formula_1, where \"Q\" is the charge in coulombs and \"C\" is the capacitance in farads.\nReading or writing a logic one requires the wordline be driven to a voltage greater than the sum of VCC and the access transistor's threshold voltage (VTH). This voltage is called \"VCC pumped\" (VCCP). The time required to discharge a capacitor thus depends on what logic value is stored in the capacitor. A capacitor containing logic one begins to discharge when the voltage at the access transistor's gate terminal is above VCCP. If the capacitor contains a logic zero, it begins to discharge when the gate terminal voltage is above VTH.\nCapacitor design.\nUp until the mid-1980s, the capacitors in DRAM cells were co-planar with the access transistor (they were constructed on the surface of the substrate), thus they were referred to as \"planar\" capacitors. The drive to increase both density and, to a lesser extent, performance, required denser designs. This was strongly motivated by economics, a major consideration for DRAM devices, especially commodity DRAMs. The minimization of DRAM cell area can produce a denser device and lower the cost per bit of storage. Starting in the mid-1980s, the capacitor was moved above or below the silicon substrate in order to meet these objectives. DRAM cells featuring capacitors above the substrate are referred to as \"stacked\" or \"folded plate\" capacitors. Those with capacitors buried beneath the substrate surface are referred to as \"trench\" capacitors. In the 2000s, manufacturers were sharply divided by the type of capacitor used in their DRAMs and the relative cost and long-term scalability of both designs have been the subject of extensive debate. The majority of DRAMs, from major manufactures such as Hynix, Micron Technology, Samsung Electronics use the stacked capacitor structure, whereas smaller manufacturers such Nanya Technology use the trench capacitor structure (Jacob, pp.\u00a0355\u2013357).\nThe capacitor in the stacked capacitor scheme is constructed above the surface of the substrate. The capacitor is constructed from an oxide-nitride-oxide (ONO) dielectric sandwiched in between two layers of polysilicon plates (the top plate is shared by all DRAM cells in an IC), and its shape can be a rectangle, a cylinder, or some other more complex shape. There are two basic variations of the stacked capacitor, based on its location relative to the bitline\u2014capacitor-under-bitline (CUB) and capacitor-over-bitline (COB). In the former, the capacitor is underneath the bitline, which is usually made of metal, and the bitline has a polysilicon contact that extends downwards to connect it to the access transistor's source terminal. In the latter, the capacitor is constructed above the bitline, which is almost always made of polysilicon, but is otherwise identical to the COB variation. The advantage the COB variant possesses is the ease of fabricating the contact between the bitline and the access transistor's source as it is physically close to the substrate surface. However, this requires the active area to be laid out at a 45-degree angle when viewed from above, which makes it difficult to ensure that the capacitor contact does not touch the bitline. CUB cells avoid this, but suffer from difficulties in inserting contacts in between bitlines, since the size of features this close to the surface are at or near the minimum feature size of the process technology (Kenner, pp.\u00a033\u201342).\nThe trench capacitor is constructed by etching a deep hole into the silicon substrate. The substrate volume surrounding the hole is then heavily doped to produce a buried n+ plate with low resistance. A layer of oxide-nitride-oxide dielectric is grown or deposited, and finally the hole is filled by depositing doped polysilicon, which forms the top plate of the capacitor. The top of the capacitor is connected to the access transistor's drain terminal via a polysilicon strap (Kenner, pp.\u00a042\u201344). A trench capacitor's depth-to-width ratio in DRAMs of the mid-2000s can exceed 50:1 (Jacob, p.\u00a0357).\nTrench capacitors have numerous advantages. Since the capacitor is buried in the bulk of the substrate instead of lying on its surface, the area it occupies can be minimized to what is required to connect it to the access transistor's drain terminal without decreasing the capacitor's size, and thus capacitance (Jacob, pp.\u00a0356\u2013357). Alternatively, the capacitance can be increased by etching a deeper hole without any increase to surface area (Kenner, p.\u00a044). Another advantage of the trench capacitor is that its structure is under the layers of metal interconnect, allowing them to be more easily made planar, which enables it to be integrated in a logic-optimized process technology, which have many levels of interconnect above the substrate. The fact that the capacitor is under the logic means that it is constructed before the transistors are. This allows high-temperature processes to fabricate the capacitors, which would otherwise degrade the logic transistors and their performance. This makes trench capacitors suitable for constructing embedded DRAM (eDRAM) (Jacob, p.\u00a0357). Disadvantages of trench capacitors are difficulties in reliably constructing the capacitor's structures within deep holes and in connecting the capacitor to the access transistor's drain terminal (Kenner, p.\u00a044).\nHistorical cell designs.\nFirst-generation DRAM ICs (those with capacities of 1\u00a0Kbit), such as the archetypical Intel 1103, used a three-transistor, one-capacitor (3T1C) DRAM cell with separate read and write circuitry. The write wordline drove a write transistor which connected the capacitor to the write bitline just as in the 1T1C cell, but there was a separate read wordline and read transistor which connected an amplifier transistor to the read bitline. By the second generation, the drive to reduce cost by fitting the same amount of bits in a smaller area led to the almost universal adoption of the 1T1C DRAM cell, although a couple of devices with 4 and 16\u00a0Kbit capacities continued to use the 3T1C cell for performance reasons (Kenner, p.\u00a06). These performance advantages included, most significantly, the ability to read the state stored by the capacitor without discharging it, avoiding the need to write back what was read out (non-destructive read). A second performance advantage relates to the 3T1C cell's separate transistors for reading and writing; the memory controller can exploit this feature to perform atomic read-modify-writes, where a value is read, modified, and then written back as a single, indivisible operation (Jacob, p.\u00a0459).\nProposed cell designs.\nThe one-transistor, zero-capacitor (1T, or 1T0C) DRAM cell has been a topic of research since the late-1990s. \"1T DRAM\" is a different way of constructing the basic DRAM memory cell, distinct from the classic one-transistor/one-capacitor (1T/1C) DRAM cell, which is also sometimes referred to as \"1T DRAM\", particularly in comparison to the 3T and 4T DRAM which it replaced in the 1970s.\nIn 1T DRAM cells, the bit of data is still stored in a capacitive region controlled by a transistor, but this capacitance is no longer provided by a separate capacitor. 1T DRAM is a \"capacitorless\" bit cell design that stores data using the parasitic body capacitance that is inherent to silicon on insulator (SOI) transistors. Considered a nuisance in logic design, this floating body effect can be used for data storage. This gives 1T DRAM cells the greatest density as well as allowing easier integration with high-performance logic circuits since they are constructed with the same SOI process technologies.\nRefreshing of cells remains necessary, but unlike with 1T1C DRAM, reads in 1T DRAM are non-destructive; the stored charge causes a detectable shift in the threshold voltage of the transistor. Performance-wise, access times are significantly better than capacitor-based DRAMs, but slightly worse than SRAM. There are several types of 1T DRAMs: the commercialized Z-RAM from Innovative Silicon, the TTRAM from Renesas and the A-RAM from the UGR/CNRS consortium.\nArray structures.\nDRAM cells are laid out in a regular rectangular, grid-like pattern to facilitate their control and access via wordlines and bitlines. The physical layout of the DRAM cells in an array is typically designed so that two adjacent DRAM cells in a column share a single bitline contact to reduce their area. DRAM cell area is given as \"n\"F2, where \"n\" is a number derived from the DRAM cell design, and \"F\" is the smallest feature size of a given process technology. This scheme permits comparison of DRAM size over different process technology generations, as DRAM cell area scales at linear or near-linear rates with respect to feature size. The typical area for modern DRAM cells varies between 6\u20138 F2.\nThe horizontal wire, the wordline, is connected to the gate terminal of every access transistor in its row. The vertical bitline is connected to the source terminal of the transistors in its column. The lengths of the wordlines and bitlines are limited. The wordline length is limited by the desired performance of the array, since propagation time of the signal that must transverse the wordline is determined by the RC time constant. The bitline length is limited by its capacitance (which increases with length), which must be kept within a range for proper sensing (as DRAMs operate by sensing the charge of the capacitor released onto the bitline). Bitline length is also limited by the amount of operating current the DRAM can draw and by how power can be dissipated, since these two characteristics are largely determined by the charging and discharging of the bitline.\nBitline architecture.\nSense amplifiers are required to read the state contained in the DRAM cells. When the access transistor is activated, the electrical charge in the capacitor is shared with the bitline. The bitline's capacitance is much greater than that of the capacitor (approximately ten times). Thus, the change in bitline voltage is minute. Sense amplifiers are required to resolve the voltage differential into the levels specified by the logic signaling system. Modern DRAMs use differential sense amplifiers, and are accompanied by requirements as to how the DRAM arrays are constructed. Differential sense amplifiers work by driving their outputs to opposing extremes based on the relative voltages on pairs of bitlines. The sense amplifiers function effectively and efficient only if the capacitance and voltages of these bitline pairs are closely matched. Besides ensuring that the lengths of the bitlines and the number of attached DRAM cells attached to them are equal, two basic architectures to array design have emerged to provide for the requirements of the sense amplifiers: open and folded bitline arrays.\nOpen bitline arrays.\nThe first generation (1\u00a0Kbit) DRAM ICs, up until the 64\u00a0Kbit generation (and some 256\u00a0Kbit generation devices) had open bitline array architectures. In these architectures, the bitlines are divided into multiple segments, and the differential sense amplifiers are placed in between bitline segments. Because the sense amplifiers are placed between bitline segments, to route their outputs outside the array, an additional layer of interconnect placed above those used to construct the wordlines and bitlines is required.\nThe DRAM cells that are on the edges of the array do not have adjacent segments. Since the differential sense amplifiers require identical capacitance and bitline lengths from both segments, dummy bitline segments are provided. The advantage of the open bitline array is a smaller array area, although this advantage is slightly diminished by the dummy bitline segments. The disadvantage that caused the near disappearance of this architecture is the inherent vulnerability to noise, which affects the effectiveness of the differential sense amplifiers. Since each bitline segment does not have any spatial relationship to the other, it is likely that noise would affect only one of the two bitline segments.\nFolded bitline arrays.\nThe folded bitline array architecture routes bitlines in pairs throughout the array. The close proximity of the paired bitlines provide superior common-mode noise rejection characteristics over open bitline arrays. The folded bitline array architecture began appearing in DRAM ICs during the mid-1980s, beginning with the 256\u00a0Kbit generation. This architecture is favored in modern DRAM ICs for its superior noise immunity.\nThis architecture is referred to as \"folded\" because it takes its basis from the open array architecture from the perspective of the circuit schematic. The folded array architecture appears to remove DRAM cells in alternate pairs (because two DRAM cells share a single bitline contact) from a column, then move the DRAM cells from an adjacent column into the voids.\nThe location where the bitline twists occupies additional area. To minimize area overhead, engineers select the simplest and most area-minimal twisting scheme that is able to reduce noise under the specified limit. As process technology improves to reduce minimum feature sizes, the signal to noise problem worsens, since coupling between adjacent metal wires is inversely proportional to their pitch. The array folding and bitline twisting schemes that are used must increase in complexity in order to maintain sufficient noise reduction. Schemes that have desirable noise immunity characteristics for a minimal impact in area is the topic of current research (Kenner, p.\u00a037).\nFuture array architectures.\nAdvances in process technology could result in open bitline array architectures being favored if it is able to offer better long-term area efficiencies; since folded array architectures require increasingly complex folding schemes to match any advance in process technology. The relationship between process technology, array architecture, and area efficiency is an active area of research.\nRow and column redundancy.\nThe first DRAM integrated circuits did not have any redundancy. An integrated circuit with a defective DRAM cell would be discarded. Beginning with the 64\u00a0Kbit generation, DRAM arrays have included spare rows and columns to improve yields. Spare rows and columns provide tolerance of minor fabrication defects which have caused a small number of rows or columns to be inoperable. The defective rows and columns are physically disconnected from the rest of the array by a triggering a programmable fuse or by cutting the wire by a laser. The spare rows or columns are substituted in by remapping logic in the row and column decoders (Jacob, pp.\u00a0358\u2013361).\nError detection and correction.\nElectrical or magnetic interference inside a computer system can cause a single bit of DRAM to spontaneously flip to the opposite state. The majority of one-off (\"soft\") errors in DRAM chips occur as a result of background radiation, chiefly neutrons from cosmic ray secondaries, which may change the contents of one or more memory cells or interfere with the circuitry used to read/write them.\nThe problem can be mitigated by using redundant memory bits and additional circuitry that use these bits to detect and correct soft errors. In most cases, the detection and correction are performed by the memory controller; sometimes, the required logic is transparently implemented within DRAM chips or modules, enabling the ECC memory functionality for otherwise ECC-incapable systems. The extra memory bits are used to record parity and to enable missing data to be reconstructed by error-correcting code (ECC). Parity allows the detection of all single-bit errors (actually, any odd number of wrong bits). The most common error-correcting code, a SECDED Hamming code, allows a single-bit error to be corrected and, in the usual configuration, with an extra parity bit, double-bit errors to be detected.\nRecent studies give widely varying error rates with over seven orders of magnitude difference, ranging from 10\u221210\u221210\u221217 error/bit\u00b7h, roughly one bit error, per hour, per gigabyte of memory to one bit error, per century, per gigabyte of memory. The Schroeder et al. 2009 study reported a 32% chance that a given computer in their study would suffer from at least one correctable error per year, and provided evidence that most such errors are intermittent hard rather than soft errors and that trace amounts of radioactive material that had gotten into the chip packaging were emitting alpha particles and corrupting the data. A 2010 study at the University of Rochester also gave evidence that a substantial fraction of memory errors are intermittent hard errors. Large scale studies on non-ECC main memory in PCs and laptops suggest that undetected memory errors account for a substantial number of system failures: the 2011 study reported a 1-in-1700 chance per 1.5% of memory tested (extrapolating to an approximately 26% chance for total memory) that a computer would have a memory error every eight months.\nSecurity.\nData remanence.\nAlthough dynamic memory is only specified and \"guaranteed\" to retain its contents when supplied with power and refreshed every short period of time (often 64 ms), the memory cell capacitors often retain their values for significantly longer time, particularly at low temperatures. Under some conditions most of the data in DRAM can be recovered even if it has not been refreshed for several minutes.\nThis property can be used to circumvent security and recover data stored in the main memory that is assumed to be destroyed at power-down. The computer could be quickly rebooted, and the contents of the main memory read out; or by removing a computer's memory modules, cooling them to prolong data remanence, then transferring them to a different computer to be read out. Such an attack was demonstrated to circumvent popular disk encryption systems, such as the open source TrueCrypt, Microsoft's BitLocker Drive Encryption, and Apple's FileVault. This type of attack against a computer is often called a cold boot attack.\nMemory corruption.\nDynamic memory, by definition, requires periodic refresh. Furthermore, reading dynamic memory is a destructive operation, requiring a recharge of the storage cells in the row that has been read. If these processes are imperfect, a read operation can cause soft errors. In particular, there is a risk that some charge can leak between nearby cells, causing the refresh or read of one row to cause a \"disturbance error\" in an adjacent or even nearby row. The awareness of disturbance errors dates back to the first commercially available DRAM in the early 1970s (the Intel 1103). Despite the mitigation techniques employed by manufacturers, commercial researchers proved in a 2014 analysis that commercially available DDR3 DRAM chips manufactured in 2012 and 2013 are susceptible to disturbance errors. The associated side effect that led to observed bit flips has been dubbed \"row hammer\".\nPackaging.\nMemory module.\nDynamic RAM ICs can be packaged in molded epoxy cases, with an internal lead frame for interconnections between the silicon die and the package leads. The original IBM PC design used ICs, including those for DRAM, packaged in dual in-line packages (DIP), soldered directly to the main board or mounted in sockets. As memory density skyrocketed, the DIP package was no longer practical. For convenience in handling, several dynamic RAM integrated circuits may be mounted on a single memory module, allowing installation of 16-bit, 32-bit or 64-bit wide memory in a single unit, without the requirement for the installer to insert multiple individual integrated circuits. Memory modules may include additional devices for parity checking or error correction. Over the evolution of desktop computers, several standardized types of memory module have been developed. Laptop computers, game consoles, and specialized devices may have their own formats of memory modules not interchangeable with standard desktop parts for packaging or proprietary reasons.\nEmbedded.\nDRAM that is integrated into an integrated circuit designed in a logic-optimized process (such as an application-specific integrated circuit, microprocessor, or an entire system on a chip) is called \"embedded DRAM\" (eDRAM). Embedded DRAM requires DRAM cell designs that can be fabricated without preventing the fabrication of fast-switching transistors used in high-performance logic, and modification of the basic logic-optimized process technology to accommodate the process steps required to build DRAM cell structures.\nTypes.\nSince the fundamental DRAM cell and array has maintained the same basic structure for many years, the types of DRAM are mainly distinguished by the many different interfaces for communicating with DRAM chips.\nAsynchronous DRAM.\nThe original DRAM, now known by the retronym \"asynchronous DRAM\" was the first type of DRAM in use. From its origins in the late 1960s, it was commonplace in computing up until around 1997, when it was mostly replaced by \"synchronous DRAM\". In the present day, manufacture of asynchronous RAM is relatively rare.\nPrinciples of operation.\nAn asynchronous DRAM chip has power connections, some number of address inputs (typically 12), and a few (typically one or four) bidirectional data lines. There are three main active-low control signals:\nThis interface provides direct control of internal timing: when RAS is driven low, a CAS cycle must not be attempted until the sense amplifiers have sensed the memory state, and RAS must not be returned high until the storage cells have been refreshed. When RAS is driven high, it must be held high long enough for precharging to complete.\nAlthough the DRAM is asynchronous, the signals are typically generated by a clocked memory controller, which limits their timing to multiples of the controller's clock cycle.\nFor completeness, we mention two other control signals which are not essential to DRAM operation, but are provided for the convenience of systems using DRAM:\nRAS-only refresh.\nClassic asynchronous DRAM is refreshed by opening each row in turn.\nThe refresh cycles are distributed across the entire refresh interval in such a way that all rows are refreshed within the required interval. To refresh one row of the memory array using RAS only refresh (ROR), the following steps must occur:\nThis can be done by supplying a row address and pulsing RAS low; it is not necessary to perform any CAS cycles. An external counter is needed to iterate over the row addresses in turn. In some designs, the CPU handled RAM refresh. The Zilog Z80 is perhaps the best known example, as it has an internal row counter R which supplies the address for a special refresh cycle generated after each instruction fetch. In other systems, especially home computers, refresh was handled by the video circuitry as a side effect of its periodic scan of the frame buffer.\nCAS before RAS refresh.\nFor convenience, the counter was quickly incorporated into the DRAM chips themselves. If the CAS line is driven low before RAS (normally an illegal operation), then the DRAM ignores the address inputs and uses an internal counter to select the row to open. This is known as CAS-before-RAS (CBR) refresh. This became the standard form of refresh for asynchronous DRAM, and is the only form generally used with SDRAM.\nHidden refresh.\nGiven support of CAS-before-RAS refresh, it is possible to deassert RAS while holding CAS low to maintain data output. If RAS is then asserted again, this performs a CBR refresh cycle while the DRAM outputs remain valid. Because data output is not interrupted, this is known as \"hidden refresh\". Hidden refresh is no faster than a normal read followed by a normal refresh, but does maintain the data output valid during the refresh cycle.\nPage mode DRAM.\nPage mode DRAM is a minor modification to the first-generation DRAM IC interface which improves the performance of reads and writes to a row by avoiding the inefficiency of precharging and opening the same row repeatedly to access a different column. In page mode DRAM, after a row is opened by holding RAS low, the row can be kept open, and multiple reads or writes can be performed to any of the columns in the row. Each column access is initiated by presenting a column address and asserting CAS. For reads, after a delay (\"t\"CAC), valid data appears on the data out pins, which are held at high-Z before the appearance of valid data. For writes, the write enable signal and write data is presented along with the column address.\nPage mode DRAM was in turn later improved with a small modification which further reduced latency. DRAMs with this improvement are called fast page mode DRAMs (FPM DRAMs). In page mode DRAM, the chip does not capture the column address until CAS is asserted, so column access time (until data out was valid) begins when CAS is asserted. In FPM DRAM, the column address can be supplied while CAS is still deasserted, and the main column access time (\"t\"AA) begins as soon as the address is stable. The CAS signal is only needed to enable the output (the data out pins were held at high-Z while CAS was deasserted), so time from CAS assertion to data valid (\"t\"CAC) is greatly reduced. Fast page mode DRAM was introduced in 1986 and was used with the Intel 80486.\n\"Static column\" is a variant of fast page mode in which the column address does not need to be latched, but rather the address inputs may be changed with CAS held low, and the data output will be updated accordingly a few nanoseconds later.\n\"Nibble mode\" is another variant in which four sequential locations within the row can be accessed with four consecutive pulses of CAS. The difference from normal page mode is that the address inputs are not used for the second through fourth CAS edges but are generated internally starting with the address supplied for the first CAS edge. The predictable addresses let the chip prepare the data internally and respond very quickly to the subsequent CAS pulses.\nExtended data out DRAM.\nExtended data out DRAM (EDO DRAM) was invented and patented in the 1990s by Micron Technology who then licensed technology to many other memory manufacturers. EDO RAM, sometimes referred to as \"hyper page mode\" enabled DRAM, is similar to fast page mode DRAM with the additional feature that a new access cycle can be started while keeping the data output of the previous cycle active. This allows a certain amount of overlap in operation (pipelining), allowing somewhat improved performance. It is up to 30% faster than FPM DRAM, which it began to replace in 1995 when Intel introduced the 430FX chipset with EDO DRAM support. Irrespective of the performance gains, FPM and EDO SIMMs can be used interchangeably in many (but not all) applications.\nTo be precise, EDO DRAM begins data output on the falling edge of CAS but does not disable the output when CAS rises again. Instead, it holds the current output valid (thus extending the data output time) even as the DRAM begins decoding a new column address, until either a new column's data is selected by another CAS falling edge, or the output is switched off by the rising edge of RAS. (Or, less commonly, a change in CS, OE, or WE.)\nThis ability to start a new access even before the system has received the preceding column's data made it possible to design memory controllers which could carry out a CAS access (in the currently open row) in one clock cycle, or at least within two clock cycles instead of the previously required three. EDO's capabilities were able to partially compensate for the performance lost due to the lack of an L2 cache in low-cost, commodity PCs. More expensive notebooks also often lacked an L2 cache due to size and power limitations, and benefitted similarly. Even for systems \"with\" an L2 cache, the availability of EDO memory improved the average memory latency seen by applications over earlier FPM implementations.\nSingle-cycle EDO DRAM became very popular on video cards toward the end of the 1990s. It was very low cost, yet nearly as efficient for performance as the far more costly VRAM.\nBurst EDO DRAM.\nAn evolution of EDO DRAM, burst EDO DRAM (BEDO DRAM), could process four memory addresses in one burst, for a maximum of 5-1-1-1, saving an additional three clocks over optimally designed EDO memory. It was done by adding an address counter on the chip to keep track of the next address. BEDO also added a pipeline stage allowing page-access cycle to be divided into two parts. During a memory-read operation, the first part accessed the data from the memory array to the output stage (second latch). The second part drove the data bus from this latch at the appropriate logic level. Since the data is already in the output buffer, quicker access time is achieved (up to 50% for large blocks of data) than with traditional EDO.\nAlthough BEDO DRAM showed additional optimization over EDO, by the time it was available the market had made a significant investment towards synchronous DRAM, or SDRAM. Even though BEDO RAM was superior to SDRAM in some ways, the latter technology quickly displaced BEDO.\nSynchronous dynamic RAM.\nSynchronous dynamic RAM (SDRAM) significantly revises the asynchronous memory interface, adding a clock (and a clock enable) line. All other signals are received on the rising edge of the clock.\nThe RAS and CAS inputs no longer act as strobes, but are instead, along with WE, part of a 3-bit command:\nThe OE line's function is extended to a per-byte DQM signal, which controls data input (writes) in addition to data output (reads). This allows DRAM chips to be wider than 8 bits while still supporting byte-granularity writes.\nMany timing parameters remain under the control of the DRAM controller. For example, a minimum time must elapse between a row being activated and a read or write command. One important parameter must be programmed into the SDRAM chip itself, namely the CAS latency. This is the number of clock cycles allowed for internal operations between a read command and the first data word appearing on the data bus. The \"Load mode register\" command is used to transfer this value to the SDRAM chip. Other configurable parameters include the length of read and write bursts, i.e. the number of words transferred per read or write command.\nThe most significant change, and the primary reason that SDRAM has supplanted asynchronous RAM, is the support for multiple internal banks inside the DRAM chip. Using a few bits of \"bank address\" that accompany each command, a second bank can be activated and begin reading data \"while a read from the first bank is in progress\". By alternating banks, a single SDRAM device can keep the data bus continuously busy, in a way that asynchronous DRAM cannot.\nSingle data rate synchronous DRAM.\nSingle data rate SDRAM (SDR SDRAM or SDR) is the original generation of SDRAM; it made a single transfer of data per clock cycle.\nDouble data rate synchronous DRAM.\nDouble data rate SDRAM (DDR SDRAM or DDR) was a later development of SDRAM, used in PC memory beginning in 2000. Subsequent specifications are numbered sequentially (\"DDR2\", \"DDR3\", etc.). DDR SDRAM internally performs double-width accesses at the clock rate, and uses a double data rate interface to transfer one half on each clock edge. DDR2 and DDR3 increased this factor to 4\u00d7 and 8\u00d7, respectively, delivering 4-word and 8-word bursts over 2 and 4 clock cycles, respectively. The internal access rate is mostly unchanged (200 million per second for DDR-400, DDR2-800 and DDR3-1600 memory), but each access transfers more data.\nDirect Rambus DRAM.\n\"Direct RAMBUS DRAM\" (\"DRDRAM\") was developed by Rambus. First supported on motherboards in 1999, it was intended to become an industry standard, but was outcompeted by DDR SDRAM, making it technically obsolete by 2003.\nReduced Latency DRAM.\nReduced Latency DRAM (RLDRAM) is a high performance double data rate (DDR) SDRAM that combines fast, random access with high bandwidth, mainly intended for networking and caching applications.\nGraphics RAM.\nGraphics RAMs are asynchronous and synchronous DRAMs designed for graphics-related tasks such as texture memory and framebuffers, found on video cards.\nVideo DRAM.\nVideo DRAM (VRAM) is a dual-ported variant of DRAM that was once commonly used to store the frame buffer in some graphics adapters.\nWindow DRAM.\nWindow DRAM (WRAM) is a variant of VRAM that was once used in graphics adapters such as the Matrox Millennium and ATI 3D Rage Pro. WRAM was designed to perform better and cost less than VRAM. WRAM offered up to 25% greater bandwidth than VRAM and accelerated commonly used graphical operations such as text drawing and block fills.\nMultibank DRAM.\nMultibank DRAM (MDRAM) is a type of specialized DRAM developed by MoSys. It is constructed from small memory banks of 256 kB, which are operated in an interleaved fashion, providing bandwidths suitable for graphics cards at a lower cost to memories such as SRAM. MDRAM also allows operations to two banks in a single clock cycle, permitting multiple concurrent accesses to occur if the accesses were independent. MDRAM was primarily used in graphic cards, such as those featuring the Tseng Labs ET6x00 chipsets. Boards based upon this chipset often had the unusual capacity of 2.25 MB because of MDRAM's ability to be implemented more easily with such capacities. A graphics card with 2.25 MB of MDRAM had enough memory to provide 24-bit color at a resolution of 1024\u00d7768\u2014a very popular setting at the time.\nSynchronous graphics RAM.\nSynchronous graphics RAM (SGRAM) is a specialized form of SDRAM for graphics adapters. It adds functions such as bit masking (writing to a specified bit plane without affecting the others) and block write (filling a block of memory with a single color). Unlike VRAM and WRAM, SGRAM is single-ported. However, it can open two memory pages at once, which simulates the dual-port nature of other video RAM technologies.\nGraphics double data rate SDRAM.\nGraphics double data rate SDRAM is a type of specialized DDR SDRAM designed to be used as the main memory of graphics processing units (GPUs). GDDR SDRAM is distinct from commodity types of DDR SDRAM such as DDR3, although they share some core technologies. Their primary characteristics are higher clock frequencies for both the DRAM core and I/O interface, which provides greater memory bandwidth for GPUs. As of 2025, there are eight successive generations of GDDR: GDDR2, GDDR3, GDDR4, GDDR5, GDDR5X, GDDR6, GDDR6X and GDDR7.\nPseudostatic RAM.\nPseudostatic RAM (PSRAM or PSDRAM) is dynamic RAM with built-in refresh and address-control circuitry to make it behave similarly to static RAM (SRAM). It combines the high density of DRAM with the ease of use of true SRAM. PSRAM is used in the Apple iPhone and other embedded systems such as XFlar Platform.\nSome DRAM components have a \"self-refresh mode\". While this involves much of the same logic that is needed for pseudo-static operation, this mode is often equivalent to a standby mode. It is provided primarily to allow a system to suspend operation of its DRAM controller to save power without losing data stored in DRAM, rather than to allow operation without a separate DRAM controller as is in the case of mentioned PSRAMs.\nAn embedded variant of PSRAM was sold by MoSys under the name 1T-SRAM. It is a set of small DRAM banks with an SRAM cache in front to make it behave much like a true SRAM. It is used in Nintendo GameCube and Wii video game consoles.\nCypress Semiconductor's HyperRAM is a type of PSRAM supporting a JEDEC-compliant 8-pin HyperBus or Octal xSPI interface.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "74568", "revid": "1289843304", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74568", "title": "Saint Thomas and Prince", "text": ""}
{"id": "74569", "revid": "1616157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74569", "title": "List of Swedish language poets", "text": ""}
{"id": "74570", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74570", "title": "Neo-nazism", "text": ""}
{"id": "74571", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74571", "title": "Verner von Heidenstam", "text": "Swedish poet and novelist (1859\u20131940)\nCarl Gustaf Verner von Heidenstam (6 July 1859 \u2013 20 May 1940) was a Swedish poet, novelist and laureate of the 1916 Nobel Prize in Literature. He was a member of the Swedish Academy from 1912. His poems and prose work are filled with a great joy of life, sometimes imbued with a love of Swedish history and scenery, particularly its physical aspects.\nEarly life.\nVerner von Heidenstam was born in Olshammar, \u00d6rebro County, on 6 July 1859 to a noble family. Von Heidenstam was the son of Gustaf von Heidenstam, an engineer, and \"Magdalena\" Charlotta von Heidenstam (n\u00e9e R\u00fctterski\u00f6ld). He was educated at \"Beskowska skolan\" in Stockholm.\nHe studied painting in the Academy of Stockholm but soon left because of ill health. He then traveled extensively in Europe, Africa and the Orient.\nLiterary career.\nHe was at once greeted as a poet of promise on the publication of his first collection of poems, \"Vallfart och vandrings\u00e5r\" (\"Pilgrimage: the Wander Years\", 1888). It is a collection of poems inspired by his experiences in the orient and marks an abandonment of naturalism that was dominant then in Swedish literature.\nHis love for beauty is also shown by the long narrative poem \"Hans Alienus \"(1892). \"Dikter\" (\"Poems\", 1895) and \"Karolinerna\" (\"The Charles Men\", 2 vols., 1897\u20131898), a series of historical portraits of King Charles XII of Sweden and his cavaliers, shows a strong nationalistic passion. English translations of short stories from \"Karolinerna\" can be found in the \"American-Scandinavian Review\" (New York), May 1914, November 1915, and July 1916. The two volumes of \"Folkunga Tr\u00e4det\" (\"The Tree of the Folkungs\", 1905\u201307) are the inspired, epic story of a clan of Swede chieftains in the Middle Ages.\nIn 1910, a controversy was waged in Swedish newspapers between a number of Swedish literary men on the topic of the proletarian \u201cdegradation\u201d of literature, the protagonists of the two opposing camps being August Strindberg and von Heidenstam. Professors Lidforss and B\u00f6\u00f6k also took part. von Heidenstam's chief contribution was the pamphlet, directed chiefly against Strindberg, \"Prolet\u00e4rfilosofiens uppl\u00f6sning och fall\" (\"The Decline and Fall of the Proletarian Philosophy\").\nvon Heidenstam's poetical collection \"Nya Dikter\", published in 1915, deals with philosophical themes, mainly concerning the elevation of man to a better humanity from solitude.\nPersonal life.\nHe died at his home \u00d6vralid on 20 May 1940.\nWorks.\nWorks in English translation\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74572", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74572", "title": "National Socialist black metal", "text": "Subgenre of black metal promoting Nazism\nNational Socialist black metal (also known as NSBM or Nazi black metal) is a movement within the black metal music genre that promotes neo-Nazism, neo-fascism, and white supremacist ideologies. NSBM artists typically combine neo-Nazi imagery and ideology with ethnic European paganism, Satanism, or Nazi occultism, and vehemently oppose Christianity, Islam and Judaism from a racialist viewpoint. According to Mattias Gardell, NSBM musicians see their ideology as \"a logical extension of the political and spiritual dissidence inherent in black metal\". NSBM artists are a small minority within black metal. While many black-metallers boycott NSBM artists, others are indifferent or say they appreciate the music without supporting the musicians. Like Nazi punk, Nazi black metal is not seen as a distinct genre, being \"distinguished only by ideology, not musical character\". \nNSBM artists do not always convey their political beliefs in their music, but may express their beliefs in interviews or imagery. Artists who hold far-right beliefs but do not express them in their music are not considered NSBM by many black-metallers, but they may be considered NSBM by outsiders. War and catastrophe are common themes in black metal, and some bands have made references to Nazi Germany for shock value, much like some punk rock and heavy metal bands. \nThe emergence of NSBM in the mid 1990s is linked with the prominent Norwegian black metal musician Varg Vikernes. After his imprisonment for church burning and murder, he developed his anti-Christian beliefs into an increasingly white nationalist and neo-Nazi form of Heathenry. The first black metal bands to have neo-Nazi lyrics and imagery were German band Absurd, and Polish bands Infernum and Graveland. In the United States, Grand Belial's Key and Judas Iscariot became involved in NSBM (the latter has since distanced themselves from the movement). As NSBM grew internationally, it started to overlap with existing White power music such as Rock Against Communism, hatecore, and the far-right faction of Oi!. The neo-Nazi record label Resistance Records, associated with the National Alliance, started releasing NSBM albums and even purchased Vikernes' label Cymophane Records. In 2012, the NSBM Asgardsrei festival was established in Moscow, Russia, and then in 2014 relocated to Kyiv, Ukraine.\nBlack metal.\nBlack metal is generally not political music and the vast majority of bands do not express political views. Black metal originated in the 1980s from the work of thrash metal bands such as Venom (whose 1982 album \"Black Metal\" coined the term), Mercyful Fate, Bathory, Slayer, Hellhammer, Celtic Frost, and Sodom. These bands did not form a scene of their own, nor did they have a common musical style. A lyrical focus that is anti-Christian, Satanist, neopagan, or a combination thereof, is often considered a prerequisite for the genre, and originally the term \"black metal\" was synonymous with \"Satanic metal\". A stricter definition still requires Satanism for a band to be classified as black metal. Non-Satanic bands from the same surroundings originally used other terms for their own music, such as pagan metal or Viking metal. In the late-1980s and early-1990s, the early Norwegian black metal scene, developed by bands such as Mayhem, Thorns, Immortal, Darkthrone, Burzum, Emperor, Satyricon, and Ulver, established a more specific sonic template that came to define Norwegian black metal and subsequently a great part of black metal in general, although other styles of black metal, like war metal, still exist. Common traits of Norwegian black metal include a fast tempo, blast beats and double-bass drumming, a thin, shrieking vocal style heavily distorted guitars played with tremolo picking and power chords, either lo-fi or well-produced recordings, an emphasis on atmosphere, and an \"unholy\" aesthetic. Keyboards are sometimes used, as are elements of neoclassical, folk, and ambient music. Artists often appear in corpse paint and adopt pseudonyms. Many black metal artists prefer to be underground, inaccessible to the mainstream, and even intentionally push away audiences and demonstrate anti-social behavior.\nHistory.\nOrigins in the Norwegian black metal scene.\nIn the early 1990s, the early Norwegian black metal scene developed black metal into a distinct genre. The scene members were fiercely anti-Christian \u2014 most generally presented themselves as misanthropic devil-worshipers who wanted to spread hatred, sorrow and evil, though some wrote about pre-Christian Scandinavia and its mythology. Among some members of the scene, the antagonism toward Christianity turned violent, and arson and attempted arson was perpetrated against a number of churches from 1992 through 1995. Among the perpetrators were Varg Vikernes of Burzum and Mayhem, Euronymous of Mayhem, Samoth of Thou Shalt Suffer and Emperor, Faust of Thorns and J\u00f8rn Inge Tunsberg of Old Funeral, Immortal, and Hades Almighty, some of whom are among the most prominent musicians in the scene. In January 1993, Vikernes spoke with a journalist from \"Bergens Tidende\". The loft where the interview was conducted was filled with Satanist and Nazi paraphernalia, along with weapons, and Vikernes declared he was at war with Christianity, had already burned eight churches, and would continue his terrorism.\nThe violence and misanthropy in the scene also included murder. In August 1992, Faust killed a gay man \u2014 Magne Andreassen \u2014 who had propositioned him in Lillehammer. Faust was not caught for a year, despite his actions being an open secret known to many in the scene. Many have attributed the murder to homophobia; however, Gaahl, a vocalist from the band Gorgoroth, is now an openly gay man who was voted Gay Person of the Year in 2010 in Bergen, and believes that the killing of Andreassen by Faust had nothing to do with Andreassen's sexuality. Likewise, Faust himself, along with bandmate Ihsahn, have claimed that Andreassen's sexuality was irrelevant, and Faust simply had a murderous impulse. In August 1993, Vikernes, with Snorre Ruch from Thorns and Mayhem as an accomplice, killed his bandmate Euronymous and was arrested shortly after. Vikernes was convicted in the spring of 1994 for arson, murder, and illegal possession of weapons. Vikernes insists that he killed Euronymous in self-defense, although while in prison claimed that it was also because Euronymous was gay and communist. Euronymous was interested in communism, even professing to be a Stalinist in 1992, and in the 1980s had participated in the Marxist\u2013Leninist youth group R\u00f8d Ungdom, which he later disavowed, but there is no evidence that he was a gay man. Despite Vikernes' later claims, the killing is not believed to have been politically motivated, which even Vikernes claimed at first, and is generally thought to have been because of a personal dispute.\nThere is an undercurrent of Romantic or ethnic nationalism in black metal, and racism is not uncommon in the scene even though most black metal and other extreme metal musicians disavow neo-Nazism and racist ideology. Within the Scandinavian scene, several musicians made racist statements and utilized Nazi language and paraphernalia \u2014 yet, black metal is also highly performative, intentionally contradictory, and artistically transgressive, and some musicians cultivate an evil, ultra-right-wing image as an aesthetic. Many of the artists who flirted with fascism, totalitarianism, and violence in their artistic themes did not find a political connection with that imagery. Still, a minority in the scene, in their opposition to Christianity and reverence for a pre-Christian past, stepped into fascist and racist ideas, particularly Nazi occultism. Euronymous in a personal letter in the early 1990s made the sweeping claim that \"Almost ALL Norwegian bands are more less nazis [sic]. Burzum, Mayhem, Emperor, Arcturus, Enslaved, you name them.\" Similarly, scholar Kirsten Dyck has described the Norwegian scene's \"Black Circle\" as neo-Nazi. According to her, the Black Circle melded Nazi occultism, anti-Semitism and the conspiracy theory of a Jewish plot for world domination, homophobia, and xenophobia with Nietzschean philosophy, Satanism, and Scandinavian neopaganism, which then contributed to the violence perpetrated by some of the musicians.\nIn 1994, Hellhammer, the drummer for the Norwegian band Mayhem, said of the genre's links with racism: \"I'll put it this way, we don't like black people here. Black Metal is for white people\". When Mayhem re-formed after Euronymous's death, they began releasing merchandise bearing World War II-era Nazi symbols. However, in a later interview, Hellhammer said \"I don't give a crap if the fans are white, black, green, yellow, or blue. For me music and politics don't go hand in hand\". In 1995, Gaahl described \"niggers\" and \"mulattoes\" as \"subhuman\" and stated his admiration for Vikernes and Adolf Hitler. However, he too has since distanced himself from these statements. Vikernes also wrote some lyrics for the album \"Transilvanian Hunger\" by Darkthrone, another key band in the Norwegian scene. It was released in 1994 with \"Norsk Arisk Black Metal\" ('Norwegian Aryan Black Metal') printed on the back cover, and issued a press release stating \"If any man should attempt to criticize this LP, he should be thoroughly patronized for his obviously Jewish behavior.\" After the ensuing controversy, Darkthrone claimed that \"Jew\" is simply a Norwegian word for \"stupid\" and that they were \"not a Nazi band nor a political band\". In a 2007 documentary, bandmember Fenriz claimed he was once arrested while participating in an anti-apartheid demonstration and later had a \"phase of being really angry with\u00a0... other races\" before he became \"totally unengaged in [political] shit\". Scholar Keith Kahn-Harris argues that it is almost impossible to believe that Darkthrone did not know that a pejorative use of the word \"Jew\" was offensive, and the denials from Darkthrone that the members had racist or fascist sympathies was disingenuous, given the statements made. But, Kahn-Harris also notes that Fenriz has made more jocular references to racism and fascism, and has interacted well with black metal enthusiasts from Israel, so Kahn-Harris believes that the actions by Darkthrone were intentionally contradictory as a form of transgressive artistic discourse and not expressions of a sincere ideology. Axl Rosenberg from the website MetalSucks notes that after these offensive actions from the band in the mid-1990s, Darkthrone has not repeatedly demonstrated racist behavior. He opines that the band members are far older now and that \"it\u2019s feasible their worldviews have changed; it\u2019s feasible they were being provocative for the sake of being provocative when they made \"Hunger\" and have since seen the error of such sophomoric behavior.\" After his release from prison, Faust stated regarding the arson and murder he committed that \"I was never a Satanist or fascist in any way, but I put behind me the hatred and negativity. Those feelings just eat you up from inside.\"\nSimilar statements were also uttered by scene members from other countries. Michael W. Ford of the American band Black Funeral mentioned that Nazi occultism was very important to him, called his former band Sorath his \"old SS Death squad\" and claimed \"you have to be white to play Black metal\". He was the American leader of Cymophane, an organisation started by Vikernes. He would later disassociate himself from Nazism. According to the authors of \"Lords of Chaos\", in 1995, three Swedish black-metallers (including Mika \"Belfagor\" Hakola of the band Nefandus) went on a \"niggerhunt\" in Link\u00f6ping. Wielding an axe and two machetes, they \"terrorized\" a black man. Nefandus were later \"considered to be Nazi sympathizers\", though Belfagor explained: \"This could not be further from the truth, but I guess this has to do with some of the controversial comments I made in various magazines in my youth, when I still aspired to play in the most hated band in the world. I used a lot of provocative language back then. But to sort things out: I associate with people of all creeds and colours. ... So to be labeled a Nazi or a racist is very offensive to me\".\nVikernes and his project Burzum are generally seen as the main catalyst in the development of the NSBM movement, although Burzum was never explicitly political. Although Vikernes has claimed to not be a neo-Nazi, he has participated in neo-Nazi activities and his statements have expressed neo-Nazi views and antagonism toward Muslims and Jews. According to an interview in \"Blood &amp; Honour\" magazine, Vikernes contacted neo-Nazi organization Zorn 88 in 1992 and joined White Aryan Resistance before he killed Euronymous. While in prison, \"Vikernes began to formulate his nationalist heathen ideology\" and wrote a manifesto called \"Vargsm\u00e5l\". It became available on the internet for a while in 1996, and in 1997 it was printed by a Norwegian publisher. Once imprisoned, Vikernes abandoned the black metal scene and started touting a neo-Nazi variety of Heathenry. According to Vikernes, he stopped playing metal music because of its origin as \"Negro music\", and argued that \"the 'metal heads' tend to behave like a bunch of 'White Niggers', so to speak, with their sex, drugs and rock'n'roll culture.\" Vikernes also has claimed that the scene had begun \"as a nationalistic (Norwegian-centric), racist and anti-Christian revolt\" but was \"hijacked\" by the \"Jew-dominated music industry\". He claims the industry made it into another tool with which to destroy Europe, by promoting bands who embraced \"everything sick and anti-European on this planet, from porn and promiscuity to drugs and homosexuality\".\nDevelopment of National Socialist black metal.\nOne of the first explicitly NSBM releases was the 1995 demo \"Thuringian Pagan Madness\" by German band Absurd. It was recorded while the members were imprisoned for murdering a boy from their school. On the demo cover is a photograph of his gravestone and the inlay contained pro-Nazi statements. Bandmember Hendrik M\u00f6bus stated that NSBM was the \"logical conclusion\" of the Norwegian black metal movement and interpreted the church burnings as a \"cultural atavism\". Other bands deemed to be part of the early NSBM scene include Graveland and Infernum, from Poland. Rob Darken of Graveland in particular was a very central figure in the development of NSBM in Poland. The burgeoning black metal scene in Poland was far more pronouncedly racist, and The Temple of Fullmoon, of which several Polish bands were members, turned into a far-right organization. Similar to what happened in Norway, the scene became increasingly violent, and three of the four members of the NSBM band Thunderbolt were imprisoned for arson and murder. According to Gunnar Sauermann, in the 1990s, some of the earliest American black metal bands\u2014like Grand Belial's Key and Judas Iscariot\u2014joined an international NSBM organization called the Pagan Front, although Judas Iscariot's sole member Akhenaten left the organization. Thelemnar, the drummer of German band Secrets of the Moon, said he got to know him \"only as an intelligent person and never as a Nazi\". The United States project I Shalt Become was another pioneer in the nascent NSBM scene. NSBM came to dominate the black metal scenes in Poland, Ukraine, and Russia.\nIn 2012, Alexey Levkin, frontman of the band M8l8th, along with others, started the NSBM music festival Asgardsrei in Moscow. The event is named after the 1999 album of the same name by Absurd. The festival was relocated to Kyiv in 2014 when Levkin and the other organizers relocated to Ukraine to join the Azov Battalion (a brigade now). Steelfest is a Finnish annual black metal festival that has been held since 2012. Steelfest is notorious for hosting a venue for National socialist black metal bands, and bands and audience have done mass nazi salutes.\nIdeology.\nNSBM typically melds Neo-Nazi beliefs (such as fascism, white supremacy, white separatism, white nationalism, right-wing extremism, antisemitism, xenophobia, and ethnic separatism, with some National-anarchist tendencies and admiration of Adolf Hitler) with hostility to \"foreign\" religions. Bands often promote ethnic European paganism, occultism, or Satanism. Hendrik M\u00f6bus of Absurd described Nazism as the \"most perfect (and only realistic!) synthesis of Satanic/Luciferian will to power, elitist Social Darwinism, connected to Aryan Germanic paganism\". Members of the band Der St\u00fcrmer (named after the antisemitic newspaper edited by Julius Streicher) subscribe to Esoteric Nazism, leaning on the works of Savitri Devi and Julius Evola. Famine of Peste Noire stated in an interview that he prefers Italian Fascism instead of Nazism as an ideology.\nAnti-Christianity and antisemitism.\nTypically NSBM musicians regard Christianity as a product of an alleged Jewish conspiracy to undermine the Aryan race by eliminating their \"Artglauben\" and their \"original\" culture. These musicians usually reject the legitimacy of Christian antisemitism as well as the German Christians movement, which celebrated and promoted Nazi ideology in the context of an unorthodox Christian theological framework. Hjarulv Henker of the band Der St\u00fcrmer said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I don't think that a dogma like Christianity has a place in Aryandom. There is no way to make Christianity fit into the Weltanschauung of the Aryan Overman. Christianity teaches humbleness, the loss of National and Racial identity, and equality, things alien to our cosmotheory. You cannot combine Jesus with characters who represent Aryan ethics. ... Christianity is Christianity and it is Jewish by its very birth and conception, a vehicle in the Jewish world domination and designed as such.\nWhite supremacy.\nNSBM musicians such as Varg Vikernes of Burzum and Famine of Peste Noire have expressed a white supremacist concern about \"race mixing\" and preserving the purity of the white race and the traditional cultures of white European nations. Somewhat perplexingly, NSBM has been popular in Poland and other Slavic countries, despite the fact that, historically, German Nazis viewed Slavic people as subhuman racial inferiors and intended to eliminate them. This contradiction is either masked, relativized or excused as a historical mistake. A conspiracy theory says the Jews would have prevented an alliance between Nazi Germany and other Eastern European countries. Knjaz Varggoth, singer and guitarist of the Ukrainian band Nokturnal Mortum, gives the following explanation for the contradiction: \"Goruth of the Russian band Temnozor sees the Slavs and Germans as a part of a Hyperborean Aryan race and nowadays differing due to its degeneration.\"\nThe Vietnamese-American band Vothana is unusual in that its members are not ethnically European, however the band\u2019s lyrics (which are performed in Vietnamese) still express racialist and fascist viewpoints and the band has performed at festivals alongside NSBM bands.\nPaganism.\nAs part of their anti-Christianity, anti-Semitism, and the idea that White Europeans should return to their native ways, most NSBM bands promote ethnic European paganism. Benjamin Hedge Olson argues that NSBM is \"indelibly linked with As\u00e1 Tr\u016d and opposed to Satanism, which gives it a 'blood and soil' attraction to many young Neo-Nazis looking for identity in their distant, ancestral past.\" Hendrik M\u00f6bus interpreted the church burnings in Norway as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; He argues that later on they would have realized the meaning of these emotions, begun to identify with paganism and taken \"an active interest in Nationalist politics designed to preserve and to cultivate this very heritage\". The booklet of the Absurd EP \"Asgardsrei\" depicts the Knights Templar, the Teutonic Order and the Waffen-SS as warriors of the \"Asgardsrei\", which the bands define as a term for an alleged godly and Germanic group of warriors.\nSatanism.\nBesides pagan beliefs, part of the NSBM scene embraces an interpretation of Satanism. Satanism is a common theme even in apolitical black metal, but in NSBM Satan is depicted as an ancient Aryan counterpart to YHWH, the god of the Jews and Christians. This view is often called \"v\u00f6lkisch Satanism\" or \"Aryan Satanism\". Chraesvelgoron of The True Frost sees Nazism as the political appearance of Satanism and the collective deification of man as a social animal, as godliness instead of humaneness. His bandmate Sadorass calls the same ideology a development of blood and soil ideology, diverse occult teachings, and the ideas of Friedrich Nietzsche in connection to Darwinism. Greek black metal musician Magus Wampyr Daoloth (of Necromantia and Thou Art Lord) said in an interview for \"Lords of Chaos\": \"If you consider that fascism and Satanism have a lot of similarities as they both advocate power, spiritual and physical excellence, responsibility, survival of the fittest, elitism, etc., it's logical that some bands advocate both\". However, many pagan and far-right bands see Satanism as a part of Christianity or Judaism.\nRelations with the broader white nationalist movement.\nMany white nationalists have warmly received NSBM for its lyrical content and ideals. However, some have not, due to the music style as well as the genre's perceived association with the rock &amp; roll lifestyle. However, \"Lords of Chaos\" notes that alcohol and illegal drugs never played a big part in the Norwegian black metal scene. B\u00e5rd G. Eithun, on the other hand, stated that many in the early scene \"were almost alcoholics\". Some also reject black metal musicians and fans since many of them have long hair, which they associate with hippies and left-wingers. Dayal Patterson writes that \"NSBM has become a movement in its own right,\" one which has reached Western Europe and the Americas and overlapped with fans of more traditional far-right music genres such as Oi! and Rock Against Communism.\nThe record label Resistance Records, a Canadian record label promoting white nationalism and white separatism, purchased Vikernes' Cymophane Records and began releasing black metal recordings, many through a sub-label, Unholy Records. William Luther Pierce, founder of the white nationalist National Alliance, sought to promote NSBM as well as other forms of white nationalist music through Resistance, believing that music would \"make the National Alliance rich and spread its message most effectively\". To this end, he accommodated Absurd frontman Hendrik M\u00f6bus while the latter had fled to the United States to evade German authorities. Although Pierce appreciated the ideological mindset of NSBM and Resistance Records, as well as the financial gains, the music did not personally appeal to him, and he attacked the \"sex, drugs &amp; rock'n'roll\" and what he called \"negroid\" influences.\nAsgardsrei festival, which has established itself as the major festival for NSBM, has been noted by analysts and journalists to function as a meetup point and pan-European and transnational networking hub for neo-Nazis, white supremacists, and other far-right extremists. In addition to the concert organizers' connections to the Ukrainian nationalist Azov Assault Brigade, Ukrainian far-right political party National Corps, and Russian-Ukrainian neo-Nazi movement Wotanjugend, members of the German neo-Nazi party The III. Path, the United States-based neo-Nazi terrorist organization Atomwaffen Division, the Italian neo-fascist movement and former political party CasaPound, and the Greek neo-Nazi party Golden Dawn have all participated in the festival. Members of neo-Nazi forums and chats such as Iron March, Stormfront, and neo-Nazi chat servers on Discord have attended and praised Asgardsrei, and the American white nationalist Greg Johnson posted a review of the 2019 festival on his alt-right publication Counter Currents.\nRelations with the broader black metal scene.\nNSBM artists are a small minority within black metal. They have also been rejected or strongly criticized by many prominent black metal musicians \u2013 including Jon N\u00f6dtveidt, Tormentor, King ov Hell, Infernus, Lord Ahriman, Emperor Magus Caligula, Protector, Erik Danielsson of Watain, and the members of Arkhon Infaustus. Some black-metallers liken Nazism to Christianity in that it is authoritarian, collectivist, and involves a \"herd mentality\". It also conflicts with the misanthropic views of many artists; Benjamin Hedge Olson writes that the shunning of Nazism within the scene \"has nothing to do with notions of a 'universal humanity' or a rejection of hate\" but that Nazism is shunned \"because its hatred is too specific and exclusive\". Joakim of Craft said, \"I don't think national socialism mix[es] with the ideology of real Black Metal in a way, but that doesn't go further than labels. I only think NS Black Metal is an inappropriate label for the music\". While some black-metallers boycott NSBM bands and labels, others draw a line between the music and the musicians, as they only care for the music. Some have criticized this as passive support for NSBM. The bigger print metal magazines tend to ignore records by NSBM bands. Christian Dornbusch and Hans-Peter Killguss's 2005 book \"Unheilige Allianzen\" caused a short debate, leading \"Legacy\" magazine to stop printing ads for NSBM labels. Another debate happened in the \"letters\" section of \"Rock Hard\" magazine following the article \"Der rechte Rand im Black Metal\" (\"Black Metal's Far-right Border\"). According to \"Unheilige Allianzen\", v\u00f6lkisch pagan metal and neo-Nazism were the current trends in black metal and in turn, were affecting the broader metal scene. Stewart Voegtlin likewise wrote for \"Stylus\" in 2006 that \"with a 'nationalistic' wave of violence and hatred spreading from Scandinavia and infiltrating France and Germany, the unfortunate exploits of a few will likely continue to supersede the music itself.\"\nDenial of identification.\nSome bands have denied being labeled NSBM, and assert that they are either pagan or instead prefer the label \"nationalist black metal.\" Official statements against this label have been made by bands such as Graveland. Akitsa, a group sometimes rumoured to be NSBM, made strong statements against the Nazi ideology and the whole NSBM genre. Ukrainian band Nokturnal Mortum has made efforts to distance themselves from the movement, but still continue to occasionally partake in some NSBM practices such as playing at festivals held for the genre. \nWhile some bands made statements which the scene and critics has taken as genuine statements condemning Nazism, other bands' statements has, by many critics, been viewed merely as a tactic to be able to play live gigs or not have their music banned, such is the case with Graveland, among others, who has continued to openly support white supremacist organizers after making statements about being \"unpolitical\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74573", "revid": "49696380", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74573", "title": "Jenna Jameson", "text": "American pornographic actress (born 1974)\nJenna Marie Massoli (born April 9, 1974), known professionally as Jenna Jameson (), is an American businesswoman, writer, television personality, and former pornographic film actress. She has been named the world's most famous adult entertainment performer and \"The Queen of Porn\".\nJameson started acting in erotic videos in 1993 after having worked as a stripper and glamour model. By 1996, she had won the \"Top Newcomer\" award from each of the three major adult movie organizations. She has since won more than 35 adult-video awards, and has been inducted into the X-Rated Critics Organization (XRCO) and Adult Video News (AVN) Halls of Fame.\nJameson founded the adult-entertainment company ClubJenna in 2000 with Jay Grdina, whom she later married and divorced. Initially, a single website, this business expanded into managing similar websites of other stars and began producing sexually explicit videos in 2001. The first such movie, \"Briana Loves Jenna\" (along with Briana Banks), was named as the best-selling and best-renting pornographic title at the 2003 AVN Awards for 2002. \nJameson has also crossed over into mainstream pop culture, starting with a minor role in Howard Stern's biographical comedy film \"Private Parts\" (1997). \nJameson announced her retirement from pornography at the 2008 AVN Awards, stating that she would never return to the industry. Although she no longer performs in pornographic films, she began working as a webcam model in 2013. In 2025, Jenna Jameson noted that she \"switched sides\" and left her previous lifestyle for the Christian faith.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nJenna Marie Massoli was born on April 9, 1974, in Las Vegas, Nevada. Her father, Laurence Henry Massoli, was a police officer at the Las Vegas Sheriff's Department and program director for KSNV-DT. Her mother, Judith Brooke Hunt, was a Las Vegas showgirl who danced in the Folies Berg\u00e8re show at the Tropicana Resort &amp; Casino. Her mother died of melanoma on February 20, 1976, two months before her daughter's second birthday. The cancer treatments bankrupted the family, and they relocated to Nevada, Arizona, and Montana, usually living in a trailer home or with their paternal grandmother. She had an older brother, Tony. Both were raised Catholic, though they were essentially left to parent each other.\nJameson was a frequent entrant in beauty pageants as a child and enrolled in ballet classes throughout her childhood. \nJameson wrote in her autobiography that in October 1990, when she was 16 years old and while the family was living on a cattle ranch in Fromberg, Montana, she was beaten with rocks and gang raped by four boys after a football game at Fromberg High School. The incident began after she attempted to hitchhike home, and she entered the car of the four while believing that she would be driven home. Jameson reported being raped a second time while still 16 by \"Preacher,\" her boyfriend Jack's biker uncle. Preacher has denied that the rape ever occurred. Rather than tell her father, she left home and moved in with Jack, with whom she began her first serious relationship.\nAccording to E!, her brother Tony, who later owned a tattoo parlor, added the inscription \"Heart Breaker.\"\nCareer.\nEarly career, education, and name.\nJameson tried to follow in her mother's career as a Las Vegas showgirl, but most shows rejected her for not meeting the then-typically required height of . Eventually, she was hired at Disneyland Resort, but left after two months, stating concerns over the schedule and salary.\nHer then-boyfriend Jack encouraged her to apply for jobs as a dancer, and in 1991, though underage, she began dancing in Las Vegas strip clubs using a fake identification. After six months, she was earning US$2,000 per night, before graduating from Bonanza High School.\nHer first stage name as a dancer was \"Jennasis\", which she later used as the name of a business that she incorporated (\"Jennasis Killing Co.\"). As for picking her permanent professional name, she said, \"I had to come up with a good name. I didn't want a porno name. So I sat down, opened up the phone book, and thumbed to the J's, cause I wanted it to match my first name.\" She saw 'James', but rejected \"Jenna James\" because it \"sounds too porno\". Right under that was 'Jameson', which struck her as being the name of the whiskey she likes, and thought, \"Ok, that's perfect.\" That night at work, she saw her brother and asked him what he thought. He said, \"I'm drinking Jameson right now.\" And the name stuck.\nBesides dancing, starting later in 1991, she began posing for nude photographs for photographer Suze Randall in Los Angeles, with the intention of getting into \"Penthouse\". After her photos had appeared in several men's magazines under various names, she then stopped working for Randall, feeling Randall was \"a shark.\"\nWhile in high school, she began taking drugs\u00a0\u2013 cocaine, LSD, and methamphetamine\u00a0\u2013 accompanied by her brother (who was addicted to heroin) and at times her father. Her addiction worsened during her four years with her boyfriend. She eventually stopped eating properly and became too thin to model; Jack left her in 1994. She weighed when a friend put her in a wheelchair and sent her to her father, who was then living in Redding, California, in order to detox; her father did not recognize her when she got off the plane.\nPornographic film.\nJameson has said that she started acting in sex videos in retaliation for the infidelity of her then-boyfriend, Jack. She first appeared in an erotic film in 1993, a non-explicit softcore movie by Andrew Blake, with girlfriend Nikki Tyler. Her first pornographic movie scenes were filmed by Randy West and appeared in 1994's \"Up and Cummers 10\" and \"Up and Cummers 11\".\nOf her first adult movie, Randy West said &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Jenna contacted me and said she wanted to get into the XXX business, but her agent didn't want her to do porn. A month later, I'm on a shoot in Woodland Hills (a San Fernando Valley section of Los Angeles), and there's Jenna. She said she wanted to get into the business, despite what her agent said. I told her, if you want, to just do a girl-on-girl scene, we can do that. She said she wanted to work with Kylie Ireland, so I set it up. When the sex started, she just fucking rocked! I knew Jenna was special right off the bat. I figured she'd be the next Ginger Lynn, but nobody had any idea she was going to be as big as she turned out to be. Jenna told me when we first met that she was going to be a star.\"\nJameson got her first breast implants on July 28, 1994, to enhance her stripping and movie careers.\nHer first adult video appearances were lesbian scenes (a common way that female performers ease into the business). She says, \"Girl-on-girl was easy and natural. Then they offered me lots of money to do boy-girl.\" Her first heterosexual scene was in \"Up and Cummers 11\" (1994). At the beginning of her career, Jameson promised herself that she would never do anal sex or double penetration scenes on film. Instead, her \"signature move\" was oral sex, lubricated with saliva. She has also never done any interracial sex scenes with men (despite that category's runaway popularity during the 2000s).\nIn 1994, after overcoming her drug addiction by spending several weeks with her father and grandmother, Jameson relocated to Los Angeles to live with Nikki Tyler. Her first movie after that was \"Silk Stockings\". Later in 1995, Wicked Pictures, a then-small pornographic film production company, signed her to an exclusive contract. She remembers telling Wicked Pictures founder Steve Orenstein: \"The most important thing to me right now is to become the biggest star the industry has ever seen.\"\nThe contract earned Jameson US$6,000 for each of eight movies in her first year. Her first big-budget production was \"Blue Movie\" (1995), in which she played a reporter investigating a porn set; it won multiple AVN Awards. In 1996, Jameson won top awards from three major industry organizations: the XRCO Best New Starlet award, the AVN Best New Starlet Award, and the Fans of X-Rated Entertainment (F.O.X.E.) Video Vixen award. She was the first entertainer to win all three awards.\nBy 2001, Jameson earned $60,000 for a day and a half of filming a single DVD, and $8,000 per night dancing at strip clubs. She tried to restrict herself to five films per year and two weeks of dancing per month. Her husband, Jay Grdina, has said that she earned as much as $25,000 per night dancing.\nBetween 2005 and 2006, she hosted Playboy TV's \"Jenna's American Sex Star\", where prospective porn stars compete in sexual performances for a contract with her company, ClubJenna. Winners of the contracts for the first two years were Brea Bennett and Roxy Jezel.\nIn January 2008, Jameson confirmed she was retiring from pornographic performances and has since said that she \"won't even do a \"Maxim\" cover.\"\nJameson's first appearance at an adult-entertainment event since announcing her retirement was at the 2013 Exxxotica New Jersey convention in October. On January 15, 2014, Fleshlight released Jameson's signature artificial vagina. Jameson was also the master of ceremonies for the 2014 XBIZ Awards on January 24.\nBusiness ventures.\nJameson and Grdina formed ClubJenna as an Internet pornography company in 2000. \nEarly ClubJenna films starred Jameson herself, limiting herself to on-screen sex with other women or with Grdina, who appeared as Justin Sterling. The first ClubJenna film, \"Briana Loves Jenna\" (2001), co-produced with Vivid, cost US$280,000 to make, and grossed over $1\u00a0million in its first year. It was the best-selling and best-renting pornographic title of its year, winning twin AVN Awards. It was marketed as \"Jenna. Her first boy/girl scene in over 2 years,\" referring to Jameson's abstention from heterosexual on-film intercourse. Grdina has stated that Jameson's films averaged sales of 100,000 copies, compared with run-of-the-mill pornographic films, which did well to sell 5,000. On the other hand, he also said that their films took up to twelve days to film, compared with one day for other pornographic films.\nIn a January 2009 interview with William Shatner on \"Shatner's Raw Nerve\", Jameson said she came close to buying \"Penthouse\" magazine when publisher Bob Guccione filed for Chapter 11 reorganization of his business (which occurred in August 2003), but was thwarted when someone else swooped in and bought up all the stock. \"New York Magazine\"'s \"Intelligencer\" quoted a source from Penthouse as saying \"I'm sure she is considering it\", adding that Jameson was to be the cover girl in January 2004 \u2013 and \"it's a really wild-looking shoot, even for a porn star.\"\nIn 2005, Jameson first directed a film, \"The Provocateur\", released as \"Jenna's Provocateur\" in September 2006. \nClubJenna was run as a family business, with Grdina's sister, Kris, as vice president in charge of merchandising. \nJameson also capitalized on merchandising herself. Since May 2003, she has been appearing on a tall billboard in New York City's Times Square promoting her website and movies. The first advertisement displayed her wearing only a thong and read \"Who Says They Cleaned Up Times Square?\" There is a line of sex toys licensed to Doc Johnson, and an \"anatomically correct\" Jenna Jameson action figure. She stars in her own sex simulation video game, \"Virtually Jenna\", in which the goal is to bring a 3D model of her to orgasm. In 2006, New York City-based Wicked Cow Entertainment started to expand her brand to barware, perfume, handbags, lingerie, and footwear, sold through high-end retailers such as Saks Fifth Avenue and Colette boutiques. Her film and merchandising success enabled her to attain her goal of becoming the top porn star in the world.\nIn August 2005, ClubJenna launched Club Thrust, an interactive website for Jameson's gay male fans, which includes videos, galleries, sex advice, gossip, and downloads. The director of webmaster relations for ClubJenna said the straight site had always had a lot of gay traffic. By 2006, ClubJenna administered more than 150 official sites for other adult entertainment industry stars.\nIn August 2005, a group of business investors that included Jameson purchased Babes Cabaret, a strip club in Scottsdale, Arizona, intending to make it the first foray of ClubJenna into live entertainment. Soon after the purchase attracted attention, the Scottsdale City Council proposed a new ordinance banning nudity at adult-entertainment venues and requiring a four-foot divider restricting contact with dancers. Such a divider would have also effectively banned lap dances, the dancers' main source of revenue. Jameson argued strongly against the ordinance and helped organize a petition against it. On September 12, 2006, in a referendum on the ordinance, voters struck down the stricter rules, allowing the club to continue operating as before.\nOn February 3, 2006, Jameson hosted a \"Vivid ClubJenna Super Bowl Party\" with several other ClubJenna and Vivid Girls at the Zoo Club in Detroit, Michigan, for a $500 to $1,000 ticket price. It featured a lingerie show, but no planned nudity or sex acts. When first announced, the party caused controversy with the National Football League, which did not sanction this as an official Super Bowl event. In 2007, Jameson signed up to play quarterback in the Lingerie Bowl, but retired due to her insurance company's damage concerns. She instead acted as a commentator.\nOn June 22, 2006, Playboy Enterprises announced that it had bought ClubJenna Inc., along with an agreement to have both Jameson and Grdina stay on as contracted executives. Playboy CEO Christie Hefner said that she expected to rapidly increase film production, producing about thirty features in the first year, and will expand the way they are sold, not only as DVDs but through TV channels, video-on-demand services, and mobile phones. On November 1, 2006, Playboy renamed one of the Spice Network's pay-per-view channels from The Hot Network to ClubJenna.\nBooks.\nJameson's autobiography, \",\" was published in 2004. It was co-written with Neil Strauss, a contributor to \"The New York Times\" and \"Rolling Stone\", and published by ReganBooks, a division of HarperCollins. The autobiography also won the 2004 \"Mainstream's Adult Media Favorite\" XRCO Award in a tie with Seymore Butts's \"Family Business\" TV series. It was translated into German as \"Pornostar. Die Autobiographie\" in November 2005, and Spanish as \"C\u00f3mo Hacer El Amor Igual Que Una Estrella Porno\" in January 2006.\nThe book covers her early career from her beginning in show business, living with her tattoo artist boyfriend, through receiving the Pornographic Hot d'Or award at Cannes, and wedding pictures from her second marriage. It does not omit sordid details, describing her two rapes, drug addictions, an unhappy first marriage, and numerous affairs with men and women. The first-person narrative is broken up by personal photos, childhood diary entries, family interviews, movie scripts, and comic panels.\nThe autobiography publisher, Judith Regan, also served as executive producer of a tie-in television news special, \"Jenna Jameson's Confessions\", airing on VH1 on August 16, 2004, one day before the book's launch. In April 2005, ReganBooks and Jameson filed lawsuits against each other. The point of contention was a proposed reality show about Jameson's everyday life, discussed between her then-husband, Jay Grdina, and the A&amp;E Network. ReganBooks maintained that any A&amp;E deal was a breach of Jameson's contract, which indicated that ReganBooks had a stake in the profits generated by both the special based on her memoir and a reality-based series, as well as \"any similar projects\". Jameson's suit claimed that the A&amp;E deal preceded the ReganBooks contract. The reality series had still not materialized, and the lawsuit was still being discussed, when HarperCollins fired Judith Regan on December 15, 2006, over an unrelated issue.\nIn January 2007, Jameson was reported to be in talks with producers on turning the autobiography into a movie. In March 2007, Jameson was reportedly missing meetings with producers, thus endangering the movie, due to problems with a recent vaginoplasty.\nIn April 2013, Jameson announced she was working on a fictional erotic novel called \"Sugar\". It was co-written with Hope Tarr and published by Skyhorse Publishing. It was released on October 21, 2013.\nMainstream appearances.\nJameson is also known for achieving a high level of celebrity outside of pornography \u2013 even bringing pornography itself closer to mainstream society's awareness and acceptance. \nIn 1995, Jameson sent photos of herself to radio host Howard Stern. She became a regular guest on his show and played the role of \"Mandy\", the \"First Nude Woman on Radio\", in Stern's semi-autobiographical 1997 film \"Private Parts\". This film appearance was the beginning of a series of non-pornographic film and television roles. In 1997, Jameson made an appearance for an Extreme Championship Wrestling pay-per-view, Hardcore Heaven (1997), as the valet for the Dudley Boyz; another appearance at ECW Living Dangerously on March 1, 1998; and a few months where she was ECW's on-screen interviewer. In 1998, she filmed a vignette with Val Venis, a character in the WWE, for airing on WWE programming. In the late 1990s, Jameson guest-hosted several episodes of the E! cable network's hit travel/adventure/party show \"Wild On!\", appearing scantily clad in tropical locations. Jameson was featured and interviewed on the British television show \"European Blue Review\" on Channel 5.\nJameson appeared in a 2002 music video for the Eminem song \"Without Me\". She can be seen in bed with Eminem as one of the \"two trailer park girls\" (the other one is fitness model Kiana Tom) that \"go round the outside\". Jameson voiced an animated version of herself in a July 2001 episode of \"Family Guy\" entitled \"Brian Does Hollywood\". Her character won an award for acting in a porn film directed by Brian Griffin, and at the close of the episode, Peter Griffin kidnaps her. In 2002, Jameson and Ron Jeremy played themselves in Comedy Central's first feature television movie, \"Porn 'n Chicken\", in the roles of speakers for a pornography viewing club. Also in 2002, she appeared in two video games, most notably voicing Candy Suxxx in \"\". Her character begins as a prostitute, but goes on to become a successful pornographic actress and is displayed on several billboards within the game. Her performance won the 2003 G-Phoria \"Best Live Action/Voice Performance Award \u2013 Female\". She also provided both the appearance and the voice for \"Daisy\", a secret playable character for the video game \"Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 4\", who performs provocative tricks with her clothing and skateboard. In 2003, Jameson appeared in two episodes of the NBC prime-time television show \"Mister Sterling\" as the girlfriend of a political financier.\nIn the months following the publication of her autobiography, she was interviewed on NBC, CNBC, Fox News, and CNN, and the book was reviewed by \"The New York Times\", Reuters, and other major media outlets.\nJameson was featured prominently in \"Samhain\", a low-budget horror film in which she starred with other pornographic actresses, including Ginger Lynn Allen. It was filmed in 2002 but had sat unreleased until 2005, when it was re-cut and released as \"\". She had another minor horror film role in \"Sin-Jin Smyth\", delayed from release until late 2006.\nIn February 2006, Comedy Central announced plans to feature Jameson as \"P-Whip\", in a starring role in its first animated mobile phone series, \"Samurai Love God\". \"Mediaweek\" called her the biggest name attached to the project. In April 2006, Jameson was the star of a video podcast ad for Adidas, advertising Adicolor shoes by playing a provocative game of whack a mole. Jameson made an appearance in the American reality TV show \"The Simple Life\" in the fifth-season episode \"Committed\", broadcast on July 1, 2007; Paris Hilton and Nicole Richie, while working in a \"love camp\", brought her in to help throw a \"love ceremony\" vow for the five dysfunctional couples. In 2008, Jameson had another starring role in the comedy horror film \"Zombie Strippers\", loosely based on Eug\u00e8ne Ionesco's play \"Rhinoceros\". Madame Tussauds has a wax model of Jameson.\nOn August 27, 2015, Jameson became a contestant on the sixteenth series of the British reality series \"Celebrity Big Brother\", representing the US.\nControversial mainstream appearances.\nSome of her mainstream appearances sparked controversy. An interview with Jameson contained in the 1999 Abercrombie &amp; Fitch \"A&amp;F Quarterly\" was part of the motivation for Michigan Attorney General Jennifer Granholm and Illinois Lieutenant Governor Corinne Wood to speak out against the hybrid magazine-catalog. The campaign was joined by parents and Christian conservative groups, and Abercrombie removed it from shelves in 2003.\nIn November 2001, the Oxford Union debating society invited Jameson to come to Oxford to argue against the proposition \"The House Believes that Porn is Harmful.\" She wrote in her diary at the time, \"I feel like I am going to be out of my element, but, I could never pass this chance up\u00a0... it's a once in a lifetime thing.\" In the end, her side won the debate 204 to 27.\nIn February 2003, Pony International planned to feature her as one of several pornographic actors in advertisements for athletic shoes. This was attacked by Bill O'Reilly of Fox News in an editorial called \"Using Quasi-Prostitutes to Sell Sneakers\", calling pornographic actors inappropriate role models for teens. In response, \"The Harvard Crimson\" proposed a boycott of O'Reilly and Fox News. Jameson herself sent a sarcastic email to the show, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I hope Bill understands the difference between a porn star and a hooker. I assume he has done some research on the subject because he requested some of my videos after we finished taping my appearance. I imagine he wanted them for professional reasons.\nPersonal life.\nIn 2004 Jameson stated that she was bisexual, and that she had had sex with 100 women and 30 men off-screen in her life, but by 2008 she described herself as \"totally hetero\". She has stated the best relationship she ever had was her lesbian relationship with porn actress Nikki Tyler, which she documents in her autobiography. They lived together at the start of her porn career and again before her second marriage. Famous boyfriends discussed in her autobiography include Marilyn Manson and Tommy Lee.\nOn December 20, 1996, Jameson married porn star/Wicked Pictures director Brad Armstrong. The marriage lasted just 10 weeks. Although they informally separated in March 1997, she remained contractually obligated to work on Wicked Pictures projects involving both of them. They legally separated and divorced in March 2001.\nJameson met former pornographic studio owner Jay Grdina, scion of a wealthy cattle-ranching family, who had entered pornographic film production after college. From 1998 until Jameson's retirement, Grdina was Jameson's only on-screen male sex partner, acting under the name Justin Sterling. They were engaged in December 2000, well before her divorce from Armstrong, and married June 22, 2003. They tried to have children from mid-2004 onwards, as Jameson had planned to retire from adult entertainment upon becoming a mother. The couple resided in Scottsdale, Arizona, in a Spanish-style mansion, bought for $2 million in 2002.\nIn October 2006, it was reported that Jameson began dating mixed martial artist and former UFC champion Tito Ortiz, whom she met on Myspace. On December 12, 2006, Jameson filed for divorce from Grdina.\nJameson announced in August 2008 that she and Ortiz were expecting twins in April 2009. On March 16, 2009, Jameson gave birth to twin boys. Jameson and Ortiz split up in March 2013. Ortiz was granted full custody of the twins.\nJameson's father died on October 2, 2010, after suffering complications from triple bypass surgery.\nOn May 25, 2012, Jameson was arrested in Westminster, California and charged with three misdemeanor counts for driving under the influence of alcohol or other drugs, driving with a blood-alcohol level over the state legal limit, and driving on a suspended license after her Range Rover struck a light pole. She initially pleaded not guilty to the charges, but later changed her plea to guilty. She was sentenced to three years of informal probation, ordered to pay $340 in fines, and participate in a Mothers Against Drunk Driving victim impact panel. The charge for driving without a valid license was dismissed.\nAs of 2014, Jameson had undergone extensive tattooing, almost completely covering both of her arms in sleeve tattoos.\nIn June 2015, Jameson announced that she was converting to Judaism, in order to marry her boyfriend, Lior Bitton. In October of that year, Israel's Channel 2 announced a reality television series documenting Jameson's conversion.\nOn August 5, 2016, Jameson announced that she and Bitton were expecting their first child together. On April 6, 2017, they welcomed a daughter, whom they named Batel.\nOn January 12, 2022, Jameson announced that she was suffering from Guillain\u2013Barr\u00e9 syndrome, although this was later proven to be a misdiagnosis.\nOn February 1, 2023, Jameson confirmed in a TikTok video that she and Bitton had ended their relationship, and was in a relationship with barber and influencer Jessi Lawless. She married Lawless on May 23, 2023.\nOn April 17, 2024, Jameson's wife Jessi Lawless filed for annulment of their marriage after less than a year. Lawless posted a video on her Instagram explaining that \"the 50-year-old former adult film star's alleged drinking led to her decision to end the marriage.\"\nIn November 2025, Jenna Jameson embraced Christianity and received the sacrament of baptism. Jameson noted that she was interested in \"helping others find Jesus too\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74575", "revid": "985645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74575", "title": "List of cities in Israel", "text": "The 15 most populous cities in Israel\nJerusalem\nTel Aviv-Yafo\nHaifa\nPetah Tikva\nRishon LeZion\nNetanya\nAshdod\nBnei Brak\nBeersheba\nHolon\nRamat Gan\nBeit Shemesh\nAshkelon\nRehovot\nBat Yam\nThis article lists the 78 localities in Israel that the Israeli Ministry of Interior has designated as a city council. It includes occupied East Jerusalem but excludes the four Israeli settlements in the West Bank that are designated as cities.\nThe list is based on the current index of the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS). Within Israel's system of local government, an urban municipality can be granted a city council by the Interior Ministry when its population exceeds 20,000. The term \"city\" does not generally refer to local councils or urban agglomerations, even though a defined city often contains only a small portion of an urban area or metropolitan area's population.\nList of cities.\nAs for 2025, Israel has 18 cities with populations over 100,000, including Jerusalem and Tel Aviv-Yafo. In all, there are 80 Israeli localities granted \"municipalities\" (or \"city\") status by the Ministry of the Interior, including four Israeli settlements in the West Bank. Two more cities, Kasif and Tila, are planned to be built in the Negev. The area and population of Jerusalem includes that of East Jerusalem which has been \"de facto\" annexed by Israel and incorporated within Jerusalem's municipal borders under the Jerusalem Law. This, however, is not recognized by the international community who regard East Jerusalem to be Palestinian territory held under Israeli occupation. If East Jerusalem is considered part of Israel, Tel Aviv is the country's second most populous city with 495,230 residents after Jerusalem with 1,028,366; if not, Tel Aviv is the most populous city, followed by West Jerusalem with 362,960.\nThe following table lists Israeli cities, not including the settlements, by name, district, population, area, and the Socio-Economic Index, according to the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74576", "revid": "46911938", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74576", "title": "Israeli system of government", "text": "The Israeli system of government is based on parliamentary democracy. The Prime Minister of Israel is the head of government and leader of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government (also known as the cabinet). Legislative power is vested in the Knesset. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The political system of the State of Israel and its main principles are set out in 11 Basic Laws. Israel does not have a written constitution.\nPresidency.\nThe President of the State is the \"de jure\" head of state of Israel. The position is largely an apolitical and ceremonial role, and is not considered a part of any Government Branch. The President's ceremonial roles include signing every law (except those pertaining to the President's powers) and international or bilateral treaty, ceremonially appointing the Prime Minister, confirming and endorsing the credentials of ambassadors, and receiving the credentials of foreign diplomats. The President also has several important functions in government. The President is the only government official with the power to pardon or commute prisoners. The President appoints the governor of the Bank of Israel, the president of the national emergency relief service Magen David Adom, and the members and leaders of several institutions. The President also ceremonially appoints judges to their posts after their selection.\nExecutive branch.\nThe Prime Minister is the most powerful political figure in the country. Under sections 7 to 14 of , the Prime Minister is nominated by the President after consulting party leaders in the Knesset; the appointment of the Prime Minister and cabinet is in turn confirmed by a majority vote of confidence from the assembled Knesset members. As head of government, the Prime Minister makes foreign and domestic policy decisions which are voted on by the cabinet. The cabinet is composed of ministers, most of whom are the heads of government departments, though some are deputy ministers and ministers without portfolio. Cabinet ministers are appointed by the Prime Minister. The cabinet's composition must also be approved by the Knesset. The Prime Minister may dismiss cabinet members, but any replacements must be approved by the Knesset. Most ministers are members of the Knesset, though only the Prime Minister is required to be one. The cabinet meets weekly on Sundays, and there may be additional meetings if circumstances require it. Each cabinet meeting is chaired by the Prime Minister.\nA select group of ministers led by the Prime Minister forms the security cabinet, responsible for outlining and implementing a foreign and defense policy. This forum is designed to coordinate diplomatic negotiations, and to make quick and effective decisions in times of crisis and war.\nThe Israeli government has 28 ministries, each of them responsible for a sector of public administration. Many ministries are located in the Kiryat Ben Gurion Government complex in the area of Givat Ram in Jerusalem. Each ministry is led by a minister, who is also a member of the cabinet and is usually a member of the Knesset. The Office of the Prime Minister coordinates the work of all government ministries, and assists the Prime Minister in their daily tasks.\nThe State Comptroller, who supervises and reviews the policies and operations of the government, is elected by the Knesset in secret ballot. They can only be removed from office by a two-thirds vote in the Knesset. In addition to their fiscal and operational oversight function, the State Comptroller also serves as a national ombudsman for the state, receiving complaints from the public about the actions of public officials and institutions.\nLegislative branch.\nKnesset.\nThe Knesset is Israel's unicameral legislature and is seated in Jerusalem. Its 120 members are elected to 4-year terms through party-list proportional representation (\"see\" electoral system, below), as mandated by the 1958 https://. Knesset seats are allocated among parties using the D'Hondt method of party list proportional representation. Parties select candidates using a closed list. Thus, voters select the party of their choice, rather than any specific candidate. Israel requires a party to meet an election threshold of 3.25% to be allocated a Knesset seat. All Israeli citizens 18 years of age and older may participate in legislative elections, which are conducted by secret ballot.\nAs the legislative branch of the Israeli government, the Knesset has the power to enact and repeal all laws. It enjoys \"de jure\" parliamentary supremacy, and can pass any law by a simple majority, even one that might arguably conflict with a Basic Law, unless it has specific conditions for its modification. The Knesset can adopt and amend Basic Laws acting through its capacity as a Constituent Assembly. The Knesset also supervises government activities through its committees, nominates the Prime Minister and approves the cabinet, and elects the President of the State and the State Comptroller. It also has the power to remove the President and State Comptroller from office, revoke the immunity of its members, and to dissolve itself and call new elections.\nThe February 2009 elections produced five prominent political parties; Kadima, Likud, Israel Beytenu, Labor and Shas, each with more than ten seats in the Knesset. Three of these parties were ruling parties in the past. However, only once has a single party held the 61 seats needed for a majority government (the Alignment from 1968 until the 1969 elections). Therefore, aside from that one exception, since 1948 Israeli governments have always comprised coalitions. As of 2009, there are 12 political parties represented in the Knesset, spanning both the political and religious spectra.\nElectoral system.\nIsrael's electoral system operates within the parameters of a Basic Law (\"The Knesset\") and of the 1969 \"Knesset Elections Law\".\nThe Knesset's 120 members are elected by secret ballot to 4-year terms, although the Knesset may decide to call for new elections before the end of the 4-year term, and a government can change without a general election; since the 1988 election, no Knesset has finished its 4-year term. In addition a motion of no confidence may be called. Voting in general elections takes place using the highest averages method of party-list proportional representation, using the d'Hondt formula.\nGeneral elections use closed lists: voters vote only for party lists and cannot affect the order of candidates within the lists. Since the 1992 \"Parties Law\", only registered parties may stand. There are no separate electoral districts; all voters vote on the same party lists. Suffrage is universal among Israeli citizens aged 18 years or older. Voting is optional. Polling locations are open throughout Israel; absentee ballots are limited to diplomatic staff and the merchant marine. While each party attains one seat for 1 in 120 votes, there is a minimum threshold of 3.25% for parties to attain their first seat in an election. This requirement aimed to bar smaller parties from parliament but spurred some parties to join together simply to overcome the threshold. The low vote-threshold for entry into parliament, as well as the need for parties with small numbers of seats to form coalition governments, results in a highly fragmented political spectrum, with small parties exercising extensive power (relative to their electoral support) within coalitions.\nThe president selects the prime minister as the party leader most able to form a government, based on the number of parliament seats their coalition has won. After the president's selection, the prime minister has forty-five days to form a government. The Knesset collectively must approve the members of the cabinet. This electoral system, inherited from the Yishuv (Jewish settlement organization during the British Mandate), makes it very difficult for any party to gain a working majority in the Knesset and thus governments generally form on the basis of coalitions. Due to the difficulties in holding coalitions together, elections often occur earlier than scheduled. The average life-span of an Israeli government is about two years. Over the years, the peace process, the role of religion in the state, and political scandals have caused coalitions to break apart or have produced early elections.\nJudicial system.\nThe judicial branch is an independent branch of the government, including secular and religious courts for the various religions present in Israel. The court system involves three stages of justice.\nJudges for all courts are appointed by the Judicial Selection Committee. The committee is composed of nine members: two cabinet members (one being the Minister of Justice), two Knesset members, two members of the Israel Bar Association, and three Supreme Court justices (one being the President of the Supreme Court). The committee is chaired by the Minister of Justice.\nIn November 1985, the Israeli government informed the United Nations Secretariat that it would no longer accept compulsory International Court of Justice jurisdiction.\nJudicial courts.\nIsraeli judicial courts consist of a three-tier system:\nReligious courts.\nSome issues of family law (marriage and divorce in particular) fall either under the jurisdiction of religious courts or under parallel jurisdiction of those and the state's family courts. The state maintains and finances Rabbinical, Sharia and various Canonical courts for the needs of the various religious communities. All judges are civil servants, and required to uphold general law in their tribunals as well. The Supreme Court serves as final appellate instance for all religious courts.\nJewish religious courts are under control of the Prime Minister's Office and the Chief Rabbinate of Israel. These courts have jurisdiction in only five areas: Kashrut, Sabbath, Jewish burial, marital issues (especially divorce), and Jewish status of immigrants. However, except for determining a person's marital status, all other marital issues may also be taken to secular Family Courts.\nThe other major religious communities in Israel, such as Muslims and Christians, have their own religious courts. These courts have similar jurisdiction over their followers as Jewish religious courts, although Muslim religious courts have more control over family affairs.\nLabor courts.\nThere are five regional labor courts in Israel as a tribunal of first instance, and a National Labor Court in Jerusalem to hear appeals and few cases of national importance. The labor courts have exclusive jurisdiction over cases involving employer-employee relationship, employment, strikes and labor union disputes, labor-related complaints against the National Insurance Institute, and Health Insurance claims.\nMilitary courts.\nThe Israel Defense Forces (IDF) maintains a series of district military courts and special military tribunals. The Military Court of Appeals is the IDF's supreme appellate court. It considers and judges over appeals submitted by the Military Advocate General, which challenges decisions rendered by the lower courts.\nCourt of Admiralty.\nIn all matters having to do with admiralty, commercial shipping, accidents at sea, and other maritime matters, the Haifa District Court, sitting as the Court of Admiralty, has exclusive statewide jurisdiction.\nSeparation of powers.\nThe Basic Law: The Government contains a number of checks and balances between the Knesset and the Government.\nThe fact that the Government holds office by virtue of the confidence of the Knesset creates a significant check on the Government's power, but there are also restrictions on the Knesset's ability to vote no confidence in the Government. The Government serves with the confidence of the Knesset, but the Knesset is limited to a constructive vote of no confidence under Basic Law: The Government (2001). Members of the Knesset are also disincentivized from supporting a vote of no confidence for the purpose of obtaining a ministerial portfolio in a subsequent government, as when members of Knesset (MKs) defect from their faction\u2014which is defined as opposing one\u2019s party\u2019s position on a vote of confidence\u2014they are ineligible to serve as ministers during that Knesset, and they cannot run on their party\u2019s list in the subsequent election.\nAdditionally, the Knesset can exercise oversight over the Government. Knesset committees can compel testimony of government ministers, and the Government is required to comply with such oversight requests. The Basic Laws also reserve a role for the Knesset minority, with 40 MKs empowered to compel the Prime Minister\u2019s attendance in the Knesset on a set topic. The Basic Laws contemplate a regularized system of oversight, with any reorganization of ministerial powers requiring Knesset approval and the creation of a committee in the Knesset to oversee the ministry. This requirement supports the Knesset\u2019s oversight of ministerial regulations. When government ministers issue regulations that involve criminal sanctions for violations, the Knesset committee that oversees that committee has the ability to invalidate that regulation within 45 days. The Israeli Supreme Court has emphasized the importance of such oversight mechanisms, in some cases requiring the government avoid taking action, including during a state of emergency, unless and until the Knesset can properly exercise oversight of it through its committees.\nLocal government.\nFor governmental purposes, Israel is divided into six districts: Central District; Haifa District; Jerusalem District; Northern District; Southern District; and Tel Aviv District. The districts further subdivide into fifteen sub-districts and into fifty natural regions. Administration of the districts is coordinated by the Ministry of Interior.\nThere are three forms of local government in Israel: city councils, local councils, and regional councils. City councils govern municipalities classified as cities, local councils govern small municipalities, and regional councils govern groups of communities. These bodies look after public services such as urban planning, zoning, the provision of water, emergency services, and education and culture, as per guidelines of the Ministry of Interior. Local governments consist of a governing council chaired by a mayor. The mayor and all council members are chosen in municipal elections.\nThe Ministry of Defense has responsibility for the administration of the occupied territories.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74577", "revid": "24927429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74577", "title": "Rear Window", "text": "1954 American mystery thriller film by Alfred Hitchcock\nRear Window is a 1954 American mystery thriller film directed by Alfred Hitchcock and written by John Michael Hayes, based on Cornell Woolrich's 1942 short story \"It Had to Be Murder\". Originally released by Paramount Pictures, the film stars James Stewart, Grace Kelly, Wendell Corey, Thelma Ritter, and Raymond Burr. It was screened at the 1954 Venice Film Festival in competition for the Golden Lion.\n\"Rear Window\" is shot almost entirely from within one room and from the point-of-view outside the window. The film was made with a budget of $1 million &amp;lpar;&amp;dollar;\u00a0in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;), and grossed $27 million during its initial release &amp;lpar;&amp;dollar;\u00a0in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;).\n\"Rear Window\" is considered by many filmgoers, critics, and scholars to be one of Hitchcock's best films, as well as one of the greatest films ever made. It received four Academy Award nominations, and was ranked number 42 on AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies list and number 48 on the 10th-anniversary edition, and in 1997 was added to the United States National Film Registry in the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nPlot.\nProfessional photojournalist L.B. \"Jeff\" Jefferies, recuperating from adventurous assignment-related injuries, with his leg in a cast from his waist to his foot, is confined to a wheelchair in his Greenwich Village apartment. His mid-floor rear window looks out onto a courtyard with small garden plots, surrounded on four sides by apartments in adjoining buildings. Jeff is regularly visited by Stella, a middle-aged nurse, and his couture-dressed girlfriend, Lisa Fremont, a socialite who works in fashion.\nDuring a heat wave, Jeff watches his neighbors through open windows, including a professional dancer coined \"Miss Torso\"; a songwriter with writer's block; a spinster who pantomimes dates with pretend suitors, \"Miss Lonely-Hearts\"; and traveling costume jewelry salesman Lars Thorwald, who is hen-pecked by his bedridden wife. One night, Jeff hears a woman scream, followed by the sound of breaking glass. Later that night, Jeff wakes as a thunderstorm breaks; he observes Thorwald making repeated excursions carrying his Halliburton aluminium sample case. After Jeff has fallen asleep, Thorwald leaves his apartment along with a woman obscured by a large black hat.\nThe next morning, Jeff notices that the Thorwalds' shades are drawn, Thorwald's wife seems to be gone, and Jeff sees Thorwald cleaning a large knife and a handsaw. Movers haul away a large trunk. After surveilling with binoculars and a camera with a telephoto lens, Jeff grows suspicious of Thorwald's activities. Convinced that Thorwald has murdered his wife, he first tells Stella, who becomes morbidly interested in the case, and then Lisa, who doubts him until they notice that Thorwald's wife is no longer in bed and the mattress is rolled up.\nJeff calls his friend, detective Tom Doyle, to request that he investigate Thorwald. Whilst sceptical, Doyle thoroughly investigates, finds nothing suspicious, and posits that the Thorwalds were having marital problems, and Thorwald had sent his wife on a vacation upstate. Temporarily mollified by this explanation, Jeff and Lisa begin to question their \"rear window ethics\". Later that night, however, a neighbor's dog is found dead in the courtyard; the previous day, Thorwald had chased the dog away from digging his garden flowerbed. The dog's alarmed owner cries out, drawing the attention of everyone except Thorwald, who sits furtively in his dark apartment, smoking. Now convinced his theory is true, Jeff looks at slides taken two weeks earlier and notices that Thorwald has replanted flowers in his garden, possibly to bury a body part.\nThe following night, Jeff telephones Thorwald to lure him away from his apartment, enabling Lisa and Stella to investigate Thorwald's flowerbed. Finding nothing, Lisa decides to climb into Thorwald's open window to search his apartment. Stella hurries back to Jeff.\nWhile Lisa is searching, Jeff and Stella are distracted when they see Miss Lonely-Hearts contemplating an overdose. Thorwald returns unexpectedly and catches Lisa, who attempts to talk her way out of trouble. Unconvinced, Thorwald attacks her, causing Lisa to cry out. Jeff and Stella call the police. The operator finally connects Jeff with the police, and he reports that a man is assaulting a woman at Thorwald's apartment. The police arrive to intervene as Lisa and Thorwald scuffle. During police questioning, Lisa signals to Jeff that she is wearing Mrs. Thorwald's wedding ring. Seeing this, Thorwald realizes Jeff is surveilling his apartment. Rather than expose Thorwald, Lisa allows herself to be arrested for breaking and entering so she can get to safety. Coincidentally, the songwriter had finished his song \"Lisa,\" playing it loudly and, enthralled by the tune, Miss Lonely-Hearts abandons her suicide attempt.\nJeff phones Doyle and leaves an urgent message while Stella leaves to bail Lisa out of jail. Locating Jeff's apartment, Thorwald attacks him; Jeff's only defense in a darkened apartment is snapping his camera flash bulbs in Thorwald's eyes. While they grapple, Doyle and other officers arrive, followed by Lisa and Stella. Police apprehend Thorwald just as he drops Jeff out of his window. Thorwald confesses his wife's murder to the police.\nA few days later, the heat wave has broken, and life in the apartment complex has returned to normal. Miss Lonely-Hearts is seen socializing with the songwriter in his studio apartment while he plays music, Thorwald's neighbors get a new puppy, Miss Torso's homely-looking boyfriend Stanley returns from army deployment, and the newlyweds' honeymoon period has ended. Having broken his other leg in the fall, Jeff is still wheelchair-bound, now with both legs in casts. Lisa is seen stretched out next to him, wearing more casual attire and reading a travel book. After noticing Jeff asleep, she puts aside the book on exploration titled \"Beyond the High Himalayas\" and turns instead to read \"Harper's Bazaar\".\nCast.\nUncredited\nCast notes\nThemes.\nAnalysis.\n\"Rear Window\" is filmed almost entirely within Jeff's apartment and from his near-static point-of-view at his window. In Laura Mulvey's essay \"Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema,\" she identifies what she sees as voyeurism and scopophilia in Hitchcock's movies, with \"Rear Window\" used as one example of how she sees cinema as incorporating the patriarchy into the way that pleasure is constructed and signaled to the audience. Additionally, she sees the \"male gaze\" as especially evident in \"Rear Window\" in the portrayal of characters such as the dancer \"Miss Torso\", who is a spectacle for both Jeff and the audience (through his substitution) to enjoy.\nIn his 1954 review of the film, Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut suggested \"this parable: The courtyard is the world, the reporter/photographer is the filmmaker, the binoculars stand for the camera and its lenses.\"\nVoyeurism.\nJohn Fawell notes in Dennis Perry's book \"Hitchcock and Poe: The Legacy of Delight and Terror\" that Hitchcock \"recognized that the darkest aspect of voyeurism ... is our desire for awful things to happen to people ... to make ourselves feel better, and to relieve ourselves of the burden of examining our own lives.\" Hitchcock challenges the audience, forcing them to peer through his rear window and become exposed to, as Donald Spoto calls it in his 1976 book \"The Art of Alfred Hitchcock: Fifty Years of His Motion Pictures\", the \"social contagion\" of acting as voyeur.\nIn his book \"Alfred Hitchcock's \"Rear Window\", John Belton further addresses the underlying issues of voyeurism which he asserts are evident in the film. He says \"Rear Window's\" story is 'about' spectacle; it explores the fascination with looking and the attraction of that which is being looked at.\"\nIn an explicit example of a condemnation of voyeurism, Stella expresses her outrage at Jeffries' voyeuristic habits, saying, \"In the old days, they'd put your eyes out with a red hot poker\" and \"What people ought to do is get outside and look in for a change.\"\nWith further analysis, Jeff's positive evolution understandably would be impossible without voyeurism\u2014or as Robin Wood puts it in his 1989 book \"Hitchcock's Films Revisited\", \"the indulging of morbid curiosity and the consequences of that indulgence.\"\nProduction.\nWriting.\nThe screenplay, which was written by John Michael Hayes, was based on Cornell Woolrich's 1942 short story \"It Had to Be Murder\". However, in 1990 the question as to who owned the film rights of Woolrich's original story went before the Supreme Court of the United States in \"Stewart v. Abend\". Although the film was copyrighted in 1954 by Patron Inc. by a production company set up by Hitchcock and Stewart, a subsequent rights holder refused to acknowledge previous rights agreements. As a result, Stewart and Hitchcock's estate became involved in the Supreme Court case. Its outcome led to the litigant, Sheldon Abend, becoming credited as a producer of the 1998 remake of \"Rear Window\".\nFilming.\nThe film was shot entirely at stage 17 at Paramount Studios which included an enormous indoor set to replicate a Greenwich Village courtyard, with the set stretching from the bottom of the basement storeroom to the top of the lighting grid in the ceiling. The lighting was rigged with four interchangeable scene lighting arrangements: morning, afternoon, evening, and night-time. Set designers Hal Pereira and Joseph MacMillan Johnson spent six weeks building the extremely detailed and complex set, which ended up being the largest of its kind at Paramount. One of the unique features of the set was its massive drainage system, constructed to accommodate the rain sequence in the film. They also built the set around a highly nuanced lighting system which was able to create natural-looking lighting effects for both the day and night scenes. Though the address given in the film is 125 W. Ninth Street in New York's Greenwich Village, the set was actually based on a real courtyard located at 125 Christopher Street.\nThe famous uninterrupted 90 second scene at the beginning of the film in which the main character Jefferies and his neighbourhood is introduced to the viewer was created with meticulous care. It required a lot of rehearsals and ten takes during half a day of filming before it was completed. Meticulous details in the filming also include such effects as the opposite building seen reflected in Jefferies' camera lens.\nIn addition to the meticulous care and detail put into the set and filming, careful attention was also given to sound, including the use of natural sounds and music that would drift across the courtyard and into Jefferies' apartment. At one point, the voice of Bing Crosby can be heard singing \"To See You Is to Love You,\" originally from the 1952 Paramount film \"Road to Bali\". Also heard on the soundtrack are versions of songs popularized earlier in the decade by Nat King Cole (\"Mona Lisa\", 1950) and Dean Martin (\"That's Amore\", 1953), along with segments from Leonard Bernstein's score for Jerome Robbins' ballet \"Fancy Free\" (1944), Richard Rodgers's song \"Lover\" (1932), and \"M'appari tutt'amor\" from Friedrich von Flotow's opera \"Martha\" (1844), most borrowed from Paramount's music publisher, Famous Music.\nHitchcock used costume designer Edith Head on all of his Paramount films.\nSoundtrack.\nAlthough veteran Hollywood composer Franz Waxman is credited with the score for the film, his contributions were limited to the opening and closing titles and the songwriter's piano tune (\"Lisa\"). This was Waxman's final score for Hitchcock. The director instead used primarily diegetic music and sounds throughout the film.\nRelease.\nOn August 4, 1954, a \"benefit world premiere\" was held for the film, with United Nations officials and \"prominent members of the social and entertainment worlds\" at the Rivoli Theatre in New York City, with proceeds going to the American\u2013Korean Foundation (an aid organization founded soon after the end of the Korean War and headed by Milton S. Eisenhower, brother of President Eisenhower).\nDuring its initial theatrical run, \"Rear Window\" earned $5.3 million in North American box office rentals.\nReception.\nBosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" called the film a \"tense and exciting exercise\" and deemed Hitchcock as a director whose work has a \"maximum of build-up to the punch, a maximum of carefully tricked deception and incidents to divert and amuse.\" Crowther also noted that \"Mr. Hitchcock's film is not 'significant.' What it has to say about people and human nature is superficial and glib, but it does expose many facets of the loneliness of city life, and it tacitly demonstrates the impulse of morbid curiosity. The purpose of it is sensation, and that it generally provides in the colorfulness of its detail and in the flood of menace toward the end.\" \"Variety\" called the film \"one of Alfred Hitchcock's better thrillers\" which \"combines technical and artistic skills in a manner that makes this an unusually good piece of murder mystery entertainment.\" The film ranked fifth on \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\"'s Top 10 Films of the Year List in 1955.\n\"Time\" called it \"just possibly the second-most entertaining picture (after \"The 39 Steps\") ever made by Alfred Hitchcock\" and a film in which there is \"never an instant\u00a0... when Director Hitchcock is not in minute and masterly control of his material.\" The reviewer also noted the \"occasional studied lapses of taste and, more important, the eerie sense a Hitchcock audience has of reacting in a manner so carefully foreseen as to seem practically foreordained.\" \"Harrison's Reports\" named the film as a \"first-rate thriller\" that is \"strictly an adult entertainment, but it should prove to be a popular one.\" They further added, \"What helps to make the story highly entertaining is the fact that it is enhanced by clever dialogue and by delightful touches of comedy and romance that relieve the tension.\"\nNearly 30 years after the film's initial release, Roger Ebert reviewed the re-release by Universal Pictures in October 1983, after Hitchcock's estate was settled. He said the film \"develops such a clean, uncluttered line from beginning to end that we're drawn through it (and into it) effortlessly. The experience is not so much like watching a movie, as like\u00a0... well, like spying on your neighbors. Hitchcock traps us right from the first\u00a0... And because Hitchcock makes us accomplices in Stewart's voyeurism, we're along for the ride. When an enraged man comes bursting through the door to kill Stewart, we can't detach ourselves, because we looked too, and so we share the guilt and in a way we deserve what's coming to him.\" In 1983, reviewing the film Vincent Canby wrote \"Its appeal, which goes beyond that of other, equally masterly Hitchcock works, remains undiminished.\"\nThe review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports an approval rating of 99% based on 134 reviews, with an average rating of 9.30/10. The critics' consensus states that \"Hitchcock exerted full potential of suspense in this masterpiece.\" At Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of a very rare perfect 100 out of 100 based on 18 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\". In his 2012 review of the film, Killian Fox of \"The Guardian\" wrote: \"Hitchcock made a career out of indulging our voyeuristic tendencies, and he never excited them more skilfully, or with more gleeful self-awareness, than in \"Rear Window\"\".\nLegacy.\nIn 1997, \"Rear Window\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". By this time, the film interested other directors with its theme of voyeurism, and other reworkings of the film soon followed, which included Brian De Palma's 1984 film \"Body Double\" and Phillip Noyce's 1993 film \"Sliver\". In 1998 \"Time Out\" magazine conducted a poll and \"Rear Window\" was voted the 21st greatest film of all time. In the British Film Institute's 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls of the greatest films ever made, \"Rear Window\" was ranked 53rd among critics and 48th among directors. In the 2022 edition of the magazine's \"Greatest films of all time\" list the film ranked 38th in the critics poll. In 2017 \"Empire\" magazine's readers' poll ranked \"Rear Window\" at No. 72 on its list of \"The 100 Greatest Movies\". In 2022, \"Time Out\" magazine ranked the film at No. 26 on their list of \"The 100 best thriller films of all time\".\n\"Rear Window\" was restored by the team of Robert A. Harris and James C. Katz for its 1999 limited theatrical re-release (using Technicolor dye-transfer prints for the first time in this title's history) and the Collector's Edition DVD release in 2000.\nAmerican Film Institute included the film as number 42 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies, number 14 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills, number 48 in AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) and number three in AFI's 10 Top 10 (Mysteries).\n\"Rear Window\" was one of five films that Hitchcock made with Paramount that were included under a deal in which the rights reverted to him after eight years. Hitchcock removed all five films from circulation for almost 20 years (often referred to as \"The Lost Hitchcocks\" or \"The Forbidden Five\"), and he rarely granted rights for them to be shown publicly. The rights were purchased by Universal in 1983 for a rumored $6 million, after which they were re-released in theaters. These films include: \"Vertigo\", \"Rear Window\", \"The Man Who Knew Too Much\" (1956), \"Rope\", and \"The Trouble With Harry\".\n\"Rear Window\" was remade as a TV movie of the same name in 1998, with an updated storyline in which the lead character is paralyzed and lives in a high-tech home filled with assistive technology. Actor Christopher Reeve, himself paralyzed as a result of a 1995 horse-riding accident, was cast in the lead role. The telefilm also starred Daryl Hannah, Robert Forster, Ruben Santiago-Hudson, and Anne Twomey.\n\"Rear Window\" has directly influenced plot elements and themes of numerous Brian De Palma films, particularly \"Hi, Mom!\" (1970), \"Sisters\" (1972), \"Dressed to Kill\" (1980), and \"Body Double\" (1984).\n\"Disturbia\" (2007) is a modern-day retelling, with the protagonist (Shia LaBeouf) under house arrest instead of laid up with a broken leg, and who believes that his neighbor is a serial killer rather than having committed a single murder. On September 5, 2008, the Sheldon Abend Trust sued Steven Spielberg, DreamWorks, Viacom, and Universal Studios, alleging that the producers of \"Disturbia\" violated the copyright to the original Woolrich story owned by Abend. On September 21, 2010, the U.S. District Court in \"Abend v. Spielberg\", 748 F.Supp.2d 200 (S.D.N.Y. 2010), ruled that \"Disturbia\" did not infringe the original Woolrich story.\nThe 2004 horror film \"Saw\" pays homage to \"Rear Window\", in a particular scene involving the character Adam Stanheight (Leigh Whannell). In the film, Adam is kidnapped and uses a camera to take photos with his camera to illuminate the dark surroundings, mirroring the actions of Jeff in \"Rear Window\", with both scenes sharing a similar tone.\nNumerous television episodes have paid homage to, or spoofed, \"Rear Window\", including the \"Simpsons\" episode \"Bart of Darkness,\" the \"Pretty Little Liars\" episode \"How the 'A' Stole Christmas,\" \"\" episode \",\" season four episode seven of \"9-1-1\", \"Night Terrors,\" the second episode \"of\" season 2 of the British crime drama \"Whitstable Pearl\" and \"Mrs. Crabtree's Neighbourhood,\" season 17, episode 2 of Murdoch Mysteries.\nIn February 2008, the film was referenced as a part of Variety's \"The 2008 Hollywood Portfolio: Hitchcock Classics\" spread, with Scarlett Johansson and Javier Bardem as Lisa and Jeff, respectively.\n\"Rear Window\" has been referenced multiple times by singer-songwriter Taylor Swift. In the music video for her single \"Me!\", Swift wears a dress similar to one of Edith Head's designs worn by Grace Kelly. Swift has also stated that the voyeuristic elements of the film inspired the storytelling of her album \"Folklore.\"\nHome media.\nOn September 25, 2012, Universal Studios Home Entertainment released \"Rear Window\" for the first time on Blu-ray as part of the \"Alfred Hitchcock: The Masterpiece Collection\". This edition included numerous supplemental features such as an audio commentary from John Fawell, excerpts from Hitchcock's interview with Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, two theatrical trailers, and an interview with the film's screenwriter John Michael Hayes.\nOn May 6, 2014, Universal Pictures Home Entertainment re-released \"Rear Window\" on Blu-ray with the same supplemental features.\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "74578", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74578", "title": "Heathrow", "text": ""}
{"id": "74579", "revid": "48713096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74579", "title": "Telecommunications in Israel", "text": "Telecommunications in Israel are the most developed in the Middle East. Israel's system consists of coaxial cables, optical fibers, and microwave radio relay. Prior to the 1990s, Israel's telecommunication market was dominated by Bezeq, a government-owned corporation. During the 1990s, the Israeli telecommunication industry transitioned from government owned monopolies to diversified private competition by a range of new companies. As of 2014, the telecommunications sector in Israel had revenues over \u20aa15\u00a0billion, representing about 2% of the GDP.\nTechnology and industry-wise, the Israeli telecom industry has been among global leaders in technology development pioneering developments of protocols such as WiMAX, VoIP and TDMoIP. During the 2000s Israel emerged as a leading supplier for the global telecommunications industry, and a global leader in technological research.\n1970s\u20131980s.\nThe 1980s brought a revolution to the communication market in Israel:\n1990s.\nThe 1990s was a decade of marked change in the Israeli telecommunications industry, and massive developments in cellular communications, Internet, commercial television, and multichannel television platform such as cable television and satellite television.\n2000s.\nIn the first decade of the 21st century there was a major emphasis on digitization and a shift to mobile technologies, following similar trends in Europe and North America.\nTelevision.\nThe Israeli satellite television provider Yes was established in 2000, introducing strong competition in the cable television market. Prior to the establishment of Yes there were only three other cable companies in Israel: Tevel, Matav and Arutzay Zahav. The competition with Yes caused a big loss of members amongst the cable TV companies which urged them to merge. In order to strengthen Yes, which was relatively new, the regulator postponed his approval to the merger of the cable companies. The merger was completed in 2003, and the cable companies were renamed under the singular company called Hot.\nThroughout the decade, Hot and Yes inserted the use of the digital set-top boxes, and with them it became possible to receive digital broadcasts (improvement in the quality of reception of the television channels), and additionally also enabled games channels, video on demand (V.O.D) and nowadays they supply digital set-top boxes which contain advanced digital video recorder (DVR) technologies which are capable of pre-recording shows (Hot Magic, Yes Max). HOT has put a big emphasis on encouraging production of local Israeli movies, while YES, in contrast, puts more emphasis on purchasing foreign TV series and movies.\nUnder the inspection of the Second Israeli Broadcasting Authority, an additional Israeli terrestrial-commercial channel was established on 28 January 2002: Channel 10. This move started a competition among the commercial channels. Channel 10 purchased for itself hosts and actors from Channel 2 and Channel 1. In spite of these procurement actions, the channel is still considered to be inferior in the amount of its viewers relatively to the other channels.\nIn 2005, an additional bid took place in channel 2, in which \"Keshet\" and \"Reshet\" were chosen to be the channel's broadcasts to the consequent decade. Israeli News Company won the bid to produce the terrestrial Knesset Channel. On 30 March 2010, all analogue terrestrial television towers were switched off and digital distribution (\"Idan Plus\") is the only digital terrestrial system in effect. The first phase includes five SD channels (IBA-1, IBA-33, Channel 2, Israel 10 and The Knesset Channel). The system is DVB-T and MPEG-4 and in SFN configuration with two frequencies across the whole country (north and south are UHF 26 while central is UHF 29). A second phase with more channels was expected in 2012 (also IBA-1 HD) and a third phase maybe in 2013.\nInternet.\nBroadband Internet became prevalent in the majority of homes in Israel. Bezeq ceased to be a monopoly in the field of the landline communications, when HOT started offering telephony services through the cables infrastructures.\nIn the middle of the decade, due to the popularity which the high-speed Internet and VoIP technologies gained amongst the Israelis, at first Israelis were able to conduct international conversations free of charge or at lower rates through the Internet due to the link between VoIP networks such as Skype and Vonage and the traditional telephony networks in Israel and abroad. In 2008, Partner Communications Company and XFONE joined the high-speed Internet providers market.\nOther communication Fields.\nOn 1 March 2006, The Israel Postal Authority became a government-owned corporation, the Israel Postal Company, as a preceding stage to the opening of the mail market to competition. The Israeli radio succeeded to recover from rating problems and opened more regional radio stations.\nOn 17 December 2007, the Israeli parliament approved a new law which enables the Israel police and other law enforcement bodies to access communication data without judicial inspection.\nOn 4 June 2008, the Ministry of Communications published a concession for operating a system which would enable broadcasting of digital radio transmissions in Israel. Over 50 stations nationwide are estimated to be broadcasting their transmissions on the Israeli digital radio broadcasts.\nPresent.\nPress.\nIsrael has three main commercial daily newspapers: \"Yedioth Ahronoth\", \"Maariv\" and \"Haaretz\". Additionally, there are also two large free daily newspapers: \"Israel Hayom\" and \"Israel Post\" (belongs to \"The Jerusalem Post\"). Other major newspapers include the Russian-language \"Vesti\", the English-language \"The Jerusalem Post\", etc.\nMail.\nThe mail field in Israel treads towards competition. The Mail Authority became the Israel Postal Company. Gradually, the government-owned postal company enabled additional companies to enter the market of postal deliveries of mail with a weight up to half a kilogram; this was done so that they could compete with the governmental mail company, allowing the postage rates to drop.\nRadio.\nIn contrast with the state which exists in the television field, in the radio field, the Israel Broadcasting Authority is allowed to produce earnings from advertising. The radio section of the Israel Broadcasting Authority is called Kol Yisrael (\"Voice Of Israel\").\nReshet Bet is the leading radio station in Israel. Two additional radio stations belong to the Israeli defense forces: Israel Defense Forces Radio and Galgalatz. In addition to the main radio stations which could be received throughout the country, there are also regional commercial radio stations broadcasting under the auspices of the Second Authority for Television and Radio. There is a severe problem in Israel with pirated radio stations.\nLandline telephony.\nAs of 2020, Bezeq, HOT, Partner and Cellcom offer landline telephony services. Bezeq offers traditional services, while the others offer Voice over IP, with Hot's service being routed through an intranet.\nIn 2020, Bezeq had 9,500 payphones throughout the country. In December of the same year, they received permission from the government to dismantle the vast majority of these phones, leaving only those in active use and those within closed spaces, e.g. prisons, where other choices are not available.\nInternational calls.\nAs of October 2016, eight operators, 012 \u2013 012 Smile, 013 \u2013 013 NetVision, 014 \u2013 Bezeq International, 015 \u2013 Hallo 015, 016 \u2013 Golan Telecom, 017 \u2013 Hot Mobile, 018 \u2013 Exphone and 019 \u2013 019 Telzar provide international telephony: All the companies offer membership services which usually offer their customers cheaper rates. Membership might include some benefits such as billing, and dialing the default 00 prefix instead of the need to dial the specific prefix of the company (as it was done in the past, when Bezeq had a monopoly in this field). Because these companies have an extensive infrastructure of links abroad, the majority of them also provide internet services. Incoming calls are distributed through the companies relative to market share.\nCellular communication.\nAs of January 2020, There are six major network operators in Israel which offer cellular communication service: Pelephone, Cellcom, Partner, Hot Mobile, Golan Telecom and we4G.\nIn addition, there are several MVNOs: Rami Levy, Home Cellular, 019 Telzar and Cellact. The services which these companies provide long ago passed the boundaries of voice conversations and currently provide also SMS Text messaging, Videoconferencing and Broadband Internet access.\nTelevision.\nCable and Satellite Broadcasting Council is a governing-body whose purpose is to facilitate and regulate the commercially operated television broadcasts in Israel. There are two companies in the market of multichannel television: HOT (which provides television services through an underground infrastructure of cables) and yes (which provides television services through satellite transmissions). The cable company has an advantage over the satellite company due to a permit granted to it from the communication office, which enables it to provide full bidirectional communications (for example the ability to provide video on demand services).\nThere are two commercial channels on Israeli television: Channel 2 and Channel 10. There also exist several niche channels which make their earnings from TV advertisements, such as: Israel Plus, Music 24, Channel 20 and the Israeli shopping channel. Additionally, Channel 1, which belongs to the Israel Broadcasting Authority, finance itself partially with the help of limited sponsorship announcements, although most of its budget comes from the license fees which every household in Israel, with a television and a digital receiver set, pays annually.\nInternet.\nThe Internet companies market is divided into two categories: infrastructure providers and service providers. The infrastructure providers are Bezeq and Hot. A third company Unlimited is building an internet-over-powerline infrastructure. As of October 2016, the largest Internet service providers are Bezeq International and Hot, in addition to 50 smaller companies.\nInternational connections.\nThree companies operate fiber optic submarine communications cables connecting Israel and Europe:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74580", "revid": "29818284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74580", "title": "Transport in Israel", "text": "Transportation in Israel primarily consists of nationwide rail transport, bus services, cycling (currently concentrating in the coast) as well as private vehicles. Most work related transportation in Israel is carried out by private motor vehicles, however in recent decades, Israel has prioritised the development of public transportation infrastructure. Cycling infrastructure is still primarily concentrated in the Tel Aviv region, while light rail operate currently in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv. \nA lack of inland waterways and the small size of the country make air and water transport of only minor importance in domestic transportation, but they are vitally important for Israel's international transport links. Demands of population growth, political factors, the Israel Defense Forces, tourism and increased traffic set the pace for all sectors, being a major driver in the mobility transition towards railways and public transit while moving away from motorized road transport.\nAll facets of transportation in Israel are under the supervision of the Ministry of Transport and Road Safety.\nPrivate transportation.\nRoads.\nIsrael's road network spans of roads, of which are classified as freeways. The network spans the whole country.\nRoute 6, the Trans Israel Highway, starts just east of Haifa down to the outskirts of Beer Sheva, about . Route 1 between Jerusalem and Tel Aviv and Route 2 between Tel Aviv and Haifa are well maintained highways. Route 90 is the longest road in Israel streaching from Metula to Eilat via the Jordan Valley and Arava.\nCycling.\nTel Aviv has a growing network of bike paths, with more than over 360 kilometers (224 miles) existing or planned. In April 2011, Tel Aviv municipality launched Tel-O-Fun, a bicycle sharing system, in which 150 stations of bicycles for rent were installed within the city limits. Jerusalem has over 125 kilometers (78 miles) of cycleways, either existing or planned. Additionally, Jerusalem also has a bicycle sharing program called Jerufun.\nNational Bike Trail.\nThe National Bike Trail, when completed will take riders from the southern city of Eilat to the border with Lebanon, passing though Jerusalem, Tel Aviv and several other cities.\nOfnidan (Greater Tel Aviv Cycle Network).\nAs of 2021, construction was underway on Ofnidan, a cycle network of seven inter-urban routes connecting the cities of the Tel Aviv Metropolitan Area, with some segments already open.\nPublic transportation.\nIn March 2024, Israel launched a reform intended to encourage use of public transport by decreasing prices. The reform includes a 50% discount to those who live on the periphery and not in places with a high income, to disabled. 33% discount will be given to people in the age of 18-26 so that people get used to move on public transport. Discharged soldiers and those who have completed national service will ride for free during one year. The discount will be given only for a \"monthly free\" arrangement and not for a ticket for a single trip. As the price of public transport in Israel is relatively low, probably more lines, bus lanes and higher frequency can cause even bigger effect.\nBus service.\nBuses are the country's main form of public transport. In 2017, bus passenger trips totaled approximately 740 million. In 2009, 16 companies operated buses for public transport, totaling 5,939 buses and 8,470 drivers. Egged is Israel's largest bus company, and operates routes throughout the country. Bus routes in some areas are operated by smaller carriers, the largest being the Dan Bus Company, operating routes in Gush Dan. Kavim is the next largest.\n, other than standalone bus stops, come in two types: terminals (\"masof\", pl. \"mesofim\") and central stations (\"tahana merkazit\"). Each terminal serves a number of routes, usually over a dozen, while a central station may serve over a hundred bus routes. The largest central bus terminal in the country is the Tel Aviv Central Bus Station, which is also the second largest bus terminal in the world.\nOn August 5, 2010, the Ministry of Transport opened a website that contained information about public bus and train routes in the country. Previously, information was given only by the individual public transit operators.\nBus rapid transit.\nIsrael has one bus rapid transit system in Haifa, called the Metronit, which consists of three lines connecting Haifa to its suburbs. In addition, there are BRT feeder lines to the Jerusalem Light Rail, running on dedicated bus lanes from Southern Jerusalem to the Northern Jerusalem neighborhood of Ramot crossing the light rail line at the intersection of Jaffa and King George Streets.\nShare taxis.\nIsrael also has a share taxi service (, \"sherut\"), run by several private companies, depending on location, in addition to regular taxicab services. The shared \"sherut\" service usually appears a yellow minivans and travel along the same path as the normal buses with identical route numbers. For a slightly higher price, the shared \"sherut\" service allows passengers to both hop on and hop off anywhere along the path of travel. During peak travel, often the time of travel can be shortened as the number of passengers is significantly small compared to normal bus services. Some routes continue to travel through the night and on Shabbat providing transport needs to the population when normal buses services cease. The beginning and end of the \"sherut\" vans may differ from the central bus station and on the weekends and evenings, the routes can also be altered for some services. In 2015, share taxis carried 34.7 million passengers, 15.2 million of which were transported on city routes, with the rest going to suburban and inter-city routes.\nPrivate taxis.\nTaxis, often called \"special taxis\" () in Israel, to distinguish them from share taxis, are regulated by the Ministry of Transport. Aside from individual taxi companies, Gett is the primary digital taxi hailing service in the country. In 2017, approximately 90 million rides were made using taxis.\nRailways.\nMany of Israel's railway lines were constructed before the founding of the state during Ottoman and British rule. The first line was the Jaffa\u2013Jerusalem railway, followed by the Jezreel Valley railway, which formed part of the greater Hejaz railway. World War I brought the creation of multiple new lines out of military needs: Portions of what is now the Coastal railway were built simultaneously by the Turkish and British and later merged during the British Mandate. Southern lines were also built by the warring states\u2014from the north by the Ottomans, and from Rafah in the west by the British.\nBeginning in the mid-1960s, railway development stagnated, and a number of lines (notably, the Jezreel Valley railway and most of the Eastern railway) were abandoned altogether. Development restarted in the 1990s, the opening of Tel Aviv's Ayalon railway in 1993 signaling a new era of rail development. Lines under construction in the 2000s include the high-speed railway to Jerusalem, an extension of the coastal railway directly from Tel Aviv to Ashdod through the northern Shephelah, and a line from Ashkelon to Beersheba via Sderot, Netivot and Ofakim, as well as a complete reconstruction of the line from Lod to Beersheba. These and other extensive infrastructure improvements led to a 20-fold increase in the number of passengers served by Israel Railways between 1990 and 2015.\nAfter numerous delays due to the complexity of the project, a new line between Tel Aviv and Jerusalem opened in 2019. This line is the first electrified railway ever built in the country. Israel Railways has ordered Bombardier Traxx electric locomotives for use on this line and for other lines to be converted to electric operation. All existing and future electrified mainline railways in Israel use 25\u00a0kV 50\u00a0Hz overhead electrification.\nThe 2023 G20 New Delhi summit proposals included a transit corridor connecting India to the Middle East and Europe through Israel which had been part of earlier Israeli plans designed by Israel Katz, a government transit minister.\nLight rail/Metro.\nThe 13-kilometre-long Jerusalem Light Rail system began operation in August 2011 and is being extended. The Tel Aviv Light Rail, serving Tel Aviv and surrounding cities, has opened its first line, the Red Line, in August 2023. A significant portion of it is underground, and two other lines are underway, the Green Line and Purple Line. A small portion of the Green Line will be underground while the Purple Line will be entirely above-ground. In addition, the Tel Aviv Metro, a subway system which will serve Tel Aviv and neighboring cities in the Gush Dan area, is planned. It will consist of three lines labelled M1, M2, and M3. The first public opening is expected to occur in 2032.\nHaifa's Carmelit, an underground funicular railway, was Israel's first subway line. It is listed in \"Guinness World Records\" as the shortest subway system in the world, being the second smallest track network (after the T\u00fcnel in Istanbul,) but being the smallest \"system\" by virtue of being the only urban rail network in the city. The Haifa\u2013Nazareth railway, a planned light rail system from Haifa to Nazareth, which will serve numerous cities and towns along the route, is planned to open in 2025. In August 2023, the construction of the Beersheba Light Rail was approved. The system will serve the city of Beersheba, as well as several towns and a military base near the city. It is expected to be completed in 2033.\nIsrael Public Transportation Statistics.\nThe average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Israel, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 70 min. 22% of public transit riders, ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 16 min, while 25% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 13.6\u00a0km, while 29.% travel for over 12\u00a0km in a single direction.\nAir transport.\nIsrael has 47 airports, the largest are Ben Gurion Airport (TLV) located near Tel Aviv, Ramon Airport serving Eilat and Uri Michaeli Haifa International Airport. In 2017, Ben Gurion Airport handled nearly 21 million passengers and was the busiest airport in the Eastern Mediterranean in terms of international passengers served. Non-stop flights from Israel travel to North America, Europe, Africa, the Far East, and neighboring countries in the Middle East. Scheduled domestic air service is available between Tel Aviv's Ben Gurion Airport and Haifa, Rosh Pina, the Golan Heights, and the southern city of Eilat. Some international charter and low cost flights also land at Eilat Ramon Airport. Ramon Airport opened in 2019 20\u00a0km north of Eilat replacing the existing Uvda and Eilat airports. While Uvda reverted to its use as a military airbase upon the opening of Ramon Airport, the old Eilat \"city\" airport was shut down with the land to be redeveloped.\nAccording to the Israel Civil Aviation Authority, as of 2012, Israel's civil aircraft fleet consisted of 59 aircraft; 56 passenger planes, and 3 freighters. 48 of these were Boeing jets, 2 Airbus, 8 turbo-prop produced by ATR, and 1 Embraer jet. Israeli airlines ordered another 2 Embraer jets, 1 ATR airplane, 5 Airbus jets, and 10 Boeing jets, a total of 18 aircraft. It is estimated that Israeli airlines will have 65-70 craft in 2017\u20132018. Airlines include El Al, Sun D'Or, Arkia and Israir Airlines. Boeing estimates that 60-80 new aircraft will be purchased by Israeli airlines over the next 20 years.\nIsrael has 29 airports with paved runways, 18 unpaved landing strips, and 3 heliports.\nPorts and harbors.\nRed Sea.\nOn the Gulf of Eilat:\nMerchant marine.\nMany ships owned and operated by Israeli companies operate under foreign registries. Israel's Zim Integrated Shipping Services is one of the largest shipping companies in the world.\nCable cars.\nThere are six tourist and leisure oriented cable car systems in Israel. These include the cable car in Haifa connecting Bat Galim on the coast to the Stella Maris observation deck and monastery atop Mount Carmel., the cable car in Kiryat Shmona, linking it to Menara 400 meters above the town, the chairlifts and cable cars in the Mount Hermon ski resort in the Golan Heights, the cable car to Masada, near the Dead Sea, enabling tourists to quickly reach the mountain top site, and the cable car at the Rosh HaNikra grottoes site, going down to the chalk cliff and cavernous tunnels on the Mediterranean coast. In addition to that, the Superland amusement park near Rishon LeZion has its own cable car and a public transport-oriented cable car is being developed in Haifa\u2014the Haifa Cable Car.\nAdditional future plans include a system in western Haifa, and systems in Tiberias, Ma'alot-Tarshiha, Jerusalem and Ma'ale Adumim.\nSegway.\nIn 2006, the Segway scooter was approved for use on sidewalks and other pedestrian designated locations, as well as roads that have no sidewalks, obstructed sidewalks or sidewalks lacking curb cuts. The user must be over 16 years old. No license is required. The maximum allowed speed is , enforced by electronic restriction put in place by the importer. Companies offering tours of Jerusalem use the second generation i2 model, equipped with Lean Steer Technology that facilitates ski-like steering.\nAcademia.\nCurrently in Israel there are a few research facilities that research the transportation field, its philosophy and impacts. The Technion - Israel institute of technology houses the fair transport lab headed by Karel Martens which specializes in the field of transport justice. In the Technion are also the T-SMART Lab (Smart Transportation Systems), the Transportation Infrastructure Laboratory, the Mobility Management Research Center, and the Road Safety Research Center. Furthermore, the Technion and Bar-Ilan University cojointly run the Israel Smart Transportation Research Center (ISTRC) headed by Yoram Shiftan and is supported directly by the Prime Minister\u2019s Smart Mobility Initiative and the Council for Higher Education. Furthermore, conferences on transportation are organized by Transport Today &amp; Tomorrow - The Israeli Organization for Sustainable Transportation. In Tel Aviv university is located the Shlomo Shmeltzer Institute for Smart Transportation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74581", "revid": "47406457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74581", "title": "Foreign relations of Israel", "text": " \nForeign relations of Israel refers to diplomatic and trade relations between Israel and other countries around the world. Israel has diplomatic ties with\u00a0\u00a0of the other 192 UN member states as of 12 December 2020. Israel is a member of the United Nations (UN) and a number of other international organisations. Israel maintains full diplomatic relations with two of its Arab neighbours, Egypt and Jordan, after signing peace treaties in 1979 and 1994 respectively. In 2020, Israel signed agreements establishing diplomatic relations with three Arab League countries, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, and Morocco. As of 2021, Israel had formal diplomatic relations with 168 countries, while 28 UN member states have either never established, or have broken off diplomatic relations with Israel.\nIsrael's foreign relations are influenced primarily by Israel's strategic situation in the Middle East, the broader Arab\u2013Israeli conflict and the conflict with Iran particularly over Iran's nuclear program, along with the rejection by regional states. Israel's foreign policy goals have therefore been to overcome diplomatic isolation and to achieve recognition and friendly relations with as many nations as possible, both in the Middle East region and further afield. Israel practices both open and secret diplomacy to further national goals, for example, commercial trade and science and technology cooperation, importing raw materials, engaging in military procurement as well as exporting arms and military assistance, intelligence cooperation with its allies, and prisoner-of-war exchanges and other arrangements for hostage releases. It has also sought to foster increased Jewish immigration to Israel and to protect vulnerable Jewish communities in the Diaspora, to offer aid to developing countries and humanitarian assistance to countries facing large-scale disasters.\nIsrael's close friendship with the United States has been a linchpin of its foreign policy since the establishment of the state. Until the Iranian Revolution and the fall of the Pahlavi dynasty in 1979, Israel and Iran maintained close ties. Iran was the second Muslim-majority country to recognize Israel as a sovereign nation after Turkey. In the mid-20th century, Israel ran extensive foreign aid and educational programs in Africa, sending experts in agriculture, water management and health care. China is also one of the few countries in the world to concurrently maintain warm relations with both Israel and the Muslim world at large. China's geopolitical credibility, reputation, and standing in world affairs has continued to play a significant role in shaping Israel's approach to international affairs and foreign policy towards Beijing, owing to China's global influence, which aligns harmoniously with the Jewish state's sensible economic management, political stability, as well as its regional strategic importance in the Middle East.\nDuring the 2000s, the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs warned that the increasing influence of the European Union would further isolate Israel in global affairs. In the wake of a series of diplomatic rifts with Turkey and the rise of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt in 2011, Israel had increasingly unfriendly relations with those countries for a few years. During roughly the same period, Israeli relations with many countries in Europe including Greece and Cyprus in the context of the Energy Triangle and in Asia, including China and India, were enhanced, largely on account of the growth of Israel's high-tech economy. Israeli ties with Egypt have improved since the Muslim Brotherhood was removed from power there, while ties to Turkey have been uneven since their 2010 nadir.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMembership in international organizations.\nThe first international organization which the Israeli government joined was the International Wheat Council, established as part of Point Four Program in early 1949. Israel has been a member of the United Nations since 11 May 1949.\nIsrael is a member of many UN agencies, including the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Israel also participates in other international organizations such as the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the World Health Organization (WHO). Israel left the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in a coordinated move with the US in 2019.\nWithin the UNESCO, Israel was a member in many international programs and organizations. In the area of science, Israel was an active member of the Man and the Biosphere Programme (MAB), the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC), the International Hydrological Programme (IHP), the International Centre for Synchrotron-Light for Experimental Science Applications in the Middle East (SESAME), and the International Geoscience Programme (IGCP).\nOther notable organizations Israel is an active member of include the Education For All movement, the European Centre for Higher Education (CEPES), the World Heritage Committee (WHC), the International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property (ICCROM), and the International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS). Relations were carried out through the Israeli National Commission for UNESCO.\nIsrael joined the European Union's Framework Programmes for Research and Technological Development (FP) in 1994, and is a member of the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), the European Molecular Biology Organization (EMBO) and the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL). It is also a member of the Bank for International Settlement (BIS) since 2003.\nOn 10 May 2010, Israel was invited to join the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Israel is a member of NATO's Mediterranean Dialogue forum. In 2014 Israel joined the Paris Club.\nAfter over 50 years of not being part of a regional grouping in the UN (effectively shut out of many internationals organizations), Israel joined the Western European and Others group on a temporary basis in 2000. Israel joined on a permanent basis in 2014.\nDiplomatic relations.\nAfter the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948, Israel was subjected to Arab League boycotts and attempts to diplomatically isolate the state. As of 2020, Israel has diplomatic ties with\u00a0\u00a0out of the other 192 member states of the United Nations, as well as with the Holy See, Kosovo, the Cook Islands and Niue. Some other countries recognize Israel as a state, but have no diplomatic relations. Several countries once had diplomatic relations with Israel, but have since broken or suspended them (Cuba and Venezuela in Latin America, Mauritania in the Arab League, Mali and Niger in non-Arab Africa, the Maldives in South Asia, and Iran until the Islamic revolution). In addition, a number of countries (all members of the Arab League) that at one time had formal economic ties (primarily trade offices) with Israel, which fell short of full diplomatic relations, subsequently severed such ties (Morocco, Oman, Qatar and Tunisia; however, Morocco renewed ties and established diplomatic relations in 2020).\nList.\nList of countries which Israel maintains diplomatic relations with:\nNo diplomatic relations.\nMember states of the United Nations.\nAs of 2024, 32 United Nations member states do not maintain diplomatic relations with Israel (period of former relations marked in parentheses):\n\"(Algeria,\" \"Libya, and\" \"Somalia do not recognise Israel)\"\n\"(Iran,\" \"Iraq,\" \"Kuwait,\" \"Lebanon,\" \"Saudi Arabia,\" \"Syria\" \"and Yemen\" \"do not recognise Israel as a state)\"\n\"(Afghanistan,\"\" Bangladesh\" \"and Pakistan\" \"do not recognise Israel as a state)\"\n\"(none of these countries recognise Israel)\"\nDespite the lack of diplomatic relations, some of these countries accept Israeli passports and acknowledge other indications of Israeli sovereignty.\nOther states.\nIsrael has no diplomatic relations with the following states or entities:\nLimited relations.\nComoros has no official diplomatic ties with Israel but the countries engage in mutual trade.\nIsraeli citizens are admitted into North Korea with Israeli passports, but like other foreign visitors they are asked to deposit their passport with the local authorities and use specially issued local documents for tourists.\nNorth Africa and Middle East.\nOn 1 October 1994, the Persian Gulf states announced their support for a review of the Arab boycott, abolishing the secondary and tertiary boycotts against Israel.\nAlgeria.\nAlgeria and Israel presently do not have diplomatic relations.\nIn the mid-1990s, while Israel and North African states slowly established diplomatic relations, Algeria remained one of the last countries to consider such a move. It was only when Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak met Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika at the funeral of King Hassan II of Morocco on 25 July 1999 that comments about rapprochement were made.\nBahrain.\nIn 2011, amid Arab spring uprising, Wikileaks cables published on \"Haaretz\" revealed some of the hidden relations between Bahraini and Israeli officials. In a meeting with the U.S. ambassador in February 2005, Bahrain's king, Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa, had bragged about having contact with Israel's national intelligence agency, Mossad. He indicated that Bahrain was ready to develop relations in other fields as well. The king reportedly ordered officials to refrain from using terms such as \"enemy\" and \"Zionist entity\" to refer to Israel. However, he refused the idea of having trade relations, saying it was \"too early\" and would be postponed until the establishment of an independent Palestine state.\nBoth countries agreed to fully normalize relations in September 2020.\nEgypt.\nIsrael has had full diplomatic relations with Egypt since the signing of the Egypt\u2013Israel peace treaty in 1979. In Israel, the 1978 Camp David Accords were supported by 85% of Israelis, according to a 2001 poll taken by the Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies, based in Israel.\nHowever, Egyptian public opinion of Israel is highly negative. According to an Egyptian Government 2006 poll of 1,000 Egyptians (taken at the time of the 2006 Lebanon War), 92% of Egyptians view Israel as an enemy nation.\nEgypt has mediated several unofficial ceasefire understandings between Israel and Palestinians, especially with the Hamas government in the Gaza Strip.\nIran.\nRelations between Israel and Iran have alternated from close political alliances between the two states, during the era of the Pahlavi dynasty, to open hostility following the rise to power of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. While Iran was the second Muslim-majority country to recognize Israel, the two states do not currently have diplomatic relations with each other, due to Iran's withdrawal of its recognition of Israel. The post-1979 Iranian authorities avoid referring to Israel by its name, and instead use the terms \"the Zionist regime\" or \"occupied Palestine\". Iranian passports bear an inscription that says, \"The bearer of this passport is forbidden from traveling to occupied Palestine.\"\nDue to recent rhetoric between Iran and Israel, development of nuclear technology, and Iranian funding of the groups Hamas and Hezbollah, tensions have risen dramatically between the State of Israel and the Islamic Republic of Iran, especially after the election of the hardline Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in 2005. Comments made by Ahmadinejad, who has called the Holocaust \"a myth\" and for Israel to be \"wiped off the map\", were perceived by Israel as threats of destruction.\nA large population of Iranian Jews lives in Israel, among them former president of Israel Moshe Katsav, former chief of staff / Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz, and former chief of staff Dan Halutz.\nIraq.\nNo diplomatic relations between Israel and Iraq ever existed, but the issue of establishing such relations was given some consideration.\nFollowing the American-British led invasion of Iraq in 2003, diplomats had been discussing the possibility of establishing diplomatic relations between Israel and Iraq. However, then-Iraqi Prime Minister Iyad Allawi said in 2004 that Iraq would not establish ties with Israel.\nKurdistan Region.\nIn 2006, President of Kurdistan Region Massoud Barzani said: \"It is not a crime to have relations with Israel. If Baghdad established diplomatic relations with Israel, we could open a consulate in Hewl\u00ear (Kurdistan).\" Israeli television broadcast photographs from the 1960s showing Mustafa Barzani embracing then Israeli defense minister Moshe Dayan. In 2004, Israeli officials met with Kurdish political leaders. In 2006 the BBC reported that Israel was training Kurdish militias in Iraqi Kurdistan. In April 2012, it was alleged that high-ranking Kurdish officials had collected the revenues of Iraqi oil that had been smuggled to Israel via the Kurdistan Region.\nJordan.\nIsrael has full diplomatic relations in peace with Jordan since the signing of the Israel\u2013Jordan Treaty of Peace in 1994, but relations remain somewhat tense. Over half of the Jordanian populations descends from Palestinian refugees, who overwhelmingly have negative views of Israel.\nKuwait.\nRelations between Israel and Kuwait are generally hostile, mainly as part of the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict. In 2019 Kuwait's Deputy Foreign Minister Khaled Al-Jarallah said \"Kuwait will be the last country to normalize relations with Israel\".\nLebanon.\nIsrael and Lebanon have been overshadowed by war, including the Syrian Occupation of Lebanon (1976\u20132005). In August 2006, after the clash between Hezbollah and Israel, Lebanese Prime Minister Fouad Siniora said that Lebanon would be the \"last Arab country to make peace with Israel\" because of the large number of civilians that were killed in the 2006 Lebanon War.\nSince the year 2000, and due to many wars with Hezbollah, Israel treats Lebanon as an \"enemy state\", although it is considering the possibility of a non-aggression pact.\nIn 2008 a Pew Research Center survey found that negative views concerning Jews were most common in Lebanon, with 97% of Lebanese having unfavorable opinion of Jews. In a 2011 survey again by the Pew Research Center, all of the Muslim-majority Middle Eastern countries polled held strongly negative views of Jews. In the questionnaire, only 3% of Lebanese reported having a positive view of Jews.\nMorocco.\nMoroccan expeditionary forces fought alongside a coalition of Arab countries in the Yom Kippur War against Israel. In 1986, King Hassan II invited then Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres for talks, becoming the second Arab leader to host an Israeli leader after Anwar Sadat. Following the September 1993 signing of the Israeli-Palestinian Declaration of Principles, Morocco accelerated its economic ties and political contacts with Israel. In September 1994, Morocco and Israel announced the opening of bilateral liaison offices. When the king died in 1999, then-prime minister Ehud Barak and the Moroccan-born foreign minister David Levy flew to Rabat for his funeral. The foreign offices were closed in 2000 following sustained Israeli-Palestinian violence. In September 2016, Moroccan King Mohammed VI sent his personal adviser Andre Azulai, who is Jewish, to attend the state funeral of former Israeli Prime Minister and President Shimon Peres.\nPrior to the establishment of formal relations, Israeli tourism to Morocco was encouraged by the World Federation of Moroccan Jewry, a non-governmental private Jewish organization.\nOn 10 December 2020, Morocco agreed to establish diplomatic relations with Israel in exchange for the United States supporting Morocco's claim on Western Sahara. On the same day, the United States agreed to the sale of sophisticated drones to Morocco.\nOman.\nIn 1996, Oman and Israel agreed to exchange trade representation offices.\nQatar.\nQatar and Israel do not currently have diplomatic relations, although they maintained economic relations between 1996 and 2000. Qatar is a major financial supporter of the Palestinian Sunni-Islamic fundamentalist group Hamas.\nOn 9 September, Israel conducted airstrikes on Qatar in an effort to eliminate the forthcoming Hamas leader. At that time, Hamas officials were engaged in discussions regarding a ceasefire. Numerous global leaders condemned Israel for the assault. Both US President Donald Trump and Germany, who are allies of Israel, denounced the attack on Qatar, labeling it a breach of Qatar's sovereignty.\nSaudi Arabia.\nIn 2005, Saudi Arabia announced the end of its ban on Israeli goods and services, mostly due to its application to the World Trade Organization, where one member country cannot have a total ban on another. However, as of \u00a02006[ [update]], the Saudi boycott was not cancelled.\nIn recent years, Saudi Arabia has changed its viewpoint concerning the validity of negotiating with Israel. It calls for Israel's withdrawal from territory occupied in June 1967 in order for peace with the Arab states; then-Crown Prince Abdullah extended a multilateral peace proposal based on withdrawal in 2002. At that time, Israel did not respond to the offer. In 2007 Saudi Arabia again officially supported a resolution of the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict which supported a full right of Palestinian refugees to move to Israel, which generated more official negative reactions from Israeli authorities.\nSyria.\nSyria's relations with Israel are very poor, due to the Israeli occupation of the Golan Heights and Syria's close ties with the anti-Israel militant group Hezbollah and with the Islamic Republic of Iran.\nSince 2004, Syria has accepted the import of apples from farmers in the Golan Heights, territory that it claims, through the Quneitra crossing. This was a result of the ongoing Israeli refusal to accept apples from Golan farmers (reportedly due to over-supply), which led to a plea by the farmers to the Syrian government to accept their produce before it became spoiled in order to prevent economic collapse. In 2010, some 10,000 tons of apples grown by Druze farmers in the Golan Heights were sent to Syria.\nTunisia.\nTunisia participated in the Yom Kippur War, sending 1,000\u20132,000 troops to fight alongside a coalition of Arab countries against Israel. The relations worsened further in the early 2000s when the Second Intifada began, and on 22 October 2000, the state radio of Tunisia declared that President Ben Ali had decided to break all diplomatic ties with Israel following the \"violence in the Palestinian-controlled territories\".\nTurkey.\nTurkey was the first Muslim-majority nation to formally recognize the State of Israel.\nIn January 2009, the Turkish government's condemnation of the 2008\u201309 Gaza War severely strained relations between the two countries. Erdo\u011fan harshly criticized Israel's conduct in Gaza at the World Economic Forum conference in Davos, Switzerland in early 2009.\nRelations between the two countries were further strained after the 2010 Gaza flotilla raid. On 2 September 2011, Turkey downgraded ties with Israel to second secretary level and suspended military co-operation between the countries.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nFollowing the assassination of Mahmoud Al-Mabhouh in the UAE in 2010, allegedly by Israel, the UAE announced that travelers suspected of being Israeli would not be admitted even if using a foreign passport. Prior to 13 August 2020, UAE had not recognized Israel as a state, and the two countries lacked official diplomatic or economic relations. Prior to the announcement of the 2020 agreement, relations had improved to the extent that Israel opened an office in Abu Dhabi, albeit only as a mission to the International Renewable Energy Agency.\nIsrael and the United Arab Emirates announced a deal to establish diplomatic relations on 13 August 2020. In July 2021, The United Arab Emirates officially opened an embassy in Israel, becoming only the third majority Arab nation to have full diplomatic relations with Israel.\nYemen.\nYemen and Israel do not have diplomatic relations, and contacts between the two countries are very tense. People with an Israeli passport or any passport with an Israeli stamp cannot enter Yemen, and Yemen is defined as an \"enemy state\" by Israeli law.\nSub-Saharan Africa.\nIsrael has diplomatic relations with 42 of the 44 Sub-Saharan African states that are not members of the Arab League, including a number of Muslim-majority states.\nAngola.\nRelations between Israel and Angola are based on trade and foreign policy. In 2005, President Jos\u00e9 Eduardo dos Santos visited Israel. In March 2006, the trade volume between the two countries amounted to $400 million. The Israeli ambassador to Angola is Avraham Benjamin.\nBotswana.\nThe two countries established relations in 1993. Neither has a formal consulate or embassy in the other country, but the two governments have cooperated on several development initiatives. Six Israeli-centered diamond companies have operations in Botswana.\nCameroon.\nH.E. Mr. Henri \u00c9toundi Essomba, Ambassador of Cameroon to Israel in 2012, serves as the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps in Israel.\nRelations were cut off in the wake of the Yom Kippur war, but restored in 1986, and Cameroon and Israel now have many military and political ties, with Israel training and arming Cameroon's rapid reaction forces and Cameroon voting against many anti-Israel resolutions at the UN.\nChad.\nIn November 2018, Chadian President Idriss D\u00e9by paid a visit to Israel. In January 2019, Prime Minister Netanyahu paid a visit to Chad and both nations re-established diplomatic relations. In February 2023, Chadian President Mahamat Deby visited Israel and opened a Chad embassy in the Ramat Gan town in Israel.\nDjibouti.\nAlthough Israel does not have diplomatic or official trade relations with Djibouti (a member of the Arab League), following a meeting between officials of both countries in September 1995, plans were then announced to open liaison offices in the respective countries' capitals, prior to the possible establishment of diplomatic relations between the two states. However, such relations did not materialize.\nEritrea.\nEritrea developed relations with Israel shortly after gaining its independence in 1993, despite protests among Arab countries. Israeli-Eritrean relations are close. The president of Eritrea has visited Israel for medical treatment. However, Eritrea condemned Israeli military action during the 2008\u20132009 Israel\u2013Gaza conflict. Israeli-Eritrean ties are complicated by Israel's close ties to Ethiopia.\nEswatini.\nIsrael established diplomatic relations with Eswatini in September 1968, immediately following that country achieving independence from the United Kingdom. Eswatini was one of only three Sub-Saharan African states (the others being Lesotho and Malawi) that continued to maintain full diplomatic relations with Israel in the aftermath of the Yom Kippur War in 1973, and has never severed such ties.\nEthiopia.\nIn Africa, Ethiopia is Israel's main and closest ally in the continent, due to common political, religious and security interests. However, relations were severed between the years 1973 and 1989. Many towns in Ethiopia are named after biblical Israel settlements, including Ethiopia's third largest city of Nazret (Adama). Israel also provides expertise to Ethiopia on irrigation projects. Thousands of Ethiopian Jews (Beta Israel) live in Israel. In 2012, Israel appointed a Beta Israeli of Ethiopian origin, Beylanesh Zevadia, as ambassador to Ethiopia.\nIn October 2020, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu visited Ethiopia.\nGhana.\nDiplomatic relations with Ghana were established immediately following Ghanaian independence in 1957. Agreement on technical cooperation was concluded on 25 May 1962. On 24 May 1968, a trade agreement was concluded. A cultural cooperation agreement was concluded on 1 March 1973.\nRelations were broken at the initiative of the government of Ghana on 28 October 1973, following the Yom Kippur war. Improvement in relations followed Israeli attempts to prevent Ghanaian support for the Palestinian Authority, which led to a state visit to Ghana by Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs Avigdor Liberman in September 2009. During that visit, a bilateral agreement for agricultural cooperation was signed. Diplomatic relations were restored in September 2011.\nGuinea.\nDiplomatic relations between Israel and the Republic of Guinea were established in 1958, but were strained due to the Cold War, as the Israeli government supported US policy while the government of Guinea took a pro-Soviet line. These relations were broken on 5 June 1967 when war broke out between Israel and Egypt in the Six-Day War. After Israel's support to Guinea during its fight against the Ebola virus, relations between the two states were restored on 20 July 2016.\nKenya.\nDiplomatic relations were established in December 1963. Israel has an embassy in Nairobi and Kenya has an embassy in Tel Aviv. In 2003, Kenya requested Israel's help in developing a national solar energy program. In 2006, Israel sent an 80-person search-and-rescue team to Kenya to save people trapped in rubble when a multistory building collapsed. Following the 2007 Kenyan presidential election Israel donated medicine to the Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital in Eldoret. In November 2017, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu visited Kenya.\nLesotho.\nLesotho was one of only three Sub-Saharan African states (the others being Eswatini and Malawi) that maintained full diplomatic relations with Israel in the aftermath of the Yom Kippur War in 1973.\nLiberia.\nLiberia was one of the United Nations member states to vote in favor of establishing a Jewish state in Palestine in 1947. Israel and Liberia established relations in the late 1950s. The administration of William Tolbert severed ties with the Israeli government in 1973 in response to the Yom Kippur War, but they were re-established in 1983 by Samuel Doe, who succeeded Tolbert via coup.\nMadagascar.\nBoth countries have a number of bilateral agreements in force.\nMalawi.\nIsrael established diplomatic relations with Malawi in July 1964, immediately following that country achieving independence from the United Kingdom. Malawi was one of only three Sub-Saharan African states (the others being Eswatini and Lesotho) that continued to maintain full diplomatic relations with Israel in the aftermath of the Yom Kippur War in 1973, and has never severed such ties.\nMauritania.\nMauritania declared war on Israel as a result of the 1967 Six-Day War, following the Arab League's collective decision (although Mauritania was not formally admitted to the League until November 1973). Mautritania did not reverse that declaration until at least 1991.\nMauritania did not abide by moves to recognise Israel's right to exist in the same way as most other Arab countries later did, staying true to the 1967 Khartoum Resolution which, in reference to Israel, stated \"no peace, no recognition, no negotiable.\"\nLittle public information exists, and an account of Israeli-Mauritanian relations must be inferred from a number of indirect known factors, such as: behind the scenes meetings between Mauritania and Israel in 1995 and 1996, said to be at the instigation of Mauritania's President Ould Taya; the establishment of unofficial \"interest sections\" in the respective Spanish embassies in 1996 in the two capital cities, leading to the exchange of diplomatic representatives in each other's countries from 27 October 1999. It is inferred from this evidence that Mauritania had reversed its declaration by then.\nOn 6 March 2009, the Israeli diplomatic delegation to Mauritania left after nine years of diplomatic ties, following a demand from the Mauritanian authorities to close the Israeli embassy in Nouakchott within 48 hours. The Mauritanian delegation to Israel left earlier without sending official notice to the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs.\nMauritius.\nBoth countries have signed many bilateral agreements.\nNigeria.\nIsrael and Nigeria established diplomatic relations in 1960. In 1973, Nigeria broke off contacts with Israel, but in May 1992, bilateral relations were restored. Since April 1993, Israel has maintained an embassy in Abuja, and Nigeria has maintained an embassy in Tel Aviv. Many Nigerians go on religious pilgrimage to Israel.\nRwanda.\nRelations with Rwanda were established soon following independence of the African state. They were broken by the government of Rwanda on 8 October 1973, during the Yom Kippur war.\nIn January 2019, transportation ministers of Israel and Rwanda announced plans to inaugurate regular Air Rwanda flights to Israel. Then, in April 2019, Israel opened an embassy in Kigali.\nIn 2016, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu visited Rwanda. In 2017, Rwandan President Paul Kagame visited Israel. In 2024, Israeli President Isaac Hergoz visited Rwanda to attend the 30th commemoration of the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi.\nSenegal.\nRelations with Senegal were established soon following independence of the African state. They were broken by the government of Senegal on 28 October 1973, following the Yom Kippur war. Israel and Senegal on 4 June 2017, announced the resumption of full diplomatic relations, which had been frozen after Senegal cosponsored a UN Security Council against Israeli settlements. Israel returned its ambassador to Senegal, and Senegal backed Israel's candidacy for observer status at the African Union. In a trilateral partnership between Israel, Italy and Senegal, Israeli drip irrigation systems are being installed to help farmers in 12 districts of rural Senegal.\nSouth Africa.\nThe Union of South Africa was one of only four Commonwealth nations to vote in favour of the 1947 UN partition resolution, which led to the establishment of the State of Israel. South Africa was one of the first states to recognize Israel; diplomatic relations between Israel and South Africa were established in 1948. After the Sharpeville massacre of 1960, Israel became a harsh critic of apartheid, leading to a break in its relations with Pretoria. After 1967, Israel and South Africa became strategic partners again, and this lasted until 1987 when Israel joined the West in forcefully opposing apartheid.\nSince the end of apartheid, South Africa's new government has been cold toward Israel and critical of Israel's policies towards Palestinians but has nevertheless ignored calls from pro-Palestinian South African groups to sever relations between the two countries.\nAs a result of the Gaza war, the African National Congress passed a motion calling on the government to close its embassy in Tel Aviv in November 2023. The South African governmental cabinet also called on the International Criminal Court to issue an arrest warrant for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and recalled the country's ambassador to Israel and withdrew all the country's diplomatic staff from Israel.\nSouth Sudan.\nIsrael recognized the Republic of South Sudan on 10 July 2011, and offered the new state economic help, following its declaration of independence the previous day from the mainly Arab Muslim north Sudan. On 15 July 2011, South Sudan declared its intention to establish full diplomatic relations with Israel and, on 28 July 2011, it was announced that full diplomatic ties had been established between the two countries.\nSudan.\nOn 23 October 2020, Sudan agreed to normalise relations with Israel in return for the Trump Administration removing Sudan from the United States' list of state sponsors of terrorism, unblocking economic aid and investment in Sudan.\nTogo.\nIn May 2009, Israel and Togo signed a \"pact for cooperation in the economic, agricultural and educational fields\" with each other.\nUganda.\nIn a joint Israeli-Ugandan project, a professor from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem's Faculty of Agriculture conducted a survey of Lake Victoria with a Ugandan colleague from Makerere University. They found that Nile perch, introduced by the British sixty years ago, have decimated native fish populations, leading to malnutrition in the lakeside communities. She helped to set up artificial fish ponds to raise carp, which had disappeared from the local diet. The United States Agency for International Development sponsored the digging of the ponds and sent villagers to Kibbutz HaMa'apil in Emek Hefer to learn spawning techniques. Graduates of the training program established carp farms.\nZambia.\nIsrael and Zambia maintained diplomatic relations from 1966 to 1973; they were re-established in 1991. Zambia opened its embassy in Tel Aviv in 2015, while Israel reopened its embassy in Lusaka in 2025.\nZimbabwe.\nAbel Muzorewa, the Prime Minister of Zimbabwe Rhodesia, visited Israel on 21 October 1983. He urged Robert Mugabe to establish diplomatic relations, saying his political policies hurt Zimbabwe's agriculture and technology industries. In March 2002 an Israeli company sold riot control vehicles to the Mugabe government, shortly before the nation's 2002 elections.\nAsia.\nIn addition to Turkey and Azerbaijan, Israel has diplomatic relations with 5 non-Arab Muslim states in Asia (Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan).\nAfghanistan.\nAfghanistan, currently, has no relations with Israel. The Monarchy of Afghanistan did have spiritual relations with Israel, whether in secret or Tribal rules in place. The Afghan Royal Family trace their origins to King Saul of Israel. Afghanistan was the only Muslim country that did not revoke citizenship when Jews, also known as descendants of Judah, migrated to Israel. Rabbi Eliyahu Avichail has published numerous books linking the Afghans to the Lost Tribes of Israel.\nBangladesh.\nBoth the Israeli government and general public supported the Bangladesh Liberation War. After the independence of Bangladesh in 1971, Israel offered to recognise the new born country in as early as 1972 but Bangladesh immediately rejected the offer.\nBangladesh does not recognize Israel as legitimate and officially forbids its citizens to travel to Israel by putting 'Valid for travel to all countries except Israel' on Bangladeshi passports. Bangladesh supports a sovereign Palestinian state and an end to Israel's \"illegal occupation of Palestine\".\nCambodia.\nIsrael established diplomatic ties with Cambodia in 1960. Ties were cut in 1975 due to the rise of the Khmer Rouge. The ties were restored in 1993. Israel has no embassy in Cambodia and Cambodia has no embassy in Israel. Instead, the Israeli embassy in Bangkok, Thailand, is accredited to Cambodia. Cambodian students study agriculture in Israel.\nChina.\nOn 9 January 1950, the Israeli government extended recognition to the People's Republic of China, but diplomatic relations were not established until January 1992.\nSince 1992, Israel and China have developed increasingly close strategic economic, military, cultural and technological links with each other. Israel maintains an embassy in Beijing and is planning to open a new consulate in Chengdu, its third in mainland China. China is Israel's third largest trading partner globally and largest trading partner in East Asia. Trade volume increased from $50 million in 1992 to over $10 billion in 2013. Shared commonalities and similarities between the cultures and values of the two nations with ancient roots dating back thousands of years as well as convergence of interests have made the two countries natural partners. In addition, China is one of the few countries in the world to concurrently maintain warm relations with Israel, the Palestinians, and the Muslim world at large.\nChina's status as a potential world power has prompted Israel to maintain closer ties with China by integrating China's global influence with Israel's pragmatic economic management, political stability and its regional strategic importance in the Middle East. Beijing has appreciated Israel's political stability and diplomatic ingenuity and sees the Jewish state as one of the regional pillars for securing China's influence in the Middle East and the entire world.\nChina and Israel have developed close strategic military links with each other. Bilateral military relations have evolved from an initial Chinese policy of secret non-official ties to a close strategic partnership with the modern and militarily powerful Israel. Israel and China began extensive military cooperation as early as the 1980s, even though no formal diplomatic relations existed. Israel has provided China with military assistance, expertise and technology. According to a report from the United States-China Economic and Security Review Commission, \"Israel ranks second only to Russia as a weapons system provider to China and as a conduit for sophisticated cutting-edge military technology, followed by France and Germany.\" Israel was ready to sell China the Phalcon, an Israeli airborne early-warning radar system (AWACS), until the United States forced it to cancel the deal. Some estimate that Israel sold arms worth US$4 billion to China in this period. China has looked to Israel for the arms and military technology it cannot acquire from the United States and Russia. Israel is now China's second-largest foreign supplier of arms after Russia. China has purchased a wide array of military equipment and technology, including communications satellites. China is a vital market for Israel's aerospace and defense industry. Due to Israel's recognition of China, Israel has also limited its cooperation with Taiwan in order to foster closer ties with mainland China.\nSince the establishment of diplomatic relations, cultural exchange has been a major component of bilateral relations, as both sides recognize the importance of creating a strong foundation based on their ancient and rich histories.\nChina's receptive and friendly embrace of the Jewish people on its soil has been one of affectionate sympathy as the Chinese have developed a favorable view of Jews, admiring them for their contributions to humanity, their ability to survive, the sharing of Chinese values such as family, frugality, hard work and education, and being products of ancient civilizations have been an impetus towards the long and enduring friendship between the Chinese and Jewish peoples. Shared affinities and similar cultural commonalities has not only been an impetus for the close bonds between China and Israel but has also created a symbol of brotherhood between the two communities.\nThough Israel established diplomatic relations with China in 1992, the ties between the Chinese and Jewish people remain centuries old in addition to Israel and China being products of ancient civilizations dating back thousands of years. The cultural similarities between the Chinese and Jewish civilizations with both nations originating thousands of years ago have drawn the two countries closer together making the two countries natural partners in the international community. Chinese Jews have been a major impetus in maintaining the strong nexus between the Chinese and Jewish civilizations. Jews remain a small minority in China, but unlike many parts of the world, Jews have historically lived in China without any instances of antisemitism from the Han majority populace contributing to mutual respect and admiration between the two peoples. With the intrinsic affinity that the Chinese people feel for the Jews, relations between the two communities have been mutually close, harmonious and friendly, due to shared common cultural similarities between the two peoples resulted Jews enjoying equal rights and coexisting peacefully alongside the mainstream Han Chinese populace with instances of Jews assimilating into the Han Chinese community through intermarriage. On a geopolitical scale, China has sought to maintain close relations with the Jewish state as Israel's regional importance, stability and influence in an otherwise volatile region has been an important asset for the expansion of China's influence in the Middle East and the entire world. Shared commonalities and similarities between the cultures and values of the two nations, ancient roots as well as convergence of interests have driven the two countries closer with respect to scientific, economic, diplomatic and cultural ties.\nChina is one of Israel's closest economic allies in East Asia where both countries have placed considerable importance on maintaining a strategic and economic relationship. The economic synergy has served the two respective countries greatly where Israel's global technological prowess combined with China's global economic influence, industrial manufacturing capabilities, and marketing expertise made cooperation between the two nations inevitable. China including Hong Kong is Israel's second top export destination after the United States and has been the top market for Israeli exports in East Asia. China is also Israel's third largest trading partner and export market after the United States and the European Union with China being Israel's largest export market in East Asia. Israel has sought China's enormous global influence on world affairs, large consumer market, broad industrial manufacturing scale, and burgeoning economic dynamism while China has sought Israel as a powerhouse of advanced technological wizardry and a wellspring of entrepreneurial acumen leveraging each other's complementary capabilities and resources. China has sought Israel's technology to increase its international economic competitiveness and risk management. With the advice and experience of Jewish entrepreneurs, innovators, and inventors from the high-technology sectors, China has utilized Israel's indispensable economic and technological contributions to foster its long-term economic development. China has also expressed desire for Israel's advanced technologies, particularly in fields related to agriculture, telecommunications, and defense. The scientific and technological advancements made by Israel have led many Chinese politicians to respect the country's ingenuity and creative inventiveness because they know of the contributions Israel has made to its economy. Israeli agricultural techniques, most notably drip irrigation, and solar energy technologies are seen as crucial to China's economic development. Throughout Israel's early economic history, many Israeli startup companies were acquired by major U.S. and Western European corporations. Since the 2010s, China and Israel enhanced bilateral economic ties with China connecting both Chinese and Israeli businessmen and investors to invest in each other's economies respectively. Chinese economic cooperation with Israel has seen substantial Chinese investment of more than US$15 billion in the Israeli economy, spawning seed capital in Israeli startup companies, as well as the acquisition of Israeli companies by major Chinese corporations that incorporate Israel's know how to help the invigorate the development of the modern Chinese economy more efficiently. China now ranks second after the United States in collaboration with Israeli high-tech firms that are backed by Israel's Office of the Chief Scientist. Major Chinese firms such as Fosun, ChemChina, Brightfood, Horizons Ventures and China Everbright have invested significant amounts of financial capital and resources across numerous Israeli industries. Chinese businessmen and major Chinese corporations hold Israel's business, economic and entrepreneurial acumen and technological expertise with high esteem and have sought to integrate Israel's know-how with China's marketing proficiency, industrial manufacturing capacity and aptitude for large consumer market scaling.\nHong Kong.\nIsrael and Hong Kong have full diplomatic ties as part of Israel's diplomatic ties with China. Israel has a consulate in the city, while Hong Kong is represented in Israel by the Chinese embassy in Tel Aviv.\nIndia.\nIndia established diplomatic relations with the State of Israel in 1992 and has since become Israel's strongest ally in Asia. The two countries cooperate in anti-terrorist activities in the Middle East and Southern Asia. Israel is India's second largest arms provider and India is Israel's principal arms market, and the trade volume between the two countries has increased significantly in the past few years. Co-operation has taken place in the space sector as well with India launching Israeli satellites. India became the top source market for Israel from Asia in 2010 with 41,000 tourist arrivals in that year.\nIsrael and India share intelligence on terrorist groups. They have developed close defense and security ties since establishing diplomatic relations in 1991. In 2009, Israel overtook Russia as India's biggest arms supplier; the U.S. even gave Israel approval to sell the Phalcon to India after earlier forcing Jerusalem to cancel a similar deal with China. India has bought more than $5 billion worth of Israeli equipment since 2002. In addition, Israel is training Indian military units and discussing an arrangement to give Indian commandos instruction in counter-terrorist tactics and urban warfare. In December 2008, Israel and India signed a memorandum to set up an Indo-Israel Legal Colloquium to facilitate discussions and exchange programs between judges and jurists of the two countries. According to an international opinion survey conducted in 2009 on behalf of the Israeli Foreign Ministry, India is the most pro-Israel country in the world.\nIndia-Israel relationship has been very close and warm under the premiership of Narendra Modi since 2014. In 2017, he was the first ever Prime Minister of India to visit Israel. India was the largest arms customer of Israel in 2017. Defence relations between the two countries are longstanding.\nIndonesia.\nIn 2012, Indonesia agreed to informally upgrade its relations with Israel and to open a consulate in Ramallah, headed by a diplomat with the rank of ambassador, who will also unofficially serve as his country's ambassador for contacts with Israel. The move, which was agreed upon after five years of sensitive deliberations, represents a de facto upgrading of relations between Israel and the world's most populous Muslim country. Indonesia has formally presented the move to open a West Bank consulate as a demonstration of its support for Palestinian independence. In fact, while the ambassador-ranked diplomat will be accredited to the Palestinian Authority/PLO, a significant portion of his work will be in dealings with Israel, and the office will fulfill substantial diplomatic duties as well as consular responsibilities. Israel and Indonesia quietly maintain trade, security and other relations. Israelis can get visas for Bali in Singapore, while many Indonesians come to Israel as pilgrims.\nJapan.\nOn 15 May 1952, diplomatic relations were established with Japan at a Legation level. However, the Japanese government refrained from appointing a Minister Plenipotentiary to Israel until 1955. Relations between the two states were distant at first, but after 1958, no break occurred, despite the Arab oil embargo on several countries, including Japan.\nKazakhstan.\nBoth countries established diplomatic relations on 10 April 1992. The embassy of Israel in Kazakhstan opened in August 1992. The embassy of Kazakhstan in Israel opened in May 1996. Israel has an embassy in Astana and Kazakhstan maintains an embassy in Tel Aviv.\nMalaysia.\nIsrael and Malaysia do not maintain diplomatic relations and Malaysian passports do not allow entry into Israel. However, Malaysia and Israel has been engaged in trade relations; in 2011 Israel exported goods to Malaysia worth $716.4 million and imported goods worth $93.6 million. A report compiled by the European Commission indicated that in 2010 Malaysia ranked 15th among Israel's major trade partners, accounting for 0.8% (\u20ac667.6 million) of Israel's trade in that year.\nMaldives.\nThe Maldives established diplomatic relations with Israel in 1965 and severed them in 1974.\nIn 2009, under president Mohamed Nasheed, the Maldives signed cooperation agreements with Israel on tourism, health, and education and culture. In 2010, the Israeli government sent a team of eye doctors to treat patients and train local medical personnel in the Maldives. However, the renewed relationship did not develop into full diplomatic relations.\nIn July 2014, under president Abdulla Yameen, the Maldives terminated the cooperation agreements with Israel and announced a boycott of Israeli products, as Israel launched a military operation in Gaza. Foreign minister Dunya Maumoon also announced that the Maldives would fully support Palestinians at international forums such as the United Nations Human Rights Council and offer them humanitarian aid.\nMongolia.\nIn October 1991 the official relationship of Mongolia and Israel began. Ariel Sharon visited in Mongolia in 2001, when he was prime minister in the Likud government. Israelis wishing to enter Mongolia are exempt from arming a visa in advance. The Mongolian immigration authorities tend to provide visitors to the country a 30 days visa on their arrival. One can extend the visa fee and the extension is at the discretion of the authorities.\nAn academic delegation from the Hebrew University in Jerusalem visited the Mongolian National University in August 2010. During the visit, an agreement was signed for cooperation between universities. In 2012, the Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister Danny Ayalon visited and signed an agreement with the Mongolian Minister of Education which included collaboration between universities and institutions of higher education, in which Mongolians will learn about Israel and the Holocaust and Israel will learn about the heritage and history of Mongolia. It was also agreed on expanding ties between the two countries and embassies.\nMyanmar.\nMyanmar (also known as Burma) was one of the first countries to recognize Israel and establish diplomatic relations with Israel. Myanmar has also become one of Israel's strongest allies in the region, in terms of both technical assistance and also the much debated and rumored military links. Premiers from both sides such as U Nu and David Ben-Gurion made state visits to each other's countries in the 1950s. Myanmar sends agriculture researchers to Israel for training. This was further cemented in Israel's aid assistance during the Cyclone Nargis disaster of May 2008.\nNepal.\nIsrael\u2013Nepal relations, first established in 1960, are based on mutual security concerns. Bishweshwar Prasad Koirala, Prime Minister of Nepal from 1959 to 1960, had a strongly pro-Israel foreign policy. King Mahendra visited Israel in 1963 and maintained Koirala's special relationship. Until the 1990s Nepal was the only South Asian country to have diplomatic ties with Israel.\nNepal is one of the few Asian countries to have consistently supported Israel at international forums and at the UN. Nepal has maintained diplomatic relations and continues to support the right of Israel to exist within secure and internationally recognized boundaries. Nepal voted in favour of Security Council Resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which upheld the right of all the states in the region to live in peace. Nepal has also welcomed every initiative from whatever quarter that seeks to resolve the Middle East problems like the Camp David Accord signed between Egypt and Israel in 1978 and the renewed peace process sponsored time to time by countries like the USA.\nAfter the 2015 Nepal earthquake, Israel was one of the first to send aid to Nepal. Israel sent a delegation of 264 people for Search &amp; Rescue missions, and over 95 tons of equipment, including a field hospital. It is estimated that about 12,000 Nepalese foreign workers are residing in Israel, most of whom are women working as caregivers.\nNorth Korea.\nNorth Korea does not recognise the state of Israel, denouncing it as an \"imperialist satellite\".\nPakistan.\nIsrael and Pakistan do not have diplomatic relations with each other, and Pakistani passports say 'This passport is valid for all countries of the World except Israel'. Israeli authorities told a traveller that Pakistanis could apply for a visa, and that they would issue a paper visa and put the entry and exit stamps on it. Some Israeli leaders have expressed the belief that should diplomatic relations with Pakistan be established, then Pakistan could serve as a bridge between Israel and the Muslim world. In 2008, the Israeli Foreign minister stated that \"Israel considers Pakistan as its biggest strategic threat\" in light of concern over the increasing Taliban threat in Pakistan.\nPhilippines.\nOn 29 November 1947, the Philippines (a U.S. territory until 1946) was the only Southeast Asian nation at the time to support the partition resolution at the United Nations General Assembly recommending a Jewish State in Palestine. Israel and the Philippines established full diplomatic relationships in 1957. Embassies were opened in Tel Aviv and Manila in 1962. The two countries have enjoyed warm relations in all spheres. In 1997, the two countries signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) institutionalizing the bilateral political dialogue between the respective foreign ministries. The political dialog is accompanied by cooperation in trade and economy, culture, technical assistance, science, academic exchanges, tourism etc. There are between 37,155 and 50,000 Filipino workers in Israel as of 2004.\nSingapore.\nSingapore and Israel have maintained strong and mutually beneficial bilateral relations that are characterized by a close and amiable bond and amicable rapport, where the two nations have consistently cultivated a closely-knit and cordial relationship ever since their respective establishments. This is in part due to both countries' perception of themselves as diminutive yet affluent sovereign states and regional economic powerhouses surrounded by neighboring Islamic countries characterized by their comparatively underdeveloped societies, political instabilities, and economic struggles that have remained hostile to their continued existence in which oftentimes they have an uneasy relationship with. Following Singapore's sudden and unexpected independence after being unilaterally ejected from Malaysia in 1963, Singapore appealed to the international community for technical assistance and military aid. Israel responded by assisting the Southeast Asian city-state with the establishment of Singapore's armed forces. Both countries formally established diplomatic relations in May 1969, although unofficial and discrete relations were already established several years prior, particularly with regards to military activities. Singapore and Israel are also known to share a special relationship where they both enjoy an extensive bilateral security partnership, with Israeli and Singaporean arms contractors such as Israel Aerospace Industries and ST Engineering collaborating and engaging in joint venture developments and facilitating a large level of arms trade between the two countries. Over the years, Israel has continued to advise Singapore on an array of military affairs, ranging from night operations to aviation psychology. The defense and intelligence establishments of both countries conduct routine exchanges of information, and a small number of Israeli Defense Force officers serve in staff appointments within the Singapore Ministry of Defence (MINDEF). In 2012, it was reported that Singapore expressed interest in purchasing several Iron Dome defence system units and a deal took place in 2016.\nSouth Korea.\nThe Republic of Korea and the State of Israel established diplomatic relations on 10 April 1962. Israel opened its embassy in Seoul in April 1968, which was closed by the Israeli government in 1978. The embassy was reopened in January 1992, with Korea opening its resident embassy in Tel Aviv in December 1993.\nOn 23 August 2010, Korea Venture Investment Corp. (KVIC), a South Korean state-backed fund and investment management company, signed a memorandum of understanding with Israel's Vertex Venture Capital (VVC) to raise a US$150 million fund, which will be used to finance joint ventures or the merger and acquisition of small and medium-size venture capital firms between the two countries.\nThe two countries signed a free trade agreement in May 2021, making South Korea the first East Asian country to forge a free trade deal with Israel.\nSri Lanka.\nIsrael was a source of weapons and training for the Sri Lanka Armed Forces during the war against Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam terrorist organization and weapons sold to the country, including IAI Kfir Fighter Jet, the Saar 4 class missile boats, Super Dvora Mk II-class patrol boat and the Gabriel missile. In May 2011, the Israeli Minister of Agriculture visited Sri Lanka with an agro-business delegation to promote cooperation between the two countries.\nThailand.\nThailand and Israel have had full diplomatic relations since 23 June 1954. The Israeli embassy was opened in 1958 although the Thai embassy in Tel Aviv only opened in 1996. Since the beginning, both countries have enjoyed strong ties and beneficial bilateral cooperation in many fields, most notably in agriculture and education. Thousands of Thai academics have been sent to train in Israel while many Thai schools have been modeled after Israel's experience and know-how with aid from Mashav. State visits by Thai royalty to Israel have been reciprocated by Israel's public figures. 100,000 Israeli tourists visit Thailand annually. Thousands of skilled and unskilled Thai workers are employed in Israel and many Thai students study in Israel.\nThere is also a Thai-Israel Chamber of Commerce, Thai-Israel Friendship Foundation as well as a small community of Israelis living in Thailand.\nTurkmenistan.\nIn 2013, the Israel Foreign Ministry opened a new embassy in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan.\nVietnam.\nVietnam and Israel established diplomatic relations on 12 July 1993. Israel opened its resident embassy in Hanoi in December 1993. The first Vietnamese ambassador to Israel presented his credentials on 8 July 2009. Since the establishment of diplomatic relations, the two countries have frequently conducted reciprocal visits at various levels, and have strengthened ties in such fields as business, education, culture, technological cooperation and agriculture. The visits arranged by the Israeli government included those of delegations comprising entrepreneurs and businessmen, academic groups, journalists, artists and musicians, legal workers, and so on.\nEurope.\nAlbania.\nIsrael and Albania established diplomatic relations on 20 August 1991. Albania had previously recognized Israel as a state since 1949. Albania has an embassy in Tel Aviv and Israel also has an embassy in Tirana.\nArmenia.\nSince independence, Armenia has received support from Israel and today remains one of its major trade partners. Both countries established diplomatic relations on 4 April 1992. Israel maintains a consulate in Yerevan, while Armenia has an embassy in Tel-Aviv and an honorary consulate in Jerusalem. Israel has recognized 10 Armenians as Righteous Among the Nations for risking their lives to save Jews during the Holocaust.\nAustria.\nAustria recognized Israel on 5 March 1949. Austria has an embassy in Tel Aviv and 3 honorary consulates (in Eilat, Haifa and Jerusalem). Israel has an embassy in Vienna. Both countries are full members of the Union for the Mediterranean. The Austrian Foreign Ministry lists the bilateral treaties with Israel.\nAzerbaijan.\nAzerbaijani\u2013Israeli relations are good, and Israel has an embassy in Baku. In May 1999, the U.S.-Azerbaijan Council sponsored a seminar to discuss relations among Azeris, Jews, and Israel. In April 2000, an Israeli trade delegation visited Baku to discuss ways of strengthening bilateral economic relations.\nThe Azerbaijan\u2013Israel Friendship Society facilitates and promotes bilateral diplomatic and business links. In October 2001, President Aliyev pledged to open an embassy in Israel and send his Foreign Minister to visit the country. Although neither has occurred, Azerbaijani\u2013Israeli strategic cooperation continues to grow.\nFor many years, Azerbaijan has maintained high rates of immigration to Israel due to the economic and political situation in the country. In 2002, 475 Jews made aliyah and 111 immigrated to the United States. The Azeri government gets regular updates from Israel regarding Azeri Jews in Israel, who are plagued by unemployment, crime, and other social issues as new immigrants in Israel.\nBelarus.\nIsrael established relations with Belarus in 1992 and continue to maintain friendly relations. In April 2000, Belarus and Israel signed an agreement on trade, science, culture, and education. The two countries also formed a joint committee to improve relations between the two nations. Belarus has an embassy in Tel Aviv and Israel has an embassy in Minsk. The two countries have also discussed implementing a visa-free regime between the two countries. Belarus Foreign Minister Vladimir Makei continues to satisfied with the relations between the two countries and also expressed hope for new opportunities to facilitate further all-round cooperation with Israel in conjunction with fostering progressive development with the Jewish state. Both nations celebrated its 20th anniversary in December 2012. Bilateral cooperation has since then encapsulated tourism, culture, trade, economy, science, education and other fields. In 2013, Belarusian Vice Premier Mikhail Rusyi met top Israeli officials from the Belarusian Agriculture and Food Ministry, the State Committee for Science and Technology, Belarusbank and the Vitebsk Oblast Executive Committee to further facilitate economic cooperation as well as development of innovative technologies into the Belarusian agricultural sector.\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nIsrael and Bosnia and Herzegovina established diplomatic relations in 1997.\nBulgaria.\nIsrael and Bulgaria have strong ties. Bulgaria saved the majority of its Jews during World War II \u2014 48,000 were rescued, 11,343 were deported. Israel and Bulgaria established diplomatic relations in 1948. After the Six-Day War Bulgaria cut diplomatic ties with Israel. In 1988, Bulgaria joined the wave of first nations to recognise the State of Palestine, something it has never withdrawn. In 1990 diplomatic relations were renewed. Bulgaria has an embassy in Tel Aviv and Israel has an embassy in Sofia and honorary consul in Varna.\nIn January 2012, Israel and Bulgaria signed two memorandum of understanding, one was for joint military training exercises and one for cooperation in the defence sector. The two agreements were signed by Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak and Bulgarian Defense Minister Anyu Angelov. Minister Angelov said the two agreements, in addition to their economic and defense benefits, also \"bring a political message \u2013 Bulgaria and Israel are a step closer towards stronger cooperation and a strategic dialogue.\" After the 2012 Burga bus bombing, Bulgaria and Israel pledged to increase security relations between the two countries discussing various aspects of bilateral cooperation at a meeting at the Ministry of Interior between Bulgarian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Interior Tsvetlin Iochev and Israeli Foreign Affairs Minister, Avigdor Leiberman in November 2013. An international investigation led by Bulgaria has established was the work of people linked with the bombing to the military wing of Hezbollah where five Israeli tourists and a Bulgarian citizen died.\nThe governments of both countries also intend to cooperate in the high-tech sector, the communications sector, health care and agriculture and to continue the positive development of tourism between the two countries and energy resource divestment. Israel also intends to join with Bulgaria, Cyprus, Greece and Romania to launch a regional group for crisis response which will boost the partnership between these countries in cases of common security challenges as result of a March 2014 meeting between Avigdor Lieberman and Bulgarian Interior Minister Tsvetlin Yovchev.\nCroatia.\nWhile Croatia was part of the Yugoslavia Federation (1943\u20131991) it established diplomatic relations with Israel in year 1948 through the Federation, but after Israel attacked Yugoslavia's Non-Aligned Movement ally Egypt in the Six-Day War in 1967, Yugoslavia severed all diplomatic relations with Israel. After the breakup of Yugoslavia occurred as a result of a series of political upheavals and conflicts Croatia declared independence on 8 October 1991 and officially renewed its bilateral relations with Israel which recognized Croatia as an independent state on 16 April 1992, but due to some disagreements with the Croatian President Tu\u0111man full diplomatic relations were established 5 years later, on 4 September 1997. Since then relations between Croatia and Israel have been excellent. Croatia has an embassy in Tel Aviv and 4 honorary consulates (in Ashdod, Caesarea, Jerusalem and Kfar Shmaryahu). Israel has an embassy in Zagreb. In addition, Croatia does not recognize the State of Palestine.\nCyprus.\nIsrael has had diplomatic relations with Cyprus since Israel's independence in 1948, when Cyprus was a British protectorate. Israel and Cyprus' associations have continued to expand since 1960, the year of Cyprus' independence. The neighboring countries trade regularly and there are high flows of tourism between them. However, Cypriot politicians have frequently spoken out against Israeli military raids in the Palestinian territories as well as the 2006 Lebanon War, during which Cyprus was forced to manage a heavy flow of refugees and aid out of and into Lebanon.\nHowever, the discovery of natural gas in the Leviathan gas field led to a thawing of relations between the two governments. The two countries demarcated their Exclusive Economic Zones in 2010. Israel's rising antagonism with Turkey further increased the level of cooperation between the two countries, as Israel compensated by improving its relations elsewhere. In February 2012, Netanyahu visited Cyprus, the first visit of an Israeli Prime Minister in history.\nRelations between Israel and Cyprus are based on mutual respect for Western values, the support for free-market economy and the establishment of democracies in the Middle East that would co-exist peacefully.\nCzech Republic.\nIsrael and the Czech Republic share a special relationship. Czechoslovakia was the only country to send aid to Israel in its early years e.g. arms shipments from Czechoslovakia to Israel 1947\u20131949.\nIn December 2008, the Czech Air Force wanted to train in desert conditions for the upcoming mission in Afghanistan. No country agreed to help, except Israel. Israel saw it as an opportunity to thank the Czechs for training Israeli pilots when the country was first established.\nDenmark.\nThe relations between Denmark and Israel have been friendly and warm. Denmark voted for the partition of Palestine in 1947 and supports Israel in the United Nations. Denmark was one of few countries in Europe to save most of its Jewish population during the WWII. In Jerusalem, there is a monument to the rescue of Danish Jews, a school is named in Denmark's honor, and the King Christian X hospital in Eitanim is named after Denmark's king during World War II. Denmark has an embassy in Israel, and Israel has an embassy in Copenhagen.\nThe political lives of the two states have been somewhat intertwined: The former Israeli minister of social and diaspora affairs Michael Melchior was born in Denmark and is the son of former chief rabbi in Copenhagen, Bent Melchior, the nephew of former Danish minister of traffic and minister of tourism and communication Arne Melchior, and the grandson of the acting rabbi for the Jewish refugees from Denmark in Sweden 1943\u201345, Marcus Melchior; the executive director of the Peres Center for Peace 2001\u20132011, Ron Pundak who played an important role in starting the Oslo peace process and was part of the core group behind the Geneva Initiative, is the son of the influential Danish journalist Herbert Pundik; and the prominent Israeli politician Yohanan Plesner, former chairman of the Plesner Committee, is the son of Danish architect Ulrik Plesner.\nEstonia.\nEstonia and Israel maintain excellent relations. Israel officially recognized the Republic of Estonia on 4 September 1991 and diplomatic relations were established on 9 January 1992. Foreign Minister Urmas Paet opened the Estonian Embassy in Tel Aviv in November 2009.\nAs of 2012, bilateral trade with Israel was 19.9 million euros.\nFinland.\nIn 2004, a joint Finland-Israel Technology (FIT) cooperation program was created for research and development projects in the field of ICT. The Office of the Chief Scientist in Israel and Tekes, the Finnish Funding Agency for Research and Innovation, allocated five million euros each for the funding of projects. In 2005, Finnish exports to Israel totaled 155,24 million euros and imports from Israel to Finland totaled 95.96 million euros. Finland's leading exports to Israel are telecommunications equipment and machinery, and Israeli fruits and vegetables.\nFrance.\nIn the early 1950s, France and Israel maintained close political and military ties as common enemies of Pan-Arab nationalism. France was Israel's main weapons supplier until its withdrawal from Algeria in 1962 removed most common interest from the relationship, and France became increasingly critical of Israel. This new reality became clear when, in the crisis leading up to the Six-Day War in June 1967, Charles de Gaulle's government imposed an arms embargo on the region, mostly affecting Israel, which had relied on France for weapons over the previous decade. Under Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand in the early 1980s, French\u2013Israeli relations improved greatly. Mitterrand was the first French president to visit Israel while in office. In 1967, after the Six-Day War, 5,300 French Jews immigrated to Israel.\nGeorgia.\nRelations between Israel and Georgia remain excellent. Georgia's former defense minister from 2006 to 2008, Davit Kezerashvili, had previously lived in Israel. Israel has been selling weapons to Georgia for seven years financed by grants from the USA Included in these weapons are Israeli-built spy drones provided through the former mayor of Tel Aviv, Roni Milo. Israeli advisors, estimated to number between 100 and 1,000, have trained the Georgian military for some time. The two nations also maintain a visa free policy where Georgian and Israeli officials signed an agreement to lift visa requirements for Georgian citizens traveling to Israel, reciprocating Georgia's visa-free policy for Israelis in place since mid-2005.\nGeorgia has its embassy in Tel Aviv, and the State of Israel has its embassy in Tbilisi. In June 2013, Georgian Prime Minister Bidzina Ivanishvili praised the Jewish people and Israel and has sought to increase relations between Israel and Georgia elucidating his special relationship between him, Georgia and the Jewish people. Ivanishvili also wanted to extend strategic partnerships and as well as furthering economic cooperation by making it easier for Israeli entrepreneurs and investors to not just do business in Israel, but also facilitate the right paths to do business for the Georgians. The Israel-Georgia Chamber of Business was established in 1996 in order to facilitate business transactions between the two friendly countries and acting as a guide for Israeli businesses through the Georgian economy. Major sectors include insurance, real estate and construction, medical and dental solutions, industrial and utility projects, and energy.\nGermany.\nDue to its role in the Holocaust, Israel was at first extremely hostile towards Germany and initially refused to establish relations with them. However, relations gradually thawed as Germany offered to pay reparations in 1952, and diplomatic relations were officially established in 1965. Israel and Germany now maintain a \"special relationship\" based on shared beliefs, Western values and a combination of historical perspectives. Among the most important factors in their relations is Nazi Germany's role in the genocide of 6 million Jews during the Holocaust.\nGermany is a prime supplier of arms to Israel, including Dolphin submarines. The military co-operation has been discreet but mutually profitable: Israeli intelligence, for example, sent captured Warsaw Pact armor to West Germany to be analyzed. The results aided the German development of an anti-tank system.\nGreece.\nBoth Greece and Turkey recognized the State of Israel in the late 1940s, but were diplomatically represented in Tel Aviv on lower-than-embassy levels. Greek\u2013Israeli relations improved in 1995. \nGreece\u2013Israel relations improved as Turkey\u2013Israel relations worsened in the aftermath of the 2010 Gaza flotilla raid. In October 2010, the Israeli and Greek air-forces trained jointly in Greece. According to the BBC, this signified a boost in ties that was due in large part to Israel's rift with Turkey. In November 2011, the Israeli Air Force hosted Greece's Hellenic Air Force in a joint exercise at the Uvda base.\nThe joint Cyprus\u2013Israel oil and gas explorations are also an important factor for Greece, given its strong links with Cyprus. Additionally Greek and Israeli state controlled energy companies are planning to lay the world's longest subsea power cable, linking Israel, Cyprus and Greece by 2023. The link, called the EuroAsia Interconnector project, will be the longest in the world.\nA new joint action committee for the Greek\u2013Israeli alliance has been created in the U.S. Congress in early 2013. The creation and goals of the Greek-Israeli Caucus under the name Congressional Hellenic-Israel Alliance were announced at a special event held in the Congress. It is co-chaired by Congress members Gus Bilirakis the Republican representative from Florida and Ted Deutch the Democrat from Florida, and the Greek-Israeli Caucus consists of powerful members of both Republican and Democratic party. It is estimated that it may become the most important pressure group in Congress by 2014.\nHoly See.\nBefore the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948, the Vatican opposed Zionist policies and objectives in Palestine. In 1947, during discussions at the United Nations about the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine, the Vatican supported the internationalization of Jerusalem, in order to keep the holy places away from either Israeli or Arab sovereignty. In October 1948, as the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War was in progress, Pope Pius XII, deeply disturbed by that violent conflict, issued the encyclical \"In multiplicibus curis\", in which he called on the peace-makers to give Jerusalem and its outskirts \"an international character\" and to assure\u00a0\u2013 \"with international guarantees\"\u00a0\u2013 freedom of access and worship at the holy places scattered throughout Palestine. In April 1949, he issued the encyclical \"Redemptoris nostri cruciatus\", in which he appealed for justice for the Palestinian refugees and repeated his call for an \"international status\" as the best form of protection for the holy places.\nIn January 1964, Pope Paul VI visited Israel, the first such Papal visit.\nFollowing the Six-Day War, the Vatican modified its position on the holy places. In an address to the College of Cardinals in December 1967, Pope Paul VI called for a \"\"special statute\", internationally guaranteed\" for Jerusalem and the Holy Places, thus changing the previous demand for the internationalization of Jerusalem.\nDiplomatic relations between the Israeli government and the Vatican were established in 1994, following the conclusion of the Fundamental Agreement between the Holy See and the State of Israel, signed on 30 December 1993. The Holy See (the Vatican), which has UN observer status, is the only non-UN member state with which Israel has diplomatic relations and the only non-UN member state recognised by Israel. An important organ in these relations is the Israel-Vatican Bilateral Commission, established under article 10 of the Agreement to resolve economic issues between the parties.\nIn 2000, Pope John Paul II visited Israel, followed by visits of Pope Benedict XVI (2009) and Pope Francis (2014). The bilateral commission convened on 30 April 2009 and 10 December 2009.\nHungary.\nHungary and Israel established full diplomatic relations in 1948 and severed during the Six-Day War in 1967. Relations were restored in 1989 with improved relations as well as the opening of embassies and consulates with Hungary having an embassy in Tel Aviv and 4 honorary consulates (in Eilat, Haifa, Jerusalem and Tel Aviv) and Israel has an embassy in Budapest and an honorary consulate in Szeged. Both countries have stressed the increasing of trade and tourism between one another and an estimated 30,000 Hungarian Jews emigrated to Israel in 1948. Both nations are also members of the Union for the Mediterranean.\nIn January 2022, Israeli Prime Minister Naftali Bennett thanked his Hungarian counterpart, Prime Minister Viktor Orb\u00e1n, for the Hungarian government's consistent support of Israel at international forums.\nIreland.\nFull diplomatic relations between Ireland and Israel were established in 1975. As of 2023, the Israeli ambassador to Ireland is Dana Erlich and the Irish ambassador to Israel is Sonya McGuinness.\nThe Irish government followed a similar line to other EU governments during the 2006 Lebanon War, with the Irish Taoiseach, Bertie Ahern, condemning the actions of Israel as \"reckless and disproportionate\" and calling for an immediate ceasefire on both sides, while also condemning the actions of Hezbollah. During the conflict, a shipment of bombs that attempted to land in Ireland from USA to Tel Aviv was denied use of Irish airspace and airfields by the Irish Government. The weapons were part of a series of agreed arms shipments between the United States Government and Israel. The shipments were diverted via Scotland, where they also caused controversy.\nIn 2010, the Israel Defense Forces forcibly boarded an Irish aid ship destined for the Gaza Strip which resulted in worsened relations, Israel's Mossad was also involved in the counterfeiting of Irish passports, and two members of the Israeli ambassador's security staff in Dublin were subsequently deported. In 2010, there were numerous protests at the Israeli embassy in Ireland over the treatment of Palestinians.\nIn December 2024, Israel announced that it would close its embassy in Dublin due to what it described as \"the extreme anti-Israel policies of the Irish government\".\nItaly.\nRelations between Italy and Israel remain strong, with frequent diplomatic exchanges and a large volume of trade. The Israeli Government has followed with great attention the fight against international terrorism pursued by the Italian Government.\nKosovo.\nOn 17 February 2008, Kosovo declared its independence from Serbia, a move Serbia rejects. Kosovo has been recognized by a substantial number of UN members, including the United States and most members of the European Union. At the time of the declaration, an Israeli Foreign Ministry official stated: \"We haven't decided when we're going to decide, and instead will monitor events and consider the issue.\" Israel was reluctant to recognize Kosovo's independence, in part because of the possibility of Palestinians using recognition of Kosovo to justify their own unilateral declaration of independence. On 21 September 2018 the president of Kosovo, Hashim Thaci told that he would place the Kosovo embassy in Jerusalem if Israel recognized Kosovo as an independent state. Israel and Kosovo agreed to establish diplomatic relations on 4 September 2020. In March 2022, Kosovo officially opened its embassy in Jerusalem after becoming the first Muslim-majority territory to recognise Jerusalem as Israel's capital.\nLatvia.\nLatvia and Israel established diplomatic relations 6 January 1992. In October 2012, Foreign Minister Edgars Rink\u0113vi\u010ds called on Israeli officials for the development of economic and trade contacts between both countries and support for Latvia's accession to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Rinkevics also met with Israeli President Shimon Peres on behalf of President Berzins to visit Latvia. Rinkevics and Peres agreed on the key significance of education and knowledge-based economies for the development of small countries further paving opportunities for our future cooperation between the two nations.\nIsraeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman also corroborated claims that Israel is interested in forging closer relations with Latvia as Rinkevics emphasized the 20th anniversary of relations between Latvia and Israel in 2012 and both foreign ministers expressed their commitment to strengthening economic and trade cooperation, including contacts between Latvian and Israeli entrepreneurs and a more cooperative operation in the fields of education, culture and science.\nLithuania.\nIsrael recognized Lithuania's independence in 1991. Both countries established diplomatic relation in 1992. Israel has an embassy in Vilnius. Lithuania has an embassy in Tel Aviv and two honorary consulates (in Herzliya and Ramat Gan). Relations are warm and friendly between the two nations and both bi-national trade and tourism has doubled, and two new regularly scheduled flights have just been set between the two countries since 2010.\nLithuanian achievements, particularly Lithuania's achievements in biochemistry and the biosciences have attracted Israeli entrepreneurs and investors to invest in Lithuania's science and technology sector and Lithuania is enthusiastic in combining Israel's knack for unlocked untapped entrepreneurial and intellectual potential combined with Lithuania's strong science and technology research base and talented workforce. Both nations have concluded an agreement on cooperation in industrial research and experimental development as further cooperation within venture capital to fund joint research projects remains underway.\nBilateral meetings between both nations reached unexpected highs between 2009\u20132011 and cooperations between the two nations remain excellent with several forms of cooperation that include science, economics, education, and culture as emphasized by Lithuanian Foreign Minister Audronius Azubalis. Lithuanian President Dalia Grybauskaite has stated Israel as model of innovation in which is one of the reasons that Lithuania is interested in enhancing its bilateral relations.\nIn 2011 alone, Israeli tourism to Lithuania grew by 62 percent, and Lithuanian exports to Israel increased by 54 percent. Israel's leading pharmaceutical company, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd, has a manufacturing plant in Lithuania and TEVA recently invested in \"Sicor Biotech\", a Lithuanian biotechnological pharmaceutical company, further signifying economic cooperation and encourages the development of such sciences as biotechnology and genetic engineering in Lithuanian universities.\nIsraeli companies have taken a very active interest in possibilities for carrying out clinical research in Lithuania; many of them are already in cooperation with Lithuanian medical institutions and have invested in Lithuania's burgeoning life sciences sector. In 2013, Lithuanian biotechnology company ProBioSanus signed a representation agreement with Bharat Israel where ProBioSanus' natural, probiotic-based cleaning and personal care products will be available for sale in Israel for the first time. The company already opened stores in Lithuania and Scandinavia. Mr Andrejauskas, head of ProBioSanus spoke of this agreement saying that \"We have a strong scientific base and intellectual potential in Lithuania, so we are allocating particular attention to the creation of new formulas and products.\" Besides Israeli investments in the Lithuanian life science's sector, Lithuanian presence in Israel in the food industry remains strong as Israeli supermarkets sell Lithuanian cheese, curd desserts, Vilnius mayonnaise, \u017demaitijos Pienas butter, Panev\u0117\u017eys ice cream, \u0160vyturys-Utenos Alus beers and various styles of Lithuanian liquors. According to Vadimas Ivanovas, a business and financial analyst at Enterprise Lithuania, says that Israeli retail chains are very interested in Lithuanian sweets, pastries, canned vegetables, various sauces, alcoholic beverages, mineral water. \"Veal is particularly popular.\"\nLuxembourg.\nIn November 1947, Luxembourg voted in favor of the partition plan to create a Jewish state. Israel and Luxembourg established full diplomatic relations in 1949. Due to Luxembourg's small size, the Israeli embassy is located in Brussels and Luxembourg is represented politically by the Dutch embassy and economically by the Belgian embassy.\nMoldova.\nRelations between Moldova and Israel were established on 6 June 1992. Israel recognized Moldova on 25 December 1991. Israel is represented in Moldova through its embassy in Chisinau and Moldova has an embassy in Tel Aviv and an honorary consulate in Haifa. Relations between the two countries are friendly and a warm one based on mutual support. A myriad of efforts are primarily focused on the realization of achieved accords on cooperation in the fields of economy, medicine, industry, agriculture, social and cultural issues. Though the volume of trade between Israel and Moldova was low, Larisa Miculet, the third Ambassador of Moldova to Israel, has stated that there numerous untapped potential of increasing bilateral trade. For Israeli entrepreneurs and investors, Moldova is geopolitically convenient because of its location in the center of Europe, its high transparency between public authorities and foreign investors and due to its having eliminated most of the bureaucratic barriers that hinder business activities. Various business sectors of cooperation between Israel and Moldova range from pharmaceuticals, energy, information technology and software, electronics and electronic equipment, power engineering, metal and plastics processing and construction materials but Moldova has stressed foreign Israeli investments in all segments of the Moldovan economy.\nNetherlands.\nIn 1947, the Netherlands voted in favor of the establishing Israel and established diplomatic relation in 1949. Israel has an embassy in The Hague and The Netherlands has an embassy in Tel Aviv.\nNorway.\nNorway was one of the first countries to recognize Israel on 4 February 1949. Both countries established diplomatic relations later that year. Israel has an embassy which serves Norway and Iceland in Oslo. Norway has an embassy in Tel Aviv and 2 honorary consulates (in Eilat and Haifa). Israels Venner p\u00e5 Stortinget \"(Friends of Israel in the Parliament of Norway)\" is a pro-Israel caucus group consisting of members of the Parliament of Norway (Stortinget).\nPoland.\nFollowing the severing of relations after the Six-Day War, Poland was the first Eastern Bloc country to restore relations with Israel in 1986 (beside Romania, which had continuous relations with Israel). Full diplomatic relations were reestablished in 1990, after the fall of Communism in Poland.\nPortugal.\nThe Estado Novo regime did not recognize Israel. Full diplomatic relations with the Portuguese government were established on 12 May 1977, following the Portuguese revolution of 1974.\nRomania.\nRomania and Israel established full diplomatic relations on 11 June 1948. Between 1967 and 1989, Romania was the only Eastern Bloc country to maintain relations with Israel, after the Six-Day War.\nIsrael has an embassy in Bucharest. Romania has an embassy in Tel Aviv and 3 honorary consulates (in Haifa, Jerusalem and Tel Aviv). The two countries have signed many bilateral treaties and agreements and both of them are full members of the Union for the Mediterranean and many other international organizations.\nRussia and the Soviet Union.\nThe Soviet Union voted in favor of the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine in 1947, which paved the way for the creation of the State of Israel. On 17 May 1948, on the third day of Israel's independence, the Soviet Union granted \"de jure\" recognition to the State of Israel, becoming only the second country to recognise Israel (preceded only by the United States' \"de facto\" recognition) and the first country to grant Israel \"de jure\" recognition.\nThe Soviet Union and the other communist states of Eastern Europe (with the exception of Romania) cut diplomatic ties with Israel during the Six-Day War. Relations were restored on 19 October 1991, a few months before the dissolution of the Soviet Union, despite the fact that hostile Arab countries such as Syria also maintain close ties with Russia. Russia is known to supply Syria with weapons.\nIn September 2010, Israel and Russia signed a comprehensive military agreement that will \"increase cooperation on combating terrorism\" and the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak met with his Russian counterpart, Anatoly Serdyukov and Prime Minister Vladimir Putin, and signed the agreement during a ceremony in Moscow. The Russian military plans on purchasing additional Israeli unmanned aerial vehicles. Russia previously bought 12 drones from the Israel Aerospace Industries following the war in South Ossetia.\nSerbia.\nDiplomatic relations between Israel and Serbia's predecessor state, Yugoslavia, were severed for twenty-four years, from 1967 until 1991, when they were officially renewed, by which time Yugoslavia was in the process of disintegration. Diplomatic relations continued when, in April 1992, the two remaining Yugoslav republics, Serbia and Montenegro, formed the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (renamed to Serbia and Montenegro in February 2003). On 3 June 2006, Montenegro and Serbia dissolved the union.\nSlovakia.\nBoth countries established diplomatic relations in 1993. Israel has an embassy in Bratislava, with its first resident ambassador in Slovakia being Yael Rubinstein. Slovakia has an embassy in Tel Aviv. In May 2008, Slovakian Prime Minister Robert Fico called Ehud Olmert and Shimon Peres for the strengthening of diplomatic relations between Israel and Slovakia. An Israel \u2013 Slovakia Chamber of Commerce and Industry also exists to facilitate further economic and business cooperation between the two countries.\nSlovenia.\nIsrael and Slovenia established full diplomatic relations when Israel officially recognized Slovenia on 16 April 1992 and on 28 April 1992 when the countries signed the Protocol establishing diplomatic relations between each other. The Slovenian-Israeli Chamber of Commerce was established in 2010 signifying a strengthening of ties and both countries have discussed bilateral cooperation in business, tourism, science and technology, and agriculture.\nSlovenian Jews in Israel.\nA sizable Slovenian Jewish community was presently in the Gush Dan area.\nSpain.\nFrancoist Spain did not recognize Israel, citing an international conspiracy of Jews and Freemasons against Spain. Israel and Spain have maintained diplomatic ties since 1986. Nevertheless, Israeli exports to Spain are on the rise, totalling $870 million in 2006, and Israeli firms doing business with Spain include the Dead Sea Works, Haifa Chemicals, Amdocs, Comverse and Teva Pharmaceuticals.\nThe Spanish foreign minister visited Israel for an official visit in May 2008.\nSince the outbreak of the Gaza war, Spain has been among the most outspoken critics about Israel's actions. As of September 2025, both countries have recalled their respective ambassadors.\nSweden.\nSweden voted in favor of the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine in 1947. Relations between Sweden and Israel were good during the 1950s and 1960s, and Sweden expressed strong support for Israel during the Six-Day War. However, from 1969, Sweden became more critical of Israel. In October 2014, Sweden became the first European Union member to officially recognize the State of Palestine.\nSwitzerland.\nThe First Zionist Congress was held in Basel in 1897, and 15 out of a total of 22 congresses were held in Switzerland. Before the establishment of the State of Israel, Switzerland maintained a consulate in Jerusalem and a consular agency in Tel Aviv. It recognized the new state in 1949 and opened a consulate in Tel Aviv, which was upgraded to an embassy in 1958. The Swiss community in Israel is the largest in the Asian region, totalling around 12,000 persons.\nAfter escalation of the Middle East conflict, Switzerland halted arms sales and military cooperation with Israel from 2002 to 2005. Since 2004, there has been regular political dialogue between Switzerland and Israel.\nSwitzerland has represented Israel's interests in numerous countries (Hungary (1967\u20131989), Guinea (1967\u20131973), Ceylon/Sri Lanka (1970\u20131976), Madagascar (1973\u20131994), Liberia (1973\u20131983) and Ghana (1973\u20132002)). Conversely, it has represented the interests of Iran (1958\u20131987) and Ivory Coast (1973\u20131986) in Israel. It also lobbied successfully for inclusion of Magen David Adom in the Red Cross and Red Crescent movement.\nOn 21 April 2009, Israel recalled its ambassador for consultations due to events that occurred at the UN anti-racism conference in Geneva, Switzerland. Israeli officials, angered by a meeting between Swiss President Hans-Rudolf Merz and the Iranian president, recalled its ambassador to Switzerland, Ilan Elgar \"for consultations\" amid ongoing controversy over an anti-racism conference being held in Geneva.\nUkraine.\nBoth countries established diplomatic relations on 26 December 1991. Israel has an embassy in Kyiv. Ukraine has an embassy in Tel Aviv and a consulate-general in Haifa. In July 2010 the foreign ministers of two countries sign an agreement of non-visa traffic between Israel and Ukraine. This came into effect on 9 February 2011 and since then Ukrainians and Israelis may enter territory, travel through it or stay on Ukraine/Israel without having to obtain visas for 90 days within a period of 180 days.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIsrael established diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom in 1950. \nThe UK governed Israel from 1921 until 1948, when it achieved full independence. \nBoth countries share common membership of the OECD, and the World Trade Organization. Bilaterally the two countries have a Trade and Partnership Agreement, a Reciprocal Healthcare Agreement, and a Strategic Partnership. The two countries are currently negotiating a new Free Trade Agreement.\nRelations between the Israel and the UK began as hostile. During the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli war, Britain detained 8,000 Jewish men of military age attempting to make aliyah to Israel in Cyprus, so they could not participate in the fighting. Britain supplied weapons to the Arab states, and almost went to war with Israel. When Israel captured the Negev, the British Ministry of Defence began to draw up plans for a possible invasion of Israel. British planes spied on Israeli positions, and war between the two countries became even more possible when four British planes were shot down by Israel. However, the two countries began to soften later on, and trade began. In 1956 Israel invaded Sinai Peninsula in agreement with France and the UK that invaded Suez. Nevertheless, Anglo-Israeli relations became turbulent in the summer of 2006 when Prime Minister Tony Blair, along with many other European leaders criticized IDF airstrikes against Hezbollah targets in Lebanon, which had high civilian casualties. During the Cameron premiership, relations between the two countries continued to remain close.\nCentral America.\nCosta Rica.\nCosta Rica was one of the first countries to vote in favor of the establishment of the State of Israel. It maintained its embassy in Jerusalem until August 2006, when it finally relocated to Tel Aviv in order to bolster its ties with the Arab world. In December 2011, Rodrigo Carreras became the Costa Rican ambassador to Israel for the second time, after his posting there in the 1980s. Carreras' father, Benjamin Nunez, also served as the Costa Rican ambassador to Israel.\nGuatemala.\nFollowing Israel's independence, Guatemala was the first country to open an embassy in Jerusalem in 1959. The embassy was later relocated to Tel Aviv. However, on 16 May 2018 Guatemala again moved its embassy back to Jerusalem. The move to Jerusalem followed two days after the opening of the United States' Embassy to Israel in the city.\nHaiti.\nHaiti and Israel maintain full diplomatic relations. In 1947, Haiti voted for the UN Partition Plan and the creation of the State of Israel.\nIsrael was among the first to send both personnel and aid to Haiti following the devastating earthquake in 2010.\nPanama.\nPanama formally recognized the State of Israel on 18 June 1948. The two countries first exchanged in 1960.\nPanama voted with Israel against UN resolution 67/19, as well as UN resolution 70/70, and in 2012 had a 30% voting coincidence with Israel.\nNicaragua.\n1974\u20131978: Israel sold arms to Somoza \"r\u00e9gime\".\nOn 1 June 2010 Nicaragua suspended diplomatic ties with Israel in response to the Gaza flotilla raid. Relations were restored in March 2017. \nIn October 2024, Nicaragua once again severed diplomatic ties with Israel due to the Israeli war on Gaza and Lebanon, calling the Israeli government \"fascist\" and \"genocidal\".\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nCanada's relationship with Israel began in 1947, when Canada was represented on the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine (UNSCOP). Canada was one of the 33 countries (including only four Commonwealth members) that voted in favour of the 1947 UN partition Plan, thus beginning a longstanding relationship with the Jewish state based on a shared commitment to democratic values, understanding, and mutual respect.\nCuba.\nCuba sent troops to fight against Israel during the War of Attrition. Cuba also joined the expeditionary forces during the 1973 Yom Kippur War, and broke diplomatic relations with Israel the same year.\nAs Cuba's enemy and a very close United States ally, Israel was the only country in the world that consistently sided with the U.S. blockade against Cuba.\nIn late 2010, Fidel Castro, who at this time no longer held office in Cuba's government, stated that he believes Israel has a 'right to exist', which is a shift from his \"r\u00e9gime\"'s earlier policy.\nMexico.\nMexico and Israel have had diplomatic relations since January 1950. Throughout the years, they have maintained close relations with each other. In 2000, a free trade agreement was signed between the two nations. Mexico has also purchased weapons from Israel and is one of Israel's closest allies in the Americas.\nUnited States.\nThe relations between Israel and the United States have evolved from an initial United States policy of sympathy and support for the creation of a Jewish state in 1948 (It was the first country to recognize the establishment of the State) to an unusual partnership that links Israel with the United States trying to balance competing interests in the Middle East region. The United States has been considered Israel's most powerful and supportive ally and hosts the annual Salute to Israel Parade in New York City. From 1948 to 2012, the United States has provided Israel with $233.7 billion in aid (after adjusting for inflation). In addition, the US has provided Israel with $19 billion in loan guarantees.\nThe United States is Israel's largest trading partner, accounting for 22.4 percent of Israel's $43.19 billion in imports, and 42.1 percent of Israel's $40.14 billion in exports annually (2005). The U.S. also provides Israel with $2.4 billion in military assistance annually, which is equivalent to 24.5 percent of Israel's military expenditures. (2005).\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nAustralia was one of the four Commonwealth nations to vote in favour of the 1947 UN partition resolution. Australia and Israel established full diplomatic relations in January 1949. Australia has an embassy in Tel Aviv and Israel likewise in Canberra. In May 2010, the Australian government expelled an Israeli diplomat over the misuse of Australian passports in the assassination of Mahmoud Al-Mabhouh, which Foreign Minister Stephen Smith said was \"not the act of a friend.\"\nMarshall Islands.\nThe Marshall Islands is one of the most consistent supporters of Israel international affairs, along with the United States, Micronesia and Palau. The Marshall Islands is a country in free association with the United States, and thus consistently vote in favor of the United States.\nMicronesia.\nThe Federated States of Micronesia is one of the most consistent supporters of Israel in voting at the UN.\nIn January 2010, the President of the Federated States of Micronesia, Emanuel Mori, and the President of the Republic of Nauru, Marcus Stephen, with their foreign ministers, visited Israel to expand ties on issues such as healthcare, solar energy, water conservation, clean technologies and other areas in which Israel can provide expertise. They met with Israeli leaders including the Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, President Shimon Peres and Minister of Foreign Affairs Avigdor Lieberman.\nNauru.\nIsrael and the Republic of Nauru established diplomatic relations in December 1994. Nauru recognized Jerusalem as Israel's capital in 2019.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand was one of the four Commonwealth nations to vote in favour of the 1947 UN partition resolution. Since then, most New Zealand governments have been supportive of Israel. After 53 years of full diplomatic relations, the Israeli Embassy in Wellington closed in 2004 due to $5.4 million in cost-cuts by the Israeli Foreign Ministry. It was speculated that trade with Arab countries were a major factor. In June 2004, the New Zealand Government criticized Israel's policy of bulldozing Palestinian homes and donated $534,000 to aid homeless Palestinians. At one time there were four missions in the South Pacific area in Canberra, Sydney, Wellington and Suva in Fiji. Following the closure, only Canberra remained open, which was responsible for New Zealand-Israeli Relations. In 2009, the Israel Foreign Ministry announced the reopening of the embassy in Wellington.\nIn mid-2004, two suspected Mossad agents were jailed for three months and paid a $35,000 fine for trying on false grounds to obtain a New Zealand passport. High-level visits between the two countries were cancelled, visa restrictions imposed for Israeli officials, and an expected visit to New Zealand by Israeli president Moshe Katsav was cancelled. More than a year later, Israel apologized and New Zealand Prime Minister Helen Clark announced that it was time to resume friendly diplomatic relations with Israel.\nNiue.\nDiplomatic relations between Israel and Niue were established on 3 August 2023.\nPalau.\nPalau is one of the most consistent supporters of Israel in the United Nations and other international affairs along with the United States, Micronesia and the Marshall Islands. In 2006, Palau had the highest voting coincidence with Israel in the United Nations.\nTuvalu.\nIsrael maintains a non-resident embassy to Tuvalu in Jerusalem and Tuvalu has voted together with Israel against UN resolutions furthering Palestinian sovereignty on occasion.\nSouth America.\nArgentina.\nIn 1992, three Israeli diplomats were killed in the bombing of the Israeli Embassy which left 29 people dead and 240 wounded. Two years later, another bombing took place at the AMIA Jewish community center in Buenos Aires, killing 85 people and wounding 300. The investigation was never completed. N\u00e9stor Kirchner called this a national disgrace, and reopened the files.\nBolivia.\nIn January 2009, Bolivia limited its foreign relationship with Israel in the wake of strikes in Gaza by Israel. Bolivian President Evo Morales has reportedly promised to take Israel to an international court for alleged war crimes committed in Gaza. Bolivia originally granted visa free access to Israeli citizens. However, as a result of Israel's 2014 military operation in Gaza, which it opposed, President Evo Morales declared Israel a \"terrorist state\" and his government will now require Israeli citizens to obtain a visa to visit Bolivia. Morales has called Israel's treatment of Palestinians \"a genocide\".\nFollowing Morales's resignation and fleeing to Mexico in November 2019, relations were restored to their previous status.\nOn 1 November 2023, following the escalation of the 2023 Israel-Hamas war, Deputy Foreign Minister of Bolivia Freddy Mamani announced that Bolivia would be cutting diplomatic ties with Israel. This made Bolivia the first country to cut relations with Israel in response to the conflict.\nBrazil.\nBrazil played a large role in the establishment of the State of Israel. Brazil held the Presidency office of the UN General Assembly in 1947, which proclaimed the Partition Plan for Palestine. The Brazilian delegation to the U.N., supported and heavily lobbied for the partition of Palestine toward the creation of the State of Israel. Brazil was also one of the first countries to recognize the State of Israel, on 7 February 1949, less than one year after Israeli Declaration of Independence.\nNowadays, Brazil and Israel maintain close political, economic and military ties. Brazil is a full member state of Israel Allies Caucus, a political advocacy organization that mobilizes pro-Israel parliamentarians in governments worldwide. The two nations enjoy a degree of arms cooperation as Brazil is a key buyer of Israeli weapons and military technology. Also, Brazil is Israel's largest trading partner in Latin America. Israel has an embassy in Bras\u00edlia and a consulate-general in S\u00e3o Paulo and Brazil has an embassy in Tel Aviv and an honorary consulate in Haifa. A longstanding dispute between Israel and Brazil is ongoing over Brazil's official rejection of a new Israeli ambassador because of his ties to the West Bank.\nBrazil-Israel relations have improved significantly during the presidency of Jair Bolsonaro since 2019. Brazilian president Bolsonaro has expressed his love for Israel several times. He has even said to have turned Brazil into Israel's new best friend.\nIn December 2019, Brazil opened a trade office in Jerusalem. Brazil also considered to move its embassy to Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.\nBrazil has the ninth largest Jewish community in the world, about 107,329 by 2010, according to the IBGE census. The Jewish Confederation of Brazil (CONIB) estimates to more than 120,000.\nChile.\nChile recognized Israel's independence in February 1949. Israel sent its first ambassador to Chile in May 1950, and Chile sent its first ambassador to Israel in June 1952. Prime Minister Golda Meir visited Chile during her term in office. In March 2005, the Chilean minister of foreign affairs Ignacio Walker made an official visit to Israel. Chile is home to the largest Palestinian community outside the Middle East, approximately 500,000.\nColombia.\nColombia and Israel established formal relations in the mid-1950s. In recent years, Colombia has purchased planes, drones, weapons and intelligence systems from Israel. An Israeli company, Global CST won a $10 million contract in Colombia. On 1 May 2024, Colombian president Petro announced Colombia would break diplomatic ties with Israel.\nGuyana.\nBoth countries have established diplomatic relations on 9 March 1992.\nParaguay.\nIn September 2018, Paraguay announced that it was moving its embassy in Israel out of Jerusalem and back to Tel Aviv, just months after a previous Paraguayan administration had opened the new mission. The US, Guatemala and Paraguay, all moved their embassies to Jerusalem in May 2018. Paraguay said it had officially recognized the military wings of Palestinian group Hamas and Lebanon's Hezbollah as terrorist organizations, drawing praise from Israel. President Mario Abdo Benitez made the declaration in an official document in August 2019.\nPeru.\nIsrael and Peru established diplomatic relations in 1957. In 1998 the two countries began talks on a free-trade agreement. Israel sent rescue teams and medical aid to Peru after earthquakes in 1970, 2005 and 2007. In 2001, Eliane Karp, a former Israeli, became the First Lady of Peru.\nSuriname.\nSuriname and Israel established diplomatic relations on 24 February 1976. In February 2011, non-resident Israeli ambassador to Suriname, Amiram Magid, criticized the government of Suriname for recognizing the State of Palestine. On 30 May 2022, in a meeting with Israeli Foreign Minister Yair Lapid, Surinamese Foreign Minister Albert Ramdin announced plans to open a Surinamese embassy in Jerusalem in the near future. On 23 June, Surinamese President Chan Santokhi announced the cancellation of the Jerusalem embassy plans, citing a lack of funds.\nUruguay.\nIsrael has an embassy in Montevideo. Uruguay has an embassy in Tel Aviv and 2 honorary consulates in Ashdod and Haifa. Uruguay was one of the first nations to recognise Israel as independent.\nVenezuela.\nRelations were once strong, but the bilateral ties soured under the Presidency of Hugo Ch\u00e1vez in Venezuela. The Jewish population in Venezuela, which peaked at 45,000, is now below 15,000 \"as a result of severe instability in the country\", according to the Israeli Stephen Roth Institute. \"The Miami Herald\", \"Jewish Times\", and Jewish organizations have reported large-scale emigration of Jewish people from Venezuela during the Ch\u00e1vez administration. As a result of the June/July 2006 battles in the Gaza Strip, Venezuela withdrew its ambassador to Israel. Following the Israeli attack on Gaza in December 2008 and January 2009, Venezuela cut its diplomatic ties with Israel. Venezuelan president Hugo Ch\u00e1vez called the attack \"genocidal\", and urged that Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert be tried for war crimes.\nIsraeli foreign aid.\nIsraeli foreign aid comprises primarily development assistance and humanitarian aid provided by Israel to foreign countries. Israel provides assistance to developing countries to alleviate and solve economic and social problems through its international cooperation program of technical assistance, based on its own recent and ongoing experience in developing human and material resources. Israel's Agency for International Development Cooperation, established as an agency of the Israeli Foreign Ministry in 1958 and known by its Hebrew acronym, \"MASHAV\", is the primary vehicle for providing this aid.\nThis center trains course participants from approximately 140 countries on healthcare, as well as emergency and disaster medicine, and has participated in dozens of projects worldwide in fields economic fields such as agriculture, education, development, employment, and healthcare, as well as humanitarian fields such as disaster relief, reconstruction, and refugee absorption.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74582", "revid": "94931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74582", "title": "Freedb", "text": "Database of compact disc track listings\nFreedb was a database of user-submitted compact disc track listings, where all the content was under the GNU General Public License. To look up CD information over the Internet, a client program calculated a hash function from the CD table of contents and used it as a disc ID to query the database. If the disc was in the database, the client was able to retrieve and display the artist, album title, track list and some additional information.\nFreedb was launched in 2001 based on the CDDB (Compact Disc DataBase) after it had been changed to a proprietary license and renamed \"Gracenote\". As of 2006,[ [update]] the Freedb database held just under 2,000,000 CDs. As of 2007, MusicBrainz \u2013 a project with similar goals \u2013 had a Freedb gateway that allowed access to their own database. The Freedb gateway was shut down on March 18, 2019.\nIn 2020, Freedb was shut down by Magix, a German company that had acquired it in 2006.\nHistory.\nThe original software behind CDDB was released under the GNU General Public License, and many people submitted CD information thinking the service would also remain free. The license was later changed, however, and some programmers complained that the new license included certain terms that they couldn't accept: if one wanted to access CDDB, one was not allowed to access any other CDDB-like database (such as Freedb), and any programs using a CDDB lookup had to display a CDDB logo while performing the lookup.\nIn March 2001, CDDB, now owned by Gracenote, banned all unlicensed applications from accessing their database. New licenses for CDDB1 (the original version of CDDB) were no longer available, since Gracenote wanted to force programmers to switch to CDDB2 (a new version incompatible with CDDB1 and hence with Freedb). The license change motivated the Freedb project, which is intended to remain free.\nIn a 2006 interview with Wired, CDDB co-creator Steve Scherf pushed back against criticism that with the license change, Gracenote had privatized a public good created by the work of unpaid volunteers, noting that the data submitted to CDDB before the license remained available for download on freedb, and arguing that the stagnation of freedb at that point showed that \"the focus and dedication required for CDDB to grow could not be found in a community effort\".\nBecause it inherited CDDB's limitations, there is no data field in the Freedb database for composer. This limits its usefulness for classical music CDs. Furthermore, CDs in a series are often introduced in the database by different people, resulting in inconsistent spelling and naming conventions across discs.\nFreedb was used primarily by media players, cataloguers, audio taggers and CD ripper software. As of version 6 of the Freedb protocol, Freedb accepted and returned UTF-8 data.\nMagix acquired Freedb in 2006. MusicBrainz \u2013 a project with similar goals \u2013 released a Freedb gateway in 2007, allowing users to harvest information from the MusicBrainz database rather than Freedb. This service was shuttered in 2019. A 2011 review observed that \"unlike the flat file database structure of freedb.org, MusicBrainz is structured as a relational database, which has allowed MusicBrainz to expand its scope.\"\nIn June 2020, Freedb.org went offline (after its impending shutdown had been announced in March 2020). Asked by Heise News about the reasons for the service's demise, Magix stated that the updates required by a changing legal and technical environment had made it uneconomical to maintain. An expert quoted by Heise ruled out server costs as the reason, observing that a single request to the service amounted to just around five kilobytes of transferred data.\ngnudb.org, short for 'Global Network Universal Database', has continued to provide the Freedb.org database after Freedb.org was shut down. gnudb.org is not affiliated with the GNU project.\nClient software.\nFreedb\u2010aware applications include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74583", "revid": "8289", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74583", "title": "Stansted Airport", "text": ""}
{"id": "74584", "revid": "40873220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74584", "title": "Crippleware", "text": "Product with intentionally limited features in favor of a more expensive version\nCrippleware is computer software or hardware that has been intentionally designed to have some of its features disabled or not working to its full capability until payment of some kind is rendered.\nIn software, crippleware means that \"vital features of the program such as printing or the ability to save files are disabled until the user purchases a registration key\". While crippleware allows consumers to see the software before they buy, they are unable to test its complete functionality because of the disabled functions.\nHardware crippleware is \"a hardware device that has not been designed to its full capability\". The functionality of the hardware device is limited to encourage consumers to pay for a more expensive upgraded version. Usually the hardware device considered to be crippleware can be upgraded to better or its full potential by way of a trivial change, such as removing a jumper wire. The manufacturer would most likely release the crippleware as a low-end or economy version of their product.\nComputer software.\nDeliberately limited programs are usually freeware versions of computer programs that lack the most advanced (or even crucial) features of the original program. Limited versions are made available in order to increase the popularity of the full program (by making it more desirable) without giving it away for free. Examples include a word processor that cannot save or print, and unwanted features, for example screencasting and video editing software programs applying a watermark (often a logo) onto the video screen. However, crippleware programs can also differentiate between tiers of paying software customers.\nThe term \"crippleware\" is sometimes used to describe software products whose functions have been limited (or \"crippled\") with the sole purpose of encouraging or requiring the user to pay for those functions (either by paying a one-time fee or an ongoing subscription fee).\nThe less derogatory term, from a shareware software producer's perspective, is \"feature-limited\". Feature-limited is merely one mechanism for marketing shareware as a damaged good; others are time-limited, usage-limited, capacity-limited, nagware and output-limited. From the producer's standpoint, feature-limited allows customers to try software with no commitment instead of relying on questionable or possibly staged reviews. Try-before-you-buy applications are very prevalent for mobile devices, with the additional damaged good of ad-displays as well as all of the other forms of damaged-good applications.\nFrom an Open Source software providers perspective, there is the model of open core which includes a feature-limited version of the product and an open-core version. The feature-limited version can be used widely; this approach is used by products like MySQL and Eucalyptus.\nComputer hardware.\nThis product differentiation strategy has also been used in hardware products:\nAutomobiles.\nTesla limits the range on lower-end versions of the Model S in software, as well as disabling Autopilot functions if those functions weren't purchased.\nSome high-end BMW cars in the United Kingdom, Germany, New Zealand, and South Africa have the option to pay a subscription fee for features such as heated seats, advanced cruise control, and automatic beam switching. The components and functionality already exist within the vehicle, but BMW has a software block that prevents them from being used without paying.\nDigital rights management.\nDigital rights management is another example of this product differentiation strategy. Digital files are inherently capable of being copied perfectly in unlimited quantities; digital rights management aims to deter copyright infringement by using hardware or cryptographic techniques to limit copying or playback.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74588", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74588", "title": "Caria", "text": "Region of ancient Asia-Minor\nCaria (; from Greek: \u039a\u03b1\u03c1\u03af\u03b1, \"Karia\"; ) was a region of western Anatolia extending along the coast from mid-Ionia (Mycale) south to Lycia and east to Phrygia. The Carians were described by Herodotus as being Anatolian mainlanders and they called themselves Caria because of the name of their king. He reports the Carians themselves maintained that they were Anatolian mainlanders intensely engaged in seafaring and were akin to the Mysians and the Lydians. The Carians spoke Carian, a native Anatolian language closely related to Luwian. Also closely associated with the Carians were the Leleges, which could be an earlier name for Carians.\nMunicipalities of Caria.\nCramer's detailed catalog of Carian towns is based entirely on ancient sources. The multiple names of towns and geomorphic features, such as bays and headlands, reveal an ethnic layering consistent with the known colonization.\nCoastal Caria.\nCoastal Caria begins with Didyma south of Miletus, but Miletus had been placed in the pre-Ion Caria. South of it is the Iassicus Sinus (G\u00fcll\u00fck K\u00f6rfezi) and the towns of Iassus and Bargylia, giving an alternative name of Bargyleticus Sinus to G\u00fcll\u00fck K\u00f6rfezi, and nearby Cindye, which the Carians called Andanus. After Bargylia is Caryanda or Caryinda, and then on the Bodrum Peninsula Myndus (Mentecha or Muntecha), from Miletus. In the vicinity is Naziandus, exact location unknown.\nOn the tip of the Bodrum Peninsula (Cape Termerium) is Termera (Telmera, Termerea), and on the other side Ceramicus Sinus (G\u00f6kova K\u00f6rfezi). It \"was formerly crowded with numerous towns.\" Halicarnassus, a Dorian Greek city, was planted there among six Carian towns: Theangela, Sibde, Medmasa, Euranium, Pedasa or Pedasum, and Telmissus. These with Myndus and Syangela (or Syagela or Souagela) constitute the eight Lelege towns. Also on the north coast of the Ceramicus Sinus is Ceramus and Bargasus.\nOn the south of the Ceramicus Sinus is the Carian Chersonnese, or Triopium Promontory (Cape Krio), also called Doris after the Dorian colony of Cnidus. At the base of the peninsula (Dat\u00e7a Peninsula) is Bybassus or Bybastus from which an earlier names, the Bybassia Chersonnese, had been derived. It was now Acanthus and Doulopolis (\"slave city\").\nSouth of the Carian Chersonnese is Doridis Sinus, the \"Gulf of Doris\" (Gulf of Symi), the locale of the Dorian Confederacy. There are three bays in it: Bubassius, Thymnias and Schoenus, the last enclosing the town of Hyda. In the gulf somewhere are Euthene or Eutane, Pitaeum, and an island: Elaeus or Elaeussa near Loryma. On the south shore is the Cynossema, or Onugnathos Promontory, opposite Symi.\nSouth of there is the Rhodian Peraea, a section of the coast under Rhodes. It includes Loryma or Larymna in Oedimus Bay, Gelos, Tisanusa, the headland of Paridion, Panydon or Pandion (Cape Marmorice) with Physicus, Amos, Physca or Physcus, also called Cressa (Marmaris). Beyond Cressa is the Calbis River (Dalyan River). On the other side is Caunus (near Dalyan), with Pisilis or Pilisis and Pyrnos between.\nThen follow some cities that some assign to Lycia and some to Caria: Calynda on the Indus River, Crya and Alina in the Gulf of Glaucus (Katranci Bay or the Gulf of Makri), the Glaucus River being the border. Other Carian towns in the gulf are Clydae or Lydae and Aenus.\nInland Caria.\nAt the base of the east end of Latmus near Euromus, and near Milas where the current village Selimiye is, was the district of Euromus or Eurome, possibly Europus, formerly Idrieus and Chrysaoris (Stratonicea). The name Chrysaoris once applied to all of Caria; moreover, Euromus was originally settled from Lycia. Its towns are Tauropolis, Plarasa and Chrysaoris. These were all incorporated later into Mylasa. Connected to the latter by a sacred way are Labraunda and Sinuri. Around Stratonicea is also Lagina as well as Panamara, Tendeba and Astragon.\nFurther inland towards Ayd\u0131n is Alabanda, noted for its marble and its scorpions, Orthosia, Coscinia or Coscinus on the upper Maeander and Alinda. To the east is the religious centre Hyllarima. At the confluence of the Maeander and the Harpasus is Harpasa (Arpaz). At the confluence of the Maeander and the Orsinus, Corsymus or Corsynus is Antioch on the Maeander and on the Orsinus in the mountains a border town with Phrygia, Gordiutichos (\"Gordius' Fort\") near Geyre. Founded by the Leleges and called Ninoe it became Megalopolis (\"Big City\") and Aphrodisias, sometime capital of Caria.\nOther towns on the Orsinus are Timeles and Plarasa. Tabae was at various times attributed to Phrygia, Lydia and Caria and seems to have been occupied by mixed nationals. Caria also comprises the headwaters of the Indus and Eriya or Eriyus and Thabusion on the border with the small state of Cibyra.\nHistory.\nBronze Age.\nCaria is often identified with the Bronze Age region of \"Karkiya\" (or \"Karkisa\") known from Hittite texts, though this identification is uncertain.\nIron Age.\nGreek settlement.\nCaria was settled by Greek immigrants in the Early Iron Age. Their presence is attested by protogeometric pottery which appears in the area around 1100 BC, along with other markers of Greek material culture.\nThe coast of Caria was part of the Doric hexapolis (\"six-cities\").\nAn account also cited that Aristotle claimed Caria, as a naval empire, occupied Epidaurus and Hermione and that this was confirmed when the Athenians discovered the graves of the dead from Delos. Half of it were identified as Carians based on the characteristics of the weapons they were buried with.\nLydian province.\nThe expansionism of Lydia under Croesus (560-546 BC) incorporated Caria briefly into Lydia before it fell before the Achaemenid advance.\nPersian satrapy.\nCaria was then incorporated into the Persian Achaemenid Empire as a satrapy (province) in 545 BC. The most important town was Halicarnassus, from where its sovereigns, the tyrants of the Lygdamid dynasty (c.520-450 BC), reigned. Other major towns were Latmus, refounded as Heracleia under Latmus, Antiochia, Myndus, Laodicea, Alinda and Alabanda. Caria participated in the Ionian Revolt (499\u2013493 BC) against the Persian rule.\nDuring the Second Persian invasion of Greece (480-479 BC), the cities of Caria were allies of Xerxes I and they fought at the Battle of Artemisium and the Battle of Salamis, where the Queen of Halicarnassus Artemisia commanded the contingent of 70 Carian ships. Themistocles, before the battles of Artemisium and Salamis, tried to split the Ionians and Carians from the Persian coalition. He told them to come and be on his side or not to participate at the battles, but if they were bound down by too strong a compulsion to be able to make revolt, when the battles begin, to be purposely slack. Plutarch in his work, The Parallel Lives, at The Life of Themistocles wrote that: \"Phanias (), writes that the mother of Themistocles was not a Thracian, but a Carian woman and her name was Euterpe (), and Neanthes () adds that she was from Halicarnassus in Caria.\".\nAfter the unsuccessful Persian invasion of Greece in 479 BC, the cities of Caria became members of the Athenian-led Delian League, but then returned to Achaemenid rule for about one century, from around 428 BC. Under Achaemenid rule, the Carian dynast Mausolus took control of neighbouring Lycia, a territory which was still held by Pixodarus as shown by the Xanthos trilingual inscription.\nHalicarnassus was the location of the famed Mausoleum dedicated to Mausolus, a satrap of Caria between 377\u2013353 BC, by his wife, Artemisia II of Caria. The monument became one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, and from which the Romans named any grand tomb a \"mausoleum.\"\nHellenistic period.\nThe Carians were incorporated into the Macedonian Empire following the conquests of Alexander the Great and the Siege of Halicarnassus in 334 BC.\nCaria was conquered by Alexander III of Macedon in 334 BC with the help of the former queen of the land Ada of Caria who had been dethroned by the Persian Empire and actively helped Alexander in his conquest of Caria on condition of being reinstated as queen. After their capture of Caria, she declared Alexander as her heir.\nRoman-Byzantine province.\nAs part of the Roman Empire the name of Caria was still used for the geographic region. The territory administratively belonged to the province of Asia. During the administrative reforms of the 4th century this province was abolished and divided into smaller units. Caria became a separate province as part of the Diocese of Asia.\nChristianity was on the whole slow to take hold in Caria. The region was not visited by St. Paul, and the only early churches seem to be those of Laodicea and Colossae (Chonae) on the extreme inland fringe of the country, which itself pursued its pagan customs. It appears that it was not until Christianity was officially adopted in Constantinople that the new religion made any real headway in Caria.\nDissolution under the Byzantine Empire and passage to Turkish rule.\nIn the 7th century, Byzantine provinces were abolished and the new military theme system was introduced. The region corresponding to ancient Caria was captured by the Turks under the Mente\u015fe Dynasty in the early 13th century.\nThere are only indirect clues regarding the population structure under the Mente\u015fe and the parts played in it by Turkish migration from inland regions and by local conversions. The first Ottoman Empire census records indicate, in a situation not atypical for the region as a whole, a large Muslim (practically exclusively Turkish) majority reaching as high as 99% and a non-Muslim minority (practically exclusively Carian supplemented with a small Jewish community in Milas) as low as one per cent. One of the first acts of the Ottomans after their takeover was to transfer the administrative center of the region from its millenary seat in Milas to the then much smaller Mu\u011fla, which was nevertheless better suited for controlling the southern fringes of the province. Still named Mente\u015fe until the early decades of the 20th century, the kazas corresponding to ancient Caria are recorded by sources such as G. Sotiriadis (1918) and S. Anagiostopoulou (1997) as having a Greek population averaging at around ten per cent of the total, ranging somewhere between twelve and eighteen thousand, many of them reportedly recent immigrants from the islands. Most chose to leave in 1919, before the population exchange.\nArchaeology.\nIn July 2021, archaeologists led by Abuzer K\u0131z\u0131l have announced the discovery of two 2,500-year-old marble statues and an inscription during excavations at the Temple of Zeus Lepsynos in Euromus. According to Abuzer K\u0131z\u0131l, one of the statues was naked while other was wearing armor made of leather and a short skirt. Both of the statues were depicted with a lion in their hands.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74590", "revid": "1320172072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74590", "title": "Reus", "text": "Reus () is the capital of Baix Camp, in Camp de Tarragona, Catalonia, Spain. It has a population of .\nReus is a producer of wines and spirits, and gained significance during the Phylloxera plague. Currently it is known for its commercial activity, as a center for rock climbing, and as the birthplace of architect Antoni Gaud\u00ed.\nName.\nThe origin of the name \"Reus\" is a subject of debate. One theory is that Reus comes from the Latin word used to describe convict prisoners (\"reus\"), and as such, it would be a Roman penitentiary. Currently, the most accepted theory is that the name has Celtic roots, from the root \"red\" that originated the name \"redis\" (or \"reddis\"), that approximately meaning 'place on the way' or 'crossroads settlement.'\nHistory.\nFoundation and early history.\nc. 1150 Robert d'Aguil\u00f3 repopulated the region of Reus, after receiving it on 3 June 1154. On 5 June 1154 the archbishop of Tarragona gave two-thirds of Reus to Bertran de Castellet, as a castellan, with the order to build a church. At this time the city was known as Redis or Reddis. The castellan Bernat de Bell-lloc granted Reus the title of town on 3 August 1183, establishing a census to fund farmland and recognizing the town\u2019s vassalage towards the archbishopric of Tarragona. On 2 June 1186 the camerlengo Joan de Santboi confirmed the rights of Reus to town status.\nCamerlengo, Popes and Archbishops of Tarragona.\nIn 1305 Reus revolted against the Archbishop Rodrigo Tello, who wanted the citizens of Reus to pay for rebuilding the walls of Tarragona. In 1309 the king of Aragon gave Reus the right to hold a market on Mondays. Bernard de Cabrera became the new castellan, but in 1335 the castellan was sold to Pere Mulet, whose heirs sold their title to Bernat d'Olzinelles in 1349. The camerlengo Pere Roger de Belfort disputed the domain to the Archbishop L\u00f3pez de Ayerbe, who sent an army that attacked Reus. A second attack was repulsed. A third attack led to military occupation of the town. The camerlengo Pere Roger de Belfort, nephew of Pope Clement VI, persuaded the Pope to call the archbishop of Tarragona and the Pope received a commitment for peace.\nPere Roger de Belfort added his rose to coat of arms of the town and when he became Pope Gregory XI, he added a papal tiara and the keys of St. Peter to the town\u2019s coat of arms.\nCatalan Revolt war and the Archduke Charles.\nIn 1641 the town was occupied by the French general La Mothe.\nReus was loyal to Philip V until 1705, but the town, led by Joan Nebot, revolted in favor of the Archduke Charles. On 3 July 1706 Archduke Charles came to the town. In 1707 the town fell to the Bourbons. In 1710 Reus returned to the control of Archduke Charles. On 5 June 1712 the wife of the Archduke, Elisabeth Christine, gave the title of imperial city to Reus. In 1713 Reus was occupied finally by the Bourbon.\nGrowth in the eighteenth century.\nIn the eighteenth century Reus had extreme growth and became the second city of the principality of Catalonia. The walls were demolished in 1766. The town developed the textile trade and the liquor trade. Reus, along with London and Paris, were considered centers of liquor production. The rights to construction of a canal between Reus and Salou, proposed by Pere Sunyer were granted in 1805, but construction was stopped because of the French War. At this time Reus had consulates in the United States, Liguria, England, Holland, Sweden, Ragusa, Denmark, Sicily, the Papal States, France, Portugal, Naples and Prussia.\n19th and 20th centuries.\nIn 1854 the Reus Gas Company was founded. In 1856 the railway between Reus and Tarragona was built. In 1884 the Catalan Association of Reus was founded, and in 1893 the Assembly of the Uni\u00f3 Catalana met in Reus. In 1886 Pau Font de Rubinat founded the Catalan newspaper \"Lo Somatent\". In 1895 the phylloxera killed big areas of vineyards in the region of Reus and many of these areas started growing hazelnuts.\nIn 1931 Reus voted for the republic. In 1936 Francisco Franco bombed the city until his rebel army occupied the city on 15 January 1939, starting the dictatorship of Franco until his death in 1975.\nThe first democratic mayor after Franco was Carles Mart\u00ed Massagu\u00e9, a lawyer from Reus. In 1983 Anton Borrell Marc\u00f3 was the new mayor of the city, but he died in a car accident on the road from Reus to Cambrils. His successor was Juan Maria Roig. After him, Josep Abell\u00f3 Padr\u00f3 was the mayor until 1999, replaced by Llu\u00eds Miquel P\u00e9rez Segura, who occupied the position until 2011, when the current mayor, Carles Pellicer i Punyed, started.\nDemography.\nReus was for long the second city of Catalonia with a population of 14,440 in 1787 and 27,257 in 1860. It was overtaken by Tarragona and Lleida between 1900 and 1930. The population barely grew between 1920 and 1930, with 30,266 and 35,950 inhabitants, respectively. From then, the population growth has been substantial, from 41,014 inhabitants in 1960 to 108,100 inhabitants that the city has as of the end of 2008. Immigration, mostly from Marrakesh, has been a portion of that increase. About 6% are Muslim and 8% from other religions.\nAccording to the 2006 official Spanish census, Reus is the 9th most populous city in Catalonia and the 59th in Spain.\nClimate.\nReus has a hot-summer mediterranean climate (\"Csa\" on the K\u00f6ppen climate classification), bordering on a cold semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BSk\"). It has mild, moderately dry winters and hot, dry, moderately muggy summers. Autumn is the rainiest season of the year, especially due to the cold drop that occur in the months of September and October.\nEconomy.\nDuring the 19th and 20th centuries Reus became known as one of the world's major centers of liquor production, and was home to over 30 producers of vermouth. Today Reus is home to major exporters of vermouth including Yzaguirre, Iris (Muller), Mir\u00f3, and Fot-Li.\nFestivities.\nThe principal Reus festivity is \"Sant Pere\" on 29 June, declared of National Touristic Interest. On September 25, the \"Mare de D\u00e9u de la Miseric\u00f2rdia\" is held.\nOther noteworthy festivities are the Carnival and the \"Anada a l'Antiga\" towards Salou. Most of the neighborhoods have their own festivities.\nBesides the major festivities, Reus holds many festivals, such as \"Cos\", a festival dedicated to mime, or \"El Trapezi\", a festival with circus spectacles. In every odd numbered year the Reus Institut Municipal d'Accio Cultural presents the \"Biennals Internacionals de Fotografia Medalla Gaudi\". This bi-annual exhibition features fine art photographers from around the world working in Alternative Photographic Processes (such as Platinum Printing, Gum Dichromate, Etc.). At each Biennal they award the Medalla Gaudi award to a select few artists and purchase their work for the Institut Municipal d'Accio Cultural's permanent collection.\nSights.\nCatalan Modernist edifices.\nThe city of Reus has many Catalan modernist buildings. Although Antoni Gaud\u00ed was born in Reus, there are no buildings designed by him; there are, however, numerous modernist buildings from his colleagues as Llu\u00eds Dom\u00e8nech i Montaner, Pere Caselles i Tarrats and Pere Dom\u00e8nech Roura.\nSport.\nThe city has a roller hockey team Reus Deportiu, outside of the main league, OK Liga.\nThe association football team was CF Reus Deportiu.\nThe Barcelona Dragons of the European League of Football plan to play their home games at the local Estadi Municipal.\nTourism.\nIn recent years, tourism in Reus expanded as more and more people come to the Costa Daurada region. Nowadays, the largest group of tourists comes from Russia, followed by France and Holland.\nReus is close to the resort town of Salou and one of Europe's biggest theme resorts is at PortAventura World. Tour companies and buses operate services to Reus from tourist destinations in the region such as Salou, La Pineda, and Cambrils.\nThe accommodation in Reus consists of small hotels, hostels, and major chained hotels owned by NH Hoteles and Hotusa Group.\nRecently, Reus Airport has started to receive low cost flights from Ryanair that fly to Reus from many different European and North African locations. The airport also receives charter flights from the United Kingdom. Barcelona Airport also carries passengers into Reus.\nTransport.\nThe city is served by Reus Airport which only provides flights to limited European destinations. However, residents in the city would also use Josep Tarradellas Barcelona\u2013El Prat Airport as it provides more domestic and international destinations. The airport is located east of the city centre.\nFlag of Reus.\nThe first flag of Reus was in use from 1774 to 1943. The flag was dark red with the city arms in the centre.\nIn 1943 the flag was changed because the color red seemed to be associated with the left, defeated in the Spanish Civil War (1936\u201339). As the historic city arms were argent with a heraldic rose the new flag was white with a heraldic rose in the center. Minor changes to the rose in the flag were made after 1943.\nThe rose was changed, with the version taken from the city emblem. The emblem itself has official status.\nTwin cities.\nReus is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74591", "revid": "40835523", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74591", "title": "Osteopathy", "text": "Pseudoscientific alternative medicine emphasizing muscle and bone manipulation\nOsteopathy is a pseudoscientific system of alternative medicine that emphasizes physical manipulation of the body's muscle tissue and bones. In most countries, practitioners of osteopathy are not medically trained and are referred to as osteopaths. It is distinct from osteopathic medicine, which is a branch of the medical profession in the United States.\nOsteopathic manipulation is the core set of techniques in osteopathy. Parts of osteopathy, such as craniosacral therapy, have been described by \"Quackwatch\"\u00a0as having no therapeutic value and have been labeled by them as pseudoscience and quackery. The techniques are based on an ideology created by Andrew Taylor Still (1828\u20131917) which posits the existence of a \"myofascial continuity\"\u2014a tissue layer that \"links every part of the body with every other part\". Osteopaths attempt to diagnose and treat what was originally called \"the osteopathic lesion\", but which is now named \"somatic dysfunction\", by manipulating a person's bones and muscles. Osteopathic Manipulative Treatment (OMT) techniques are most commonly used to treat back pain and other musculoskeletal issues.\nOsteopathic manipulation is still included in the curricula of osteopathic physicians or Doctors of Osteopathic Medicine (DO) training in the US. The Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree, however, became a medical degree and is no longer a degree of non-medical osteopathy.\nHistory.\nThe practice of osteopathy (from grc \" ()\"\u00a0'bone' and \" ()\"\u00a0'pain, suffering') began in the United States in 1874. The profession was founded by Andrew Taylor Still, a 19th-century American physician (MD), Civil War surgeon, and Kansas territorial and state legislator. He lived near Baldwin City, Kansas, during the American Civil War and it was there that he founded the practice of osteopathy. Still claimed that human illness was rooted in problems with the musculoskeletal system, and that osteopathic manipulations could solve these problems by harnessing the body's own self-repairing potential. Still's patients were forbidden from treatment by conventional medicine, as well as from other practices such as drinking alcohol. These practices derive from the belief, common in the early 19th century among proponents of alternative medicine, that the body's natural state tends toward health and inherently contains the capacity to battle any illness. This was opposed to orthodox practitioners, who held that intervention by a physician was necessary to restore health in the patient. Still established the basis for osteopathy, and the division between alternative medicine and traditional medicine had already been a major conflict for decades.\nThe foundations of this divergence may be traced back to the mid-18th century when advances in physiology began to localize the causes and nature of diseases to specific organs and tissues. Doctors began shifting their focus from the patient to the internal state of the body, resulting in an issue labeled as the problem of the \"vanishing patient\". A stronger movement towards experimental and scientific medicine was then developed. In the perspective of the DO physicians, the sympathy and holism that were integral to medicine in the past were left behind. Heroic medicine became the convention for treating patients, with aggressive practices like bloodletting and prescribing chemicals such as mercury, becoming the forefront in therapeutics. Alternative medicine had its beginnings in the early 19th century, when gentler practices in comparison to heroic medicine began to emerge. As each side sought to defend its practice, a schism began to present itself in the medical marketplace, with both practitioners attempting to discredit the other. The osteopathic physicians\u2014those who are now referred to as DOs\u2014argued that the non-osteopathic physicians had an overly mechanistic approach to treating patients, treated the symptoms of disease instead of the original causes, and were blind to the harm they were causing their patients. Other practitioners had a similar argument, labeling osteopathic medicine as unfounded, passive, and dangerous to a disease-afflicted patient. This was the medical environment that pervaded throughout the 19th century, and the setting Still entered when he began developing his idea of osteopathy.\nAfter experiencing the loss of his wife and three daughters to spinal meningitis and noting that the current orthodox medical system could not save them, Still may have been prompted to shape his reformist attitudes towards conventional medicine. Still set out to reform the orthodox medical scene and establish a practice that did not so readily resort to drugs, purgatives, and harshly invasive therapeutics to treat a person suffering from ailment, similar to the mindset of the irregulars in the early 19th century. Thought to have been influenced by spiritualist figures such as Andrew Jackson Davis and ideas of magnetic and electrical healing, Still began practicing manipulative procedures that intended to restore harmony in the body. Over the course of the next twenty five years, Still attracted support for his medical philosophy that disapproved of orthodox medicine, and shaped his philosophy for osteopathy. Components included the idea that structure and function are interrelated and the importance of each piece of the body in the harmonious function of its whole.\nStill sought to establish a new medical school that could produce physicians trained under this philosophy, and be prepared to compete against the orthodox physicians. He established the American School of Osteopathy on 20 May 1892, in Kirksville, Missouri, with twenty-one students in the first class. Still described the foundations of osteopathy in his book \"The Philosophy and Mechanical Principles of Osteopathy\" in 1892. He named his new school of medicine \"osteopathy\", reasoning that \"the bone, osteon, was the starting point from which [he] was to ascertain the cause of pathological conditions\". He would eventually claim that he could \"shake a child and stop scarlet fever, croup, diphtheria, and cure whooping cough in three days by a wring of its neck.\"\nWhen the state of Missouri granted the right to award the MD degree, he remained dissatisfied with the limitations of conventional medicine and instead chose to retain the distinction of the DO degree. In the early 20th century, osteopaths across the United States sought to establish law that would legitimize their medical degree to the standard of the modern medic. The processes were arduous, and not without conflict. In some states, it took years for the bills to be passed. Osteopaths were often ridiculed and in some cases arrested, but in each state, osteopaths managed to achieve the legal acknowledgement and action they set out to pursue. In 1898 the American Institute of Osteopathy started the \"Journal of Osteopathy\" and by that time four states recognized osteopathy as a profession.\nPractice.\nAccording to the American Osteopathic Association (AOA), osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT) is considered to be only one component of osteopathic medicine and may be used alone or in combination with pharmacotherapy, rehabilitation, surgery, patient education, diet, and exercise. OMT techniques are not necessarily unique to osteopathic medicine; other disciplines, such as physical therapy or chiropractic, use similar techniques. Indeed, many DOs do not practice OMT at all, and, over time, DOs in general practice use OMT less and less and instead apply the common medical treatments.\nOne integral tenet of osteopathy is that problems in the body's anatomy can affect its proper functioning. Another tenet is the body's innate ability to heal itself. Many of osteopathic medicine's manipulative techniques are aimed at reducing or eliminating the impediments to proper structure and function so the self-healing mechanism can assume its role in restoring a person to health. Osteopathic medicine defines a concept of health care that embraces the concept of the unity of the living organism's structure (anatomy) and function (physiology). The AOA states that the four major principles of osteopathic medicine are the following:\nThese principles are not held by Doctors of Osteopathic Medicine to be empirical laws; they serve, rather, as the underpinnings of the osteopathic approach to health and disease.\nMuscle energy.\nMuscle energy techniques address somatic dysfunction through stretching and muscle contraction. For example, if a person is unable to fully abduct their arm, the treating physician raises the patient's arm near the end of the patient's range of motion, also called the edge of the restrictive barrier. The patient then tries to lower their arm, while the physician provides resistance. This resistance against the patient's motion allows for isotonic contraction of the patient's muscle. Once the patient relaxes, their range of motion increases slightly. The repetition of alternating cycles of contraction and subsequent relaxation help the treated muscle improve its range of motion. Muscle energy techniques are contraindicated in patients with fractures, crush injuries, joint dislocations, joint instability, severe muscle spasms or strains, severe osteoporosis, severe whiplash injury, vertebrobasilar insufficiency, severe illness, and recent surgery.\nCounterstrain.\nCounterstrain is a system of diagnosis and treatment that considers the physical dysfunction to be a continuing, inappropriate strain reflex, which is inhibited during treatment by applying a position of mild strain in the direction exactly opposite to that of the reflex. After a counterstrain point tender to palpation has been diagnosed, the identified tender point is treated by the osteopathic physician who, while monitoring the tender point, positions the patient such that the point is no longer tender to palpation. This position is held for ninety seconds and the patient is subsequently returned to their normal posture. Most often this position of ease is usually achieved by shortening the muscle of interest. Improvement or resolution of the tenderness at the identified counterstrain point is the desired outcome. The use of counterstrain technique is contraindicated in patients with severe osteoporosis, pathology of the vertebral arteries, and in patients who are very ill or cannot voluntarily relax during the procedure.\nHigh-velocity, low-amplitude manipulation.\nHigh velocity, low amplitude (HVLA) manipulation is a technique which employs a rapid, targeted, therapeutic force of brief duration that travels a short distance within the anatomic range of motion of a joint and engages the restrictive barrier in one or more places of motion to elicit release of restriction. The use of HVLA is contraindicated in patients with Down syndrome due to instability of the atlantoaxial joint which may stem from ligamentous laxity, and in pathologic bone conditions such as fracture, history of a pathologic fracture, osteomyelitis, osteoporosis, and severe cases of rheumatoid arthritis. HVLA is also contraindicated in patients with vascular disease such as aneurysms, or disease of the carotid arteries or vertebral arteries. People taking ciprofloxacin or anticoagulants, or who have local metastases should not receive HVLA.\nMyofascial release.\n\"Myofascial release\" is a form of alternative treatment. The practitioners claim to treat skeletal muscle immobility and pain by relaxing contracted muscles. Palpatory feedback by the practitioner is said to be an integral part to achieving a release of myofascial tissues, accomplished by relaxing contracted muscles, increasing circulation and lymphatic drainage, and stimulating the stretch reflex of muscles and overlying fascia.\nPractitioners who perform myofascial release consider the fascia and its corresponding muscle to be the main targets of their procedure, but assert that other tissue may be affected as well, including other connective tissue. Fascia is the soft tissue component of the connective tissue that provides support and protection for most structures within the human body, including muscle. This soft tissue can become restricted due to psychogenic disease, overuse, trauma, infectious agents, or inactivity, often resulting in pain, muscle tension, and corresponding diminished blood flow.\nSome osteopaths search for small lumps of tissue, called \"Chapman release points\" as part of their diagnostic procedure.\nLymphatic pump treatment.\nLymphatic pump treatment (LPT) is a manual technique intended to encourage lymph flow in a person's lymphatic system. The first modern lymphatic pump technique was developed in 1920, although osteopathic physicians used various forms of lymphatic techniques as early as the late 19th century.\nRelative contraindications for the use of lymphatic pump treatments include fractures, abscesses or localized infections, and severe bacterial infections with body temperature elevated higher than .\nEffectiveness.\nA 2005 Cochrane review of osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT) in asthma treatment concluded that there was insufficient evidence that OMT can be used to treat asthma.\nIn 2013, a Cochrane review reviewed six randomized controlled trials which investigated the effect of four types of chest physiotherapy (including OMT) as adjunctive treatments for pneumonia in adults and concluded that \"based on current limited evidence, chest physiotherapy might not be recommended as routine additional treatment for pneumonia in adults.\" Techniques investigated in the study included paraspinal inhibition, rib raising, and myofascial release. The review found that OMT did not reduce mortality and did not increase cure rate, but that OMT slightly reduced the duration of hospital stay and antibiotic use. A 2013 systematic review of the use of OMT for treating pediatric conditions concluded that its effectiveness was unproven.\nIn 2014, a systematic review and meta-analysis of 15 randomized controlled trials found moderate-quality evidence that OMT reduces pain and improves functional status in acute and chronic nonspecific low back pain. The same analysis also found moderate-quality evidence for pain reduction for nonspecific low back pain in postpartum women and low-quality evidence for pain reduction in nonspecific low back pain in pregnant women. A 2013 systematic review found insufficient evidence to rate osteopathic manipulation for chronic nonspecific low back pain. In 2011, a systematic review found no compelling evidence that osteopathic manipulation was effective for the treatment of musculoskeletal pain.\nA 2018 systematic review found that there is no evidence for the reliability or specific efficacy of the techniques used in visceral osteopathy.\n\"The New England Journal of Medicine\"'s 4 November 1999 issue concluded that patients with chronic low back pain can be treated effectively with manipulation. The United Kingdom's National Health Service says there is \"limited evidence\" that osteopathy \"may be effective for some types of neck, shoulder or lower limb pain and recovery after hip or knee operations\", but that there is no evidence that osteopathy is effective as a treatment for health conditions unrelated to the bones and muscles. Others have concluded that there is insufficient evidence to suggest efficacy for osteopathic style manipulation in treating musculoskeletal pain.\nCriticism.\nThe American Medical Association listed DOs as \"cultists\" and deemed MD consultation of DOs unethical from 1923 until 1962. MDs regarded that osteopathic treatments were rooted in \"pseudoscientific dogma\", and although physicians from both branches of medicine have been able to meet on common ground, tensions between the two continue.\nIn 1988, Petr Skrabanek classified osteopathy as one of the \"paranormal\" forms of alternative medicine, commenting that it has a view of disease which had no meaning outside its own closed system.\nIn a 1995 conference address, the president of the Association of American Medical Colleges, Jordan J. Cohen, pinpointed OMT as a defining difference between MDs and DOs; while he saw there was no quarrel in the appropriateness of manipulation for musculoskeletal treatment, the difficulty centered on \"applying manipulative therapy to treat other systemic diseases\"\u2014at that point, Cohen maintained, \"we enter the realm of skepticism on the part of the allopathic world.\"\nIn 1998, Stephen Barrett of Quackwatch said that the worth of manipulative therapy had been exaggerated and that the American Osteopathic Association (AOA) was acting unethically by failing to condemn craniosacral therapy. The article attracted a letter from the law firm representing the AOA accusing Barrett of libel and demanding an apology to avert legal action. In response, Barrett made some slight modifications to his text, while maintaining its overall stance; he queried the AOA's reference to \"the body's natural tendency toward good health\", and challenged them to \"provide [him] with adequate scientific evidence showing how this belief has been tested and demonstrated to be true.\" Barrett has been quoted as saying, \"the pseudoscience within osteopathy can't compete with the science\".\nIn 1999, Joel D. Howell noted that osteopathy and medicine as practiced by MDs were becoming increasingly convergent. He suggested that this raised a paradox: \"if osteopathy has become the functional equivalent of allopathy, what is the justification for its continued existence? And if there is value in therapy that is uniquely osteopathic\u00a0\u2013 that is, based on osteopathic manipulation or other techniques\u00a0\u2013 why should its use be limited to osteopaths?\"\nIn 2004, the osteopathic physician Bryan E. Bledsoe, a professor of emergency medicine, wrote disparagingly of the \"pseudoscience\" at the foundation of OMT. In his view, \"OMT will and should follow homeopathy, magnetic healing, chiropractic, and other outdated practices into the pages of medical history.\"\nIn 2010, Steven Salzberg wrote that OMT was promoted as a special distinguishing element of DO training, but that it amounted to no more than \"'extra' training in pseudoscientific practices.\" It has been suggested that osteopathic physicians may be more likely than MDs to be involved in questionable practices such as orthomolecular therapy and homeopathy.\nScience writer Harriet Hall stated that DOs trained in the U.S. are Doctors of Osteopathic Medicine and are legally equivalent to MDs. \"They must be distinguished from 'osteopaths', members of a less regulated or unregulated profession that is practiced in many countries. Osteopaths get inferior training that can't be compared to that of DOs.\"\nRegulation and legal status.\nThe osteopathic profession has evolved into two branches: non-physician manual medicine osteopaths and full-scope medical practice osteopathic physicians. The two groups are so distinct that in practice they function as separate professions. The regulation of non-physician manual medicine osteopaths varies greatly between jurisdictions. In Australia, Denmark, New Zealand, Switzerland, the UAE and the UK, non-physician manual medicine osteopaths are regulated by statute; their practice of osteopathy requires registration with the relevant regulatory authority. The Osteopathic International Alliance (OIA) publishes a country guide that details registration and practice rights, while the International Osteopathic Association maintains a list of all accredited osteopathic colleges.\nSeveral international and national organizations are involved in osteopathic education and political advocacy. The OIA is an international body that oversees national osteopathic and osteopathic medical associations, statutory regulators, and universities or medical schools offering osteopathic and osteopathic medical education.\nThe following sections describe the legal status of \"osteopathy\" and \"osteopathic medicine\" in each country listed.\nAustralia.\nA majority of osteopaths work in private practice, with osteopaths working within aged care, traffic and workers compensation schemes or co-located with medical practitioners. Osteopaths are not considered physicians or medical doctors in Australia, rather as allied health professionals offering private practice care. The majority of private health insurance providers cover treatment performed by osteopaths, as do many government based schemes such as veteran's affairs or workers compensations schemes In addition, treatment performed by osteopaths is covered by the public healthcare system in Australia (Medicare) under the Chronic Disease Management plan.\nOsteopathy Australia (formerly the Australian Osteopathic Association) is a national organization representing the interests of Australian osteopaths, osteopathy as a profession in Australia, and consumers' right to access osteopathic services. Founded in 1955 in Victoria, the Australian Osteopathic Association became a national body in 1991 and became Osteopathy Australia in 2014. and is a member of the Osteopathic International Alliance.\nThe Osteopathy Board of Australia is part of the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency which is the regulatory body for all recognized health care professions in Australia. The Osteopathic Board of Australia is separate from the Medical Board of Australia which is the governing body that regulates medical practitioners. Osteopaths trained internationally may be eligible for registration in Australia, dependent on their level of training and following relevant competency assessment.\nStudents training to be an osteopath in Australia must study in an approved program in an accredited university. Current accredited courses are either four or five years in length. To achieve accreditation universities courses must demonstrate the capabilities of graduates. The capabilities are based on the CanMEDS competency framework that was developed by the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada.\nA 2018 large scale study, representing a response rate of 49.1% of the profession indicated the average age of the participants was 38.0 years, with 58.1% being female and the majority holding a Bachelor or higher degree qualification for osteopathy. The study also estimated a total of 3.9 million patients consulted osteopaths every year in Australia. Most osteopaths work in referral relationships with a range of other health services, managing patients primarily with musculoskeletal disorders.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, the titles \"osteopath\" and \"osteopathic physician\" are protected in some provinces by the medical regulatory college for physicians and surgeons. As of 2011, there were approximately 20 U.S.-trained osteopathic physicians, all of which held a Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine degree, practicing in all of Canada. As of 2014, no training programs have been established for osteopathic physicians in Canada.\nThe non-physician manual practice of osteopathy is practiced in most Canadian provinces. As of 2014, manual osteopathic practice is not a government-regulated health profession in any province, and those interested in pursuing osteopathic studies must register in private osteopathy schools. It is estimated that there are over 1,300 osteopathic manual practitioners in Canada, most of whom practice in Quebec and Ontario. Some sources indicate that there are between 1,000 and 1,200 osteopaths practicing in the province of Quebec, and although this number might seem quite elevated, many osteopathy clinics are adding patients on waiting lists due to a shortage of osteopaths in the province.\nQuebec.\nBeginning in 2009, Universit\u00e9 Laval in Quebec City was working with the \"Coll\u00e8ge d'\u00e9tudes ost\u00e9opathiques\" in Montreal on a project to implement a professional osteopathy program consisting of a bachelor's degree followed by a professional master's degree in osteopathy as manual therapy. However, due to the many doubts concerning the scientific credibility of osteopathy from the university's faculty of medicine, the program developers decided to abandon the project in 2011, after &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 years of discussion, planning, and preparation for the program implementation. There was some controversy with the final decision of the university's committee regarding the continuous undergraduate and professional graduate program in osteopathy because the Commission of studies, which is in charge of evaluating new training programs offered by the university, had judged that the program had its place at Universit\u00e9 Laval before receiving the unfavourable support decision from the faculty of medicine. Had the program been implemented, Universit\u00e9 Laval would have been the first university institution in Quebec to offer a professional program in osteopathy as a manual therapy.\nEgypt and the Middle East.\nHesham Khalil introduced osteopathy in the Middle East at a local physical therapy conference in Cairo, Egypt in 2005 with a lecture titled \"The global Osteopathic Concept / Holistic approach in Somatic Dysfunction\". Since then he has toured the Middle East to introduce osteopathy in other Middle Eastern and North African countries, including Sudan, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, UAE, Kuwait and Oman.\nIn December 2007 the first Workshop on Global osteopathic approach was held at the Nasser Institute Hospital for Research and Treatment, sponsored by the Faculty of Physical Therapy, University of Cairo, Egypt. On 6 August 2010, the Egyptian Osteopathic Society (OsteoEgypt) was founded. OsteoEgypt promotes a two-tier model of osteopathy in Egypt and the Middle East. The event was timed to coincide with the birthday of A.T. Still.\nEuropean Union.\nThere is no European regulatory authority for the practice of osteopathy or osteopathic medicine within the European Union; each country has its own rules. The UK's General Osteopathic Council, a regulatory body set up under the country's Osteopaths Act 1993, issued a position paper on European regulation of osteopathy in 2005.\nBelgium.\nSince the early 1970s, osteopaths have been practicing in Belgium, during which time several attempts have been made to obtain an official status of health care profession. In 1999, a law was voted (the 'Colla-Law') providing a legal framework for osteopathy, amongst three other non-conventional medical professions.\nIn 2011, the former Belgian Minister Onkelinx set up the Chambers for Non-Conventional Medicines and the Joint Commission provided for in the \"Colla-law\" (1999). Their goal was to discuss and reach an agreement between the various medical professions to rule on these practices. In February 2014, only one practice, homeopathy, received its recognition. The others, including osteopathy, remain unresolved.\nFinland.\nOsteopathy has been a recognized health profession since 1994 in Finland. It is regulated by law along with chiropractors and naprapaths. These professions require at least a four-year education. Currently there are three osteopathic schools in Finland, one which is public and two private ones.\nFrance.\n\"Osteopathy\" is a governmentally recognized profession and has title protection, . The most recent decree regarding osteopathy was enacted in 2014.\nGermany.\nGermany has both \"osteopathy\" and \"osteopathic medicine\". There is a difference in the osteopathic education between non-physician osteopaths, physiotherapists, and medical physicians.\nPhysiotherapists are a recognized health profession and can achieve a degree of \"Diploma in Osteopathic Therapy (D.O.T.)\". Non-physician \"osteopaths\" are not medically licensed. They have an average total of 1200 hours of training, roughly half being in manual therapy and osteopathy, with no medical specialization before they attain their degree. Non-physician osteopaths in Germany officially work under the \"Heilpraktiker\" law. Heilpraktiker is a separate profession within the health care system. There are many schools of osteopathy in Germany; most are moving toward national recognition although such recognition does not currently exist. In Germany, there are state level rules governing which persons (non-physicians) may call themselves osteopaths.\nPortugal.\nOsteopathy is a governmentally recognized health profession and the title of Osteopath is protected by Law (Act 45/2003, of 22 October, and Act 71/2013, of 2 September). Currently there are eight faculties that teach the four-year degree course of osteopathy (BSc Hon in Osteopathy).\nIndia.\nSri Sri University offers BSc and MSc Osteopathy programmes.\nNew Zealand.\nThe practice of osteopathy is regulated by law, under the terms of the Health Practitioners Competence Assurance Act 2003 which came into effect on 18 September 2004. Under the act, it is a legal requirement to be registered with the Osteopathic Council of New Zealand (OCNZ), and to hold an annual practicing certificate issued by them, in order to practice as an osteopath. Each of the fifteen health professions regulated by the HPCA act work within the \"Scope of Practice\" determined and published by its professional board or council. Osteopaths in New Zealand are not fully licensed physicians. In New Zealand, in addition to the general scope of practice, osteopaths may also hold the Scope of Practice for Osteopaths using western medical acupuncture and related needling techniques.\nIn New Zealand a course is offered at the Unitec Institute of Technology (Unitec). Australasian courses consist of a bachelor's degree in clinical science (osteopathy) followed by a master's degree. The Unitec double degree programme is the OCNZ prescribed qualification for registration in the scope of practice: Australian qualifications accredited by the Australian and New Zealand Osteopathic Council are also prescribed qualifications.\nOsteopaths registered and in good standing with the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency \u2013 Osteopathy Board of Australian are eligible to register in New Zealand under the mutual recognition system operating between the two countries. Graduates from programs in every other country are required to complete an assessment procedure.\nThe scope of practice for US-trained \"osteopathic physicians\" is unlimited on an \"exceptions\" basis. Full licensure to practice medicine is awarded on an exceptions basis following a hearing before the licensing authorities in New Zealand. Both the Medical Council of New Zealand and the OCNZ regulate osteopathic physicians in New Zealand. Currently, the country has no recognized osteopathic medical schools.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe British School of Osteopathy (now the University College of Osteopathy) was the first school of osteopathy in Britain, established in London in 1917 by John Martin Littlejohn, a pupil of A.T. Still, who had been Dean of the Chicago College of Osteopathic Medicine. After many years of existing outside the mainstream of health care provision, the osteopathic profession in the United Kingdom was accorded formal recognition by Parliament by the Osteopaths Act 1993. This legislation now provides the profession of osteopathy with the same legal framework of statutory self-regulation as other healthcare professions, such as medicine and dentistry. This Act provides for \"protection of title\". A person who expressly or implicitly describes themself as an osteopath, osteopathic practitioner, osteopathic physician, osteopathist, osteotherapist, or any kind of osteopath, is guilty of an offence unless registered as an osteopath.\nThe General Osteopathic Council (GOsC) regulates the practice of osteopathy under the terms of the Act. Under British law, an osteopath must be registered with the GOsC to practice in the United Kingdom. More than 5,300 osteopaths were registered in the UK as of 2021. The General Osteopathic Council has a statutory duty to promote, develop and regulate the profession of osteopathy in the UK. Its duty is to protect the interests of the public by ensuring that all osteopaths maintain high standards of safety, competence and professional conduct throughout their professional lives. In order to be registered with the General Osteopathic Council an osteopath must hold a recognized qualification that meets the standards as set out by law in the GOsC's Standard of Practice.\nOsteopathic medicine is regulated by the General Osteopathic Council, (GOsC) under the terms of the Osteopaths Act 1993 and statement from the GMC. Practising osteopaths will usually have a BS or MSc in osteopathy. Accelerated courses leading to accreditation are available for those with a medical degree and physiotherapists. The London College of Osteopathic Medicine teaches osteopathy only to those who are already physicians.\nUnited States.\nAn \"osteopathic physician\" in the United States is a physician trained in the full scope of medical practice, with a degree of Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (DO). With the increased internationalization of osteopathy, the American Osteopathic Association (AOA) recommended in 2010 that the older terms \"osteopathy\" and \"osteopath\" be reserved for \"informal or historical discussions and for referring to previously named entities in the profession and foreign-trained osteopaths\", and replaced in the US by \"osteopathic medicine\" and \"osteopathic physician\". The American Association of Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine made a similar recommendation.\nThose trained only in manual osteopathic treatment, generally to relieve muscular and skeletal conditions, are referred to as osteopaths, and are not permitted to use the title DO in the United States to avoid confusion with osteopathic physicians.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74592", "revid": "10810150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74592", "title": "Palma de Mallorca", "text": "City in the Balearic Islands, Spain\nPalma (, ; ), also known as Palma de Mallorca (officially between 1983 and 1988, 2006\u20132008, and 2012\u20132016), is the capital and largest city of the autonomous community of the Balearic Islands in Spain. It is situated on the south coast of Mallorca on the Bay of Palma. With a population of 438,234 as of 2024, it is the 8th-largest city in Spain.\nThe Cabrera Archipelago, though widely separated from Palma proper, is part of the municipality.\nHistory.\nPalma was founded as a Roman camp upon the remains of a Talaiotic settlement. The city was subjected to several Vandal raids during the fall of the Western Roman Empire, then reconquered by the Byzantine Empire, then colonised by the Moors (who called it Medina Mayurqa) and, in the 13th century, by James I of Aragon.\nRoman period.\nAfter the conquest of Mallorca, the city was loosely incorporated into the province of Tarraconensis by 123 BC; the Romans founded two new cities: \"Palma\" on the south of the island, and \"Pollentia\" in the northeast \u2013 on the site of a Phoenician settlement. Whilst Pollentia acted as a port to Roman cities on the northwestern Mediterranean Sea, Palma was the port used for destinations in Africa, such as Carthage, and Hispania, such as Saguntum, Gades and Carthago Nova. Though present-day Palma has no significant remains from this period, occasional archaeological finds are made in city centre excavations. For example, the remains of the Roman Wall can be seen at Can Bordils, the Municipal Archive, and below it, at the Maim\u00f3 ben Faraig Center.\nByzantine period.\nThough the period between the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the Muslim conquest is not well understood (due to lack of documents), there is clear evidence of a Byzantine presence in the city, as indicated by mosaics found in the oldest parts of the cathedral, which was in early medieval times part of a paleo-Christian temple.\nMuslim period.\nBetween 902 and 1229, the city was under Islamic control. It remained the capital of the island and it was known as Medina Mayurqa, which in Arabic means \"City of Majorca\".\nUnder the Emirate of C\u00f3rdoba.\nThe arrival of the Moors in the Balearic Islands occurred at the beginning of the 8th century. During this period, the population developed an economy based on self-sufficiency and piracy and even showed evidence of a relative hierarchy. The dominant groups took advantage of the Byzantine withdrawal due to Islamic expansion across the Mediterranean, to reinforce their domination upon the rest of the population, thus ensuring their power and the gradual abandonment of Imperial political structures.\nIn 708, a Muslim fleet, under the command of Abd Allah ibn Musa, son of the governor of Ifriqiya, Musa ibn Nusayr, stopped off at the island. It appears that Abd Allah convinced the powers of the city to accept a peace treaty. This treaty was granted in exchange for a tax, respect for the social, economic, and political structures of the communities that subscribed to it, as well as the continuity of their religious beliefs.\nAfter 707, the city was inhabited by Christians who were nominally in allegiance to the sovereignty of the Umayyad Caliphate, yet who, \"de facto\", enjoyed absolute autonomy. The city, being in Mallorca, constituted an enclave between western Christian and Islamic territories, and this attracted and encouraged increased levels of piracy in the surrounding waters. For wide sectors of the city's population, the sacking of ships (whether Muslim or Christian) which passed through Balearic waters was a source of riches over the next fifteen decades. Eventually, continued piracy in the region led to a retaliation by Al-Andalus which launched a naval fleet against the city and the whole of the Islands. The Islands were defended by the emperor Charlemagne in 799 from a Muslim pirate incursion.\nIn 848 (maybe 849), four years after the first Viking incursions had sacked the whole island, an attack from C\u00f3rdoba forced the authorities to ratify the treaty to which the city had submitted in 707. As the city still occupied an eccentric position regarding the commerce network established by the Moors in the western Mediterranean, the enclave was not immediately incorporated into Al-Andalus.\nWhile the Emirate of C\u00f3rdoba reinforced its influence upon the Mediterranean, Al-Andalus increased its interest in the city. The consequence of this was the substitution of the submission treaty for the effective incorporation of the islands to the Islamic state. A squad under the command of Isam al-Jawlani took advantage of the instability caused by several Viking incursions and disembarked in Mallorca, and after destroying any resistance, incorporated Mallorca, with Palma as its capital, to the C\u00f3rdoban state.\nThe incorporation of the city into the Emirate set the basis for a new society. Commerce and manufacturing developed in a previously unknown manner. This caused considerable demographic growth, thereby establishing Medina Mayurqa as one of the major ports for trading goods in and out of the Emirate of C\u00f3rdoba.\nD\u00e9nia\u2014Balearic taifa (1015\u20131087).\nThe Umayyad regime, despite its administrative centralisation, mercenary army and struggle to gain wider social support, could neither harmonise the various ethnic groups inside al-Andalus nor dissolve the old tribes which still organised sporadic ethnic fighting. During the 11th century, the Caliphate's control waned considerably. Provinces broke free from the central Cordoban administration and became effectively sovereign states \u2014 \"taifas\" \u2014 under the same governors that had been named by the last Umayyad Caliphs. According to their origin, these \"taifas\" can be grouped under three broad categories: people of Arab, Berber or Slavic origin.\nPalma was part of the taifa of D\u00e9nia. The founder of this state was a client of the Al-Mansur family, Muyahid ibn Yusuf ibn Ali, who could profit from the progressive crumbling of the Caliphate's superstructure to gain control over the province of D\u00e9nia. Subsequently, Muyahid organised a campaign throughout the Balearic Islands to consolidate the district and incorporated it into their \"taifa\" in early 1015.\nDuring the following years, Palma became the main port from where attacks on Christian vessels and coasts could be launched. Palma was the base from where a campaign against Sardinia was launched between 1016 and 1017, which caused the Pisans and Genoese forces to intervene. Later, this intervention set the basis for Italian mercantile penetration of the city.\nThe Denian dominion lasted until 1087, a period during which the city and the rest of the islands were relatively peaceful. Their supremacy at sea was still not rivaled by the Italian merchant republics, thus there were few external threats.\nBalearic Taifa (1087\u20131115) and Western Mediterranean.\nThe Banu Hud conquest of D\u00e9nia and its incorporation to the Eastern District of the taifa of Zaragoza meant the destruction of the legacy of Muyahid. The islands were freed from mainland dominion and briefly enjoyed independence, during which Medina Mayurqa was the capital.\nThe economy during this period depended on both agriculture and piracy. In the latter 11th century, Christian commercial powers took the initiative at sea against the Muslims. After centuries of fighting defensively in the face of Islamic pressure, Italians, Catalans and Occitans took offensive action. Consequently, the benefits of piracy diminished causing severe economic stress to the city.\nThe clearest proof of the new ruling relation of forces, from 1090, is the Crusade organised by the most important mercantile cities of the Christian states against the Islands. This effort was destined to finally eradicate Muslim piracy mainly based in Palma and surrounding havens. In 1115, Palma was sacked and later abandoned by an expedition commanded by Ramon Berenguer III the Great, count of Barcelona and Provence, which was composed of Catalans, Pisans, and other Italians, and soldiers from Provence, Corsica, and Sardinia, in a struggle to end Almoravid control.\nAfter this, the Islands became part of the Almoravid dynasty. The inglobement of all the taifa to a larger state helped to re-establish a balance along the frontier that separated western Christian states from the Muslim world.\nPeriod of the Banu Ganiya (1157\u20131203).\nThe situation changed in the mid-12th century when the Almoravids were displaced from al-Andalus and western Maghreb by the Almohad. Almoravid dominions, from 1157 on, were restricted to the Balearic Islands, with Palma again acting as the capital, governed by Muhammad ibn Ganiya. The massive arrival of al-Andalus refugees contributed to reinforcing the positions of the last Almoravid legitimatists, the Banu Ganiya, who, conscious of their weakness in the Western Mediterranean context, started to get closer to the growing powers represented by Italian maritime republics. Genoa and Pisans obtained in this period their first commercial concessions in the city and the rest of the islands.\nThe Banu Ganiya, taking advantage of the great loss suffered by Abu Yuqub Yusuf in the Siege of Santar\u00e9m, attacked Ifriqiya, where the Almohad dominion had not been consolidated yet, in the same year. However, this attack was repelled and the Almohad authorities encouraged anti-Almoravid revolts in the Islands. The city was captured by the Almohads in 1203.\nAragonese conquest and late Middle Ages.\nOn 31 December 1229, after three months of siege, the city was conquered by James I of Aragon and was renamed Ciutat de Mallorca (Mallorca City). In addition to being kept as the capital of the Kingdom of Majorca, it was given a municipality that comprised the whole island. The governing arm was the University of the City and Kingdom of Majorca.\nAfter the death of James I of Aragon, Palma became the joint capital of the Kingdom of Majorca, together with Perpignan. His son, James II of Majorca, championed the construction of statues and monuments in the city: Bellver Castle, the churches of St. Francesc and St. Domingo, reformed the Palace of Almudaina and began the construction of the Cathedral of Majorca.\nThe city's advantageous geographical location allowed it extensive commerce with Catalonia, Valencia, Provence, the Maghreb, the Italian republics, and the dominions of the Ottoman Empire, which heralded a golden age for the city, ending with Aragonese conquest in 1344.\nIn 1391, anti-Jewish riots broke out. The Jewish community of Inca was completely wiped out, as were those of S\u00f3ller, Sineu, and Alcudia. Despite the governor's prohibition on leaving the island, many Jews fled to North Africa. The remaining Jews were forced to convert under the threat of death.\nAbraham Cresques was a 14th-century Jewish cartographer of the Majorcan cartographic school from Palma; Cresques is credited with the authorship of the famous Catalan Atlas.\nThe river that cut through the city gave rise to two distinct areas within the city; the \"Upper town\" and \"Lower town\", depending upon which side of the river one was situated.\nAt the beginning of the 16th century, the Rebellion of the Brotherhoods (a peasant uprising against Charles V's administration) and the frequent attack of Turkish and Berber pirates caused a reduction of commercial activities and a huge investment in defensive structures. As a consequence, the city entered a period of decadence that would last till the end of the 17th century. Catalina Tomas, a canoness and mystic who became later one of the patron saints of Mallorca, lived in the convent of St Mary Magdalene of Palma between 1550 and 1572.\n17th to 19th centuries.\nThe 17th century was characterised by the division of the city into two sides or gangs, named \"Canamunts\" and \"Canavalls\" (from Majorcan Catalan \"the ones from the upper/lower side\"), with severe social and economic repercussions. During this period, the port became a haven for pirates. During the last quarter of the century, the Inquisition continued its persecution of the city's Jews, locally called \"xuetes\". Xuetes practiced strict endogamy by marrying only within their own group. Many of their descendants observe a syncretist form of Christian worship known as Xueta Christianity.\nThe fall of Barcelona in 1714 meant the end of the War of the Spanish Succession and the defeat and destruction of the Crown of Aragon, and this was reflected in the Nueva Planta decrees, issued by Philip V of Spain in 1715. These occupation decrees changed the government of the island and separated it from the municipality's government of Palma, which became the official city name. By the end of the 19th century, the name \"Palma de Mallorca\" was generalised in written Spanish, although it is still colloquially named \"Ciutat\" (\"city\") in Catalan. In the 18th century, Charles III of Spain removed interdiction of commerce with Spanish colonies in America and the port and commercial activity of the city grew once again.\nAt the beginning of the 19th century, Palma became a refuge for many who had exiled themselves from the Napoleonic occupation of Catalonia and Valencia; during this period freedom flourished, until the absolutist restoration. With the establishment of the contemporary Spanish state administrative organization, Palma became the capital of the new Balearic Islands province in the 1833 territorial division of Spain. The French occupation of Algeria in the 19th century ended the fear of Maghrebi attacks in Majorca, which favoured the expansion of new maritime routes, and consequently, the economic growth of the city.\nModern period.\nSince the advent of mass tourism in the 1950s, the city has been transformed into a tourist destination and has attracted many workers from mainland Spain. This has contributed to a huge change in the city's traditions, its language, and its economic power.\nThe boom in tourism has caused Palma to grow significantly. In 1960, Mallorca received 500,000 visitors, in 1997 it received more than 6,739,700. In 2001 more than 19,200,000 people passed through \"Son Sant Joan airport\" near Palma, with an additional 1.5 million coming by sea. In 2023, the total number of passengers arriving at \"Son Sant Joan airport\" amounted to 31,105,987.\nIn the 21st century, urban redevelopment, by the so-called \"Pla Mirall\" (English \"Mirror Plan\"), had attracted groups of immigrant workers from outside the European Union, especially from Africa and South America.\nTourism provides 80% of the island's GNP. Tourism has affected the rapid economic growth of Palma, placing the island of Mallorca among the wealthier regions in Spain.\nThe second economic portal of Palma is agriculture. The main exports of Palma's agriculture are almonds, oranges, lemons, and olives. The island is also gifted with a wide variety of natural resources, such as mines of copper, lead, and marble.\nThe city also has several surrounding neighborhood communities including Establiments, Nord, Son Espanyol, Ces Cases Noves, and Sa Creu Vermella.\nIn 1953, the Riu family\u2014Juan Riu and Mar\u00eda Bertr\u00e1n Espigul\u00e9, together with their son Luis Riu Bertr\u00e1n \u2014acquired the small Hotel San Francisco at Playa de Palma, a property that later became emblematic of the island\u2019s beach tourism. During a 1954 trip to Germany, Luis Riu reached a booking arrangement with tour operator Dr. Tigges (a forerunner of today\u2019s TUI), which began sending organised groups of German holidaymakers to the hotel and helped to pioneer early package travel to Mallorca. At the time, flights for these early packages used Palma\u2019s Son Bonet airfield, which served as the island\u2019s main civil airport until traffic moved to Son Sant Joan in 1959. In the early 1960s, German charter carriers\u2014among them LTU, founded in 1955\u2014expanded seasonal services from D\u00fcsseldorf and other cities to Mallorca, contributing to the consolidation of mass tourism in the Balearic Islands. \nIn October 2021, Palma was shortlisted for the European Commission's 2022 European Capital of Smart Tourism award along with Bordeaux, Copenhagen, Dublin, Florence, Ljubljana and Valencia.\nGeography.\nPalma is a major city and seaport located in the southwest of Mallorca, a western Mediterranean island belonging to the Balearic Islands archipelago. The land area of the city is about with an altitude of above sea level.\nThe city center of Palma is located north of the homonymous bay (\"Badia de Palma\" in the local Catalan language). The area that extends eastwards is mostly a flat fertile plain known as Es Pla. To the north and west, the city borders the Serra de Tramuntana, the island's major mountain range, and a Unesco World Heritage site.\nClimate.\nPalma has a hot semi-arid climate bordering on a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BSh\" bordering on \"Csa\"; Trewartha: \"BSal\" bordering on \"Csal\") with an average annual temperature of . During the coldest month, January, the average high temperature is , while the average low is . In the warmest month, August, the average high temperature is , while the low is . Autumn is the wettest season, with occasional heavy rainfall and storms. The average sunshine hours are around 2800 per year. There is a significant maritime influence, so the city has mild winters and hot but not extreme summers. The surrounding continental landmasses can warm up the offshore sea surface temperatures and as a result, the small confines of Mallorca are still able to build up and sustain heat despite being on an island. There is vast seasonal lag, especially in late summer courtesy of the seawater peaking in temperatures long after the summer solstice. Extreme temperatures are rare for the influence of the sea. Freezes are extremely rare, as the port of Mallorca has only registered once a low temperature below freezing ( in February 2012), as well as Mallorca, has never gone above in any summer month since temperature records began in 1978. The average temperature of the sea in Mallorca is and the beach weather normally lasts about 6\u20137 months, from late April to early November.\nNote.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2024, the population is 438,234, and the population of the urban area is 550,000 as of 2017, making it the 12th-largest urban area of Spain. Almost half of the total population of Mallorca lives in Palma.\nAs of 2024, the foreign-born population of the city is 128,005, equal to 29.2% of the total population.\nMain sights.\nPla\u00e7a d'Espanya.\nThe \"Pla\u00e7a d'Espanya\" is the transport hub of Palma. The Estaci\u00f3 Intermodal caters to buses and trains (the latter controlled by TIB). The two old buildings are home to the tourist information centre and several caf\u00e9s sit on either side of the two large escalators which lead into the \"Estaci\u00f3\", which sits underneath a large and popular park. On the lawns are several glass boxes, which let in light and ventilation to the station below ground. There are also train-themed playing structures, each one shaped like a train carriage and named after towns along the line of the Ferrocarril de S\u00f3ller, a railway dating back to 1911 which has its Palma Station right next to the park. Just down the street from here a new bus station is under construction. At the centre of the plaza is a statue of James I, Conquistador of Majorca.\nCathedral area.\nPalma is famous for La Seu, its vast cathedral built on a previous mosque which was built atop an original Christian church. Although construction of the present Cathedral began in 1229, it did not finish until 1601. Catalan architect Antoni Gaud\u00ed was drafted to restore the building in 1901. The Parc de la Mar (Park of the Sea) lies just south, overlooked by the great building which sits above it on the city's stone foundations. Between the two are the town walls.\nOld city.\nThe Old City (in the southeast area of Palma behind the cathedral) is a maze of streets clearly hinting at an Arab past. Except for a few streets and squares which allow traffic and are populated with tourists most of the time, the walkways of this city quarter are fairly narrow, quiet streets, surrounded by a diverse range of interesting buildings, the architecture of which is comparable to cities such as Florence. The majority are private houses, some of which are open to the public as discreet museums or galleries. The Old City is also home to the \"Ajuntament\" (or Town Hall), the Convent of the cathedral, and the \"Banys \u00c0rabs\".\nBanys \u00c0rabs.\nThe \"Banys \u00c0rabs\" (Arab Baths, in English), one of the few remnants of Palma's Moorish past, are situated on Can Serra street, 7, near the Convent of the cathedral. \nThe small two-roomed brick building that once housed the baths is of Byzantine origin, dating back to the 11th century and possibly once part of the home of a Muslim nobleman. The bathroom has a cupola with five oculi which let in dazzling light. The twelve columns holding up the small room were pillaged from an earlier Roman construction. The floor over the hypocaust has been worn away by people standing in the centre, mainly to photograph the entrance and the garden beyond it. The whole room is in a rather dilapidated condition. The other room is a brick cube with a small model of the baths as they once were in the corner.\nNotable people.\nNotable people who were born in the city include the following individuals:\nSports.\nFootball is the most popular sport on the island, led by the Palma-based La Liga club Real Mallorca, who play at the Estadi de Son Moix, and Segunda Divisi\u00f3n B club Atl\u00e9tico Baleares.\nBasketball is also a popular sport. Palma's top team is Bah\u00eda San Agust\u00edn, which plays its home games at the 5,076 capacity Palau Municipal d'Esports Son Moix.\nBecause of its maritime location, all sea sports have a big presence in Palma.\nRoad cycling is popular in Mallorca. An international race for professional cyclists, the Vuelta a Mallorca, is held in February, the first day of which consists of a circuit race around the streets of Palma. The city is also home to the Palma Arena, a multi-platinum venue featuring a velodrome. The arena also hosted the Battle of Surfaces tennis event.\nIn June 2016, the city of Palma participated in the First World Company Sports Games which included five days of culture, sport, and inclusivity within the community of Mallorca as a whole. It was operated through the World Federation Company Sport and was promoted for both local people and tourists to come together in the city. It became a large business venture by offering packages including accommodations close to the events and additional tourism information for future events.\nIn 2023, Palma hosted the 2023 UEFA Futsal Champions League Finals.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nPalma de Mallorca is twinned with Caruaru, Brazil, Alghero, Italy and Naples, Italy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74593", "revid": "51058355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74593", "title": "Bydgoszcz", "text": "City in Kuyavian-Pomeranian, Poland\nBydgoszcz (Bromberg) is a city in northern Poland and the largest city in the historical region of Kuyavia. Straddling the confluence of the Vistula River and its left-bank tributary, the Brda, the strategic location of Bydgoszcz has made it an inland port and a vital centre for trade and transportation. With a city population of 339,053 as of December 2021, Bydgoszcz is the eighth-largest city in Poland. Today, it is the seat of Bydgoszcz County and one of the two capitals of the Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship as a seat of its centrally appointed governor, a voivode.\nBydgoszcz metropolitan area comprising the city and several adjacent communities is inhabited by half a million people, and forms a part of an extended polycentric Bydgoszcz-Toru\u0144 metropolitan area with a population of approximately 0.8 million inhabitants. Since the Middle Ages, Bydgoszcz served as a royal city of the Kingdom of Poland until partitions and experienced the industrialisation period bolstered by the construction of the Bydgoszcz Canal in the late 18th century. Its academic and cultural landscape is shaped by Casimir the Great University, Bydgoszcz University of Science and Technology, the Medical College of Nicolaus Copernicus University, Feliks Nowowiejski Music Academy, the Pomeranian Philharmonic, and the Opera Nova. Bydgoszcz also plays a role of the biggest centre of NATO headquarters in Poland. The city is served by an international airport and is a member of Eurocities.\nBydgoszcz is an architecturally rich city, with Gothic, Neoclassicist, Neo-Gothic, Neo-Baroque, Modernist and Art Nouveau styles present, for which, combined with extensive green spaces, it has earned the nickname \"Little Berlin\". The notable granaries on Mill Island and along the riverside belong to one of the most recognized timber-framed landmarks in Poland. In 2023, the city entered the UNESCO Creative Cities Network and was named UNESCO City of Music.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Bydgoszcz\", originally \"Bydgoszcza\", derives from \"Bydgost\", a personal name, and the suffix -\"ja\", denoting ownership. The German name \"Bromberg\" is an alteration of \"Braheberg\", meaning \"hill on the Brahe River\" (Polish: \"Brda\"). The Latin names for the city is \"Bidgostia\" and \"Civitas Bidgostiensis\".\nIn Polish, the city's name has feminine grammatical gender.\nHistory.\nEarly history and first settlements.\nIn ancient times, there was a development of settlements related to lively trade contacts with the Roman Empire, as Askaukalis a convenient location of today's Bydgoszcz laid on the Amber Road heading northwest to the Baltic coastline avoiding crossing the Vistula river.\nDuring the early Slavic period a fishing settlement called \"Bydgoszcza\" (\"Bydgostia\" in Latin) became a stronghold on the Vistula trade routes.\nThe gr\u00f3d of Bydgoszcz was built between 1037 and 1053 during the reign of Casimir I the Restorer. In the 13th century it was the site of a castellany, mentioned in 1238, probably founded in the early 12th century during the reign of Boles\u0142aw III Wrymouth. In the 13th century, the church of Saint Giles was built as the first church of Bydgoszcz. The Germans later demolished it in the late 19th century. The first bridge was constructed at the reign of Casimir I of Kuyavia. In the early 14th century, the Duchy of Bydgoszcz and Wyszogr\u00f3d was created, with Bydgoszcz serving as its capital with Wyszogr\u00f3d, a settlement today within its borders.\nDuring the Polish\u2013Teutonic War (1326\u20131332), the city was captured and destroyed by the Teutonic Knights in 1330. Briefly regained by Poland, it was occupied by the Teutonic Knights from 1331 to 1337 and annexed to their monastic state as \"Bromberg\". In 1337, it was recaptured by Poland and was relinquished by the Knights in 1343 at their signing of the Treaty of Kalisz along with Dobrzy\u0144 and the remainder of Kuyavia.\nRoyal city of Poland.\nKing Casimir III of Poland granted Bydgoszcz city rights (charter) on 19 April 1346. The king granted a number of privileges, regarding river trade on the Brda and Vistula and the right to mint coins, and ordered the construction of the castle, which became the seat of the castellan. Bydgoszcz was an important royal city of Poland located in the Inowroc\u0142aw Voivodeship.\nThe city increasingly saw an influx of Jews after that date. In 1555, however, due to pressure from the clergy, the Jews were expelled and returned only with their annexation to Prussia in 1772. After 1370, Bydgoszcz castle was the favourite residence of the grandson of the king and his would-be successor Duke Casimir IV, who died there in 1377. In 1397 thanks to Queen Jadwiga of Poland, a Carmelite convent was established in the city, the third in Poland after Gda\u0144sk and Krak\u00f3w.\nDuring the Polish\u2013Lithuanian\u2013Teutonic War in 1409 the city was briefly captured by the Teutonic Knights. In the mid-15th century, during the Thirteen Years' War, King Casimir IV of Poland often stayed in Bydgoszcz. At that time, the defensive walls were built and the Gothic parish church (the present-day Bydgoszcz Cathedral). The city was developing dynamically thanks to river trade. Bydgoszcz pottery and beer were popular throughout Poland. In the 15th and 16th centuries, Bydgoszcz was a significant location for wheat trading, one of the largest in Poland. The first mention of a school in Bydgoszcz is from 1466.\nIn 1480, a Bernardine monastery was established in Bydgoszcz. The Bernardines erected a new Gothic church and founded a library, part of which has survived to this day. A Sejm of the Kingdom of Poland was held in Bydgoszcz in 1520. In 1522, after a decision taken by the Polish king, a salt depot was established in Bydgoszcz, the second in the region after Toru\u0144. In 1594, Stanis\u0142aw Cikowski founded a private mint, which in the early 17th century was transformed into a royal mint, one of the leading mints in Poland.\nIn 1621, on the occasion of the Polish victory over the Ottoman Empire at Chocim, one of the most valuable and largest coins in the history of Europe was minted in Bydgoszcz \u2013 100 ducats of Sigismund III Vasa. In 1617 the Jesuits came to the city, and subsequently established a Jesuit college.\nDuring the year of 1629, shortly before the end of the Polish-Swedish War of 1626\u201329, the town was conquered by Swedish troops led by king Gustav II Adolph of Sweden personally. During this war, the town suffered destruction. The town was conquered a second and third time by Sweden in 1656 and 1657 during the Second Northern War. On the latter occasion, the castle was destroyed completely and has since remained a ruin. After the war only 94 houses were inhabited, 103 stood empty and 35 had burned down. The suburbs had also been considerably damaged.\nThe Treaty of Bromberg, agreed in 1657 by King John II Casimir Vasa of Poland and Elector Frederick William II of Brandenburg-Prussia, created a military alliance between Poland and Prussia while marking the withdrawal of Prussia from its alliance with Sweden.\nAfter the Convocation Sejm of 1764, Bydgoszcz became one of three seats of the Crown Tribunal for the Greater Poland Province of the Polish Crown alongside Pozna\u0144 and Piotrk\u00f3w Trybunalski. In 1766 royal cartographer Franciszek Florian Czaki, during a meeting of the Committee of the Crown Treasury in Warsaw, proposed a plan of building a canal, which would connect the Vistula via the Brda with the Note\u0107 river. J\u00f3zef Wybicki, Polish jurist and political activist best known as the author of the lyrics of the national anthem of Poland, worked at the Crown Tribunal in Bydgoszcz.\nLate modern period.\nIn 1772, in the First Partition of Poland, the town was acquired by the Kingdom of Prussia as Bromberg and incorporated into the Netze District in the newly established province of West Prussia. At the time, the town was seriously depressed and semi-derelict. Under Frederick the Great the town revived, notably with the construction of a canal from Bromberg to Nakel (Nak\u0142o) which connected the north-flowing Vistula River via the Brda to the west-flowing Note\u0107, which in turn flowed to the Oder via the Warta. From this period until the end of the German Empire, a large majority of the city's inhabitants spoke German as their main language, and the city would later acquire the nickname \"little Berlin\" from its similar architectural appearance to the prewar image of the German capital and the work of shared architects such as Friedrich Adler, Ferdinand Lepcke, Heinrich Seeling, or Henry Gross. During the Ko\u015bciuszko Uprising, in 1794 the city was briefly recaptured by Poles, commanded by General Jan Henryk D\u0105browski, and the local Polish administration was co-organized by J\u00f3zef Wybicki.\nIn 1807, after the defeat of Prussia by Napoleon and the signing of the Treaty of Tilsit, Bydgoszcz became part of the short-lived Polish Duchy of Warsaw, within which it was the seat of the Bydgoszcz Department. With Napoleon's defeat at the Battle of Nations in 1813, the town was re-annexed by Prussia as part of the Grand Duchy of Posen (Pozna\u0144), becoming the capital of the Bromberg Region. During the November Uprising, a Polish insurgent organization was active in the city and local Poles helped smuggle volunteers, weapons and ammunition to the Russian Partition of Poland. After the fall of the uprising, one of the main escape routes for surviving insurgents and civilian insurgent authorities from partitioned Poland to the Great Emigration led through the city.\nIn 1871 the Province of Posen, along with the rest of the Kingdom of Prussia, became part of the newly formed German Empire. During German rule, the oldest church of the city (church of Saint Giles), the remains of the castle, and the Carmelite church and monastery were demolished. In the mid-19th century, the city saw the arrival of the Prussian Eastern Railway. The first stretch, from Schneidem\u00fchl (Pi\u0142a), was opened in July 1851.\nAt the time of World War I, Poles in Bydgoszcz formed secret organizations, preparing to regain control of the city in the event of Poland regaining its independence.\nInterbellum.\nAfter the war, Bydgoszcz was assigned to the recreated Polish state by the 1919 Versailles Treaty. Now officially Bydgoszcz again, the city belonged to the Pozna\u0144 Voivodeship. The local populace was required to acquire Polish citizenship or leave the country. This led to a drastic decline in ethnically German residents, whose number within the town decreased from over 40.000 in 1910 to 11,016 in 1926. A Nazi German youth organization was subsequently founded, which distributed Nazi propaganda books from Germany among the German minority.\nThe city's boundaries were greatly expanded in 1920 to include the surrounding suburbs of Okole, Szwederowo, Bartodzieje, Kapu\u015bciska, Wilczak, Jachcice and more, which made Bydgoszcz the third largest city in the Second Polish Republic in terms of area. In 1938, the city was made part of the Polish Greater Pomerania.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the invasion of Poland, at the beginning of World War II, on September 1, 1939, Germany carried out air raids on the city. The Polish 15th Infantry Division, which was stationed in Bydgoszcz, fought off German attacks on September 2, but on September 3 was forced to retreat. During the withdrawal of Poles, as part of the diversion planned by Germany, local Germans opened fire on Polish soldiers and civilians. Polish soldiers and civilians were forced into a defensive battle in which several hundred people were killed on both sides. The event, referred to as the \"Bloody Sunday\" by the propaganda of Nazi Germany, which exaggerated the number of victims to 5,000 \"defenceless\" Germans, was used as an excuse to carry out dozens of mass executions of Polish residents in the Old Market Square and in the Valley of Death. Between September 3\u201310, 1939, the Germans executed 192 Poles in the city.\nOn September 5, while the Wehrmacht entered the city, German-Polish skirmishes still took place in the Szwederowo district, and the German occupation of the city began. The German \"Einsatzgruppe IV\", \"Einsatzkommando 16\" and SS-Totenkopf-Standarte \"Brandenburg\" entered the city to commit atrocities against the Polish population, and afterwards some of its members co-formed the local German police. Many of the murders were carried out as part of the \"Intelligenzaktion\", aimed at exterminating the Polish elites and preventing the establishment of a Polish resistance movement, which emerged nevertheless. On September 24, the local German \"Kreisleiter\" called local Polish city officials to a supposed formal meeting in the city hall, from where they were taken to a nearby forest and exterminated. The \"Kreisleiter\" also ordered the execution of their family members to \"avoid creating martyrs\". By decision from September 5, 1939, one of the first three German special courts in occupied Poland was established in Bydgoszcz.\nThe Germans established several camps and prisons for Poles. As of September 30, 1939, over 3,000 individuals were imprisoned there, and in October and November, the Germans carried out further mass arrests of over 7,200 people. Many of those people were then murdered. Poles from Bydgoszcz were massacred at various locations in the city, at the Valley of Death and in the nearby village of Tryszczyn. The victims were both men and women, including activists, school principals, teachers, priests, local officials, merchants, lawyers, and also boy and girl scouts, gymnasium students and children as young as 12. The executions were presented as punishment for supposedly \"murdering Germans\" and \"destroying peace\", and were used by Nazi propaganda to show the world that it was alleged \"Polish terror\" that forced Hitler to start the war. On the Polish National Independence Day, November 11, 1939, the Germans symbolically publicly executed Leon Barciszewski, the mayor of Bydgoszcz. On November 17, 1939, the commander of the local SD-EK unit declared there was no more Polish intelligentsia capable of resistance in the city.\nThe city was annexed to the newly formed province of Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia as the seat of the district or county (\"kreis\") of Bromberg. However, the annexation was not recognised in international law. Extermination of the inhabitants continued throughout the war, and in total, around 10,000 inhabitants, mostly Poles, but also Polish Jews, were killed. Some Polish inhabitants were also murdered in the village of Jastrz\u0119bie in January 1940, and local teachers were also among Polish teachers murdered in both Mauthausen and Dachau concentration camps. The history of Jews in Bydgoszcz ended with the German invasion of Poland and the Holocaust. The city's Jewish citizens, who constituted a small community in the city (about two percent of the prewar population) and many of whom spoke German, were sent to extermination camps or murdered in the town itself. The city renamed \"Bromberg\" was the site of Bromberg-Ost, a women's subcamp of the Stutthof concentration camp. A deportation camp was situated in Smuka\u0142a village, now part of Bydgoszcz. On February 4, 1941, the first mass transport of 524 Poles came to the Potulice concentration camp from Bydgoszcz. The local train station was one of the locations, where Polish children aged 12 and over were sent from the Potulice concentration camp to slave labor. The children reloaded freight trains.\nDuring the occupation, the Germans destroyed some of the city's historic buildings to erect new structures in the Nazi style. The Germans built a huge secret dynamite factory (\"DAG Fabrik Bromberg\") hidden in a forest in which they used the slave labor of several hundred forced laborers, including Allied prisoners of war from the Stalag XX-A POW camp in Toru\u0144. In 1943, local Poles managed to save some kidnapped Polish children from the Zamo\u015b\u0107 region, by buying them from the Germans at the local train station.\nThe Polish resistance was active in Bydgoszcz. Activities included distribution of underground Polish press, sabotage actions, stealing German ammunition to aid Polish partisans, espionage of German activity and providing shelter for British POWs who escaped from the Stalag XX-A POW camp. The Gestapo cracked down on the Polish resistance several times.\nIn spring 1945, Bydgoszcz was occupied by the advancing Red Army. Those German residents who had survived were expelled in accordance with the Potsdam Agreement and the city was returned to Poland, although with a Soviet-installed communist regime, which stayed in power until the 1980s. The Polish resistance remained active in Bydgoszcz.\nPost-war period.\nIn the same year 1945, the city was made the seat of the Pomeranian Voivodship, the northern part of which was soon separated to form Gda\u0144sk Voivodship. The remaining part of the Pomeranian Voivodship was renamed Bydgoszcz Voivodeship in 1950. In 1951 and 1969, Bydgoszcz University of Science and Technology and Kazimierz Wielki University in Bydgoszcz were founded respectively.\nIn 1973, the former town of Fordon, located on the left bank of the Vistula, was included in the city limits and became the easternmost district of Bydgoszcz. In March 1981, Solidarity's activists were violently suppressed in Bydgoszcz.\nWith the Polish local government reforms of 1999, Bydgoszcz became the seat of the governor of a province entitled Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship. In 2005, Casimir the Great University was opened in Bydgoszcz.\nCurrently, Bydgoszcz is the biggest center of NATO headquarters in Poland, the most known being the Joint Force Training Centre. In May 2023, debris of a Russian Kh-55 air-sol missile was found in the forest of the near village Zamo\u015b\u0107.\nMain sights.\nThe oldest building in the city is the Cathedral of St Martin and St Nicolas, commonly known as Fara Church. It is a three-aisle late Gothic church, erected between 1466 and 1502, which boasts a late-Gothic painting entitled \"Madonna with a Rose\" or \"the Holy Virgin of Beautiful Love\" from the 16th century. The colourful 20th-century polychrome is also especially worthy of note.\nThe Church of the Assumption of the Holy Virgin, commonly referred to as \"The Church of Poor Clares,\" is a famous landmark of the city. It is a small, Gothic-Renaissance (including Neo-Renaissance additions), single-aisle church built between 1582 and 1602. The interior is rather austere since the church has been stripped of most of its furnishings. This is not a surprising fact, considering that in the 19th century the Prussian authorities dissolved the Order of St Clare and turned the church into a warehouse, among other uses. Nonetheless, the church is worth visiting. In particular, the original wooden polychrome ceiling dating from the 17th century draws the attention of every visitor.\n\"Wyspa M\u0142y\u0144ska\" (Mill Island) is among the most spectacular and atmospheric places in Bydgoszcz. What makes it unique is the location in the very heart of the city centre, just a few steps from the old Market Square. It was the 'industrial' centre of Bydgoszcz in the Middle Ages and for several hundred years thereafter, and it was here that the famous royal mint operated in the 17th century. Most of the buildings which can still be seen on the island date from the 19th century, but the so-called \"Bia\u0142y Spichlerz\" (the White Granary) recalls the end of the 18th century. However, it is the water, footbridges, historic red-brick tenement houses reflected in the rivers, and the greenery, including old chestnut trees, that create the unique atmosphere of the island.\n\"Hotel pod Or\u0142em\" (The Eagle Hotel), an icon of the city's 19th-century architecture, was designed by the distinguished Bydgoszcz architect J\u00f3zef \u015awi\u0119cicki, the author of around sixty buildings in the city. Completed in 1896, it served as a hotel from the very beginning and was originally owned by Emil Bernhardt, a hotel manager educated in Switzerland. Its fa\u00e7ade displays forms characteristic of the Neo-baroque style in architecture.\nSaint Vincent de Paul's Basilica, erected between 1925 and 1939, is the largest church in Bydgoszcz and one of the biggest in Poland. It can accommodate around 12,000 people. This monumental church, modeled after the Pantheon in Rome, was designed by the Polish architect Adam Ballenstaedt. The most characteristic element of the neo-classical temple is the reinforced concrete dome 40 metres in diameter.\nThe three granaries in Grodzka Street, picturesquely located on the Brda River near the old Market Square, are the official symbol of the city. Built at the turn of the 19th century, they were originally used to store grain and similar products, but now house exhibitions of the city's Leon Wycz\u00f3\u0142kowski District Museum.\nThe building of the former Prussian Eastern Railway Headquarters erected between 1886 and 1889 in Dutch Mannierist style is another notable structure in the city. Initially it served as a headquarters of the Prussian Eastern Railway and later it belonged to the Polish State Railways. Since 2022 it is privately owned.\nThe city is mostly associated with water, sports, Art Nouveau buildings, waterfront, music, and urban greenery. Bydgoszcz boasts the largest city park in Poland (830 ha). The city was also once famous for its industry.\nSome great monuments have been destroyed, for example, the church in the Old Market Square and the Municipal Theatre. Additionally, the Old Town lost a few characteristic tenement houses, including the western frontage of the Market Square. The city also lost its Gothic castle and defensive walls. In Bydgoszcz, there are a great number of villas in the style of typical garden suburbs.\nEconomy and demographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;In the city, there are 38 banks represented through a network of 116 branches (including the headquarters of the Bank Pocztowy SA), whilst 37 insurance companies also have offices in the city. JP Morgan Chase, one of the largest financial institutions in the world, has established a branch in Bydgoszcz. Most industrial complexes are scattered throughout the city. Of note are the 'Zachem' chemical works, covering dozens of square kilometers in the south-east of the city. These remnants of the German explosives factory built in World War II occupy an area which has its own rail lines, internal communication and housing, plus a large forested area. An open-air museum, the Exploseum, is located here as well.\nSince 2001, Bydgoszcz has been annually subjected to international 'verification' ratings. In February 2008 the 'Fitch Ratings' Agency recategorised the city, increasing its rating from BBB-(stable forecast) to BBB (stable estimate).\nIn 2004, Bydgoszcz launched an Industrial and Technology Park of 283 hectares, an attractive place for doing business as companies that relocate there receive tax breaks, 24-hour security, access to large plots of land and to the media, the railway line Chorz\u00f3w Batory \u2013 Tczew (passenger, coal), the DK5 and DK10 national roads, and future freeways S10 and S5. Bydgoszcz Airport is also close by.\nCulture.\nBydgoszcz is a major cultural centre in the country, especially for music. Traditions of the municipal theatre date back to the 17th century, when the Jesuit college built a theatre. In 1824, a permanent theatre building was erected, and this was rebuilt in 1895 in a monumental form by the Berlin architect Heinrich Seeling. The first music school was established in Bydgoszcz in 1904; it had close links to the very well-known European piano factory of Bruno Sommerfeld. Numerous orchestras and choirs, both German (Gesangverein, Liedertafel) and Polish (St. Wojciech Halka, Moniuszko), have also made the city their home. Since 1974, Bydgoszcz has been home to a very prestigious Academy of Music. Bydgoszcz is also an important place for contemporary European culture; one of the most important European centers of jazz music, the Brain club, was founded in Bydgoszcz by Jacek Majewski and Slawomir Janicki.\nBydgoszcz was a candidate for the title of European Capital of Culture in 2016.\n It joined the list of UNESCO's Cities of Music in 2023.\nMuseums.\nMuzeum Okr\u0119gowe im. Leona Wycz\u00f3\u0142kowskiego (Leon Wycz\u00f3\u0142kowski District Museum) is a municipally owned museum. Apart from a large collection of Leon Wycz\u00f3\u0142kowski's works, it houses permanent as well as temporary exhibitions of art. It is based in several buildings, including the old granaries on the Brda River and Mill Island and the remaining building of the Polish royal mint. Exploseum, a museum built around the World War II Nazi Germany munitions factory, is also part of it.\nIn Bydgoszcz, the Pomeranian Military Museum specializes in documenting 19th- and 20th-century Polish military history, particularly the history of the Pomeranian Military District and several other units present in the area.\nThe city has many art galleries, two symphony orchestras, many chamber orchestras and choirs. Bydgoszcz's cultural facilities also include libraries, including the Provincial and Municipal Public Library with an extensive collection of volumes from the 15th to the 19th centuries. The municipally owned Palaces and park ensemble in Ostromecko near the city contains the Andrzej Szwalbe Collection of Historical Pianos, one of the largest such collections in Poland.\nTheatre.\nTeatr Polski im Hieronima Konieczki (Hieronim Konieczka's Polish Theatre): Despite its name, the theatre offers a wide variety of shows both of national and foreign origin. It also regularly plays host to a large number of touring shows. Founded in 1949, since 2002 the theatre has taken part in the \"Festiwal Prapremier\" where the most renowned Polish theatres stage their latest works. There are also a number of private theatre companies operating in Bydgoszcz.\nFrom 1960 to 1986, there was an outdoor theater, the reactivation of which is currently being pursued by the Theatre Culture Association, \"Fides\" and the Acting School A. Grzymala-Siedlecki.\nThe Pomeranian Philharmonic named after Ignacy Jan Paderewski has existed since 1953. The concert hall, which can hold 920 people is classified, in terms of sound, as one of the best in Europe, which is confirmed by well-known artists and critics (including Jerzy Waldorff). Due to the phenomenon of acoustics, it attracts the interest of many famous artists. Bydgoszcz's stage has been frequented by many global celebrities, including Arthur Rubinstein, Benjamin Britten, Witold Ma\u0142cu\u017cy\u0144ski, Luciano Pavarotti, Shlomo Mintz, Mischa Maisky, Kevin Kenner, Kurt Masur, Kazimierz Kord, Jerzy Maksymiuk and Antoni Wit. In recent years, the city has also hosted an excellent range of bands such as the BBC Radio Symphony Orchestra, the Polish National Radio Symphony Orchestra, and others.\nThe Opera Nova, in existence since 1956, started the construction of a new building in 1974 which was to consist of three main halls, situated on the Brda. The Opera Nova has become a cultural showcase of Bydgoszcz in the world. Considering the short history of the Opera, its success has been astounding; a large number of famous opera singers have performed there and theatrical troops from the Wroc\u0142aw Opera, Theatre of Leningrad, Moscow, Kiev, Minsk, and Gulbenkian Foundation of Lisbon have also made appearances.\nTransport.\nRailways.\nBydgoszcz is one of the biggest railway junctions in Poland, with two important lines crossing there \u2013 the east\u2013west connection from Toru\u0144 to Pila and the north\u2013south line from Inowroc\u0142aw to Gda\u0144sk (see: Polish Coal Trunk-Line). There are also secondary-importance lines stemming from the city, to Szubin and to Che\u0142m\u017ca. Among rail stations located in the city, there are:\nPolitics.\nBydgoszcz constituency.\nMembers of Polish Sejm 2007\u20132011 elected from Bydgoszcz constituency:\nMembers of Polish Senate 2007\u20132011 elected from Bydgoszcz constituency:\nInternational relations.\nConsulates.\nThere is an Honorary Consulate General of Hungary in Bydgoszcz, and nine honorary consulates, of Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Czech Republic, Germany, Montenegro, Serbia, Slovakia and Ukraine.\nLegends.\nIt is said that Pan Twardowski spent some time in the city of Bydgoszcz, where, in his memory, a figure was recently mounted in a window of a tenement, overseeing the Old Town. At 1:13\u00a0p.m. and 9:13\u00a0p.m. the window opens and Pan Twardowski appears, to the accompaniment of weird music and devilish laughter. He takes a bow, waves his hand, and then disappears. This little show gathers crowds of amused spectators.\nClimate.\nBydgoszcz has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\").\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74594", "revid": "38389953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74594", "title": "Lublin", "text": "City in Lublin Voivodeship, Poland\nLublin is the eighth-largest city in Poland and the second-largest city of historical Lesser Poland. It is the capital and the centre of Lublin Voivodeship with a population of 336,339 (December 2021). Lublin is the largest Polish city east of the Vistula River, located southeast of Warsaw.\nOne of the events that greatly contributed to the city's development was the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Union of Krewo in 1385. Lublin thrived as a centre of trade and commerce due to its strategic location on the route between Vilnius and Krak\u00f3w; the inhabitants had the privilege of free trade in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The Lublin Parliament session of 1569 led to the creation of a real union between the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, thus creating the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. Lublin witnessed the early stages of the Reformation in the 16th century. A Calvinist congregation was founded and groups of radical Arians appeared in the city, making it an important global centre of Arianism.\nUntil the partitions at the end of the 18th century, Lublin was an important royal city of the Kingdom of Poland. Its delegates, alike nobles, had the right to participate in the royal election. In 1578, Lublin was chosen as the seat of the Crown Tribunal, the highest appeal court in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, and for centuries, the city has been flourishing as a centre of culture and higher learning.\nIn 2011, the analytical Financial Times Group found Lublin to be one of the best cities for business in Poland. The Foreign Direct Investment ranking placed Lublin second among larger Polish cities in the cost-effectiveness category. Lublin is noted for its green spaces and a high standard of living; the city has been selected as the 2023 European Youth Capital and 2029 European Capital of Culture. Its historical Old Town is one of Poland's national monuments (\"Pomnik historii\") tracked by the National Heritage Board of Poland.\nHistory.\nArchaeological finds indicate a long presence of cultures in the area. A complex of settlements started to develop on the future site of Lublin and in its environs in the sixth to seventh centuries. Remains of settlements dating back to the sixth century were discovered in the centre of today's Lublin on Czwartek (\"Thursday\") Hill.\nThe early Middle Ages were marked by an intensified settlement of people, particularly in the areas along river valleys. The settlements were centred around the stronghold on Old Town Hill, which was likely one of the main centres of the Lendians, a Lechitic tribe. When the tribal stronghold was destroyed in the 10th century, the centre shifted to the northeast, to a new stronghold above Czech\u00f3wka valley and, after the mid-12th century, to Castle Hill.\nAt least two churches are presumed to have existed in Lublin in the early medieval period. One of them was most probably erected on Czwartek Hill during the rule of Casimir the Restorer in the 11th century. The castle became the seat of a castellan, first mentioned in historical sources from 1224, but was quite possibly present from the start of the 12th or even 10th century. The oldest historical document mentioning Lublin dates from 1198, so the name must have come into general use some time earlier.\nThe location of Lublin at the eastern borders of the Polish lands gave it military significance. During the first half of the 13th century, Lublin was a target of attacks by Mongols, Tatars, Ruthenians, and Lithuanians, which resulted in its destruction. It was also ruled by Kingdom of Galicia\u2013Volhynia between 1289 and 1302. Lublin was founded as a town by W\u0142adys\u0142aw I the Elbow-high or between 1258 and 1279 during the rule of the prince Boles\u0142aw V the Chaste. Casimir III the Great, appreciating the site's strategic importance, built a masonry castle in 1341 and encircled the city with defensive walls. From 1326, if not earlier, the stronghold on Castle Hill included a chapel in honor of the Holy Trinity. A stone church dating to 1335\u20131370 exists to this day.\nJagiellonian Poland.\nIn 1392, the city received an important trade privilege from the king W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o. With the coming of peace between Poland and Lithuania, it developed into a trade centre, handling a large portion of commerce between the countries. In 1474, the area around Lublin was carved out of Sandomierz Voivodeship and combined to form the Lublin Voivodeship, the third voivodeship of Lesser Poland.\nDuring the 15th and 16th centuries, the town grew rapidly. The largest trade fairs of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth were held in Lublin. In the 16th century, the parliaments (\"Sejm\") of the Kingdom of Poland were held in Lublin several times. On 26 June 1569, one of the most important proclaimed the Union of Lublin, which united Poland and Lithuania. Lublin as one of the most influential cities of the state enjoyed voting rights during the royal elections in Poland.\nSome of the artists and writers of the 16th century Polish renaissance lived and worked in Lublin, including Sebastian Klonowic and Jan Kochanowski, who died in the city in 1584. In 1578, the Crown Tribunal, the highest court of the Lesser Poland Province, was established in Lublin.\nSince the second half of the 16th century, Protestant Reformation movements devolved in Lublin, and a large congregation of Polish Brethren was present in the city. One of Poland's most important Jewish communities was established in Lublin around this time. Jews established a widely respected\" yeshiva\", Jewish hospital, synagogue, cemetery, and education centre (\"kahal\") and built the Grodzka Gate (known as the Jewish Gate) in the historic district. Jews were a vital part of the city's life until the Holocaust, during which they were relocated by Nazi Germany to the infamous Lublin Ghetto and ultimately murdered.\nThe yeshiva became a centre of learning of Talmud and Kabbalah, leading the city to be called \"the Jewish Oxford\". In 1567, the \"rosh yeshiva\" (headmaster) received the title of rector from the king along with rights and privileges equal to those of the heads of Polish universities.\nThe city declined due to the disastrous Deluge, when it was invaded by Russo-Cossack forces in 1655, and Sweden in 1656.\n19th and early 20th century.\nAfter the Third Partition of Poland in 1795, Lublin was located in the Austrian Empire, then following the Austro-Polish War of 1809 it was part of the short-lived Polish Duchy of Warsaw, and then in 1815 it became part of the Congress Poland in the Russian Partition of Poland.\nAt the beginning of the 19th century, new squares, streets, and public buildings were built. In 1877, a railway connection to Warsaw and Kovel and Lublin Station were constructed, spurring industrial development. Lublin's population grew from 28,900 in 1873 to 50,150 in 1897 (including 24,000 Jews).\nRussian rule ended in 1915, when the city was occupied by German and Austro-Hungarian armies. After the defeat of the Central Powers in 1918, the Provisional People's Government of the Republic of Poland\u2014the first government of independent Poland\u2014operated in Lublin for a short time. In the interwar years, the city continued to modernise and its population grew; important industrial enterprises were established, including the first aviation factory in Poland, the Plage i La\u015bkiewicz works, later nationalised as the LWS factory. The Catholic University of Lublin was founded in 1918.\nIn 1921, Roman Catholics constituted 58.9% of the city's population, with Jews at 39.5%. In 1931, 63.7% of the inhabitants were Roman Catholic and 34.7% Jewish.\nOn 20 July 1931 a violent tornado carved a path of destruction through the city, destroying dozens of structures in downtown and killing six people. This tornado is officially rated F4 on the Fujita scale; however, the Polish Weather Service estimated winds at , potentially ranking it as an F5.\nWorld War II.\nIn early September 1939, during the joint German-Soviet invasion of Poland, which started World War II, the Polish government evacuated a portion of the Polish gold reserve from Warsaw to Lublin, and then further east to \u0141uck, before the city was occupied by Germany, and found itself in the newly formed General Government territory. The Polish population became a target of severe Nazi persecutions focusing on intelligentsia and Polish Jews. In November 1939, during the \"Intelligenzaktion\", the Germans carried out mass arrests of hundreds of Poles, including teachers, judges, lawyers, engineers, priests, lecturers of the local theological seminary, and lecturers and students of the Catholic University of Lublin, which the occupiers closed down. Arrested Poles were held in a prison established in the Lublin Castle, and many were afterwards deported to concentration camps.\nOn 23\u201325 December 1939, the Germans carried out massacres of 31 Poles in several locations in Lublin. Among the victims were lawyers, professors, school principals, starosts of Lublin and Lubart\u00f3w counties and other well-known and respected citizens of the region. In January and February 1940, the occupiers arrested 23 Capuchin friars and 43 Jesuit friars. Persecution of Polish intelligentsia was continued with the \"AB-Aktion\". On 24 June 1940, the Germans carried out mass arrests of over 800 Poles in Lublin, who were then imprisoned in the castle, along with dozens of Poles who were arrested at the same time in other towns in the region, including Bia\u0142a Podlaska, Che\u0142m, Pu\u0142awy. Many of the prisoners were then deported to the Sachsenhausen and Auschwitz concentration camps, while around 500 Poles were murdered in five large massacres carried out in the present-day district of Rury in 1940. Among the victims of the massacres were both men and women: doctors, engineers, local officials, lawyers, judges, activists, military officers, parliamentarians, Polish resistance members, policemen, teachers and school and university students.\nAn attempt to \"Germanise\" the city led to an influx of the ethnic \"Volksdeutsche\", increasing the number of German minority from 10\u201315% in 1939 to 20\u201325%. Near Lublin, the so-called \"reservation\" for the Jews was built based on the idea of racial segregation known as the \"Nisko or Lublin Plan\".\nThe Germans established and operated a Baudienst forced labour camp for Poles in Lublin. Many Poles from or associated with Lublin, including 94 lecturers, alumni and students of the Catholic University of Lublin were murdered by the Soviets in the large Katyn massacre in April\u2013May 1940.\nThe Jewish population was forced into the newly established Lublin Ghetto near Podzamcze. The city served as headquarters for Operation Reinhardt, the main German effort to exterminate all Jews in occupied Poland. The majority of the ghetto inmates, about 26,000 people, were deported to the Be\u0142\u017cec extermination camp between 17 March and 11 April 1942. The remainder were moved to facilities around the Majdanek concentration camp established at the outskirts of the city. Almost all of Lublin's Jews were murdered during the Holocaust in Poland. The secret Polish Council to Aid Jews \"\u017begota\", established by the Polish resistance movement operated in the city. There are also known cases of local Polish men and women, who were captured and sent to either forced labour or concentration camps by the Germans for sheltering and aiding Jews. Poles who saved Jews in other places in the region were also temporarily imprisoned in the local castle, before being sent to the Auschwitz concentration camp.\nAfter the war, some survivors emerged from hiding with the Christian rescuers or returned from the Soviet Union, and re-established a small Jewish community in the city, but their numbers were insignificant. Most survivors left Poland for Israel, the United States and other countries.\nIn the first years of the occupation, many expelled Poles from Gda\u0144sk and German-annexed Pomerania were deported to Lublin, and later on, in 1943, around 9,000 expelled Poles from the nearby Zamojszczyzna region were brought to Lublin and imprisoned in the Majdanek concentration camp and in a transit camp at Krochmalna Street; many were afterwards deported to forced labour in Germany. In August 1943, thanks to efforts of the Polish \"Rada G\u0142\u00f3wna Opieku\u0144cza\" charity organisation, around 2,200 people were released from those two camps. Many of the released people, including hundreds of kidnapped Polish children, were extremely exhausted or sick, and were taken to local hospitals, which quickly became overcrowded. Many exhausted children died soon. Lublin pharmacists and residents organized help for the children, and after leaving the hospital, the people were taken in by the inhabitants of the surrounding villages, which resulted in an epidemic typhus outbreak, which caused many deaths among the population.\nOn 24 July 1944, the city was taken by the Soviet Army and became the temporary headquarters of the Soviet-controlled communist Polish Committee of National Liberation established by Joseph Stalin, which was to serve as the basis for a puppet government. The Soviets carried out arrests of Polish resistance members, including the regional delegate of the Polish government-in-exile, W\u0142adys\u0142aw Cholewa, and the commander of the regional branch of the Home Army, Colonel Kazimierz Tumidajski, who was eventually killed in Russian captivity in 1947. The capital of new Poland was moved to Warsaw in January 1945 after the Soviet westward offensive.\nPost-war period.\nIn the postwar years, Lublin continued to grow, tripling its population and greatly expanding its area. A considerable scientific and research base was established around the newly founded Maria Curie-Sk\u0142odowska University. A large automotive factory, Fabryka Samochod\u00f3w Ci\u0119\u017carowych (FSC), was built in the city. In 2017, the city was awarded the Europe Prize by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe for having made exceptional efforts to spread the ideal of European unity.\nGeography.\nLublin lies in eastern Poland on the Lublin Upland. The Bystrzyca river, a tributary of the Wieprz river, passes through the city and divides it into two parts: western, with a more varied relief with loess gorges, and eastern, which is flat. In the southern part of the city there is an artificial Zemborzyce Lake created by damming Bystrzyca.\nThe area of the city is 147 km2. The highest point lies at a height of and the lowest point at a height of .\nLublin has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\") with cold, damp winters and warm summers.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe population of Lublin at the end of 2024 was 328,300.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nThe Lublin region is a part of eastern Poland, which has benefited less from the economic transformation after 1989 than regions of Poland located closer to Western Europe. Despite the fact that Lublin is one of the closest neighbour cities for Warsaw, the investment inflow in services from the Polish capital has secured a steady growth due to relatively fast connection, while external investments are progressing, enabling nearby satellite municipality \u015awidnik for large-scale industrial investments.\nLublin is a regional centre of IT companies. Asseco Business Solutions S.A., eLeader Sp z o.o., CompuGroup Medical Polska Sp. z o.o., Abak-Soft Sp. z o.o. and others have their headquarters here. Other companies (for example Comarch S.A., Britenet Sp. z o.o., Simple S.A., Asseco Poland S.A.) outsourced to Lublin, to take advantage of the educated specialists. There is a visible growth in professionals eager to work in Lublin, due to reasons like quality of life, culture management, the environment, improving connection to Warsaw, levels of education, or financial, because of usually higher operating margins of global organisations present in the area.\nThe large car factory Fabryka Samochod\u00f3w Ci\u0119\u017carowych (FSC) was acquired by the South Korean Daewoo conglomerate in the early 1990s. With Daewoo's financial troubles in 1998 related to the Asian financial crisis, the production at FSC practically collapsed and the factory entered bankruptcy. Efforts to restart its van production succeeded when the engine supplier bought the company to keep its prime market. With the decline of Lublin as a regional industrial centre, the city's economy has been reoriented toward service industries. Currently, the largest employer is the Maria Curie-Sklodowska University.\nThe price of land and investment costs are lower than in western Poland. However, the Lublin area has to be one of the main beneficiaries of the EU development funds. Jerzy Kwiecinski, the deputy secretary of state in the Ministry for Regional Development at the Conference of the Ministry for Regional Development (Poland in the European Union \u2014 new possibilities for foreign investors) said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the immediate financial outlook, between 2007 and 2013, we will be the largest beneficiaries of the EU \u2014 every fifth Euro will be spent in Poland. In total, we will have at our disposal 120 billion EUR, assigned exclusively for post-development activities. This sum will be an enormous boost for our country.\nIn September 2007, the prime minister signed a bill creating a special economic investment zone in Lublin that offers tax incentives. It is part of \"Park Mielec\" \u2014 the European Economic Development area. At least 13 large companies had declared their wish to invest here, e.g., Carrefour, Comarch, Safo, Asseco, Aliplast, Herbapol, Modern-Expo, and Per\u0142a Browary Lubelskie. At the same time, the energy conglomerate, Polska Grupa Energetyczna, which will build Poland's first nuclear power station, is to have its main offices in Lublin.\nModern shopping centers built in Lublin like Tarasy Zamkowe (Castle Terraces), Lublin Plaza, Galeria Olimp, Galeria Gala, the largest shopping mall in the city, covering 33,500 square meters of area. Similar investments are planned for the near future such as Park Felin (Felicity) and a new underground gallery (\"Alchemy\") between and beneath \u015awi\u0119toduska and Lubartowska Streets.\nMedia.\nThe local TVP station, TVP3 Lublin, broadcasts from a -tall concrete television tower. The station put its first program on the air in 1985. In recent years it contributed programming to TVP3 channel and later TVP Info.\nThe radio stations airing from Lublin include Radio 'eR \u2013 87.9 FM', Radio 'Eska Lublin' \u2013 103.6 FM, Radio Lublin (regional station of the Polish Radio) \u2013 102.2 FM, [ Radio Centrum (university radio station)] \u2013 98.2 FM, Radio 'Free' (city station of the Polish Radio) \u2013 89,9 FM, and Radio 'Z\u0142ote Przeboje' (Golden Hits) Lublin \u2013 95.6 FM.\nLocal newspapers include \"Kurier Lubelski\" daily, regional partner of the national newspaper \"Dziennik Wschodni\" daily, \"Gazeta Wyborcza\" [ Lublin Edition] daily (regional supplement to the national newspaper \"Gazeta Wyborcza\"), \"[ Metro]\" (daily, free), and \"Nasze Miasto Lublin\" weekly (free).\nTransport.\nAirport.\nThe Lublin Airport (Port Lotniczy Lublin) (IATA: LUZ) is located about SE of Lublin. With approximately 8 destinations and over 450 000 passengers served in 2018, it is the biggest airport in Eastern Poland. There is a direct train and bus link from the airport to downtown.\nRailways.\nFrom Lublin G\u0142\u00f3wny railway station, ten trains depart each day to Warsaw, and three to Krak\u00f3w, as in other major cities in Poland. Lublin has also direct train connections with Rzesz\u00f3w, Szczecin, Gdynia, and other Polish cities and towns in the region as Na\u0142\u0119cz\u00f3w, Che\u0142m or Zamo\u015b\u0107. The express train to Warsaw takes about two hours.\nThere are other smaller stations in Lublin for local trains:\nRoads.\nLublin is located at the intersection of expressways S12, S17, and S19.\nExpressway S17 between Lublin and Warsaw was completed in 2020. S19 between Lublin and Rzesz\u00f3w was largely finished in 2022. The rest of the planned expressway network around the city, that will be built in the coming years, consists of S12 to the east in the direction Che\u0142m, S19 north towards Bia\u0142ystok, and S17 southeast towards Zamo\u015b\u0107. The expressway bypass of Lublin allows transit traffic to avoid the city centre.\nLong-distance buses depart from near the Castle in the Old Town and serve most of the same destinations as the rail network. \nLublin is one of only four towns in Poland to have trolleybuses (the others are Gdynia, Sopot, and Tychy).\nLublin is the largest city in Poland to not have a tram network\nCulture and tourism.\nLublin is the largest city in eastern Poland and serves as an important regional cultural capital. Since then, many important international events have taken place here, involving international artists, researchers and politicians.\nArchitecture.\nLublin's Old Town shares several traditions with Lesser Poland, mostly the dialect and historic architecture that brings a unique ambience comparable with Krak\u00f3w. It is, however, a distinct experience, which benefits from artistic renovation, that progressed somehow slower and more modestly focusing more on quality and less on commercialization. Historic buildings, including ruined townhouses that await for new owners, create a unique atmosphere of the renaissance city. Lublin's Old Town has cobbled, narrow streets and mostly medieval layout and design. Many venues around Old Town enjoy an architecture applicable for restaurants, art hotels, pubs galleries, and clubs. Apart from entertainment, the area houses small businesses and prestigious offices.\nThere are several historic churches in the Old Town, including the Holy Trinity Chapel in Lublin Castle with the frescos, that are a mixture of Roman Catholic motifs with eastern Byzantine styles, reinforcing how the city connects the west with the east. Other important churches are the Late Gothic Virgin Mary Victorious Church, Renaissance Dominican Basilica and Bernardine church as well as Baroque St. John the Baptist Cathedral.\nMonuments of the 20th-century architecture include the Chachmei Lublin Yeshiva and its synagogue, socialist-realist and brutalist by Oskar Hansen.\nThe arts.\nMuseum.\nThe premier museum in the city is the National Museum of Lublin, one of the oldest and largest museums of Eastern Poland. It is located in the Lublin castle and contains some castle's interiors, like the Holy Trinity Chapel with its frescoes in the Byzantine style. The museum permanent collection include also many Polish and foreign painting from the 17th to 20th century, as well as the gallery of paintings by Tamara de Lempicka.\nOther museums include also the Museum of the History of the City of Lublin, the Museum of the Eastern Territories of the Old Polish Republic, the J\u00f3zef Czechowicz Museum, the Under the clock Martyrdom Museum and the Museum of Housing Estates on the S\u0142owacki Housing Estate.\nImportant museum is also the Majdanek State Museum in the former Majdanek Nazi concentration and extermination camp. In 2011 it was visited by 121,404 visitors.\nCinema.\nLublin is a city with a proactive approach towards filmmaking industry. The city is featured in some notable films, and that include Oscar-winning \"The Reader\" which was partially filmed at the Nazi Majdanek concentration camp.\nIn 2008, Lublin collaborated with Ukrainian Lviv, to film and distribute promotional materials which painted both cities as attractive to the filmmaking industry. Films were handed out between filmmakers present at Cannes Festival. This was sponsored by the European Union. There are numerous movie theatres in Lublin including a few multiplexes, i.e. Cinema City and Multikino chains, also smaller venues like Cinema Bajka, Cinema Chatka \u017baka, Cinema Perla, Cinema Grazyna and Cinema Medyk.\nThe Lublin Film Fund has been active since 2009, actively caring for cultivation of cinematographic talents in Lublin and promoting the city by provision of financial and organizational support. Numerous feature films have been partially financed by the fund, including Kamienie na Szaniec, Panie Dulskie, Volta and award-winning Carte Blanche.\nTheatres.\nThere are many cultural organizations in Lublin, either municipal, governmental and/or non-governmental. Among the popular venues are municipal theatres and playhouses such as:\nFringe theatres:\nGalleries.\nThere are numerous art galleries in Lublin; some are run by private owners, and some are municipal, government, NGO, or associations' venues. The Labyrinth Gallery (formerly \"BWA\") is the Artistic Exhibitions Office \u2013 \"Biuro Wystaw\"\nFood and music.\nIn the Old Town and the immediate surrounding, over 100 unique restaurants, fine-dining venues, cafes, pubs, clubs and other catering outlets are located. In the latter half of the 2010s, the robust international community gathered around Lublin's Medical University has impacted the growth of restaurants offering various world cuisines.\nCatering to students, who account for 35% of the population, the city offers a vibrant music and nightclub scene Lublin has many theatres and museums and a professional orchestra, the Lublin Philharmonic.\nCity of festivals.\nLublin aims to be known as the Polish Capital of Festivals. Most years, Lublin increases the number of festivals held in the city. The most significant of them include:\nEuropean Capital of Culture.\nIn 2007, Lublin joined the group of Polish cities as candidates for the title of European Capital of Culture. Lublin was shortlisted, but ultimately Wroc\u0142aw was chosen. Lublin is a pilot city of the Council of Europe and the European Commission Intercultural cities programme.\nSports.\nOther notable clubs:\nEducation.\nThere are five public schools of higher education:\nLublin is home to private higher education establishments.\nIt is home to one of the oldest still-functioning schools in Poland, , which was established in 1586. The school has many notable alumni, such as Boles\u0142aw Prus, one of the most influential Polish writers and novelists, and , the co-founder of the Warsaw Stock Exchange.\nPolitics and local government.\nLublin is the capital of the province called Lublin Voivodeship, a province (voivodeship) created in 1999. The city is a separate urban gmina and city county (powiat).\nMunicipal government.\nLublin is governed by the municipal legislature known as the city council (Rada Miasta) and the city's mayor (Prezydent Miasta). The city council is made up of 31 councillors directly elected by the city's inhabitants. The remit of the council and president extends to all areas of municipal policy and development planning, up to and including the development of local infrastructure, transport, and planning permission. The city's current mayor is Krzysztof \u017buk, who has served in this position since 2010.\nSymbols.\nLublin has an official flag, a 5:8 rectangle divided into three horizontal stripes: white (top), green (narrow, middle), and red (bottom). In the central part, there is the coat of arms of Lublin. It is also allowed to hang the flag in the form of a vertical ribbon: then white should be on the left side or near the spar.\nDistricts.\nLublin is divided into 27 administrative divisions (dzielnica): Abramowice, Bronowice, Czech\u00f3w Po\u0142udniowy, Czech\u00f3w P\u00f3\u0142nocny, Czuby Po\u0142udniowe, Czuby P\u00f3\u0142nocne, Dziesi\u0105ta, Felin, G\u0142usk, Hajd\u00f3w-Zad\u0119bie, Kalinowszczyzna, Konstantyn\u00f3w, Ko\u015bminek, Ponikwoda, Rury, S\u0142awin, S\u0142awinek, Stare Miasto, Szerokie, \u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie, Tatary, W\u0119glin Po\u0142udniowy, W\u0119glin P\u00f3\u0142nocny, Wieniawa, Wrotk\u00f3w, Za Cukrowni\u0105, and Zemborzyce.\nInternational relations.\nLublin is a pilot city of the Council of Europe and the EU Intercultural cities programme. In 2017, Lublin was awarded the Europe Prize by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. In 2023, Lublin was selected as the European Youth Capital by international jury of the European Youth Forum. Lublin is a signatory of the European charter for equality of women and men in local life.\nIn 2023, following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the city of Lublin was honoured by President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelensky who granted it the title of \"City-Rescuer\" in recognition of its humanitarian and financial assistance to Ukraine and the country's war refugees.\nIn Lublin, there is a Consulate General of Ukraine, an Honorary Consulate General of Hungary, honorary consulates of Austria, Brazil, Czech Republic, Germany, Moldova, Peru, Slovenia, and an Honorary Vice-Consulate of Italy\nTwo settlements outside of Poland were created that were named Lublin. Lublin, Wisconsin, is a village in Taylor County in the United States, while Lublin, Moldova, was a Jewish agricultural colony founded in what is now the village of Nimereuca in 1842.\nLublin is one of five global locations with a portal, a public art project showing video feed of different places in rotation. The portal locations connected to Lublin are:\nTwin towns \u2014 sister cities.\nLublin is twinned with:\nFormer twin towns:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74595", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74595", "title": "Cz\u0119stochowa", "text": "City in southern Poland\nCz\u0119stochowa ( , ) is a city in southern Poland on the Warta with 214,342 inhabitants, making it the thirteenth-largest city in Poland. It is situated in the Silesian Voivodeship. However, Cz\u0119stochowa is historically part of Lesser Poland, not Silesia, and before the 1795 Partition of Poland, it belonged to the Krak\u00f3w Voivodeship. Cz\u0119stochowa is located in the Krak\u00f3w-Cz\u0119stochowa Upland. It is the largest economic, cultural and administrative hub in the northern part of the Silesian Voivodeship.\nThe city is known for the famous Jasna G\u00f3ra Monastery of the Order of Saint Paul the First Hermit of the Catholic Church, which is the home of the Black Madonna of Cz\u0119stochowa, a shrine to Mary, mother of Jesus. Every year, millions of pilgrims from all over the world come to Cz\u0119stochowa to see it.\nCz\u0119stochowa was also home to Frankism in the late 18th and 19th centuries, an antinomian Sabbatean movement of Rabbinic Judaism that led to a mass conversion to Catholicism.\nThe city excavated an ancient site of the Lusatian culture, with a museum devoted to it. The ruins of a medieval Royal Castle stand in Olsztyn, approximately from the city centre (see also Trail of the Eagles' Nests).\nCity name.\nThe name of Cz\u0119stochowa means 'Cz\u0119stoch's place' and comes from a personal name of Cz\u0119stoch, mentioned in the medieval documents also as \"Cz\u0119stobor\" and \"Cz\u0119stomir\". Variations of the name include \"Czanstochowa\" used in 1220, and Cz\u0119stochow used in 1382 and 1558. A part of today's city called Cz\u0119stoch\u00f3wka was a separate municipality mentioned in the 14th century as the Old Cz\u0119stochowa (\"Antiquo Czanstochowa\", 1382) and \"Cz\u0119stoch\u00f3wka\" in 1470\u201380. The city was also known in German as , in Russian as (), and in Yiddish as ().\nHistory.\nA Lusatian culture cemetery from around 750\u2013550 BC is located in the present-day district of Rak\u00f3w and it is now an Archaeological Reserve, a branch of the Cz\u0119stochowa Museum.\nMiddle Ages.\nAccording to archaeological findings, the first medieval settlement in the location of Cz\u0119stochowa was established in the late 11th century within Piast-ruled Poland. It was first mentioned in historical documents from 1220, when Bishop of Krak\u00f3w Iwo Odrow\u0105\u017c made a list of properties of the Mst\u00f3w monastery. Two villages, Cz\u0119stochowa and Cz\u0119stoch\u00f3wka were mentioned in the document. Both of them belonged to the basic territorial unit of Slavic Polish tribes (\"opole\"), with its capital at Mst\u00f3w. Cz\u0119stoch\u00f3wka was located on a hill, where the Jasna G\u00f3ra Monastery was later built.\nIn the late 13th century Cz\u0119stochowa became the seat of a Roman Catholic parish church, which was under the Lel\u00f3w deanery. The village was located in the northwestern corner of \"Krak\u00f3w Land\", Lesser Poland, near the Royal Castle at Olsztyn. Cz\u0119stochowa developed along a busy merchant road from Lesser Poland to Greater Poland. The village was ruled by a starosta, who stayed at the Olsztyn Castle.\nIt is not known when Cz\u0119stochowa was granted a town charter, as no documents have been preserved. It happened sometime between 1356 and 1377. In 1502, King Alexander Jagiellon granted a new charter, based on Magdeburg rights to Cz\u0119stochowa. In 1382 the Paulist monastery of Jasna G\u00f3ra was founded by Vladislaus II of Opole \u2013 the Polish Piast prince of Upper Silesia. Two years later the monastery received its now-famous Black Madonna icon of the Virgin Mary; in subsequent years became a centre of pilgrimage, contributing to the growth of the adjacent town.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEarly modern period.\nCz\u0119stochowa prospered in the late 15th and early 16th centuries, due to efforts of Sigismund I the Old, the future king of Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. At that time, Sigismund ruled the Duchy of G\u0142og\u00f3w, and frequently visited Cz\u0119stochowa on his way to the Duchies of Silesia (1498, 1502, 1502, 1503, 1505, 1505, 1506). In 1504, Cz\u0119stochowa was granted the right to collect tolls on the Warta river bridge. In 1508, Cz\u0119stochowa was allowed to organise one fair a year; in 1564, the number of fairs was increased to three annually, and in 1639 to six. In the year 1631, Cz\u0119stochowa had 399 houses, but at the same time, several residents died in a plague, after which 78 houses were abandoned.\nIn the first half of the 17th century, kings of the House of Vasa turned the Jasna G\u00f3ra Monastery into a modern Dutch-style fortress. During the Swedish invasion of Poland in 1655, the monastery was one of the pockets of Polish resistance against the Swedish armies (for more information, see Siege of Jasna G\u00f3ra). The town of Cz\u0119stochowa was almost completely destroyed by Swedish soldiers. It has been estimated that the town lost 50% of the population, and 60% of houses. But the town suffered less severe destruction than nearby towns like Przyr\u00f3w, Olsztyn and Mst\u00f3w. It took several years for Cz\u0119stochowa to recover from these extensive losses. As late as in the 1680s there still were ruined houses in the town.\nAt the same time, the Jasna G\u00f3ra Monastery prospered. On 27 February 1670 the wedding of King Micha\u0142 Korybut Wi\u015bniowiecki to Princess Eleonore of Austria took place here. In 1682 the celebration of the 300th anniversary of the Black Madonna of Cz\u0119stochowa brought thousands of pilgrims from both Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth and Silesia. The Jewish community in Cz\u0119stochowa developed by about 1700.\nDuring the Great Northern War, Cz\u0119stochowa was captured by the Swedish army on 11 August 1702. In February 1703 Swedes besieged the monastery, but failed to seize it. In April 1705 the Swedes returned, and appeared at the monastery again in September 1709. Unable to capture the fortified stronghold, they looted villages in the area, set Cz\u0119stochowa on fire, and left towards Wielu\u0144. At that time, a village of Cz\u0119stoch\u00f3wka also existed next to Cz\u0119stochowa. The village belonged to the monastery and quickly developed. In 1717 it was granted town charter, and its name was changed into \"Nowa Cz\u0119stochowa\" (\"New Cz\u0119stochowa\"). The town was completely destroyed during the Bar Confederation. On 8 February 1769 the monastery was seized by rebels of the Bar Confederation, commanded by Kazimierz Pu\u0142aski. Soon the stronghold was besieged by Russians under German-born General Johann von Drewitz. The Russians gave up on 15 January 1771.\nIn 1789, the population of Cz\u0119stochowa (also called \"Stara Cz\u0119stochowa\", \"Old Cz\u0119stochowa\") was app. 1,600, which was less than in the 15th century. After the Great Sejm passed the Constitution of 3 May 1791, local Sejmiks were obliged to legitimize it. On 14\u201315 February 1792, a sejmik of the szlachta of northern part of Krak\u00f3w Voivodeship (counties of Lel\u00f3w and Ksi\u0105\u017c Wielki) took place in Cz\u0119stochowa. Traditionally, local sejmiks were organized in \u017barnowiec; the fact that it was moved to Cz\u0119stochowa confirms the growing importance of the town.\nIn 1760, Jacob Frank, the leader of a Jewish sect mixing Kabbalah, Catholicism and Islam, was imprisoned for heresy in the monastery by the church. His followers settled near him, later establishing a cult of his daughter Eve Frank. In August 1772, Frank was released by the Russian general Aleksandr Bibikov, who had occupied the city. Frank had promised the Russians that he would convince Jews to convert to Orthodox Christianity.\nPartitions of Poland.\nDuring the Second Partition of Poland, Cz\u0119stochowa was seized by the Kingdom of Prussia in 1793, and incorporated into the newly formed province of South Prussia, Department of Kalisz. The Old Cz\u0119stochowa became the seat of a county (see Districts of Prussia). During the Napoleonic Wars, in 1807 Cz\u0119stochowa became part of the Duchy of Warsaw. In 1815 it came under Russian-controlled Congress Poland, in which it remained until World War I. Old Cz\u0119stochowa remained the seat of a county in 1807\u20131830. In 1809, the monastery was unsuccessfully besieged by Austrians (see Polish\u2013Austrian War). On 2 April 1813 Jasna G\u00f3ra was seized by the Russians (see War of the Sixth Coalition), after a two-week siege, and the fortifications were razed that year.\nIn 1821, the government of Congress Poland carried out a census, according to which the population of New Cz\u0119stochowa was 1,036, while the population of Old Cz\u0119stochowa was 2,758. Furthermore, almost four hundred people lived in several settlements in the area (Zawodzie, Stradom, Kucelin). The idea of a merger of both towns was first brought up in 1815. In 1819, military architect Jan Bernhard planned and started the construction of \"Aleja Naj\u015bwi\u0119tszej Panny Marii\"\u2014the \"Holy Virgin Mary Avenue\", which is the main arterial road of the modern city. It connected Old Cz\u0119stochowa with New Cz\u0119stochowa.\nFinally, the two towns were officially merged on 19 August 1826. The new city quickly emerged as the fourth-largest urban centre of Congress Poland; surpassed only by the cities of Warsaw, Lublin, and Kalisz. On 8 September 1862 a patriotic rally took place in the city, in front of St. Sigismund church. As a reprisal, Russian military authorities destroyed app. 65% of Cz\u0119stochowa's Old Town, and introduced martial law . During the January Uprising, several skirmishes took place in the area of Cz\u0119stochowa, with the last one taking place on 4 July 1864 near Chorzenice.\nIn 1846 the Warsaw-Vienna Railway line was opened, linking the city with the rest of Europe. After 1870 iron ore started to be developed in the area, which gave a boost to the local industry. Among the most notable investments of the epoch was the Huta Cz\u0119stochowa steel mill built by Bernard Hantke, as well as several textile mills and paper factories.\nIn 1900, the traveling cinema of brothers W\u0142adys\u0142aw and Antoni Krzemi\u0144ski came to the city for the first time, after it was founded in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a in 1899 as the oldest Polish cinema. In 1909, they settled in Cz\u0119stochowa and founded Kino Odeon, the first permanent cinema in the city.\nUp to the Second World War, like many other cities in Europe, Cz\u0119stochowa had a significant Jewish population: according to Russian census of 1897, out of the total population of 45,130, Jews constituted 12,000 (so around 26% percent).\nAn anti-Semitic pogrom occurred in 1902. A mob attacked the Jewish shops, killing fourteen Jews and one gendarme.\nCz\u0119stochowa entered the 20th century as one of the leading industrial centres of Russian Poland (together with Warsaw, \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, and Zag\u0142\u0119bie D\u0105browskie). The city was conveniently located on the Warta and other smaller rivers (\"Kucelinka, Stradomka, Konopka\"). Real estate and land prices were low, compared to \u0141\u00f3d\u017a. The monastery attracted numerous pilgrims, who also were customers of local businesses. In 1904, Cz\u0119stochowa had 678 smaller workshops, which employed 2,000 workers. In 1902, rail connection to the Prussian border crossing at Herby Stare was opened, and in 1911, the line to Kielce was completed. The Revolution in the Kingdom of Poland (1905\u20131907) began in Cz\u0119stochowa as early as May 1904, when first patriotic rallies took place. On 25 December 1904 a man named Wincenty Makowski tried to blow up a monument of Tsar Alexander II, which stood in front of the monastery. In February 1905, a general strike action was declared in the city, with workers demanding pay rises. In June 1905 street clashes took place in Cz\u0119stochowa, in which 20 people were killed by Russian forces. Further protests took place in 1909 and 1912.\nWorld War I.\nIn early August 1914, Cz\u0119stochowa was abandoned by the Imperial Russian Army, and the first units of the German Army entered the city on August 3. Four days later drunken German soldiers shot at each other; an unknown number died. Residents of the city were accused of killing Germans, and as a punishment, a number of civilians were executed. During the German occupation (1914\u20131918), Cz\u0119stochowa was cut off from its prior Russian markets, which resulted in widespread poverty and unemployment. Furthermore, German authorities closed down several factories, urging unemployed workers to migrate to Upper Silesia, where they replaced men drafted into the army. Altogether, some 20,000 left for Upper Silesia and other provinces of the German Empire. On 2 February 1915 Cz\u0119stochowa was visited by Charles I of Austria. Four days later Emperor Wilhelm II came to the city, and on 17 May 1915 Cz\u0119stochowa hosted King of Saxony Frederick Augustus III.\nUnlike the city of Cz\u0119stochowa, since 26 April 1915 the Jasna G\u00f3ra Monastery had been under the control and protection of Austria-Hungary, after the personal intervention of Emperor Franz Joseph I, who was a pious Roman Catholic. The monastery was manned by soldiers under Austrian Army Captain Josef Klettinger and remained under Austrian control until 4 November 1918. In October 1917 the City Council of Cz\u0119stochowa demanded permission to destroy the monument to Tsar Alexander II, to which General Governor of Warsaw Hans Hartwig von Beseler agreed. Polish authorities established control over the entire city on 11 November 1918, the day of the re-establishment of Poland's independence.\nSecond Polish Republic.\nOn 12 November 1918, three companies of the freshly created Polish Army marched along the Holy Virgin Mary Avenue. In 1919\u20131921, Cz\u0119stochowa was one of the centres of support of Silesian Poles fighting in the Silesian Uprisings. On 4 December 1920 Symon Petliura arrived, together with app. 2,000 Ukrainian soldiers. Their arrival spurred widespread protests, as the city already had a desperate food situation and was obliged to house and feed the Ukrainians.\nIn the Second Polish Republic, Cz\u0119stochowa belonged to Kielce Voivodeship (Kieleckie), where from 1928 it constituted the \"City County of Cz\u0119stochowa\". In the 1920s, local industry still suffered from World War I losses, and having been cut off from Russian markets. Unemployment remained high, and thousands of workers left for France in search of work. The Great Depression was particularly difficult, resulting in strikes and workers' street clashes with the police.\nIn 1925, the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cz\u0119stochowa was created. The city grew in size, when between 1928 and 1934, several local settlements and villages were incorporated into city limits. In 1939, the population of Cz\u0119stochowa was 138,000, which made it the eighth-largest city of Poland. In 1938, the Polish government announced plans to liquidate Kielce Voivodeship, and create Sandomierz Voivodeship, based on Central Industrial Area. According to these plans, Cz\u0119stochowa was to be transferred either to \u0141\u00f3d\u017a Voivodeship, or Silesian Voivodeship, together with Zag\u0142\u0119bie D\u0105browskie.\nWorld War II.\nIn the Polish Defensive War of 1939, Cz\u0119stochowa was defended by the 7th Infantry Division, part of northern wing of Krak\u00f3w Army. After the Battle of Mokra and other battles, Polish forces withdrew, and the Wehrmacht entered the city on Sunday 3 September 1939. Cz\u0119stochowa was renamed by the Germans as \"Tschenstochau\", and incorporated into the General Government. Monday 4 September 1939 became known as \"Bloody Monday\" or also \"Cz\u0119stochowa massacre\". The Germans killed 227 people (205 ethnic Poles and 22 Jews) in various places in the city, including the town hall courtyard, town squares and at a local factory (some estimates of victims put the number at more than 1,000; 990 ethnic Poles and 110 Jews).\nFrom the beginning of the occupation, the Germans initiated a plan of cultural and physical extermination of the Polish nation (see \"Nazi crimes against the Polish nation\"). By a decision of 5 September 1939, one of the first three German special courts in occupied Poland was established in the city. On 6 September 1939 the \"Einsatzgruppe II\" entered the city to commit atrocities against the population. On 14\u201315 September 1939 the Germans arrested around 200 inhabitants of the district of Stradom. In order to terrorize the Polish population, on 9\u201311 November 1939 the Germans carried out mass arrests of dozens of Poles, including the mayor, vice-mayor, teachers, students, activists and local officials, but they were soon released. During the \"AB-Aktion\", the Germans carried out mass arrests of Poles in March, June and August 1940, and also imprisoned 60 Poles from Radomsko and the Radomsko County in the local prison in March 1940. Arrested Poles were then either deported to the Sachsenhausen, Buchenwald and Ravensbr\u00fcck concentration camps or massacred in the nearby forests of Olsztyn and Apolonka. Among the victims of the massacres committed in Olsztyn were school principals, teachers, lawyers, policemen, merchants, craftsmen, pharmacists, engineers, students and local officials, and among the victims of the Apolonka massacres were 20 girl scouts. Further executions of local Poles were carried out by the Germans throughout the war.\nUnder German occupation Cz\u0119stochowa administratively was a city-county (\"Stadkreis Tschenstochau\"), part of the Radom District of the General Government. The Polish resistance movement was active in the city, and units of the Home Army and National Armed Forces (\"NSZ\") operated in its area. A branch of the secret Polish University of the Western Lands was located in the city, and it secretly continued Polish education. The secret Polish Council to Aid Jews \"\u017begota\", established by the Polish resistance movement operated in the city. On 20 April 1943 a \"NZS\" unit attacked the local office of the Bank Emisyjny w Polsce. After the collapse of the Warsaw Uprising, Cz\u0119stochowa was briefly the capital of the Polish Underground State.\nOn 9 April 1941 the Nazis created a ghetto for Jews in the city. Approximately 45,000 of Cz\u0119stochowa's Jews, almost the entire community, were killed by the Germans. Life in German-occupied Cz\u0119stochowa is depicted in the Pulitzer Prize-winning graphic novel \"Maus\", by Art Spiegelman, the son of a Jewish Cz\u0119stochowa resident. Before the Holocaust, Cz\u0119stochowa was considered a great Jewish centre in Poland. By the end of World War II, nearly all Jews had been killed or deported to extermination camps to be killed, making Cz\u0119stochowa what Nazi Germany called \"judenfrei\". There are known cases of local Polish men and women, who were captured and persecuted by the Germans for rescuing and aiding Jews. These Poles were sentenced to death, prison or concentration camps, in which some died, some survived, while the fate of many remains unknown. Poles who saved Jews in other places in the region were also either sentenced to death by the local German court or incarcerated in the local prison. The Germans also tried to obscure the Catholic shrine and pilgrim devotion by renaming the road leading to the pilgrimage church after Hitler, though they did allow some pilgrimage activity to continue.\nFrom 1941 to 1944, the German occuying administration operated the Stalag 367 prisoner-of-war camp for Italian and Soviet POWs in the city. During and after the Warsaw Uprising, in August\u2013October 1944, the Germans deported thousands of Varsovians from the Dulag 121 camp in Pruszk\u00f3w, where they were initially imprisoned, to Cz\u0119stochowa. Those Poles were mainly old people, ill people and women with children. In late December 1944, there were 14,671 registered Poles, who were expelled from Warsaw.\nIn the autumn 1944, Germans fortified the city, preparing for a lengthy defence. On January 16, 1945, however, the Wehrmacht retreated after just one day of fighting. The city was restored to Poland, however, with a Soviet-installed communist regime, which remained in power until the Fall of Communism in the 1980s.\nRecent period.\nDue to the communist idea of fast industrialisation, the inefficient steel mill was significantly expanded and named after Boles\u0142aw Bierut. This, combined with the growing tourist movement, led to yet another period of fast city growth, concluded in 1975 with the creation of a separate Cz\u0119stochowa Voivodeship. In the immediate post-war period, Cz\u0119stochowa belonged to Kielce Voivodeship (1945\u20131950), and then the city was transferred to Katowice Voivodeship. In the Polish People's Republic, Cz\u0119stochowa emerged not only as an industrial, but also academic centre of the region. The city expanded, with the first tram lines opened in 1959. On 1 January 1977 several villages and settlements were included within Cz\u0119stochowa city limits. As a result, the area of the city expanded from .\nPope John Paul II, prayed before the Black Madonna during his historic visit to his Polish homeland in 1979, several months after his election to the Chair of Peter. The Pope made another visit to Our Lady of Cz\u0119stochowa in 1983 and again in 1987, 1991, 1997 and 1999. On 15 August 1991 John Paul II was named Honorary Citizen of Cz\u0119stochowa. In 1998, the city was awarded the Europe Prize by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe for having made exceptional efforts to spread the ideal of European unity. On 26 May 2006 the city was visited by Pope Benedict XVI.\nClimate.\nThe climate is humid continental (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfb\"), but still with some oceanic characteristics (\"Cfb\"), especially in recent normals. Cz\u0119stochowa is in one of the hottest summer regions in Poland; although its winters are not the most rigorous, they are colder than the more moderate climates of the west and the Baltic Sea.\nOn average, there are four hours a day with direct solar radiation. In the course of the year, the best insolation is observed in June, due to the greatest length of the day. There are few windless days in Cz\u0119stochowa. Lull periods on an annual scale account for an average of 9.2%. Western winds prevail here \u2013 18% and south-west \u2013 18.2%. At the same time, they achieve the highest speeds from these directions \u2013 2.2\u00a0m/s. The northern winds are least common \u2013 7.7% and north-eastern winds \u2013 7.4%.\nEconomy.\nThere are about 26,000 companies registered in Cz\u0119stochowa. They are represented by the Regional Chamber of Commerce and Industry in Cz\u0119stochowa. The investment areas form part of the Katowice Special Economic Zone. The main initiator of activities pertaining to the economic development and investments is the Agency of Regional Development. In 2007, in areas surrounding the ISD Cz\u0119stochowa Steelworks, the Cz\u0119stochowa Industry Park was established. In 2011, three industry clusters were established \u2013 The Cluster of Polymers Manufacturing \"Plastosfera\", Cz\u0119stochowa Communal Cluster \"Aglomeracja\" and the Regional Cluster of Building Industry and Infrastructure \"Budosfera\".\nIndustry.\nCz\u0119stochowa is the main city in the Cz\u0119stochowa Industrial District, which is the third biggest in the Silesian Voivodship. Since the medieval times, the metal industry has been developing, thanks to the iron ore deposits. The main factories in the city include:\nTourism.\nCurrently, the city is one of the main tourist attractions of the area and is sometimes called the \"little Nuremberg\" because of the number of souvenir shops. It attracts millions (4.5 mln \u2013 2005) of tourists and pilgrims every year. The Black Madonna of Cz\u0119stochowa, housed at the Jasna G\u00f3ra Monastery, is a particularly popular attraction.\nThroughout the centuries, many buildings have been erected, most of them now have the status of tourist attractions and historical monuments since Cz\u0119stochowa was established already in the Middle Ages. Among those attractions are old townhouses and the urban core of the city centre. The most popular with religious tourism as mentioned above is the Jasna G\u00f3ra Monastery.\nArchitectural sites.\nThe main representative artery in the city centre is the Naj\u015bwi\u0119tszej Maryi Panny Avenue (The Holy Virgin Mary Avenue). It was first built in the beginning of the 19th century, as a road linking Cz\u0119stochowa with New Cz\u0119stochowa, cities which were administratively merged in 1826. The most characteristic feature of the avenue is its layout, whereby the lanes are separated by the pedestrianised boulevard. During the pilgrimage period, the Avenues are used by pilgrims heading for Jasna G\u00f3ra Monastery. The avenues are long and 44 m wide; primarily they perform trade, service, financial and cultural functions. The housing consists mostly of classicist, late-classicist houses, rarely eclectic. More modern buildings can also be noticed. The most interesting townhouses include:\nParks.\nJasna G\u00f3ra Parks are two city parks (Stanis\u0142aw Staszic Park and 3 May Park) located in the city centre, on the slope of Jasna G\u00f3ra Hill. The parks were established in 1843. The total area of both parks is 11.8 ha. The parks are a popular leisure place and a spot for those enjoying short walks. In 1909, the Great Exhibition of Agriculture and Industry took place in the park, it was attended by 660 exhibitors and 500,000 visitors. In Staszic Park, one can find an astronomical observatory, which was opened in 1909. The parks also accommodate the Iron Ore Museum.\nThere are also several other parks in various parts of the city, including Park Lisiniec, Las Anio\u0142owski, Park Parkitka.\nTransport.\nMain road connections from Cz\u0119stochowa include a connection with Warsaw (to the north-east) and Katowice (to the south) via the European route E75 (Motorway ). There are also three other national roads: to Wielu\u0144, to Opole and to Piotrk\u00f3w Trybunalski. Furthermore, Cz\u0119stochowa is a major railroad hub, located at the intersection of two important lines\u2014west\u2013east (from Lubliniec to Kielce) and north\u2013south (from Warsaw to Katowice). Also, an additional northbound line stems from Cz\u0119stochowa, which goes to Chorzew Siemkowice, where it joins the Polish Coal Trunk-Line. There are six railway stations in the city, the biggest ones being Cz\u0119stochowa Osobowa and Cz\u0119stochowa Stradom. The city has direct connections to many Polish cities as Warsaw, Krak\u00f3w, Katowice, Wroc\u0142aw and Szczecin, proteza koniecpolska makes some of the connections more comfortable.\nThe public transport is managed by the Cz\u0119stochowa City Council of Roads and Transport. The public transport carriage is contracted to the City Public Transport Corporation (Miejskie Przedsi\u0119biorstwo Komunikacyjne). The public transport in Cz\u0119stochowa comprises 3 tram lines, 28 city bus lines and 4 suburban lines connecting Cz\u0119stochowa with Poczesna, Olsztyn, Zawodzie and Nierada. The bus transport connecting Cz\u0119stochowa with other towns and villages in the Cz\u0119stochowa region is operated by the Cz\u0119stochowa Bus Transport Ltd. (PKS Cz\u0119stochowa) as well as other private operators\nThe closest airport is the Katowice International Airport, which is located from Cz\u0119stochowa, and a small Cz\u0119stochowa - Rudniki airport in Ko\u015bcielec, R\u0119dziny.\nCulture.\nMuseums.\nIn Cz\u0119stochowa on top of the Jasna G\u00f3ra Monastery serving the museum and exhibition functions, other similar institutions include:\nMusic.\nThe Bronis\u0142aw Huberman Philharmonic of Cz\u0119stochowa is located in the city centre on Wilson Street, in the building erected between 1955 and 1965 on foundations of New Synagogue, which had been burnt down on 25 December 1939. The Philharmonic has at its disposal two concert halls and one rehearsal hall. The large concert hall can accommodate 825 people, whilst the small hall has 156 seats.\nThe concert hall of the Philharmonic of Cz\u0119stochowa is a place where concerts of symphonic orchestra take place. The building itself is younger than the history of symphonic concerts in Cz\u0119stochowa, as the first concert took place in March 1945. The mixed choir has been functioning since the Philharmonic was set up. The choir was professionalized in September 2012 and it was named The Cz\u0119stochowa Philharmonic Choir \"Collegium Cantorum\".\nThe Philharmonic is also a co-organiser and a co-performer of operas, operettas and ballets. It is also a place where various exhibitions take place. The Philharmonic annually organises Bronis\u0142aw Huberman International Violin Festival, Reszek Vocal Competition, Festival of Traditional Jazz \"Hot Jazz Spring\". The Philharmonic also engages in organising the \"Night of Culture\", the International Festival of Sacral Music \"Gaude Mater\" and the Bach Family Music Festival.\nMusic education is also an important part of the Philharmonic's activity. Its educational functions are carried out through a series of concerts such as \"Music for children\", \"FEEL harmony - feel the climate!\" and \"Sunday Mornings with Philharmonic\". In 2010, the building of The Philharmonic of C\u017c\u0119stochowa was refurbished through the financial support from the European Fund of Regional Development.\nIn Cz\u0119stochowa, there are many functioning female, male and mixed choirs. The oldest is the Male Choir \"Pochodnia\" (Torch). Others include the Academic Choir of the Cz\u0119stochowa University of Technology, the Jasna G\u00f3ra Vocal Ensemble \"Camerata\" and the Archcathedral Choir of the Holy Family \"Basilica Cantans\".\nTheatre.\nAdam Mickiewicz Theatre is located on Kili\u0144ski Street in the city centre. The building was erected between 1928 and 1931. Between 1979 and 1984 it was refurbished. The theatre has three halls: Big, Small, Histrion and Marek Perepeczko Foyer. The Theatre organises \"Festival of Important Plays - Through Touch\", \"Festival of High School Theatres\" and \"Children's Land of Sensitivity\". It also takes part in annually organised \"Night of Culture\".\nFestivals.\nThe Centre for the Promotion of Culture 'Gaude Mater' is a cultural institution established in 1991. It is the organiser of various cultural events in Cz\u0119stochowa, such as:\nCinemas.\nIn Cz\u0119stochowa, there are three cinemas. Two are part of chain of cinemas Cinema City Poland: Cinema City \"Wolno\u015b\u0107\" (Freedom), which has 1766 seats, and Cinema City Galeria Jurajska, opened in 2009. There is also an independent cinema, O\u015brodek Kultury Filmowej (Centre of Cinematography), established in 1991.\nEducation.\nSome of the tertiary educational institutions in Cz\u0119stochowa include:\nSports.\nThe most popular sports in Cz\u0119stochowa are speedway, volleyball and football. The following teams represent Cz\u0119stochowa on a national level:\nAdministration.\nCz\u0119stochowa is a city with powiat rights. Residents of Cz\u0119stochowa elect 28 city councillors. The executive branch of local government is a city mayor. The city hall is located in \u015al\u0105ska Street 11/13.\nThe city is divided into 20 neighborhoods. The residents of each neighborhood elect Neighborhood Council members.\nThe neighborhoods of Cz\u0119stochowa include: B\u0142eszno, Cz\u0119stoch\u00f3wka-Parkitka, D\u017ab\u00f3w, Gnaszyn-Kawodrza, Grab\u00f3wka, Kiedrzyn, Lisiniec, Mir\u00f3w, Ostatni Grosz, Podjasnog\u00f3rska, P\u00f3\u0142noc, Rak\u00f3w, Stare Miasto, Stradom, \u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie, Trzech Wieszcz\u00f3w, Tysi\u0105clecie, Wrzosowiak, Wyczerpy-Anio\u0142\u00f3w, and Zawodzie-D\u0105bie.\nPolitics.\nLocal government.\nThe current mayor of Cz\u0119stochowa is Krzysztof Matyjaszczyk, a member of Democratic Left Alliance.\nIn the Cz\u0119stochowa 2018 mayoral elections the results were as follows: Krzysztof Matyjaszczyk (Democratic Left Alliance) 59.76%, Artur Warzocha (Law and Justice) 25.54%, Marcin Maranda (Residents of Cz\u0119stochowa) 6.17%, Tomasz Jask\u00f3\u0142a (Kukiz'15) 5.27%, Jacek Krawczyk (Civic Coalition) 2.83%, Martin Saczek (Razem) 0.43%.\nIn the Cz\u0119stochowa City Council Elections 2018 the results were as follows. Seats in the city council: Left Democratic Alliance (32.80%) 12, Law and Justice (26.04%) 10, Civic Coalition (15.98%) 5, Together for Cz\u0119stochowa (Independents) (8.77%) 1. After elections in Cz\u0119stochowa was formed a centre-left coalition between liberal and pro-market Civic Coalition and social democratic Left Democratic Alliance. Conservative Law and Justice remained in opposition.\nMedia.\nThere are also published cultural quarterlies such as: Aleje 3, Bulion; a monthly Puls Regionu and an annual \u2013 Ziemia Cz\u0119stochowska\nReligion and places of worship.\nIn addition to the Roman Catholic Church and Polish Orthodox Church, various denominations are present in Cz\u0119stochowa, including Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession in Poland, Baptist Union of Poland, Jehovah Witnesses, Pentecostal Church, Plymouth Brethren, Seventh-day Adventist Church, and Polish Catholic Church. Cz\u0119stochowa is the Seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cz\u0119stochowa, as well as Holy Family Archdiocese Cathedral in Cz\u0119stochowa, and the Jasna G\u00f3ra Monastery along with 50 Catholic Parish Churches.\nInternational relations.\nConsulates.\nThere is an Honorary Consulate of the Czech Republic in Cz\u0119stochowa.\nTwin towns.\nCz\u0119stochowa is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74596", "revid": "294689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74596", "title": "Sosnowiec", "text": "Sosnowiec is an industrial city county in the D\u0105browa Basin of southern Poland, in the Silesian Voivodeship, which is also part of the Metropolis GZM municipal association. Located in the eastern part of the Upper Silesian Industrial Region, Sosnowiec is one of the cities of the Katowice urban area, which is a conurbation with a total population of 2.7 million people; as well as the greater Katowice-Ostrava metropolitan area populated by about 5.3 million people. The population of the city is 189,178 as of December 2022.\nGeography.\nIt is believed that the name Sosnowiec originates from the Polish word \"sosna\", referring to the pine forests growing in the area prior to 1830. The village was originally known as \"Sosnowice\". Other variations of the name include \"Sosnowietz, Sosnowitz, Sosnovitz\" (Yiddish), \"Sosnovyts, Sosnowyts, Sosnovytz, Sosnowytz,\" and \"Sosnovetz\". There are five other smaller settlements in Poland also called Sosnowiec, located in the Kielce Voivodship, \u0141\u00f3d\u017a Voivodship, and Opole Voivodship.\nSosnowiec serves as one of the administrative centres of the geographical and historical area of southern Poland known as the Zag\u0142\u0119bie D\u0105browskie (the D\u0105browa Basin). It lies within the historic Lesser Poland region near the border with Silesia. It is located about north-east to the centre of Katowice and north-west of Krak\u00f3w, situated in the Silesian Upland on the rivers Brynica and Przemsza, a tributary of the Vistula. The full list of rivers includes Bia\u0142a Przemsza as well as Czarna Przemsza, Brynica, Bobrek, and Potok Zag\u00f3rski creek. The city is part of the Silesian Voivodeship since its formation in 1999. Previously (since 1945), it was part of Katowice Voivodeship, and before World War II, Sosnowiec belonged to Kielce Voivodeship.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe history of the city begins in 1902 when it was granted city rights after the merger a number of older settlements. However, the history of the village of Sosnowiec dates back to the year 1227, when it was mentioned for the first time. It was a small settlement in the Polish Duchy of Krak\u00f3w, located in close vicinity of much larger and better-developed villages of Sielce and Zag\u00f3rze (both are now districts of the city). Other districts are even older. Milowice was first mentioned in 1123 as \"Miley\". Documents from 1228 already mention Milowice, Klimont\u00f3w, and Zag\u00f3rze. Furthermore, Milowice was placed on a 1561 map.\nAs part of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, Sosnowiec belonged to Krak\u00f3w Voivodeship in the larger Lesser Poland Province. It became a border town after the neighbouring Duchies of Silesia passed to the Bohemian Crown in 1335. In the result of the third partition of Poland in 1795, however, it was seized by the Kingdom of Prussia and was included into the newly established province of New Silesia. During the Napoleonic Wars, it became part of the Duchy of Warsaw in 1807 and later, of Congress Poland ruled by the namiestniks of the Russian Empire. Located at the borders with the German Empire and Austria-Hungary, Sosnowiec became famous for the Three Emperors' Corner tripoint, which was located within current limits of the city. During the January Uprising, in February 1863, the Battle of Sosnowiec was fought, in which Polish insurgents led by Apolinary Kurowski defeated the Russians. The victory allowed the Poles to take control of the surrounding towns as well.\nCity rights.\nWith effect from 10 June 1902, by the order of Emperor Nicholas II of Russia, Sosnowiec was legally named a city with the area of and with 60,000 inhabitants. Obtaining the city rights helped the economic and cultural development of the town. Apart from steelworks and coal-mines and many enterprises of heavy and light industry, new cultural and social establishments were opened as well. The newly established town consisted of the districts of Sosnowiec, Pogo\u0144, Ostra G\u00f3rka, Sielec, Ku\u017anica and Radocha, all of which had been separate villages before. The very fact that Russian authorities waited for so long to grant Sosnowiec town rights is seen as a punishment for local support for the Polish January Uprising 1863/64, after which numerous towns had seen their status, and were reduced to a village status. Sosnowiec was the first post-1860s location in Congress Poland to have received town charter, the second being Pu\u0142awy in 1906.\nNatural resources and a good geographical location had an important influence on the development of Sosnowiec. The opening of a branch line of the Warsaw-Vienna Railway in 1859 was vitally important for the growth of the town. Development of industry with the new factory of rope and wire, rolling mill, steelworks, iron foundry, steam boilers factory, and later spinning mill, dye-house and paper mill sealed the new image of the town as entirely urban. The \"Summer Theatre\" and, in 1887, the \"Winter Theatre \"were founded, the second of which was called City Theatre from 1924 in independent Poland, and later the \"Theatre of Zag\u0142\u0119bie\". In 1915, the village of \u015arodula was incorporated into Sosnowiec.\nPoland finally regained independence in 1918, after World War I. In the Second Polish Republic, Sosnowiec became part of the Kielce Voivodeship, and in 1934 the \"City County of Sosnowiec\" was established. Sosnowiec suffered war damages during both major military conflicts in the 20th century: World War I, which caused mainly destruction to industry, and World War II, which brought about the terror of executions.\nWorld War II.\nAfter the 1939 Invasion of Poland, which started World War II, the city was occupied by Nazi Germany and renamed \"Sosnowitz\". On September 4, 1939, German troops murdered 10 Poles, including 15-year-old boy Henryk S\u0142omka, in Sosnowiec in revenge for Polish defense. Around the same time, the Germans murdered nine Poles in nearby Klimont\u00f3w (present-day district of Sosnowiec). The \"Einsatzgruppe zbV\" entered the city on September 12, 1939. The German police carried out mass searches of Polish houses. Initially under military administration set up as part of the General Government, Sosnowiec was annexed by Germany and incorporated into the Province of Silesia on 20 November 1939. In March 1940, the Germans established a transit camp (\"Gefangenensammellager\") for arrested Poles in Sosnowiec. Inhabitants of Sosnowiec were also among Poles murdered in Celiny in June 1940. The German occupying administration operated three labour subcamps of the Stalag VIII-B/344 prisoner-of-war camp in the city, and two more in the present-day district of Klimont\u00f3w. The Polish underground resistance movement was active in the city.\nIn June 1943 thousands of Jews were deported from Sosnowiec Ghetto to the Auschwitz concentration camp. The ghetto was liquidated two months later and almost all remaining Jews (around 15,000) were also deported to Auschwitz. Previously there had been considerable underground activity among them. The Germans established and operated two subcamps of the Auschwitz concentration camp in the city. In the first subcamp they held about 100 Polish forced labourers, and in the second, larger, they held hundreds of forced labourers, initially mostly Jews. In 1944, the Germans sent kidnapped Polish children from Sosnowiec to the Potulice concentration camp.\nThe Vistula\u2013Oder Offensive of the Red Army in January 1945 brought about the liberation of the city.\nPost-war.\nAfter World War II, Sosnowiec further developed. On June 1, 1975, the metropolitan area was expanded when the neighbouring locations of Zag\u00f3rze, Kazimierz G\u00f3rniczy, Por\u0105bka, Klimont\u00f3w, and Maczki, became its districts. By 1977 the population of the city reached 200,000. Further growth was accelerated by the construction of Katowice Steelworks, and in 1981, the population of Sosnowiec was 250,000, reaching its peak in 1987, when it was 259,000. Since then, the population has been declining. In 1992, the city became the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Sosnowiec.\nEconomy.\nSosnowiec is characterised by its urban dynamics, economic activity, cultural heritage, and natural environment. In recent years, Sosnowiec was further developed from an industrial centre (with mainly mining and heavy industries) into a hub of trade and services. Nevertheless, it still operates several important coal mines, steel factories and other industrial plants. Its Special Economic Zone, established in Sosnowiec thanks to the efforts of local authorities, plays a major role in attracting new businesses into the area. As a result, several companies with Polish and foreign capital opened their businesses in the city. Sosnowiec City Office was awarded the ISO 9001 2001 quality certificate for its management system for providing services for the local community.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDistricts.\nFor Sosnowiec's 100th birthday, the downtown area was thoroughly rebuilt, to harmonise its architectural layout and give the city a more modern image. In 2004 Sosnowiec authorities and designers were awarded the Grand Prix for the rebuilding of the downtown area in a competition for the best public space in the \"\u015al\u0105skie\" Provinces. This investment had been accompanied by a program designed to improve the esthetic qualities of the city, under which a comprehensive program for unifying the colors of the elevations, and advertisements entitled \u201crainbow city\u201d were introduced. Among the city districts there are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPoints of interest.\nThere are many relics of the industrial era, especially residences of industrialists. Most of them are located outside the strict city center, on the Czarna Przemsza river bank. One of the oldest is a 17th-century castle known as the Sielecki Castle. Other main tourist attractions include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nParks and gardens.\nSosnowiec has more than 2,250 ha of green areas occurring as parks, squares, protection zones, lot gardens and forests. In the area of the city preserved many parks established at the residence of industrialists, and also created a lot of new. Many of them present historical and natural value. Main parks and green areas include the Sielec Park, which is a historical park at the castle with many natural monuments; the historical Dietel Park; the Park-Palace Complex of Sch\u00f6en with two palaces; the Millennium Park, the \u015arodula Park with a sports complex; the nature park \"Szopienice-Borki\"; as well as the peat bog \"Bory\" protected area, part of Natura 2000.\nEducation and science.\nInstitutions of higher learning in Sosnowiec include:\nAmong general secondary level schools in Sosnowiec there are high-schools such as the II Liceum Og\u00f3lnokszta\u0142c\u0105ce im. Emilii Plater, III Liceum Og\u00f3lnokszta\u0142c\u0105ce im. Boles\u0142awa Prusa, and IV Liceum Og\u00f3lnokszta\u0142c\u0105ce im. Stanis\u0142awa Staszica.\nInternational relations.\nConsulates.\nThere is an Honorary Consulate of Bangladesh in Sosnowiec.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nSosnowiec is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74597", "revid": "40263939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74597", "title": "Radom", "text": "City in Masovian Voivodeship, Poland\nRadom is a city in east-central Poland, located approximately south of the capital, Warsaw. It is situated on the Mleczna River in the Masovian Voivodeship. Radom is the fifteenth-largest city in Poland and the second-largest in its province with a population of 196,918 (30.06.2023)\nRadom was a significant center of administration, having served as seat of the Polish Crown Council which ratified the Pact of Vilnius and Radom between Lithuania and Poland in 1401. The Nihil novi and \u0141aski's Statute were adopted by the Sejm at Radom's Royal Castle in 1505. In 1976, it was a center of the June 1976 protests. Despite being part of the Masovian Voivodeship, the city historically belongs to Lesser Poland.\nThe city is home to the biennial Radom Air Show, the largest air show in the country, held during the last weekend of August. \"Radom\" is also the popular unofficial name for a semiautomatic FB Vis pistol, which was produced from 1935 to 1944 by Radom's \u0141ucznik Arms Factory. The city continues to produce military firearms for the Polish Armed Forces.\nThe international Radom Jazz Festival and the International Gombrowicz Theater Festival are held in the city.\nHistory.\nRadom's original settlement dates back to the 8th\u20139th century. It was an early medieval town in the valley of the Mleczna River (on the approximate site of present-day \"Old Town\"). In the second half of the 10th century, it became a gord, called \"Piotr\u00f3wka\", which was protected by a rampart and a moat. Due to convenient location on the edge of a large wilderness, and its proximity to the border of Lesser Poland and Mazovia, Radom quickly emerged as an important administrative center of the early Kingdom of Poland. \"Piotr\u00f3wka\" was probably named after St. Peter church, which in 1222 was placed under the authority of a Benedictine Abbey in nearby Sieciech\u00f3w. The church no longer exists; the oldest still-extant church in Radom is St. Wac\u0142aw, founded in the 13th century by Prince of Sandomierz Leszek I the White. The first documented mention of Radom comes from the year 1155, in a bull of Pope Adrian IV (\"villam iuxta Rado, que vocatur Zlauno\", or \"a village near Radom, called S\u0142awno\"). By 1233, Radom was the seat of a castellan. The name of the city comes from the ancient Slavic given name \"Radomir\", and Radom means a \"gord, which belongs to Radomir\".\nIn the second half of the 13th century, Radom was granted a \u015aroda \u015al\u0105ska town charter by Prince Boles\u0142aw V the Chaste, although no documents exist to confirm the exact date of this event. The town prospered in the 14th century, when in 1350 King Casimir III the Great established the so-called \"New Town\", with a royal castle, a defensive wall, and a town hall. There was also a market square and a grid plan of the streets, patterned after Gothic German towns. The area of \"New Town\" was 9 hectares, and the length of the defensive wall was 1,100 meters. Radom had three gates, named after main merchant roads: \"I\u0142\u017ca Gate\", \"Piotrk\u00f3w Trybunalski Gate\", and \"Lublin Gate\". The defensive wall was further protected by 25 fortified towers. \"New Town\" had the Church of John the Baptist, and the Royal Castle was built between the church and the moat.\nIn 1364, Radom's obsolete \u015aroda \u015al\u0105ska rights were replaced with more modern Magdeburg rights, and residents gained several privileges as a result. At that time, Radom was located along the so-called \"Oxen Trail\", from Ruthenian lands to Silesia. In 1376, the city became the seat of a starosta, and entered the period of its greatest prosperity.\nPoland's Golden Age.\nKing W\u0142adys\u0142aw Jagie\u0142\u0142o granted several privileges to the city. Jagie\u0142\u0142o himself frequently travelled from Krak\u00f3w to Vilnius, and liked to stay at Radom Castle en route. On March 18, 1401, the Pact of Vilnius and Radom was signed, which strengthened the Polish\u2013Lithuanian union. Immediately after the Pact, preparations for the Polish\u2013Lithuanian\u2013Teutonic War began. King Casimir IV Jagiellon frequently visited Radom, along with his wife, Elizabeth of Austria. Here, the King would host foreign envoys, from such countries as the Crimean Khanate, the Kingdom of Bohemia, and the Duchy of Bavaria. On November 18, 1489, Johann von Tiefen, the Grand Master of the Teutonic Knights, paid homage to King Jagiellon at Radom Castle. Miko\u0142aj Radomski, one of the earliest Polish composers, comes from Radom. In 1468, the complex of a Bernardine church and monastery was founded here by King Jagiellon, with support of the local starosta, Dominik z Kazanowa. The complex was originally made of wood (until 1507).\nIn 1481, Radom became the residence of Prince Casimir Jagiellon, the son of King Casimir IV Jagiellon. The young prince died of tuberculosis, and later became patron saint of both the city of Radom (since 1983), and the Roman Catholic Diocese of Radom (since 1992). During the reign of Alexander Jagiellon, the Nihil novi act was adopted by the Polish Sejm in a meeting at Radom Castle. Furthermore, at the same meeting, the first codification of law published in the Kingdom of Poland was accepted. Radom was a royal city, county seat and castellany, administratively located in the Sandomierz Voivodeship in the Lesser Poland Province. It remained one of the most important urban centers of the Sandomierz Voivodeship, and was also the seat of the Treasure Tribunal in 1613\u20131764, which controlled taxation. Several kings visited the city, including Stephen Bathory and his wife Anna Jagiellon, Sigismund III Vasa, and Augustus III of Poland. In 1623 many residents died in an epidemic, and in 1628, half of Radom burned in a fire.\nThe period of prosperity ended during the Swedish invasion of Poland. The Swedish army captured the city without a fight in November 1655. At first the invaders behaved correctly, as King Charles X Gustav still sought alliances within the Polish-Lithuanian nobility; the situation changed, however, in early 1656, when anti-Swedish uprisings broke out in southern Lesser Poland and quickly spread across the country. Radom was looted and almost completely destroyed in August 1656. Its population shrank from some 2,000 before the war, to 395 in 1660, with only 37 houses still standing. Swedish soldiers burned the royal castle and the monastery. With the Polish population in decline, the number of Jewish settlers grew by the early 18th century. In 1682 the first Piarists arrived, and in 1737\u20131756, opened a college. The 3rd Infantry Regiment of the Polish Crown Army was stationed in Radom at various times.\nLate modern era.\nAfter the Third Partition of Poland (1795), Radom was part of the Austrian province of West Galicia. After the Polish victory in the Austro-Polish War of 1809, it was part of the Polish Duchy of Warsaw, which named it capital of the Radom Department. From 1815 the city belonged to Russian-controlled Congress Poland, remaining a regional administrative center. In 1816\u20131837 it was the capital of the Sandomierz Voivodeship, whose capital, despite the name, was at Radom. In 1837\u20131844 it was the capital of the Sandomierz Governorate, and from 1844 until the outbreak of World War I, the capital of the Radom Governorate. The Polish 5th Line Infantry Regiment, which later fought against Russia in the November Uprising, was stationed in Radom. The city was an important center of the November Uprising. Its obsolete and ruined fortifications were destroyed upon order of Mayor J\u00f3zef Kr\u00f3likowski. In the early days of the January Uprising, Marian Langiewicz visited Radom, preparing the rebellion. In the 19th century, Radom was one of the leading centers of the new art of photography in partitioned Poland, alongside major cities of Warsaw, Gda\u0144sk, Krak\u00f3w and Wilno. In 1867 a sewage system was built. Russians closed down the Benedictine monastery and established a Tsarist prison in its place. Streets were gradually paved, and in 1885, a rail line from D\u0105browa G\u00f3rnicza to D\u0119blin was completed, via Radom. In the early 20th century a power plant was built. In 1906, notable Polish independence fighter Kazimierz Sosnkowski, future politician and general, escaped from Warsaw to Radom, pursued by the Russian Okhrana. In Radom, he continued his secret activities, and became the commander of the local Combat Organization, before he eventually had to escape again, this time to the D\u0105browa Basin.\nDuring World War I, the city was captured by the Austro-Hungarian Army in July 1915. An Austrian garrison remained until November 1918.\nIn the Second Polish Republic Radom became part of Kielce Voivodeship. In 1932 the City County of Radom was created, and the following year, its rail connection with Warsaw was completed. In the late 1930s, due to the government project known as the Central Industrial Area, several new factories were built; by 1938, the population had grown to 80,000. The city was also a military garrison, serving as headquarters of the 72nd Infantry Regiment.\nWorld War II.\nOn September 1, 1939, the first day of the German invasion of Poland and World War II, the Germans air raided the city. On September 8, 1939, Radom was captured by the Wehrmacht, and was afterwards occupied by Germany. On September 21, 1939, the German \"Einsatzgruppe II\" entered the city to commit various crimes against the population, and afterwards its members co-formed the local German police and security forces. The Germans immediately confiscated the food stored in warehouses in Radom and nearby settlements, and carried out requisitions in the city council. The occupiers established a special court in Radom, and two temporary prisoner-of-war camps for captured Polish soldiers, one in the pre-war military barracks and one in the Tadeusz Ko\u015bciuszko Park. There were poor conditions in the camp in the barracks, and hunger and diseases were common. The local civilian population helped many POWs escape from the camp.\nFrom 1939 to 1945, Radom was the seat of the Radom District in the General Government.\nFrom October 1939 to January 1940, the Germans carried out several public executions of Polish civilians in various locations in Radom, killing 111 people. The Germans also operated a heavy prison in the city, and carried mass arrests of hundreds of Poles, who were then held in the prison. Many Poles expelled from Gdynia in 1939 were placed in a temporary transit camp in a local church, before they were sent to nearby settlements.\nThe occupiers liquidated local cultural and social life. All sports clubs and high schools were closed, and teaching of literature, geography and history in the remaining schools was prohibited.\nIn March and May 1940, the Germans carried out massacres of 210 Poles, including teenagers, from Radom and nearby settlements in the city's Firlej district. Around 100 Poles from Radom were murdered by the Russians in the large Katyn massacre in April\u2013May 1940. In July, August and November 1940, the Germans carried out deportations of Poles from the local prison to the Auschwitz concentration camp. Deportations to concentration camps continued throughout the war, and 18,000 people passed through the local prison, mostly Polish political activists, resistance members and innocent people, plus ordinary criminals. At the large massacre sites in the present-day districts of Firlej and Kos\u00f3w, the Germans murdered around 15,000 and 1,500 people, respectively.\nIn October 1940, the German occupiers established a forced labour camp for Jews, and in 1941, they formed the Radom Ghetto, with a population of 34,000 Jews, most of whom perished at the Treblinka extermination camp. According to German regulations, sheltering Jews outside the ghetto was punishable by death. The secret Polish Council to Aid Jews \"\u017begota\", established by the Polish resistance movement operated in the city.\nRadom was a center of Polish resistance, with various organizations, such as Service for Poland's Victory, Independent Poland, Union of Armed Struggle, Bataliony Ch\u0142opskie, Grey Ranks and numerous Home Army units operating in the area. The resistance carried out various actions, which included sabotage, stealing weapons, secret education, etc. Poles were even able to produce weapons for Polish partisans in the local arms factory, even though it was seized by the Germans. In 1942, the Germans discovered the activity, and then publicly hanged 50 Poles, including 26 employees of the arms factory, and a pregnant woman. Scouts from the Gray Ranks who worked at the local post office stole and destroyed anonymous letters to the Gestapo, thus possibly saving many lives. Two German doctors from a local hospital helped the Polish resistance, for which one was even arrested and sent to a concentration camp. In April 1943, the resistance successfully assassinated the chief of the local German police.\nIn 1944, following the Polish Warsaw Uprising, the Germans deported thousands of Varsovians from the Dulag 121 camp in Pruszk\u00f3w, where they were initially imprisoned, to Radom. Those Poles were mainly old people, ill people and women with children. 3,500 Poles expelled from Warsaw stayed in the city, as of November 1, 1944.\nIn January 1945, the occupiers sent the last transport of prisoners from Radom to Auschwitz, but it only reached Cz\u0119stochowa, while the remaining prisoners were massacred in Firlej.\nOn January 16, 1945, the city was captured by the Red Army, and then restored to Poland, although with a Soviet-installed communist regime, which then stayed in power until the Fall of Communism in the 1980s. Fallen Red Army soldiers rest at the local cemetery at Warszawska Street. The communists held Polish resistance members in the former German prison. In September 1945, the resistance movement attacked the communist prison and liberated nearly 500 prisoners.\nUp to the Second World War, like many other cities in interwar Poland, Radom had a large Jewish population. According to the Imperial 1897 census, out of the total population of 28,700, Jews constituted 11,200 (~39%).\nCurrent events.\nFrom 1975 to 1998, it was the seat of the Radom Voivodeship. In 1954 and 1984, city limits were greatly expanded by including several settlements as new districts, including D\u0142ugoj\u00f3w G\u00f3rny, Huta J\u00f3zefowska, Janiszpol, J\u00f3zef\u00f3w, Kierzk\u00f3w, Ko\u0144czyce, Krychnowice, Krzewie\u0144, Malczew, Mleczna, Nowa Wola Go\u0142\u0119biowska, Nowiny Malczewskie, Stara Wola Go\u0142\u0119biowska, Wincent\u00f3w, W\u00f3lka Klwatecka.\nIn 2007, two pilots died in an accident at the air show, resulting in the cancellation of the rest of the event. On 30 August 2009, also during the air show, another two pilots who represented Belarus were killed when their plane crashed.\nRadom was one of the main centres of the strike action taken by Polish health care workers in 2007.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nRadom has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfb\").\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransport.\nRadom is an important railroad junction, where two lines meet: east\u2013west connection from Lublin to \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, and north\u2013south from Warsaw to Kielce, and Krak\u00f3w. The city is also located close \nto European route E77, here the European route E371 begins, which runs southwards, to Slovakia. The famous Radom Air Show takes place at Radom Airport, an airport located from the center of Radom.\nEducation.\nRadom is home to about 20 schools of higher education:\nPolitics.\nMembers of Parliament (Sejm) elected from Radom constituency\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2014 sister cities.\nRadom is twinned with:\nFormer twin towns:\nOn 28 February 2022, Radom ended its partnership with the Russian city of Ozyory and the Belarusian city of Homyel as a reaction to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nNotable people.\nNotable people who have been born, have lived or have worked in Radom:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74598", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74598", "title": "Kielce", "text": "City in \u015awi\u0119tokrzyskie Voivodeship, Poland\nKielce (; ) is a city in south-central Poland. It is the capital of the \u015awi\u0119tokrzyskie Voivodeship. In 2021, it had 192,468 inhabitants. The city is in the middle of the \u015awi\u0119tokrzyskie Mountains (Holy Cross Mountains), on the banks of the Silnica River, in the northern part of the historical Polish province of Lesser Poland.\nKielce has a history back over 900 years, and the exact date that it was founded remains unknown. Kielce was once an important centre of limestone mining, and the vicinity is famous for its natural resources like copper, lead, uranium, and iron, which, over the centuries, were exploited on a large scale.\nThere are several fairs and exhibitions held in Kielce throughout the year. One of the city's most famous food products is Kielecki Mayonnaise, a type of mayonnaise.\nThe city and its surroundings are also known for their historic architecture, green spaces, and recreational areas like the \u015awi\u0119tokrzyski National Park. In sports, the city is known as the home of the top-tier handball club, multiple Polish Champion, and one-time EHF Champions League winner Vive Kielce.\nEtymology.\nAccording to a local legend, Mieszko II Lambert, son of Boleslaus I of Poland, while hunting, stopped to rest and refresh, and fell asleep. During his sleep, he had a dream he was attacked by a band of brigands in a forest. In the dream he saw a vision of Saint Adalbert who drew a winding line which turned into a stream. When Mieszko woke up, he found the Silnica River whose waters helped him regain strength. He also discovered white tusks of an animal, perhaps wild boar. Mieszko announced he would build a town and a church to St. Adalbert at that site. According to this legend, the town's name Kielce commemorates the mysterious tusks ( in Polish). Various other legends exist to explain the name's origin. One states that the town was named after its founder who belonged to the noble family of Kie\u0142cz, while another claims that it stems from the Celts who may have lived in the area in previous centuries. Other theories connect the town's name to occupational names relating to mud huts, iron tips for arrows and spears, or the production of tar (, a settlement of tar makers).\nThe most probable etymology traces the origins of the name to an Old Polish noun (plural form of 'sprout') and refers to plants sprouting in the wetlands where the settlement was located. The earliest extant document referring to the settlement by the name of Kielce dates to 1213.\nHistory.\nThe area of Kielce has been inhabited since at least the 5th century BC. Until the 6th or 7th century, the banks of the Silnica were inhabited by Celts. They were driven out by a Lechitic tribe of Vistulans who started hunting in the nearby huge forests and had settled most of the area now known as Lesser Poland and present-day \u015awi\u0119tokrzyskie Voivodeship. The lands of Wi\u015blanie were at first subdued by Bohemia, however they soon came under the control of the Piast dynasty and became a part of the emerging Polish state.\nThe area of the Holy Cross Mountains was almost unpopulated until the 11th century when the first hunters established permanent settlements at the outskirts of the mountains. They needed a place to trade furs and meat for grain and other necessary products, and so the market of Kielce was formed. In the early 12th century the new settlement became a property of the Bishops of Krak\u00f3w, who built a wooden church and a manor. In 1171 a stone church was erected by bishop Gedeon Gryf. During the times of Wincenty Kad\u0142ubek a parochial school in Kielce was opened in 1229. By 1295 the town was granted city rights. In the mid-13th century the town was destroyed by the Mongol invasion of \u00d6gedei Khan, but it quickly recovered.\nWithin the Polish Kingdom, Kielce was administratively located in the Sandomierz Voivodeship in the Lesser Poland Province. The area around Kielce was rich in minerals such as copper ore, lead ore, and iron, as well as limestone. In the 15th century Kielce became a significant centre of metallurgy. There were also several glass factories and armourer shops in the town. In 1527 bishop Piotr Tomicki founded a bell for the church and between 1637 and 1642 Mannerist palace was erected near the market place by Bishop Jakub Zadzik. It is one of the very few examples of French Renaissance architecture in Poland and the only example of a magnate's manor from the times of Vasa dynasty to survive World War II.\nDuring The Deluge the town was pillaged and burnt by the Swedes. Only the palace and the church survived, but the town managed to recover under the rule of bishop Andrzej Za\u0142uski. During the Great Northern War it was the site of a battle between Swedish forces under Charles XII and Polish and Saxon forces under the Polish-Lithuanian king Augustus II. By 1761 Kielce had more than 4,000 inhabitants. In 1789 Kielce were nationalized and the burgers were granted the right to elect their own representatives in Sejm. The 3rd Infantry Regiment of the Polish Crown Army was stationed in Kielce in 1789. Until the end of the century the city's economy entered a period of fast growth. A brewery was founded as well as several brick factories, a horse breeder, hospital.\nForeign partitions of Poland.\nAs a result of the Third Partition of Poland the city was annexed by Austria. During the Austro-Polish War of 1809 it was captured by prince J\u00f3zef Poniatowski and joined with the Napoleon controlled Duchy of Warsaw, but after the fall of Napoleon Bonaparte in 1815 it was joined with Russian-controlled Congress Poland. For a brief period when Krak\u00f3w was an independent city-state (Republic of Krak\u00f3w), Kielce became the capital of the Krak\u00f3w Voivodeship. Thanks to the efforts by Stanis\u0142aw Staszic Kielce became the centre of the newly established Old-Polish Industrial Zone (\"Staropolski Okr\u0119g Przemys\u0142owy\"). The town grew quickly as new mines, quarries and factories were constructed. In 1816 the first Polish technical university was founded in Kielce. However, after Staszic's death the Industrial Zone declined and in 1826 the school was moved to Warsaw and became the Warsaw University of Technology.\nIn 1830 many of the inhabitants of Kielce took part in the November Uprising against Russia. In 1844, priest Piotr \u015aciegienny began organising a local revolt to liberate Kielce from the Russian yoke, for which he was sent to Siberia. In 1863 Kielce took part in the January Uprising. As a reprisal for insubordination the tsarist authorities closed all Polish schools and turned Kielce into a military garrison city. The Polish language was banned. Because of these actions many gymnasium students took part in the 1905 Revolution and were joined by factory workers.\nSovereign Poland.\nAfter the outbreak of World War I, Kielce was the first Polish city to be liberated from Russian rule by the Polish Legions under J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski. After the war when Poland regained its independence after 123 years of Partitions, Kielce became the capital of Kielce Voivodeship. The plans to strengthen Polish heavy and war industries resulted in Kielce becoming one of the main nodes of the Central Industrial Area (\"Centralny Okr\u0119g Przemys\u0142owy\"). The town housed several big factories, among them the munitions factory \"Granat\" and the food processing plant \"Spo\u0142em\".\nSecond World War.\nDuring the Polish Defensive War of 1939, the main portion of the defenders of Westerplatte as well as the armoured brigade of General Stanis\u0142aw Maczek were either from Kielce or from its close suburbs. During the German occupation that lasted for most of the Second World War, the city was an important centre of resistance. There were several resistance groups active in the town, including Armia Krajowa (AK) and Gwardia Ludowa (GL).\nFollowing the invasion, the German \"Einsatzgruppe II\" entered the city to commit various atrocities against the population, and the occupiers established a special court in Kielce. In September\u2013November 1939, the Germans also operated a temporary \"Dulag\" transit camp for some 3,000 Polish prisoners of war. The POWs were held in poor conditions, there were cases of dysentery and typhoid fever, and 18 POWs were executed by the Germans. Local Poles provided food and medicine to the POWs.\nIn January and March 1940, the Germans carried out mass arrests of local Poles as part of the \"AB-Aktion\". Among the victims were teachers, priests, and local political and social activists, including women. Arrested Poles were either imprisoned in the local prison, deported to concentration camps or massacred, with a notable massacre of 63 people committed by the Germans on 12 June 1940 at a local stadium. Many Poles from the prison in Kielce were also murdered in the Brzask forest near Skar\u017cysko-Kamienna on 29 June 1940. At least five local Polish boy scouts were killed by the Germans during the war.\nNotable acts of resistance included theft of 2 tons of TNT from the \"Spo\u0142em\" factory run by the Nazis, which were then used by the partisans to make hand grenades. Also, the daring escape from jail in Kielce of a dozen or so AK members, organized in November 1942 by Stanis\u0142aw Depczy\u0144ski. Not to mention, a grenade attack by a unit of the GL on the Smole\u0144ski coffee shop, killing 6 Germans including a major in the SS (February 1943), as well as the assassination of the noted Gestapo informant Franz Wittek on 15 June 1944, by a unit under Second Lt. Kazimierz Smolak on the corner of Solna and Paderewski Streets. One of the attackers died during the attack and a further four lost their lives not long afterwards. This was not the first assassination attempt against Wittek. In 1942, Henryk Pawelec fired at him in the market square, but his pistol misfired. In February 1943, a unit under the command of Stanis\u0142aw F\u0105far shot at Wittek by the Seminarium building. Wittek, though wounded by 14 bullets, survived. Successful assassinations of local collaborators, including the shooting of Jan Bocian took place in broad daylight at a shop in Bodzenty\u0144ska Street. Similar was the attack on the factory of C. Wawrzyniak in March 1943, terrorizing and disarming the \"volksdeutscher\" workers and destroying the machinery, as well as the attack on the HASAG factory in May 1943 and the takeover of the Kielce Herbskie railway station. The underground University of the Western Lands gave secret lectures in Kielce.\nFrom 1942 to 1944, the Germans operated a collection camp for Soviet POWs, seen as potential collaborators.\nIn 1944, during and following the Warsaw Uprising, the Germans deported thousands of Varsovians from the Dulag 121 camp in Pruszk\u00f3w, where they were initially imprisoned, to Kielce. Those Poles were mainly old people, ill people and women with children. 9,000 Poles expelled from Warsaw stayed in Kielce, as of 1 November 1944.\nMoreover, the hills and forests of Holy Cross Mountains became a scene of heavy partisan activity. A small town of Pi\u0144cz\u00f3w located some from Kielce became the capital of the so-called \"Pincz\u00f3w Republic\", a piece of Polish land controlled by the partisans. The \"Jodla\" \u015awi\u0119tokrzyskie Mountains Home Army fought against the Germans long before Operation Tempest inflicted heavy casualties on the occupying forces and later took part in the final liberation of their towns and cities in January 1945. During the war, many of inhabitants of Kielce lost their lives. Following the war, Kielce was restored to Poland, although with a Soviet-installed communist regime, which stayed in power until the 1980s. In August 1945, the Polish resistance led by Antoni Heda and Stefan Bembi\u0144ski carried out the Raid on Kielce Prison and liberated some 350 prisoners.\nJewish history.\nPrior to the 1939 Invasion of Poland, like many other cities across the Second Polish Republic, Kielce had a significant Jewish population. According to the Russian census of 1897, among the total population of 23,200 inhabitants, there were 6,400 Jews in Kielce (around 27 percent). On the eve of the Second World War there were about 18,000 Jews in the city. Between the onset of war and March 1940, the Jewish population of Kielce expanded to 25,400 (35% of all residents), with trains of dispossessed Jews arriving under the escort of German Order Police battalions from the Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany.\nImmediately after the German occupation of Poland in September 1939, all Jews were ordered to wear a Star of David on their outer garments. Jewish\u2013owned factories in Kielce were confiscated by the Gestapo, stores and shops along the main thoroughfares liquidated, and ransom fines introduced. The forced labour and deportations to concentration camps culminated in mass extermination of Jews of Kielce during the Holocaust in occupied Poland.\nIn April 1941, the Kielce Ghetto was formed, surrounded by high fences, barbed wire, and guards. The gentile Poles were ordered to vacate the area and the Jews were given one week to relocate. The ghetto was split in two, along Warszawska Street (Nowowarszawska) with the Silnica River\u00a0\"\" running through it. The so-called large ghetto was set up between the streets of Orla, Piotrkowska, Pocieszka, and Warszawska to the east, and the smaller ghetto between Warszawska on the west, and the streets of Bodzenty\u0144ska, St. Wojciech, and the St. Wojciech square. The ghetto gates were closed on 5 April 1941; the Jewish Ghetto Police was formed with 85 members and ordered to guard it. Meanwhile, expulsions elsewhere and deportations to Kielce continued until August 1942 at which time there were 27,000 prisoners crammed in the ghetto. Trains with Jewish families arrived from the entire Kielce Voivodeship, and also from Vienna, Pozna\u0144, and \u0141\u00f3d\u017a.\nThe severe overcrowding, rampant hunger, and outbreaks of epidemic typhus took the lives of 4,000 people before mid-1942. During this time, many of them were forced to work at a nearby German munition plant run by Hasag. In August 1942, the Kielce Ghetto was liquidated in the course of only five days. During roundups, all Jews unable to move were shot on the spot including the sick, the elderly, and the disabled; 20,000\u201321,000 Jews were led into waiting Holocaust trains, and murdered in the gas chambers of Treblinka. After the extermination action only 2,000 Jews were left in Kielce, lodged in the labour camp at Stolarska and Jasna Streets \"\" within the small ghetto. Those who survived were sent to other forced labour camps. On 23 May 1943 the Kielce cemetery massacre was perpetrated by the German police; 45 Jewish children who had survived the Kielce Ghetto liquidation, were murdered by Order Police battalions.\nOn 4 July 1946 the local Jewish gathering of some 200 Holocaust survivors from the Planty 7 Street refugee centre of the Zionist Union became the target of the Kielce pogrom in which 37 (40) Jews (17\u201321 of whom remain unidentified) and 2 ethnic Poles were killed, including 11 fatally shot with military rifles and 11 more stabbed with bayonets, indicating direct involvement of loyal to Moscow Polish communist troops.\nDuring the Cold War, many Jewish historians theorized that the pogrom became the cause of outward Jewish emigration from Poland immediately following the opening of the borders in 1947. Nevertheless, the true reasons behind the dramatic increase of Jewish emigration from Poland were far more complex. The new government of the Communist Poland signed a repatriation agreement with the Soviet Union helping over 150,000 Holocaust survivors leave the Soviet Union legally. Poland was the only Eastern Bloc country to allow free and unrestricted Jewish Aliyah to the nascent State of Israel, upon the conclusion of World War II. After the Kielce pogrom Gen. Spychalski of PWP signed a legislative decree allowing the remaining survivors to leave Poland without visas or exit permits. Poland was the only Eastern Bloc country to do so, at war's end. Britain demanded from Poland (among others) to halt the Jewish exodus, but their pressure was largely unsuccessful.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nKielce is one of the relatively cooler cities in Poland. It experiences four distinct seasons and has a warm summer subtype humid continental climate (\"Dfb\"), typical of this part of Europe. It has cool, cloudy winters with almost daily light snowfall and generally moderate temperatures within a few degrees of the freezing point, and moderately warm and sunny summers, with frequent but brief hot spells and abundant rainfall falling mostly during numerous and occasionally severe thunderstorms. Surrounded by the Holy Cross Mountains, however, the summer night time temperatures are somewhat cooler and the thunderstorms somewhat more frequent and severe than in surrounding areas of Poland.\nBoth continental and maritime air masses can enter the area undergoing little modification, resulting in striking differences in the seasons from year to year, particularly in winter when the contrast between maritime and continental air is at its greatest. Maritime influences from the Atlantic typically bring cool, cloudy, damp and often foggy weather both in summer and in winter, whereas continental air masses often result in long periods of sunny and dry weather, hot in summer and on occasion, extremely cold in winter.\nThe highest temperature recorded in Kielce since 1971 is and the lowest is , giving the city a temperature range of 70.3\u00a0\u00b0C (126.5\u00a0\u00b0F), the second highest in Poland. The city receives 1720 to 1829 hours of sunshine annually, depending on the source, with a notably sunny spring and summer, and a cloudy late autumn and winter. Winds are generally very light throughout the year, with an abundance of calm days, and as a result, cool temperatures often feel much milder than expected due to a relative lack of windchill, especially during sunny spells in early spring, as well as during severe winter cold snaps, which are typically dominated by calm, anticyclonic weather. F\u00f6hn winds from the Carpathian mountains do occasionally reach the city, resulting in unusually mild temperatures for a semi-continental location at this latitude, on rare occasions reaching approximately in the winter months.\nWinter conditions are highly dependent on the source region of the air mass that dominates during a particular month, resulting in tremendous variability from one year to the next. For example, in January 2006, the city experienced typically continental winter weather, resulting in an average daytime high of , recording a nighttime low of on the 24th. The very next year, in January 2007, the weather was predominantly of the Atlantic type, resulting in an average high of and occasional days above , more typical of coastal locations in Western Europe. As a result of this variability, severe cold with temperatures below can be completely absent during some winters, and in others, it can occur with regularity, even as late as March. Heavy snowfall is rare, and significant snow accumulations typically occur gradually, a few centimeters at a time over a protracted cold spell.\nSummer is warm and lasts from June to early September, and is characterized by abundant sunshine, but also severe weather, particularly early in the season. Though temperatures average in the low-to-mid 20s (70s Fahrenheit), they are rather variable with frequent hot spells reaching approximately interrupted by cold fronts, which frequently bring violent thunderstorms and several days of cool and sometimes chilly weather. Although hot weather is frequent and many summers experience a few oppressively hot days of around , summer temperatures in the city are never extreme and have not exceeded in recent decades.\nThe transitional seasons of spring and autumn are highly unpredictable and experience large temperature swings with periods of fine weather and temperatures around as early as March and late into October, alternating with much colder periods. Sharp nighttime frosts can occur as early as September and as late as May, though on calm, clear days, it often warms up rapidly to approximately , especially in April. Occasionally, significant, accumulating snow can occur in October and April, though mild weather rapidly returns.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 31 December 2020 there were 193,415 people living in Kielce.\nAt the end of June 2021, the unemployment rate was 5.0%.\nAs of the end of June 2021, the average per capita income was PLN 4798.67 gross.\nCulture.\nSports.\nOther clubs:\nTransport.\nKielce is an important transport hub, and is on international and domestic routes:\nProvincial roads:\nIn addition, Kielce has a network of district roads, covering 109 streets with a total length of and a network of roads covering 446 streets with a total length of . 57.5% of roads in the city has an improved hard surface, 8.4% of hard surface is not improved, while 34.1% are dirt.\nRailways.\nRail transport came to Kielce in 1885, when the construction of the line linking Iwanogr\u00f3d (D\u0119blin) and D\u0105browa G\u00f3rnicza was completed. Currently, Kielce is an important intersection of railway lines, running to Cz\u0119stochowa and Lubliniec, Warsaw, Krak\u00f3w and Sandomierz. Within the administrative boundaries of the city there are the following railway stations: Kielce, Kielce Piaski, Kielce Bia\u0142ogon, Kielce Herbskie, Kielce \u015alichowice.\nAir travel.\nAt present, air services are only available to the residents of Kielce at Kielce-Mas\u0142\u00f3w Airport, a civilian airport located in nearby Mas\u0142\u00f3w. It is not able to accommodate large passenger planes, because its runway is only 1,200 m. Its reconstruction is seen as not viable and in June 2006 the decision was made about the location of a new airport near the village of the Obice Morawica, able to handle regular airlines. At present, land has been purchased for the investment. The nearest international airports are located in Krak\u00f3w-Balice, Warsaw-Okecie and Rzesz\u00f3w-Jasionka.\nLocal transport.\nOfficial transport services were first established on 22 July 1951, when the local transport department was created.\nAfter many changes today, the city operates 46 regular bus lines (1-53 without 3, 6, 15\u201317, 20, 22, 37, 39\u201340, 42, 46, 48\u201349, 52), 7 \"EU\" lines (102-114 without 105\u2013106, 109\u2013111, 113), 5 hybrid bus lines (34, 46, 50, 51, 54), two free circle lines (0W and 0Z) two lines of special constants (F, Z) and two night lines (N1, N2). Most of the regular lines are operated by the Municipal Transport Company (MPK Kielce) and Kielce Bus Company Workers (KASP), and the \"EU\", the free circle lines and some normal lines (13, 23, 24) are operated by BP Tour Regio under an agreement signed with the Management of Urban Transport (ZTM Kielce). In Kielce, there are two depots, one used by MPK and the other used by BP Tour Regio. The rolling stock is composed of about 165 buses.\nIn 2009/10 the Transport Authority in Kielce released the Polish Operational Programme Development of Eastern 2007 - 2013 project \"Development of public transport system in Kielce Metropolitan Area.\" They bought 40 new buses -Solaris Urbino 12s, and another 20 were bought in 2010. These buses will support new lines. Part of the project, envisages installation of 24 electronic boards for bus departure times and 20 stationary ticket vending machines.\nLong-distance travel.\nThe history of communication dates back to coaches from Kielce in 1945, when the District was set up. Already in 1946, there were regular routes to Krak\u00f3w, Warsaw, Jelenia G\u00f3ra, Teplice and neighbouring towns.\nAfter 1990, the Kielce Bus Station was renamed the \"PKS Station in Kielce\", and has maintained regular passenger long-distance routes.\nKielce constituency.\nThe current Members of Parliament (Sejm) elected from Kielce constituency in 2019 Polish parliamentary election are:\nThe current senator elected from Kielce constituency is Krzysztof S\u0142o\u0144 (Law and Justice).\nInternational relations.\nConsulates.\nThere are honorary consulates of Finland, Germany and Hungary in Kielce.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nKielce is twinned with:\nFriendly relations.\nIn addition to the twin towns, Kielce also has friendly relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74599", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74599", "title": "Ma\u00f3", "text": ""}
{"id": "74600", "revid": "16101447", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74600", "title": "Gliwice", "text": "City in Silesian Voivodeship, Poland\nGliwice (; , Czech: \"Hlivice\"; ) is a city in Upper Silesia, in southern Poland. The city is located in the Silesian Highlands, on the K\u0142odnica river (a tributary of the Oder). It lies approximately west from Katowice, the regional capital of the Silesian Voivodeship.\nGliwice is the westernmost city of the Metropolis GZM, a conurbation of 2.0 million people, and is the third-largest city of this area, with 175,102 permanent residents as of 2021. It also lies within the larger Katowice-Ostrava metropolitan area which has a population of about 5.3 million people and spans across most of eastern Upper Silesia, western Lesser Poland and the Moravian-Silesian Region in the Czech Republic. Gliwice is bordered by three other cities and towns of the metropolitan area: Zabrze, Knur\u00f3w and Pyskowice. It is one of the major college towns in Poland, thanks to the Silesian University of Technology, which was founded in 1945 by academics of Lw\u00f3w University of Technology. Over 20,000 people study in Gliwice. Gliwice is an important industrial center of Poland. Following an economic transformation in the 1990s, Gliwice shifted from steelworks and coal mining to automotive and machine industry.\nFounded in the 13th century, Gliwice is one of the oldest settlements in Upper Silesia, with a preserved Old Town core. Gliwice's most historical structures include St Bartholomew's Church (15th century), Gliwice Castle and city walls (14th century), (originally a hospital, 15th century) and (15th century). Gliwice is also known for its Radio Tower, where the Gleiwitz incident took place shortly before the outbreak of World War II and which is thought to be the world's tallest wooden construction, as well as Weichmann Textile House, one of the first buildings designed by world-renowned architect Erich Mendelsohn. Gliwice hosted the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2019 which took place on 24 November 2019.\nEtymology.\nThe name of the city is derived from the Slavic root or , suggesting terrain characterized by loam or wetland.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nGliwice was first mentioned as a town in 1276, however, it was granted town rights earlier by Duke W\u0142adys\u0142aw Opolski of the Piast dynasty. It was located on a trade route connecting Krak\u00f3w and Wroc\u0142aw and was part of various Piast-ruled duchies of fragmented Poland: Opole until 1281, Bytom until 1322, from 1322 to 1342 Gliwice was a capital of the Duchy of Gliwice, afterwards again part of the Duchy of Bytom until 1354, later it was also ruled by other regional Polish Piast dukes until 1532, although in 1335 it fell under the suzerainty of the Bohemian Crown, which itself was part of the Holy Roman Empire, and passed with that crown under suzerainty of the Austrian Habsburgs in 1526.\nAccording to 14th-century writers, the town seemed defensive in character, when under rule of Siemowit of Bytom. In the Middle Ages the city prospered mainly due to trade and crafts, especially brewing.\nOn 17 April 1433, Gliwice was captured by the Duke Bolko V, who joined the Hussites after they captured Prudnik.\nEarly Modern Age.\nAfter the dissolution of the Duchy of Opole and Racib\u00f3rz in 1532, it was incorporated as Gleiwitz into the Habsburg monarchy. Because of the vast expenses incurred by the Habsburg monarchy during their 16th century wars against the Ottoman Empire, Gleiwitz was leased to Friedrich Zettritz for the amount of 14,000 thalers. Although the original lease was for a duration of 18 years, it was renewed in 1580 for 10 years and in 1589 for an additional 18 years. Around 1612, the Reformed Franciscans came from Krak\u00f3w, and then their monastery and Church of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross were built. The city was besieged or captured by various armies during the Thirty Years' War. In 1645 along with the Duchy of Opole and Racib\u00f3rz it returned to Poland under the House of Vasa, and in 1666 it fell to Austria again. In 1683, Polish King John III Sobieski stopped in the city before the Battle of Vienna. In the 17th and 18th century, the city's economy switched from trading and brewing beer to clothmaking, which collapsed after the 18th-century Silesian Wars.\nDuring the mid 18th century Silesian Wars, Gleiwitz was taken from the Habsburg monarchy by the Kingdom of Prussia along with the majority of Silesia. After the end of the Napoleonic Wars, Gleiwitz was administered in the Prussian district of Tost-Gleiwitz within the Province of Silesia in 1816. The city was incorporated with Prussia into the German Empire in 1871 during the unification of Germany. In 1897, Gleiwitz became its own Stadtkreis, or urban district.\nIndustrialization.\nThe first coke-fired blast furnace on the European continent was constructed in Gleiwitz in 1796 under the direction of John Baildon. Gleiwitz began to develop into a major city through industrialization during the 19th century. The town's ironworks fostered the growth of other industrial fields in the area. The city's population in 1875 was 14,156. However, during the late 19th century Gleiwitz had: 14 distilleries, 2 breweries, 5 mills, 7 brick factories, 3 sawmills, a shingle factory, 8 chalk factories and 2 glassworks.\nOther features of the 19th-century era industrialized Gleiwitz were a gasworks, a furnace factory, a beer bottling company, and a plant for asphalt and paste. Economically, Gleiwitz opened several banks, savings and loan associations, and bond centers. Its tram system was completed in 1892, while its theater was opened in 1899; until World War II, Gleiwitz's theatre featured actors from throughout Europe and was one of the most famous theatres in the whole of Germany. Despite Germanisation policies, the Poles established various Polish organizations, including the \"Sok\u00f3\u0142\" Polish Gymnastic Society, and published local Polish newspapers.\n20th century.\nAccording to the 1911 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Gleiwitz's population in 1905 was 61,324. By 1911, it had two Protestant and four Roman Catholic churches, a synagogue, a mining school, a convent, a hospital, two orphanages, and a barracks. Gleiwitz was the center of the mining industry of Upper Silesia. It possessed a royal foundry, with which were connected machine factories and boiler works.\nAfter the end of World War I, clashes between Poles and Germans occurred during the Polish insurrections in Silesia. Some ethnically Polish inhabitants of Upper Silesia wanted to incorporate the city into the Second Polish Republic, which just regained independence. On 1 May 1919, a Polish rally was held in Gliwice. Seeking a peaceful solution to the conflict, the League of Nations held a plebiscite on 20 March 1921 to determine which country the city should belong to. In Gleiwitz, 32,029 votes (78.7% of given votes) were for remaining in Germany, Poland received 8,558 (21.0%) votes, and 113 (0.3%) votes were declared invalid. The total voter turnout was listed as 97.0%. This prompted another insurrection by Poles. The League of Nations determined that three Silesian cities: Gleiwitz (Gliwice), Hindenburg (Zabrze) and Beuthen (Bytom) would remain in Germany, and the eastern part of Upper Silesia with its main city of Katowice (Kattowitz) would join restored Poland. After delimiting the border in Upper Silesia in 1921, Gliwice found itself in Germany, but near the border with Poland \u2013 nearby Knur\u00f3w was already in Poland.\nDuring the interbellum the city witnessed not only anti-Polish, but also anti-French incidents and violence by the Germans. In 1920, local Polish doctor and city councillor Wincenty Styczy\u0144ski, protested against the German refusal to treat French soldiers stationed in the city. In January 1922, he himself treated French soldiers shot in the city. On 9 April 1922, 17 Frenchmen died in an explosion during the liquidation of a German militia weapons warehouse in the present-day So\u015bnica district. Styczy\u0144ski, who defended the rights of local Poles and protested against German acts of violence against Poles, was himself murdered by a German radical/militant on 18 April 1922. Nevertheless, various Polish organizations and enterprises still operated in the city in the interbellum, including a local branch of the Union of Poles in Germany, Polish banks and a scout troop.\nOn 9 June 1933, Gliwice was the site of the first conference of the Nazi anti-Polish organization Bund Deutscher Osten in Upper Silesia. In a secret \"Sicherheitsdienst\" report from 1934, Gliwice was named one of the main centers of the Polish movement in western Upper Silesia. Polish activists were increasingly persecuted starting in 1937.\nThe Gleiwitz incident was a false-flag attack on a radio station in Gleiwitz on 31 August 1939, staged by the German secret police, which served as a pretext, devised by Reinhard Heydrich under orders from Hitler, for Nazi Germany to invade Poland, and which marked the start of the Second World War. Shortly after the outbreak of the war, on 4 September 1939, the \"Einsatzgruppe I\" entered the city to commit atrocities against Poles. After the invasion of Poland, the assets of local Polish banks were confiscated by Germany. The Germans formed a \"Kampfgruppe\" unit in the city. It was also the cremation site of many of around 750 Poles murdered in Katowice in September 1939.\nIn early 1940, the advanced shaped charge explosive developed for the attack on Fort \u00c9ben-\u00c9mael as part of the \"Blitzkrieg\" attack on the Maginot Line on 10 May 1940 were tested at places in Gleiwitz to ensure secrecy.\nDuring the war, the Germans operated a \"Dulag\" transit camp for Polish prisoners of war, and a Nazi prison in the city, and established numerous forced labour camps, including a \"Polenlager\" camp solely for Poles, a camp solely for Jews, a penal \"education\" camp, a subcamp of the prison in Strzelce Opolskie, and six subcamps of the Stalag VIII-B/344 prisoner of war camp. In October 1943, the Germans brought a large transport of Italian POWs to a forced labour camp in today's \u0141ab\u0119dy district. From July 1944 to January 1945, Gliwice was the location of four subcamps of the Auschwitz concentration camp. In the largest subcamp, whose prisoners were mainly Poles, Jews and Russians, nearly 100 either died of hunger, mistreatment and exhaustion or were murdered. During the evacuation of another subcamp, the Germans burned alive or shot 55 prisoners who were unable to walk. There are two mass graves of the victims of the early 1945 death march from Auschwitz in the city, both commemorated with monuments.\nDuring the final stages of the war, 124 inhabitants committed suicide fearing the advancing Red Army. On 24 January 1945, Gliwice was occupied by the Red Army. Soviet troops then murdered over 1,000 civilians, mostly women, children and elders. In February 1945, the Soviets carried out deportations of local men to Soviet mines. Under borders changes dictated by the Soviet Union at the Potsdam Conference, Gliwice fell inside Poland's new borders after Germany's defeat in the war. It was incorporated into Poland's Silesian Voivodeship on 18 March 1945, after almost 300 years of being outside of Polish rule.\nIn 1956, Gliwice was the site of a manifestation of solidarity with the Hungarian Revolution of 1956, and local Poles raised funds and donated blood for the Hungarian insurgents (see also \"Hungary\u2013Poland relations\").\nDemographics.\nPopulation development.\nThe earliest population estimate of Gliwice from 1880, gives 1,159 people in 1750. The same source cites population to have been 2,990 in 1810, 6,415 in 1838, and 10,923 in 1861. A census from 1858 reported the following ethnic makeup: 7,060 - German, 3,566 - Polish, 11 - Moravian, 1 - Czech. Since the Industrial Revolution, Gliwice saw rapid economic growth which fuelled fast population increase. In 1890, Gliwice had 19,667 inhabitants, and this number has increased over twofold over the next 10 years to 52,362 in 1900. Gliwice gained its status of a large city (\"\" in German) in 1927, when population reached 102,452 people.\nIn 1945, with the approaching Red Army, a significant number of residents were either evacuated or fled the city at their own discretion. Following the Yalta Conference, Gliwice, along most of Silesia, was incorporated into communist Poland, and the remaining German population was expelled. Ethnic Poles, some of them themselves expelled from the Polish Kresy (which were incorporated into Soviet Union), started to settle down in Gliwice.\nAs of 31 December 2016, Gliwice's population stood at 182,156 people, a decrease of 1,236 over the previous year.\nNationality, ethnicity and language.\nHistorically, Gliwice was ethnically diverse, initially inhabited by Poles, later it had a German majority as a result of German colonization, with a significant autochthonous Polish minority. In the Upper Silesian Plebiscite in 1921, 78.9 percent of voters opted for Germany (however 15.1 percent of the vote in Gliwice was cast by non-residents, who are believed to overwhelmingly vote for Germany across the region). After Germany's defeat in World War II, the Germans either fled or were displaced to Allied-occupied Germany in accordance with the Potsdam Agreement. Polish inhabitants remained in Gliwice, and were joined by Poles displaced from former eastern Poland annexed by the Soviet Union, including the city of Lw\u00f3w (Lviv), Volhynia, Polesie, the Wilno region (Vilnius region) and the Grodno region. In addition, Poles from other regions of Poland, including the vicinity of Kielce, Rzesz\u00f3w, \u0141\u00f3d\u017a or Pozna\u0144, as well as Poles from other countries, settled in Gliwice. Many of these new inhabitants were academics from the Lw\u00f3w Polytechnic who created the Silesian University of Technology.\nAccording to the 2011 Polish Census, 93.7 percent of people in Gliwice claimed Polish nationality, with the biggest minorities being Silesians (or both Poles and Silesians at the same time) at 9.7 percent (18,169 people) and Germans at 1.3 percent (2,525). 0.3 percent declared another nationality, and the nationality of 2.1 percent of people could not be established. These numbers do not sum up to 100 percent as responders were allowed to choose up to two nationalities. The most common languages used at home were Polish (97.7 percent), Silesian (2.3 percent), German (0.7 percent) and English (0.4 percent).\nReligion.\nExcept for a short period immediately after Reformation, Gliwice has always had a Catholic majority, with sizeable Protestant and Jewish minorities. According to the population estimate in 1861, 7,476 people (68.4 percent) were Catholic, 1,555 (14.2 percent) Protestant, and 1,892 Jewish (17.3 percent, highest share in city history).\nCurrently, as of 2011 census, 84.7 percent of inhabitants claim they belong to a religion. The majority \u2013 82.73 percent \u2013 belongs to the Catholic Church. This is significantly lower than the Polish average, which is 89.6 and 88.3 percent, respectively. According to the Catholic Church in Poland, weekly mass attendance in the Diocese of Gliwice is at 36.7 percent of obliged, on par with Polish average. Other larger denominations include Jehovah's Witnesses (0.56 percent or 1,044 adherents) and Protestants (0.37 percent or 701 adherents).&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGliwice is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Gliwice, which has 23 parish churches in the city. Gliwice is also the seat of one of the three Armenian Church parishes in Poland (the other being in Warsaw and Gda\u0144sk), which is subject to the Holy See directly. Other denominations present in the city include a Greek Catholic Church parish, an Evangelical Church of Augsburg Confession parish, a Methodist parish, 9 Jehovah Witnesses halls (including one offering English-language services), several evangelical churches, a Buddhist temple and a Jewish prayer house.\nJews in Gliwice.\nGliwice's Jewish population reached its height in 1929 at approximately 2,200 people, but started to decline in the late 1930s, as the Nazi Party gained power in Germany, of which Gliwice was then a part. In 1933, there were 1,803 Jews living in the city; this number had dropped by half (to 902) by 1939 due to emigration. Between 1933 and 1937, Jews living in Upper Silesia enjoyed somewhat less legal persecution compared to Jews in other parts of Germany, thanks to the Polish-German Treaty of Protection of Minorities' Rights in Upper Silesia. This regional exception was granted thanks to the Bernheim petition that Gliwice citizen Franz Bernheim filed against Nazi Germany with the League of Nations. The New Synagogue was destroyed in 1938 during the Nazi November pogroms known as Kristallnacht. During the Holocaust, Jews from Gliwice were transported to Auschwitz-Birkenau in 1942 and 1943.\nOnly 25 Jews from Gliwice's pre-war Jewish population survived World War II in the city, all of them being in mixed marriages with gentiles. Immediately after the war, Gliwice became a congregation point for Jews who had survived the Holocaust, with the Jewish population standing at around a 1,000 people in 1945. Since then, the number of Jews in Gliwice has declined as survivors moved to larger cities or emigrated to Israel, the United States, and other western countries. Currently, Gliwice's Jewish community is estimated at around 25 people and is part of the Katowice Jewish Religious Community.\nGliwice has one , where religious services are held every Sabbath and on holidays. It is located in the house that the Jewish Religious Community elected in 1905.\nNotable members of the Jewish community in Gliwice include:\nHigher education and science.\nGliwice is a major applied science hub for the Metropolis GZM. Gliwice is a seat of:\nTransport.\nThe Polish north\u2013south A1 and east\u2013west A4 motorways, which are parts of the European routes E75 and E40, respectively, run through Gliwice, and their junction is located in the city. In addition the Polish National roads 78 and 88 also run through the city.\nWater transport.\nThe Gliwice Canal (\"Kana\u0142 Gliwicki\") links the harbour to the Oder River and thus to the waterway network across much of Germany and to the Baltic Sea. There is also an older K\u0142odnica Canal (\"Kana\u0142 K\u0142odnicki\") which is no longer operational.\nSports.\nOther notable clubs:\nPolitics.\nThe city's President (i.e. mayor) is Adam Neumann. He succeeded Zygmunt Frankiewicz who was mayor for 26 years (1993\u20132019) before being elected as a Polish Senator.\nGliwice has 21 city districts, each of them with its own \"Rada Osiedlowa\". They include, in alphabetical order: Bojk\u00f3w, Brzezinka, Czechowice, Kopernik, Ligota Zabrska, \u0141ab\u0119dy, Obro\u0144c\u00f3w Pokoju, Ostropa, Politechnika, Sikornik, So\u015bnica, Stare Gliwice, Szobiszowice, \u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie, \u017bwirki I Wigury, Trynek, Wilcze Gard\u0142o, Wojska Polskiego, W\u00f3jtowa Wie\u015b, Zatorze, \u017berniki.\nBytom/Gliwice/Zabrze constituency.\nMembers of Parliament (Sejm) elected from Bytom/Gliwice/Zabrze constituency include: Brzezi\u0144ski Jacek (PO), Ch\u0142opek Aleksander (PiS), Ga\u0142a\u017cewski Andrzej (PO), G\u0142ogowski Tomasz (PO), Ka\u017amierczak Jan (PO), Martyniuk Wac\u0142aw (LiD), Religa Zbigniew (PiS), Seku\u0142a Miros\u0142aw (PO), Szarama Wojciech (PiS), Szumilas Krystyna (PO).\nInternational relations.\nConsulates.\nThere are honorary consulates of Germany, Kyrgyzstan and Slovakia in Gliwice.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nGliwice is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74601", "revid": "51027454", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74601", "title": "Bytom", "text": "City in Silesian Voivodeship, Poland\nBytom ( ; Silesian: \"Byt\u014dm, Byt\u014d\u0144\", ) is a city in Upper Silesia, in southern Poland. Located in the Silesian Voivodeship, the city is northwest of Katowice, the regional capital.\nIt is one of the oldest cities in the Upper Silesia, and the former seat of the Piast dukes of the Duchy of Bytom. Until 1532, it was in the hands of the Piast dynasty, then it belonged to the Hohenzollern dynasty. After 1623 it was a state country in the hands of the Donnersmarck family. From 1742 to 1945 the town was within the borders of Prussia and Germany, and played an important role as an economic and administrative centre of the local industrial region. Until the outbreak of World War II, it was the main centre of national, social, cultural and publishing organisations fighting to preserve Polish identity in Upper Silesia. In the interbellum and during World War II, local Poles and Jews faced persecution by Germany.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAfter the war, decades of the Polish People's Republic were characterized by a constant emphasis on the development of heavy industry, which deeply polluted and degraded Bytom. After 1989, the city experienced a socio-economic decline. The population has also been rapidly declining since 1999. However, it is an important place in the cultural, entertainment, and industrial map of the region.\nGeology.\nThe bedrock of the Upland of consists primarily of sandstones and slates. The rocks are punctuated with abundant natural resources of coal and iron ore from the Carboniferous period. In the north part of the upland, in the Bytom basin lays the broad range of the triassic rocks, from sandstones to limestones, with rich ore, zinc and lead reserves. The upper layer is composed of clay, sand and gravel.\nCoat of arms.\nOne half of the coat of arms of Bytom depicts a miner mining coal, while the other half presents a yellow eagle on the blue field \u2013 the symbol of Upper Silesia.\nHistory.\nBytom is one of the oldest cities of Upper Silesia, originally recorded as \"Bitom\" in 1136, when it was part of the Medieval Kingdom of Poland. Archaeological discoveries have shown that there was a fortified settlement (a \"gr\u00f3d\") here, probably founded by the Polish King Boles\u0142aw I the Brave in the early 11th century.\nAfter the fragmentation of Poland in 1138, Bytom became part of the Seniorate Province, as it was still considered part of historic Lesser Poland. In 1177 it became part of the Silesian province of Poland, and remained within historic Silesia since. Bytom received city rights from Prince W\u0142adys\u0142aw in 1254 with its first centrally located market square. The city of Bytom benefited economically from its location on a trade route linking Krak\u00f3w with Silesia from east to west, and Hungary with Moravia and Greater Poland from north to south. The first Roman Catholic Church of the Virgin Mary was built in 1231. In 1259 Bytom was raided by the Mongols. The Duchy of Opole was split and in 1281 Bytom became a separate duchy, since 1289 under overlordship and administration of the Kingdom of Bohemia. Bytom Castle was built in around 1284-1299 and demolished in later centuries. They duchy existed until 1498, when it was re-integrated with the Piast-ruled Duchy of Opole. Due to German settlers coming to the area, the city was being Germanized.\nIt came under the control of the Habsburg monarchy of Austria in 1526, which increased the influence of the German language. In 1683, Polish King John III Sobieski and his wife Queen Marie Casimire, visited the city, greeted by the townspeople and clergy, on the king's way to the Battle of Vienna. The city became part of the Kingdom of Prussia in 1742 during the Silesian Wars and part of the German Empire in 1871. In the 19th and the first part of the 20th centuries, the city rapidly grew and industrialized.\nBytom was one of the main centers of Polish resistance against Germanization in Upper Silesia in the 19th century, up until the mid-20th century. Polish social, political and cultural organizations were formed and operated here. From 1848, the newspaper \"\" was published here. Poles smuggled large amounts of gunpowder through the city to the Russian Partition of Poland during the January Uprising in 1863. According to the Prussian census of 1905, the city of Beuthen had a population of 60,273, of which 59% spoke German, 38% spoke Polish and 3% were bilingual. In 1895, the \"Sok\u00f3\u0142\" Polish Gymnastic Society was established, and, during the Silesian uprisings, in 1919\u20131920, Polish football clubs Poniatowski Szombierki and Polonia Bytom were founded, which later on, in post-World War II Poland both won the national championship. After World War I, in the Upper Silesian plebiscite of 1921, 74.7% of the votes in Beuthen city were for Germany, and 25.3% were for Poland, due to which it remained in Germany, as part of the Province of Upper Silesia. In the interwar period, Bytom was one of two cities (alongside Kwidzyn) in Germany, in which a Polish gymnasium was allowed to operate. In 1923 a branch of the Union of Poles in Germany was established in Bytom. There was also a Polish preschool, two scout troops and a Polish bank. In a secret \"Sicherheitsdienst\" report from 1934, Bytom was named one of the main centers of the Polish movement in western Upper Silesia. Polish activists were persecuted since 1937. The Bytom Synagogue was burned down by Nazi German SS and SA troopers during the Kristallnacht on 9\u201310 November 1938. Before 1939, the town, along with Gleiwitz (now Gliwice), was at the southeastern tip of German Silesia.\nWorld War II and post-war period.\nDuring the German invasion of Poland, which started World War II, the Germans carried out mass arrests of local Poles. On September 1, 1939, the day of the outbreak of the war, Adam Bo\u017cek, the chairman of the Upper Silesian district of the Union of Poles in Germany, was arrested in Bytom and then deported to the Dachau concentration camp. The Germans carried out searches in the Polish gymnasium and the local Polish community centre, 20 Polish activists were arrested on September 4, 1939, then released and arrested again a few days later to be deported to the Buchenwald concentration camp. Also three Polish teachers, who had not yet fled, were arrested, while the assets of the Polish bank were confiscated. The \"Einsatzgruppe I\" entered the city on September 6, 1939, to commit atrocities against Poles. Many Poles were conscripted to the Wehrmacht and died on various war fronts, including 92 former students of the Polish gymnasium. The Beuthen Jewish community was liquidated via the first ever Holocaust transport to be exterminated at Auschwitz-Birkenau.\nThe Germans operated a Nazi prison in the city with a forced labour subcamp in the present-day Karb district. There were also multiple forced labour camps within the present-day city limits, including six subcamps of the Stalag VIII-B/344 prisoner-of-war camp. Dozens of prisoners were sent from the Nazi prison on a death march westwards towards G\u0142ubczyce.\nIn January 1945, the city was captured by the Soviet Red Army. Soviet troops then committed massacres of civilians in the present-day district of Miechowice and Stolarzowice, killing some 400 and 70 people, respectively, and raped many women. In 1945, the city was transferred to Poland as a result of the Potsdam Conference. Its German population was largely expelled by the Soviet Army and the remaining indigenous Polish inhabitants were joined mostly by Poles repatriated from the eastern provinces annexed by the Soviets.\nIn 2017, the Tarnowskie G\u00f3ry Lead-Silver-Zinc Mine and its Underground Water Management System, located mostly in the neighboring city of Tarnowskie G\u00f3ry, but also partly in Bytom, was included on the UNESCO World Heritage List.\nDistricts.\nThe city of Bytom is divided into 12 districts (Polish: \"Dzielnice\"), year of inclusion within the city limits in brackets:\nRadzionk\u00f3w with Rojca (currently a district of Radzionk\u00f3w) were located within the city limits of Bytom from 1975 until 1997. Somehow there is (probably) autonomic district named \"Vitor\" in South Stroszek.\nEconomy.\nTrade is one of the main pillars of the economy of Bytom. Being a city with long traditions of commercial trade, Bytom is fulfilling its new postindustrial role. In the centre of Bytom, and mainly around Station Street and the Market Square, is the largest concentration of registered merchants in the county.\nIn 2007, Bytom and its neighbours created the Upper Silesian Metropolitan Union, the largest urban centre in Poland. The Union was superseded by Metropolis GZM in 2018.\nPublic transport.\nThe tram routes are operated by Silesian Interurbans Tramwaje \u015al\u0105skie S.A\nSport.\nBytom is home to Polonia Bytom which has both a football and an ice hockey team (TMH Polonia Bytom). Its football team played in the Ekstraklasa, most recently from 2007 to 2011, winning it twice in 1954 and in 1962. The Szombierki district is home to another former Polish champion Szombierki Bytom which won the title in 1980, and is one of the oldest clubs in the region. Other areas of the city host football clubs such as G\u00f3rniki which is home to lower league club Rod\u0142o G\u00f3rniki, founded in 1946.\nCulture.\nBytom's cultural venues include:\nAmong Bytom's art galleries are: Galeria Sztuki U\u017cytkowej Stalowe Anio\u0142y, Galeria \"Rotunda\" MBP, Galeria \"Suplement\", Galeria \"Pod Czapl\u0105\", Galeria \"Platforma\", Galeria \"Pod Szrtychem\", Galeria Sztuki \"Od Nowa 2\", Galeria SPAP \"Plastyka\" \u2013 Galeria \"Kolor\", Galeria \"Stowarzyszenia.Rewolucja.Art.Pl\", and Galeria-herbaciarnia \"Fanaberia\".\nFestivals\nPolitics.\nBytom/Gliwice/Zabrze constituency.\nMembers of Parliament (Sejm) elected in the 2023 election from Bytom/Gliwice/Zabrze constituency\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nBytom is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74603", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74603", "title": "Bielsko-Bia\u0142a", "text": "City in Silesian Voivodeship, Poland\nBielsko-Bia\u0142a (; ; ), is a city in the Silesian Voivodeship, southern Poland, with a population of approximately 166,765 as of December 2022, making it the 22nd largest city in Poland, and an area of . It is the core of the broader metropolitan area with around 335,000 inhabitants. It serves as the seat of the Bielsko County, Euroregion Beskydy, Roman Catholic Diocese of Bielsko\u2013\u017bywiec and the Evangelical Church Diocese of Cieszyn.\nSituated north of the Beskid Mountains, Bielsko-Bia\u0142a is composed of two former towns which merged in 1951\u2014\"Bielsko\" in the west and \"Bia\u0142a\" in the east\u2014on opposite banks of the Bia\u0142a River that divides the historical regions of Silesia and Lesser Poland. The history of Bielsko dates back to the 13th century, while Bia\u0142a was founded in the 16th century and obtained city rights in 1723. Despite the administrative separation, both towns effectively functioned as one urban area already in the 19th century. Industrialization, especially the textile and automotive industries, was of great importance for its development in the past. Between 1975 and 1998, the city was the seat of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a Voivodeship and currently lies within the Silesian Voivodeship.\nBielsko-Bia\u0142a is the administrative, economic, academic and cultural centre for the Silesian-Lesser Polish border region, sometimes colloquially referred to as \"Podbeskidzie\". It is also an important commercial and industrial hub, as well as a road and railway junction. It is a significant tourist destination due to its numerous architectural monuments (a popular slogan \"Little Vienna\" refers to many Revivalist and Art Nouveau buildings shaping the cityscape of the central districts) and its direct proximity to the mountains (fourteen mountain peaks lie within the city limits).\nToponymy.\nBoth Bielsko and Bia\u0142a derive their names from the Slavic stem \"*b\u011bl\u044a\" meaning \"white\" (in modern Polish \"bia\u0142y\", in modern Czech \"b\u00edl\u00fd\"). The river Bia\u0142a was the first to be named in this way. The reason was probably the general impression of the color of the water: \"white\", that is, bright and clear. Some researchers also linked the city's name to the bleaching of fiber, which is questionable, however, due to the fact that in the 13th century the cloth industry in Bielsko was not yet developed.\nThe German name was derived from the Slavic one. In medieval and early modern documents, the name of the town appears both in a form close to modern Polish and Czech (\"Bilsko\", \"Belsko\") and German (\"Bilitz\", \"Belicz\", \"Bylitz\"). Over time, the official name \"Bielitz\" in German and \"B\u00edlsko\" in Czech became established, while in Polish there were still various fluctuations in the 20th century, such as between \"Bielsko\" in the neuter gender and \"Bielsk\" in the masculine gender. In the case of Bia\u0142a, the Polish wording of the name was the only official one, even when the town belonged to the Habsburg monarchy. The Germanized form \"Beil\" was used only in the local dialect. The Wymysorys language uses the form \"By\u0142c-Bej\u0142\" which is close to how the two towns were called by the autochthonous German population.\nThe combined name \"Bielsko-Bia\u0142a\" in Polish or \"Bielitz-Biala\" in German was used as early as the 19th century in the names of various societies, clubs, branches of institutions and businesses (e.g. \"Bielitz-Bialaer Leseverein\", \"Bielitz-Bialaer Actienbrauerei\" or \"Bielsko-Bialski Zwi\u0105zek Adwokat\u00f3w\"), in the titles of local newspapers (e.g. \"Bielitz-Bialaer Anzeiger\" or \"Bielitz-Bialaer Wochenblatt\"), as the name of a railroad station, on maps printed jointly for both cities, and in many other publications.\nGeography.\nLocation and relief.\nBielsko-Bia\u0142a is located in the southern part of the Silesian Voivodeship, on the border of historical regions: Cieszyn Silesia (left-bank districts, 57.89% of the area) and Lesser Poland (right-bank districts, 42.11% of the area). The city represents 1.01% of the area of the voivodeship and 0.04% of the area of Poland. The latitudinal extent is approximately km and the meridional extent approximately . The straight line distance from the city center to the Czech border is , and to the Slovak border .\nThe greater part of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a lies in the Silesian Foothills (\"Pog\u00f3rze \u015al\u0105skie\"), which are part of the Western Beskid Foothills (\"Pog\u00f3rze Zachodniobeskidzkie\") physiographic macroregion. Within the administrative borders of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a\u2014in the southern districts\u2014there are also mountain massifs of the Little Beskids (\"Beskid Ma\u0142y\") and the Silesian Beskids (\"Beskid \u015al\u0105ski\"). Most of the mountainous areas of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a lie within two landscape parks: Little Beskids Landscape Park and Silesian Beskids Landscape Park. At the same time, they are protected under the Natura 2000 nature protection programme.\nThe relief of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a is quite diverse. Within the administrative borders of the city there are both upland and mountainous areas. The centrally located Boles\u0142aw Chrobry Square is above sea level. The lowest point are Komorowice Ponds at above sea level, while the highest peak is Klimczok in Silesian Beskids at above sea level. The upland part of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a consists of dozens of hills, separated by valleys of rivers and streams, the central one being the valley of the Bia\u0142a River. The Beskid massifs are separated by the Wilkowice Gate (\"Brama Wilkowicka\") connecting the Silesian Foothills (\"Pog\u00f3rze \u015al\u0105skie\") with the \u017bywiec Basin (\"Kotlina \u017bywiecka\"). There are 14 mountain peaks within the city limits: Cyberniok, D\u0119bowiec, Klimczok, Ko\u0142owr\u00f3t, Kopany, Kozia G\u00f3ra, \u0141ysa G\u00f3ra, Palenica, Przykra, R\u00f3wnia, Sto\u0142\u00f3w, Szyndzielnia, Trzy Kopce and Wysokie. In addition, the slopes of Czupel, Gaiki and Magurka Wilkowicka mountains partly reach the peripheral districts of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a. On the south-western slopes of Sto\u0142\u00f3w is the Sto\u0142\u00f3w Cave (\"Jaskinia w Sto\u0142owie\"), whose passages are long. In 2003, an entrance to the Deep Sto\u0142\u00f3w Cave (\"Jaskinia G\u0142\u0119boka w Sto\u0142owie\") was also discovered on the slopes of Sto\u0142\u00f3w. With a length of and a depth of , it is one of the largest caves in the Polish part of Carpathians. Several smaller caves can also be found in the Klimczok area.\nClimate.\nBielsko-Bia\u0142a has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\") with cold, damp winters and warm, wet summers. However, using the 0\u00a0\u00b0C isotherm, the climate is a Dfb-type called of humid continental climate, which explains its considerable thermal amplitude for Central Europe. The extremes may still be moderated by the western patterns and winds of this direction, which still maintains hybrid characteristics in the city's climate. Fo\u00ebhn winds help maintain a milder winter in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a and average about 4\u00a0\u00b0C lower than the surrounding mountains each year. The sunniest days are between late summer and early fall, with a few months reaching 9 sunny days. In the 1960s 55\u00a0cm of snow cover was recorded.\nAir pollution.\nBielsko-Bia\u0142a is a city with relatively high air pollution. According to a 2016 report by the World Health Organization, it was ranked as the twenty-seventh most polluted city in the European Union. Then in a 2020 report by the IQAir company, it was ranked thirty-eighth in Europe and fifth in Poland. The biggest contributor to air pollution is the fact that many households, including in the inner city area, still use traditional heating systems based on burning coal. The environmental situation in the city has been gradually improving in recent years. This is influenced by municipal measures such as the \"Low Emission Economy Plan\", which has been implemented since 2015. In 2020, 454 coal-fired boilers in residentional buildings were replaced by gas or district heating using municipal subsidies.\nBielsko-Bia\u0142a belongs to the cities where the environmental condition has been gradually improving over the past few years. The number of days when the permissible daily concentration of suspended particulate matter PM10 was exceeded in the years 2018-2022 were as follows: 52, 30, 33, 41, 24, respectively.\nThe main contributors to air pollution are the use of outdated solid fuel sources in households, emissions of gases and particles from industrial plants, and traffic.\nThe operation of outdated heating systems and solid fuel combustion sources within the city promotes the formation of smog during the heating season. Smog has a negative impact on human health and can also have destructive effects on buildings, especially historical ones.\nPollution from traffic is concentrated within densely built-up areas known as \"street canyons.\" The city's air quality is significantly influenced by transregional factors, such as the influx of pollutants from neighboring municipalities.\nThe quality of the water flowing through the city has been gradually improving. However, in 2022, the state of a significant portion of surface water, both in the Bia\u0142a and Wapienica rivers, was classified as poor.\nThe city's ecological situation has been gradually improving in recent years, thanks in part to the actions of municipal authorities, such as the implementation of the \"Low-Emission Economy Plan\" since 2010. Between 2008 and 2022, with the city's support, over 7200 solid fuel boilers and furnaces were eliminated in residential buildings in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a.\nThe first municipal Energy Management Bureau in Poland was established in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a in 1997, and it currently operates as an energy team within the Department of Environmental Protection and Energy of the Municipal Office.\nIn 2022, there were three monitoring stations in the city as part of the National Air Quality Monitoring System, and the city installed 36 air quality sensors in urban areas to depict the distribution of pollutants within the city [Source: Data from the Department of Environmental Protection and Energy, Municipal Office in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a].\nDistricts.\nBielsko-Bia\u0142a is officially divided into 30 \"osiedla\", which are auxiliary units of the municipality.\nIn parallel, there is a division into \"obr\u0119by ewidencyjne\" (cadastral areas), the boundaries of which reflect the former boundaries of the municipalities gradually incorporated into Bielsko-Bia\u0142a in the 20th century, as well as the boundaries of the historical districts (suburbs) of Bielsko. These are:\nSome peripheral areas are also included within \"obr\u0119by ewidencyjne\" of Bystra \u015al\u0105ska, Jaworze, Maza\u0144cowice, Mi\u0119dzyrzecze G\u00f3rne and Pisarzowice, which is a result of the incorporation of parts of these villages into Bielsko-Bia\u0142a. In some cases (e.g. Mikuszowice Krakowskie, Stare Bielsko, Straconka) the boundaries of \"osiedla\" and \"obr\u0119by ewidencyjne\" are similar, in many others (e.g. Aleksandrowice, Dolne Przedmie\u015bcie, Lipnik, Mikuszowice \u015al\u0105skie) \"osiedla\" and \"obr\u0119by ewidencyjne\" with the same names do not correspond territorially. The commons understanding of 'districts' in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a and the belonging of particular areas to them draws loosely on both types of division.\nHistory.\nBielsko.\nThere has been human habitation in Bielsko since around 1400 BC, wooden tools have been found along with stone axes dating from 1000 BC. The remnants of a fortified settlement in what is now the Stare Bielsko (Old Bielsko) district of the city were discovered between 1933 and 1938 by a Polish archaeological team. The settlement was dated to the 12th \u2013 14th centuries. Its dwellers manufactured iron from ore and specialized in smithery. The current centre of the town was probably developed as early as the first half of the 13th century. At that time a castle (which still survives today) was built on a hill.\nIn the second half of the 13th century, the Piast dukes of Opole invited German settlers to colonize the Silesian Foothills. As the dukes then also ruled over the Lesser Poland lands east of the Bia\u0142a River, settlements arose on both banks like \"Bielitz\" (now Stare Bielsko), \"Nickelsdorf\" (Mikuszowice \u015al\u0105skie), \"Kamitz\" (Kamienica), \"Batzdorf\" (Komorowice \u015al\u0105skie) and \"Kurzwald\" in the west as well as \"Kunzendorf\" (Lipnik), \"Alzen\" (Ha\u0142cn\u00f3w) and \"Wilmesau\" (Wilamowice) in the east. Nearby settlements in the mountains were \"Lobnitz\" (Wapienica) and \"Bistrai\" (Bystra). Those settlements did not undergo Slavonicisation in the following centuries, which led to the creation of a German language island (\"Bielitz-Bialaer Sprachinsel\") that survived until the 20th century.\nAfter the partition of the Duchy of Opole in 1281, Bielsko passed to the Dukes of Cieszyn within fragmented Poland. The town was first documented in 1312 when Duke Mieszko I of Cieszyn granted a town charter. The Bia\u0142a again became a border river, when in 1315 the eastern Duchy of O\u015bwi\u0119cim split off from Cieszyn as a separate under Mieszko's son W\u0142adys\u0142aw. After the Dukes of Cieszyn had become vassals of the Bohemian kings in 1327 and the Duchy of O\u015bwi\u0119cim was sold to the Polish Crown in 1457, returning to Lesser Poland after three centuries, the Bia\u0142a River for next centuries marked the border between the Bohemian crown land of Silesia within the Holy Roman Empire and the Lesser Poland Province of the Kingdom of Poland and the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth.\nWith Bohemia and the Upper Silesian Duchy of Cieszyn, Bielsko in 1526 was inherited by the Austrian House of Habsburg and incorporated into the Habsburg monarchy. From 1560 Bielsko was held by Frederick Casimir of Cieszyn, son of Duke Wenceslaus III Adam, who due to the enormous debts his son left upon his death in 1571, had to sell it to the Promnitz noble family at Pless. With the consent of Emperor Maximilian II, the Promnitz dynasty and their Schaffgotsch successors ruled the Duchy of Bielsko as a Bohemian state country; acquired by the Austrian chancellor Count Friedrich Wilhelm von Haugwitz in 1743, and afterwards by Polish aristocrat Aleksander J\u00f3zef Su\u0142kowski in 1752, the ducal status was finally confirmed by Empress Maria Theresa in 1754. It remained in possession of the Polish Su\u0142kowski family until the dissolution of the duchy in 1849, while the castle was still owned by the Su\u0142kowskis until World War II.\nBielsko was the first town in the Duchy of Cieszyn where the teachings of Martin Luther spread in the late 1530s, even before Duke Wenceslaus III Adam adopted Lutheranism in 1545. Also later, Bielsko was home to the strongest Protestant community in the whole of Cieszyn Silesia, which in 1587 obtained a privilege guaranteeing that only Lutheran services would be held in the town. Ji\u0159\u00ed T\u0159anovsk\u00fd was active in the Bielsko castle. Bielsko retained its Protestant character also after the Thirty Years' War. The recatholisation campaign, which started in the second half of the 17th century, was not very successful. Throughout the Counter-Reformation period, Lutheran services were held\u2014at first in the Holy Trinity Church with the permission of the authorities, later in homes or in the surrounding Beskid forests (the so-called forest churches)\u2014and immediately after the issuing of the Patent of Toleration by Emperor Joseph II in 1781, an Evangelical district was established north of the historical centre, with the Church of the Saviour, the present seat of the Lutheran bishop and schools, known as the Bielsko Zion (\"Bielski Syjon\"). To this day, it remains a Protestant cultural centre of supra-regional significance. In 1900, a monument to Martin Luther was unveiled there. It was one of only two in the whole of Austria-Hungary (the other was erected in the Bohemian town of A\u0161), and now is the only one within the borders of Poland. In the second half of the 19th century, Lutherans ceased to constitute the majority of the population due to the influx of new inhabitants, mostly Catholic or Jewish.\nAfter the Prussian king Frederick the Great had invaded Silesia, Bielsko remained with the Habsburg monarchy as part of Austrian Silesia according to the 1742 Treaty of Breslau. In late 1849 Bielsko became a seat of political district. In 1870 it became a statutory city. \nThe town's development in the 19th century was primarily linked to the textile industry, and to a lesser extent the engineering industry. The Bielsko-Bia\u0142a area was described as the third largest centre of the textile industry in the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, after Brno and Liberec. In the second half of the 19th century, new tenements, villas of wealthy industrialists and public buildings in Revival and Art Nouveau styles began to spring up in the landscape of the city. These were often inspired by the architecture of Vienna, to which the slogan \"Little Vienna\", which is still popular today, refers. The local architect of the Jewish origin Carl Korn had the greatest influence on the architecture of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, shaping the character of \"Little Vienna\", while the plan for urban regulation was prepared in 1899 by the Viennese urban planner Max Fabiani. In 1855 a branch of the Emperor Ferdinand Northern Railway was built from Dziedzice to Bielsko, which in 1877 was extended to \u017bywiec and connected to the Galician Transversal Railway. A long tunnel under the centre of Bielsko was then built. In 1888, a railway connection to Cieszyn and Kalwaria Zebrzydowska was opened. In 1895, an electric tram line was established in Bielsko. It connected the railway station with Zigeunerwald/Cyga\u0144ski Las, which in the meantime was transformed into a forest-park complex on the model of the Vienna Forest with many summer villas of Bielsko's factory owners built in its surroundings.\nHowever, the demographic boom was weaker than, for example, in the Upper Silesian conurbation, due to the restriction of the settlement of workers in the city proper. Many of them lived in the surrounding villages, which formally remained separate, even though they were taking on an increasingly urban character. According to the 1910 census, Bielsko had a population of 18,568. 84.3% used German in their domestic interactions, 14.3% used Polish, 0.7% used Czech or Slovak, and 0.7% used another language. 55.9% were Roman Catholic, 27.6% Lutheran, 16.3% Jewish, and 1.1% were of another denomination or with no religion.\nAfter 1918, when Austria-Hungary collapsed, Bielsko found itself within a disputed territory between Poland and Czechoslovakia. Attempts to incorporate the city into the Republic of German-Austria failed. In July 1920, the Conference of Ambassadors decided to divide Cieszyn Silesia in such a way that Bielsko became part of the autonomous Silesian Voivodeship in the Second Polish Republic. \nPolitical life during the interwar period was marked by ethnic and national tensions. The influx of Polish officials and teachers increased the proportion of the Polish population, although the city retained a significant German-speaking community. \nIn the 1930s, some ethnic German residents, under the leadership of Rudolf Wiesner, organized the \"Jungdeutsche Partei\", an anti-Polish and antisemitic political movement that functioned as a de facto branch of the NSDAP. A considerable number of young Germans joined the party during the mid-1930s. \nThe interwar period also brought significant urban development. A new residential district in Modernist style was built beginning in 1934 on the site of the former castle gardens, and the first Polish high school (today the Nicolaus Copernicus High School) was opened in 1927. In 1938, the nearby municipality of Aleksandrowice was incorporated into the city, where an airport and a pilot school were established.\nBia\u0142a.\nThe history of Bia\u0142a dates back to the second half of the 16th century. The first written mention comes from 1564 and describes a small craftsmen settlement of thirteen houses. It was located near the mouth of Niwka to the Bia\u0142a River, in the area of today's \u0141ukowa Street. Administratively, it belonged to the Silesian County of the Krak\u00f3w Voivodeship within the Kingdom of Poland. The first residents most likely came from the suburbs of neighboring Bielsko. They crossed to the other side of the river tempted by the opportunity to build new houses in the face of restrictions imposed by the Bielsko town council and disputes between the suburban population and the privileged burghers of the Old Town. The settlement was established on the land of the village of Lipnik, from which it became independent in 1613. Further development of the village was associated with the influx of refugees from neighboring Silesia during the Thirty Years' War and the Counter-Reformation.\nThough already named a town in the 17th century, Bia\u0142a officially was granted borough rights by the Polish king Augustus II the Strong in 1723. At that time it counted only 40 inhabited houses and about 300 residents, mostly German-speaking and Lutheran. There has been a new urban layout made, in the center of which was a rectangular market square - today's Wojska Polskiego Square.\nIn the course of the First Partition of Poland in 1772, Bia\u0142a was annexed by the Habsburg Empire and incorporated into the crownland of Galicia. After that the town underwent major urban transformations in the 1780s in connection with the construction of the Central Galician Road, part of which is today's 11 Listopada Street. At that time, the New Market was also delineated - the present Wolno\u015bci Square.\nThe town's boundaries were artificially limited as a result of disputes with the Lipnik municipality, which refused to give up part of its territory, even though the western part of Lipnik formed an urban and functional unity with Bia\u0142a. West Lipnik also formed the de facto Jewish quarter of Bia\u0142a, due to the official ban on Jewish settlement in the town, which was in effect from 1757 to 1848. Joachim Adler's cloth factory, considered the first mechanized factory in the Bielsko-Biala area, was also established within Lipnik's borders in 1810. Lipnik was finally incorporated into Bia\u0142a in 1925. The town thus expanded its territory more than sixteen times (before 1925 it had only , while Lipnik had ), and the population increased two and a half times.\nIn the 19th century, Bia\u0142a formed a single industrial region with Bielsko, also with a predominance of textile industry. From 1867 it was the capital of Bia\u0142a County. At the turn of the 20th century, a number of \"Vienna-like\" buildings were constructed in Bia\u0142a, too, including a pompous Neo-Renaissance town hall in 1895\u20131897.\nAccording to the 1910 census, Bia\u0142a had a population of 8,668. 69.3% used German in their domestic interactions, 29.3% used Polish, and 1.4% used another language (mainly Czech or Ukrainian). 72.1% were Roman Catholic, 17,7% Jewish and 12.3% Lutheran. Of the remaining 0.9%, there were small groups of Greek Catholics, Orthodox Christians, Calvinists and five people with no religion.\nWith the dissolution of Austria-Hungary in 1918, Bia\u0142a became part of the Second Polish Republic. Throughout the interwar period it belonged to the Krak\u00f3w Voivodeship. From 1925, the official name of the town was \"Bia\u0142a Krakowska\".\nBielsko-Bia\u0142a.\nAlthough the two towns effectively functioned as one urban area for a long time, they were administratively combined for the first time by the Nazi authorities after the invasion of Poland in September 1939. Bia\u0142a became a district of Bielsko under the name \"Bielitz-Ost\". During the World War II, the city was occupied by the Nazi Germany, within the province of Upper Silesia. Germans committed various crimes against the Polish and Jewish population. Several Polish teachers and principals were deported to Nazi concentration camps and murdered there. Many Jewish residents were murdered at the nearby Auschwitz extermination camp. Only less than 1000 people of the city's Jewish community of nearly 8000 survived the war. Several widely known Holocaust survivors from Bielsko-Bia\u0142a were Roman Frister, Gerda Weissmann Klein and Kitty Hart-Moxon, all of whom wrote accounts of their experiences during the war. However, when it comes to material losses, the city survived the war almost intact. It was not bombed, and fighting during the Soviet offensive in the winter of 1945 was limited to today's peripheral districts, such as Ha\u0142cn\u00f3w and the eastern part of Lipnik.\nAfter World War II, the ethnic structure of the place changed. Most of the German population was expelled and those who remained assimilated with the Poles. In the 21st century, there is only a small German minority circle in the town. Poles transferred from the eastern areas that had been annexed to the USSR, as well as new settlers from central Poland, especially Lesser Poland, came to Bielsko-Bia\u0142a.\nThe new Polish authorities initially restored the pre-war borders, including the division into Bielsko and Bia\u0142a in two different voivodeships. But soon the decision to re-unify the two towns was made. The new municipality under the name \"Bielsko-Bia\u0142a\" was created on 1 January 1951. Until 1975, it was part of the Katowice Voivodeship.\nIn post-war Poland, the city has remained an important centre of textile industry (second only to \u0141\u00f3d\u017a), alongside which new branches have developed: in 1946 the Gliding Institute was established and in 1948 the car engine plant WSM, on the basis of which the FSM Automobile Factory was founded in 1972. The factory was born from an agreement between the FSO and Fiat for the construction of a new model, the Polski Fiat 126p, Polish version of Fiat 126 commonly known as \"Maluch\". A huge industrial complex has been built in the northern part of the city. Thousands of people came from all over Poland to work then; in the 1970s Bielsko-Bia\u0142a observed the biggest population boom in its history. The influx of new residents was associated with the construction of new housing estates with large panel system-buildings, like Z\u0142ote \u0141any (1970\u20131975), Wojska Polskiego (1976\u20131980), Beskidzkie (1976\u20131982) or Karpackie (1979\u20131982). The population has also increased due to the incorporation of surrounding communes: Kamienica and Mikuszowice (together with Olsz\u00f3wka) in 1969, Straconka in 1973, Stare Bielsko, Komorowice, Ha\u0142cn\u00f3w and Wapienica in 1977.\nBielsko-Bia\u0142a was made famous on a large scale by the Studio Film\u00f3w Rysunkowych (Animated Film Studio), founded in 1947. It was one of five animation studios in post-war Poland. Among the children's TV series produced here were \"Reksio\", \"Bolek i Lolek\", \"Margo the Mouse\" and \"Porwanie Baltazara G\u0105bki\".\nThe general strike launched by the workers of the Bewelana textile factory in January 1981 is considered the most effective strike of the first wave of Solidarity. The strikers forced the mayor of the city, the provincial governor, the commander of Milicja Obywatelska and the municipal and voivodeship secretaries of the Communist party to resign.\nFrom 1975 to 1998, Bielsko-Bia\u0142a was the capital of the Bielsko-Bia\u0142a Voivodeship, covering most of Polish Cieszyn Silesia and south-western Lesser Poland (counties of \u017bywiec, O\u015bwi\u0119cim, Wadowice and Sucha Beskidzka). To describe its territory, the name \"Podbeskidzie\" was adopted, which is still popular among Bielsko-Bia\u0142a residents (\"Bielsko-Bia\u0142a - the capital of Podbeskidzie\"), but elsewhere it is criticized as an artificial term that is trying to replace traditional historical and geographical lands. The subject of a lively public debate is the long-term effects of the loss of the status of a provincial capital as a result of the administrative reform in 1998, when the area of the former Bielsko-Bia\u0142a Voivodeship was divided and Bielsko-Bia\u0142a was incorporated into the Silesian Voivodeship.\nThe economic transformation after 1989 affected the industrial city with a serious socio-economic crisis. The textile industry, which almost disappeared from Bielsko-Bia\u0142a, was the most affected. The car factory bought directly by Fiat limited its production only to components. The bad condition of the historic Old Town was the clearest sign of the city's decline in the 1990s, while its gradual revitalization started in 2002 became an important symbol of changes for the better. During the first and second decades of the 21st century, Bielsko-Bia\u0142a managed to return to the path of economic prosperity. Between 2001 and 2009, on the site of the demolished Lenko and Finex textile factories, a large shopping mall, Galeria Sfera, was built. It is a characteristic post-modernist architectural structure on the banks of the Bia\u0142a river, however criticised for its negative influence on the traditional commercial zone located around the nearby 11 Listopada Street pedestrian zone. Like other contemporary cities, Bielsko-Bia\u0142a is strongly affected by suburbanization, which results in a decrease in the number of inhabitants while the population of the neighboring communes is increasing.\nDemographics.\nOn December 31, 2021, the population of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a was 168,835, including 79,740 (47.2%) men and 89,095 (52.8%) women. This means that there were 112 women for every 100 men. 56.4% of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a's residents were of working age, 17.5% were of pre-working age, and 26.0% of residents were of post-working age. The city's population accounted for 3.77% of the population of the Silesian Voivodeship. Population density was 1,356 people per square kilometer.\nThe natural increase, according to data for 2020, was negative, at -610 (-3.58 per thousand residents). 1519 children were born and 2129 deaths were registered. The fertility rate at 1.44 was slightly higher than that of the voivodeship and Poland as a whole. The balance of internal migration was -355 in 2020, while foreign migration was +24. 592 marriages were concluded. 28.6% of residents were single, 55.0% were married, 6.9% were divorced, and 9.4% were widows and widowers.\nAt the time of the merger of Bielsko and Bia\u0142a in 1951, the city had a population of about 60,000. Over the years, the population increased with the development of industry and the incorporation of nearby municipalities, particularly fast in the 1970s. Bielsko-Bia\u0142a reached its highest population (184,421) in 1991. Since then, as in most cities in Poland, there has been a gradual decline in population. Between 2002 and 2021, the population declined by 5.1%. According to forecasts by the Central Statistical Office, Bielsko-Biala is expected to have a population of 161,900 in 2025, 150,400 in 2035 and 133,300 in 2050.\nIn the 2021 Polish census 99.30% of the population of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a (167,913 people) declared Polish ethnicity. 2.30% declared another ethnicity (there were a possibility to declare dual ethnicity, so percentages do not add up to 100%), of which: 0.66% (1,108 people) Silesian, 0.21% (321 people) German, 0.20% (335 people) Ukrainian, 0.19% (313 people) English and 0.13% (222 people) Italian. 99.70% of the population (168 582 people) speak Polish at home. Other most commonly used languages (exclusively or together with Polish) are: English (2.30% or 3,893 people), German (0.44% or 743 people), Italian (0.23% or 388 people), Silesian (0.19% or 319 people), Ukrainian (0.16% or 275 people) and Russian (0.13% or 227 people). Detailed statistics on the religious structure are not available.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEthnic and linguistic structure.\nIn the National Census of Population and Housing 2021, 99.30% of Bielsko-Biala residents (167,913 people) declared Polish nationality. 2.30% declared a different nationality (as the only one or together with Polish), including: 0.66% (1108 people) Silesian, 0.21% (321 people) German, 0.20% (335 people) Ukrainian, 0.19% (313 people) English and 0.13% (222 people) Italian.\nIn the light of the same census, 99.70% of Bielszczans (168,582 people) speak Polish at home. The other most commonly used languages (exclusively or jointly with Polish) are: English (2.30%, 3893 people), German (0.44%, 743 people), Italian (0.23%, 388 people), Silesian (0.19%, etc%, 319 people), Ukrainian (0.16%, 275 people) and Russian (0.13%, 227 people).\nSights.\nThe Old Town of Bielsko is located on the Town Hill. It is characterized by an oval urban layout with a regular street grid running out from the corners of the rectangular Market Square (\"Rynek\"), typical of towns founded in the 13th century under the Magdeburg Law. The external appearance of the buildings dates mainly from the first half of the 19th century, when the town was restored after the fires of 1808 and 1836. Among the most picturesque corners are Podcienie Street, where 18th-century arcades are still preserved, and Schodowa Street, which is a step street. Along Orkana, Wary\u0144skiego and Zamkowa Street, fragments of the outer belt of town walls completed in the 16th century have been preserved.\nWithin the Old Town are two iconic historic buildings: \nTo the north of the Old Town lies the Bielsko Zion (\"Bielski Syjon\"), a Lutheran quarter founded after Emperor Joseph II issued the 1782 Edict of Tolerance. There are important monuments associated with the Lutheran community here: the Church of the Saviour (1782-1790, then extended several times in the 19th century, including between 1881 and 1882 by Heinrich Ferstel), the only Luther Monument in present-day Poland, unveiled in 1900, a complex of school buildings from the 19th century, and the Old Lutheran Cemetery.\nTo the west of the Old Town, along Cieszy\u0144ska and Sobieskiego Street, extends the Upper Suburb (\"G\u00f3rne Przedmie\u015bcie\"). It is a former clothmakers' quarter with characteristic small-town buildings. Particularly notable among them is the wooden Weaver's House with a museum dedicated to the life and work of the clothiers in the pre-industrial era. Somewhat tucked away in Zdrojowa Street stands one of the oldest still preserved villas of Bielsko's rich factory owners - the Neo-Renaissance Villa Bartelmuss from 1872.\nThe Lower Suburb (\"Dolne Przedmie\u015bcie\"), which extends to the north, is dominated by the turn-of-the-20th-century architecture. This is where the greatest concentration of Revivalist and Art Nouveau buildings to which Bielsko-Bia\u0142a owes the term \"Little Vienna\" is to be found: the own house of the architect Carl Korn (1883), Villa Sixt (1883), J\u0119drzej \u015aniadecki School of Electrical, Electronic and Mechanical Engineering (originally \"the High Schools Building\", 1883), the former Municipal Savings Bank (\"Komunalna Kasa Oszcz\u0119dno\u015bci\", 1889, with an extension of 1901 by Max Fabiani and another extension of 1908\u20131910), Main Train Station (1890), Theatre (1890), Hotel President (1893), Main Post Office (1898), the former district office (1903, now one of the seats of the Regional Court), Villa Schneider (1904), Bielsko Industrial School (\"Bielska Szko\u0142a Przemys\u0142owa\", 1912). Architecturally valuable are the complexes of the bourgeois townhouses along 3 Maja, 11 Listopada, Barlickiego or Mickiewicza Street. Boles\u0142awa Chrobrego Square, commonly known as \"Pigal\", stretching between the Bielsko Castle and the former Municipal Savings Bank, is the de facto central square of the city today. A much lesser role is now played by Franciszka Smolki Square which is the historic Lower Market.\nThe axis of the historic centre of Bia\u0142a is the right bank section of 11 Listopada Street, laid out in the 1780s. Numerous townhouses representing the so-called Josephine style (named after Emperor Joseph II) with Baroque and Neoclassical features have been preserved along it. The street, which today serves as the main promenade, passes through two of Bia\u0142a's historic markets: Wojska Polskiego Square (delineated in 1723) and Wolno\u015bci Square (delineated in the 1780s). The two main churches in Bia\u0142a also date from the late 18th century: the Lutheran Church of Martin Luther (1782\u20131788) and the Roman Catholic Church of the Divine Providence (1769, expanded in the 19th century). The Lutheran church is located next to Wojska Polskiego Square, while the Catholic church is on what used to be outskirts of the town, near the border with Lipnik.\nBia\u0142a's Town Hall, built between 1895 and 1897 in Neo-Renaissance style according to a design by Emanuel Rost Junior, today serves as the City Hall for the combined city. Other important architectural monuments from the turn of the 20th century in Bia\u0142a are: the former Polish elementary school at Legion\u00f3w Street (1898), Jakubecki House at 51 Stoja\u0142owskiego Street (1903, by Leopold Bauer), Frog House (\"Kamienica Pod \u017babami\", 1903, a prominent example of Art Nouveau), Pedagogical Library (1903, originally the villa of the architect Emanuel Rost Junior), the former hotel Under the Eagle (\"Hotel Pod Or\u0142em\", 1904) and the Economic High School (\"Zesp\u00f3\u0142 Szk\u00f3\u0142 Ekonomicznych\", 1910, originally the Polish Teachers' Seminary).\nThe architecture of the interwar period also plays an important role in the cityscape. The largest concentration of early Modernist housing is in the area of Bohater\u00f3w Warszawy, Wilsona and Grota-Roweckiego Street, which has been built up since 1934 (before that, the castle gardens stretched here). The public buildings of the 1920s and 1930s include: Nicolaus Copernicus High School (\"Liceum Kopernika\", 1925\u20131927), a complex of buildings at the intersection of Sixta and Krasi\u0144skiego Street (1922\u20131930), the fire station on Grunwaldzka Street (1928), and the new headquarters of the Municipal Savings Bank on the other side of Boles\u0142awa Chrobrego Square (1938).\nOld industrial buildings intersect with urban development in many places, especially in the Lower Suburb near the Bia\u0142a River, in the \u017bywiec Suburb (\"\u017bywieckie Przedmie\u015bcie\"), which is the southern part of Bielsko, and in Bia\u0142a. The Old Factory Museum (\"Stara Fabryka\") in the former B\u00fcttner's textile factory (\"Bewelana\" during the socialist period), the former Jacob Gross's vodka and liqueur factory (later \"Polmos\") converted into lofts at Stoja\u0142owskiego Street, the former Gustav Josephy's machine factory complex (\"Befama\") at Powsta\u0144c\u00f3w \u015al\u0105skich Street, or the whole area around Podwale and Gra\u017cy\u0144skiego Street are some notable examples. In the area of Micha\u0142owicza Street a workers' housing estate with \"familoks\" was built between 1892 and 1911.\nSignificant examples of post-war architecture in the central districts include: Grunwaldzkie housing estate (1951\u20131957), the bus station (1972), Library of Beskids (1973), Church of the Sacred Heart of Jesus (1984), \"Klimczok\" Cooperative Department Store (1988) and Art Exhibition Bureau (1989, now \"Galeria Bielska BWA\"). Post-modern and contemporary architecture is represented by the Galeria Sfera shopping mall (2000\u20132001, with an extension from 2007\u20132011) and by the blob concert hall Cavatina Hall (2019\u20132021).\nMurals have been created in many places in the inner city in recent years. The street art tourist trail counted 25 sites in 2022. As part of the \"Fairytale Bielsko-Biala\" trail, small monuments to characters from animated films produced by \"Studio Film\u00f3w Rysunkowych\" are being erected. By 2023, they have been created: Reksio, Bolek and Lolek, Baltazar G\u0105bka with the Wawel Dragon, Pampalini the Animal Hunter, and Don Pedro de Pommidore.\n\"Cyga\u0144ski Las\" (literally \"Gypsy Forest\") is a forest park located between the districts of Mikuszowice \u015al\u0105skie and Olsz\u00f3wka Dolna, at the foot of the Kozia G\u00f3ra and R\u00f3wnia mountains. At the end of the 19th century, it was arranged as a space for walking and relaxation for the inhabitants in imitation of the Vienna Woods and connected to the centre by a tram line (existing until 1971). Adjacent to \"Cyga\u0144ski Las\" there is a meadow area known as \"B\u0142onia\" used as a sports and recreation area. An important attraction of Olsz\u00f3wka Dolna and Mikuszowice \u015al\u0105skie is a number of bourgeois summer villas from the turn of the 20th century.\nAnother favourite destination for suburban excursions is the Szyndzielnia mountain, , which is accessible by a gondola lift. The tourist hostel on Szyndzielnia was opened in 1897. Attractions on the D\u0119bowiec mountain, , are a ski complex and a toboggan run. Both D\u0119bowiec and Szyndzielnia offer extensive views of the city.\nIn Stare Bielsko there is the Roman Catholic Church of St. Stanislaus, built around 1380, with well-preserved fragments of Gothic polychromies and a valuable altar triptych from the 16th century. The second temple of Stare Bielsko is the Lutheran Church of Saint John the Baptist in Neoclassical style from 1818. Adjacent to it there is a circular undeveloped area that is a remnant of a medieval hillfort (\"Grodzisko\"), a settlement that existed at this location before the city was founded.\nAnother important religious monument are Roman Catholic churches of St. Barbara in Mikuszowice Krakowskie (wooden, built in 1690) and of the Visitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary in Ha\u0142cn\u00f3w (from the 18th century, it serves as a local pilgrimage site). There is also a well-preserved Jewish cemetery in Aleksandrowice with a Moorish-style pre-burial house from 1885.\nCulture.\nCultural centres.\nThe most important public institutions organising cultural life in the city are: Maria Koterbska Bielsko-Bia\u0142a Cultural Centre (\"Bielskie Centrum Kultury im. Marii Koterbskiej\", BCK), Regional Cultural Centre (\"Regionalny O\u015brodek Kultury\", ROK), Municipal House of Culture (\"Miejski Dom Kultury\", MDK) made up of thirteen facilities including district culture centers including eight district cultural centres, Military Cultural Centre \"Soldier's House\" (\"Wojskowy O\u015brodek Kultury \"Dom \u017bo\u0142nierza\"\") and Cooperative Cultural Centre BEST (\"Sp\u00f3\u0142dzielczy Dom Kultury BEST\").\nTheatres and cinemas.\nPolish Theatre (\"Teatr Polski\") is a drama theater that was established after World War II as a successor to the German \"Stadttheater Bielitz\", founded in 1890, and took over its historic building at 1 Maja Street. Banialuka Puppet Theatre (\"Teatr Lalek Banialuka\") was founded in 1947 on the initiative of Jerzy Zitzman and Zenobiusz Zwolski. It is one of the leading institutions of its kind in Poland. In addition, numerous performances are staged at BCK cultural centre, and non-professional theater activities are conducted by the Bielsko-Bia\u0142a Artistic Association \"Teatr Grodzki\", founded in 1999.\nBielsko-Bia\u0142a is known as the city where \"Studio Film\u00f3w Rysunkowych\" (SFR)\u2014one of five animation studios established in post-war Poland\u2014is headquartered. It has existed since 1947, and has produced such cartoons as \"Reksio\", \"Bolek and Lolek\", \"Margo the Mouse\" and a number of others. Among the most recent works is the series \"Kuba i \u015aruba\", filmed between 2011 and 2016. In 2024, the OKO Interactive Fairy Tale and Animation Centre (\"Interaktywne Centrum Bajki i Animacji OKO\") was opened on the studio premises at 22-24 Cieszy\u0144ska Street, which serves as a museum and thematic entertainment and educational centre based on the SFR's heritage. The centre includes the Kreska cinema, the only arthouse cinema in the city. Apart from it, Bielsko-Biala has two multiplexes: \"Helios\" in the Galeria Sfera shopping mall and \"Cinema City\" in the Gemini Park shopping mall.\nArt galleries.\nThe largest art gallery is \"Galeria Bielska BWA\". It is a municipally owned institution founded in 1994 based on the transformation of the former Art Exhibition Bureau (\"Biuro Wystaw Artystycznych\"). It is located in the former Artists' Pavilion at 3 Maja Street, and since 2020 it has also had a second location in the historic Villa Sixt. There is a club caf\u00e9 Aquarium at the main BWA site which hosts numerous cultural and social events.\nAmong private establishments, the Wzg\u00f3rze Gallery, founded in 1987 by Franciszek Kukio\u0142a, and the Contemporary Art Gallery (\"Galeria Sztuki Wsp\u00f3\u0142czesnej\"), the Ars Nova sculpture and ceramics studio, which has existed since 1991, and the Photography Gallery B&amp;B, established in 1992 by Inez and Andrzej Baturo, have the longest and most vibrant tradition.\nMuseums.\nThe Historical Museum of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a (\"Muzeum Historyczne w Bielsku-Bia\u0142ej\") has its seat in the Bielsko Castle, where the permanent exhibition is divided into nine parts: \"History of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a and its surroundings\" (historical and archaeological exhibition), \"Biedermeier\" or bourgeois salon of the second half of the 19th century, \"Music salon\", \"Hall of ancient art\", \"Shooting gallery\" (collection of weapons), \"Gallery of European and Polish painting of the 19th and 20th century\", \"Gallery of portrait painting of the 19th and first half of the 20th century\", \"Gallery of graphics of the turn of the 19th and 20th century\", \"Gallery of contemporary art of the Bielsko-Bia\u0142a region\" (works of the second half of the 20th century with special emphasis on artists from the Beskid Group around Ignacy Bieniek). In addition, the museum has three branches:\nThere are several private museums in the city: the Automotive Museum (\"Muzeum Motoryzacji\") with a small collection of old cars and other automotive exhibits made available by the Beskidy Car Club (\"Automobilklub Beskidzki\"), the Fiat 126p Museum with a collection of Fiat 126p cars produced since the 1970s at the FSM factory in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a run by Antoni Przychodzie\u0144, the Museum of Armored Weapons and Militaria (\"Muzeum Broni Pancernej i Militari\u00f3w\") with a collection of military vehicles collected since the 1980s by Rafa\u0142 Bier, and the Museum of Minerals \"Treasures of the Earth\" (\"Muzeum Minera\u0142\u00f3w \"Skarby Ziemi\"\") run by Piotr Kotula.\nAt the end of 2023, the activities of the W\u0142adys\u0142aw Reymont Museum of Literature (\"Muzeum Literatury im. W\u0142adys\u0142awa Reymonta\"), which was run in an old town house at 1 Pankiewicza St. by Tadeusz Modrzejewski, who had devoted himself to transcribing the works of W\u0142adys\u0142aw Reymont by hand since the 1980s, were suspended. The collection secured by \"Ksi\u0105\u017cnica Beskidzka\" is to be made available again after the renovation of the building.\nMusic.\nIn 2021, a modern concert hall named \"Cavatina Hall\", with philharmonic parameters, was put into operation.\nThere are several orchestras and musical ensembles affiliated to the Maria Koterbska Bielsko-Bia\u0142a Cultural Centre: Bielsko-Bia\u0142a Chamber Orchestra (\"Bielska Orkiestra Kameralna\"), Bielsko-Bia\u0142a Brass Band (\"Bielska Orkiestra D\u0119ta\"), Bielsko-Bia\u0142a Chamber Choir (\"Bielski Ch\u00f3r Kameralny\"), Ave Sol youth choir, \"Bielsko\" Song and Dance Ensemble (\"Zesp\u00f3\u0142 Pie\u015bni i Ta\u0144ca \"Bielsko\"\") and children's \"Jarz\u0119binki\" Dance and Song Ensemble (\"Zesp\u00f3\u0142 Ta\u0144ca i Piosenki \"Jarz\u0119binki\"\"). In addition, the Telemann Orchestra (\"Orkiestra im. Telemanna\") has been active in the city since 1993, aiming to promote early music.\nFrom Bielsko-Bia\u0142a come musical bands such as Akurat, Eye for an Eye, Grupa Furmana, Kapitan DA, Newbreed and Psio Crew.\nEducation.\nUniversity of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a (\"Uniwersytet Bielsko-Bialski\", until 2023 called in Polish \"Akademia Techniczno-Humanistyczna\") was founded in 2001 through the transformation of the Bielsko-Bia\u0142a branch of the Technical University of \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, which had existed since 1969. As of 2023, it is made up of five faculties: Faculty of Mechanical Engineering and Computer Science; Faculty of Materials, Construction and Environmental Engineering; Faculty of Management and Transport; Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences; and Faculty of Health Sciences. In the 2022/2023 academic year, around five thousand students were educated there. The campus is located in the southern part of the city, in the Mikuszowice \u015al\u0105skie district.\nIn 2023, a branch of the Medical University of Silesia opened in the city.\nIn addition, there are five private colleges established in the city in the 1990s:\nEconomy.\nAt the end of 2021, 27,799 enterprises were registered in the National Official Register of Entities of the National Economy. 26,724 (96.13%) of them were in the private sector, and 597 (2.14%) in the public sector. Enterprises employing up to 9 employees dominated, with 26,619. Only three enterprises had more than a thousand employees.\nThe unemployment rate was only 2.2% at the end of 2021 and was significantly lower than the national and provincial average (among the cities of the Silesian Voivodeship, it was lower only in Katowice and Tychy). The average gross monthly salary in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a was PLN 5,789.65, which corresponded to 96.5% of the average gross monthly salary in Poland. Among the economically active residents, 4,700 people traveled to other cities to work, and 24,302 people came to work from outside the municipality, meaning that the balance of arrivals and departures to work was 19,602. 42.9% of people worked in industry and construction, 21.3% in the service sector, 2.3% in the financial sector, and 0.9% in agriculture.\nHistorically, Bielsko-Bia\u0142a was an important industrial center, especially of the textile industry, which, however, completely lost its importance as a result of the economic transformation after 1989. Among the few factories today that continue these traditions are the Befaszczot brush factory, the Befado shoe factory, the Zipper zipper factory and the Rytex wool fabric manufacturer.\nCurrently, the largest industrial area is located in the northern part of the city between Komorowice, Stare Bielsko and Dolne Przedmie\u015bcie. This is the former Fabryka Samochod\u00f3w Ma\u0142olitra\u017cowych, which was taken over by Fiat Auto Poland during the transformation and since 2021 has been part of Stellantis Poland. While actual car production now takes place in Tychy, the plant in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a produces engines. Since 2000, the area has been one of the sub-areas of the Katowice Special Economic Zone. In subsequent years, further areas in Wapienica, Komorowice and Lipnik were included. In 2021, a total of twenty enterprises employing more than 4.6 thousand workers operated on the 82-hectare area of the special economic zone.\nOther important factories based in Bielsko-Biala include Bielmar, which produces margarines, oils and animal feed, as well as the Silesian Vodka Factory POLMOS Bielsko-Bia\u0142a, where Extra \u017bytnia vodka is produced.\nBielsko-Biala is among the cities with the highest saturation of retail space in Poland. According to a 2019 report by Colliers International, it was per 1,000 residents. In total, the city had of retail space. As much as one-third of this figure fell on the largest shopping mall, which is Galeria Sfera. It consists of two buildings\u2014Sfera I and Sfera II\u2014erected on the site of former industrial plants and completed in 2001 and 2009, respectively. There are a number of other shopping facilities in the immediate vicinity, led by the \"Klimczok\" Cooperative Department Store owned by PSS Spo\u0142em, which was built in 1988 and at the time was one of the largest in Poland. At the start of the 1990s an urban myth arose about the department store concerning drug users deliberately leaving blood on the escalators. The anthropologist Olga Drenda has suggested the story, relating to the contemporary HIV epidemic, is symbolic of the era of transition from communism. Other large shopping malls include Gemini Park in Leszczyny and Sarni Stok in the northern part of the city. There are also Auchan, Kaufland, Makro, Castorama and Leroy Merlin hypermarkets, as well as number of supermarkets and smaller retail outlets. The traditional shopping promenade is 11 Listopada Street. However, the number of stores and service outlets located through it has declined markedly in recent years, which is often attributed to the negative influence of large shopping malls. Outdoor marketplaces are located on Lompy and Broniewskiego Street, as well as in Komorowice Krakowskie.\nThe most important trade fairs held in Bielsko-Biala are the ENERGETAB Bielsko International Energy Fair organized by ZIAD Bielsko-Bia\u0142a, as well as those whose organization is the responsibility of the ASTRA Promotion and Exhibition Office: the \"Tw\u00f3j Dom\" International Construction Fair, the \"Instal-System\" Fair of Heating Techniques and Energy Saving, and the EKOStyl International Fair. The main venue for the fairs is the multi-purpose hall on Karbowa Street.\nTransport.\nRail transport.\nThe railroad reached the city in 1855, when a branch of the Emperor Ferdinand Northern Railway was built. Currently, three railway lines cross the city:\nRegional train services to Katowice and Zwardo\u0144 are operated by Koleje \u015al\u0105skie, while Polregio trains run to Kalwaria Zebrzydowska and Krak\u00f3w. In addition, Bielsko-Bia\u0142a has connections with large Polish cities (Bia\u0142ystok, Bydgoszcz, Warsaw, Wroc\u0142aw, Pozna\u0144, Gda\u0144sk) by PKP Intercity express trains. Services on the line 190 were suspended in 2009. In 2023, plans were announced to restore trains on this route.\nThe main railway station is Bielsko-Bia\u0142a G\u0142\u00f3wna, located in the northern part of the city centre. In total, there are twelve railway stations and stops in the city, eight of which are currently (2023) open for passenger traffic.\nRoad transport.\nBielsko-Bia\u0142a is located within a short distance to Czech and Slovakian borders on the crossroads of two expressways connecting Poland with neighbouring countries:\nBielsko-Bia\u0142a is connected with the rest of Poland by the National road 1 (dual carriageway) running to Tychy where it intersects the Expressway S1 and further to Katowice where it intersects the Motorway A4.\nIt is planned to extend S1 north along the existing dual carriageway DK1 from Bielsko-Bia\u0142a to Tychy and Katowice, thus building an expressway connection of the city with the national motorway network of Poland. National road 52 connects Bielsko-Bia\u0142a with Krak\u00f3w in the east. The most important interchange in the area is the cloverleaf north of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a (Komorowice \u015al\u0105skie district) where S1, DK1 and S52 meet.\nAleja Andersa and Bora-Komorowskiego Street constitute the Downtown Western Bypass (\"\u015ar\u00f3dmiejska Obwodnica Zachodnia\"), which connects the districts of Leszczyny, Kamienica, Aleksandrowice and Stare Bielsko to the junction with S52.\nAccording to the June 2021 ranking, Bielsko-Bia\u0142a had 826.7 registered vehicles per 1,000 inhabitants, including 681.3 passenger cars, which means that it was the ninth most motorized city in Poland and the second (after Katowice) in the Silesian Voivodeship.\nPublic transport.\nThe public transport system in the city has been in existence since 1895. Until 1972 it included a tram network, and since 1927 also a bus network which is currently the only one.\nThe main carrier is \"Miejski Zak\u0142ad Komunikacyjny w Bielsku-Bia\u0142ej\" (Municipal Transport Company of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a, MZK), which in 2023 served transport on 40 daily and two night bus lines. Four of them went outside the city limits: to Czechowice-Dziedzice, Bystra, Wilkowice and Janowice. Some stops in Bielsko-Bia\u0142a are also served by three lines of \"PKM Czechowice-Dziedzice\", a municipal bus company from the neighbouring town, marked with numbers 5, VII and X (to distinguish from \"7\" and \"10\" of MZK). The fares and timetables of the two carriers are not coordinated.\nRegional bus transport within the Bielsko County, as well as towards K\u0119ty, Andrych\u00f3w and Chybie, is operated by \"Komunikacja Beskidzka\" established in 2021 as a result of the transformation of the former PKS Bielsko-Bia\u0142a. The bus station from which the KB lines (numbered from 100 upwards) and long-distance bus connections depart, is located at Warszawska Street opposite the Bielsko-Bia\u0142a G\u0142\u00f3wna railway station.\nThere also small private bus companies operating in the region, e.g. \"Linea Trans\" with services to Strumie\u0144 and to Cieszyn via Skocz\u00f3w, \"Konkret Bus\" for Brzeszcze and O\u015bwi\u0119cim, or \"\u017b\u0105d\u0142o\" going to Szczyrk. Their stops are located near the station: at Warszawska, Podwale and Wa\u0142owa Street.\nAirports.\nThere are 3 international airports within a radius of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a, all serving connections with major European cities: Katowice International Airport, Krak\u00f3w John Paul II International Airport, Ostrava Leo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek Airport.\nIn Aleksandrowice there is an airport with a unpaved runway used by the Aeroclub of Bielsko-Bia\u0142a for sports purposes. Another airport in the vicinity is Bielsko-Bia\u0142a Kani\u00f3w Airport, which is part of the Bielsko-Bia\u0142a Technology Park of Aviation, Entrepreneurship and Innovation.\nSports.\nThe city co-hosted the 1978 UEFA European Under-18 Championship, 2009 European Youth Olympic Winter Festival, 2019 FIFA U-20 World Cup and 2023 European Games.\nPolitics.\nBielsko-Biala is a city with county rights, and also forms a single municipality (\"gmina\") in its entirety. The mayor of the city since 2018 is Jaros\u0142aw Klimaszewski, elected as a candidate of the Civic Coalition.\nThe results of the city council elections for the 2024-2029 term were as follows:\nIn the Sejm elections, Bielsko-Bia\u0142a is part of constituency No. 27 along with Bielsko, Cieszyn, Pszczyna and \u017bywiec counties. The following deputies represent the constituency in the 2023-2027 term: \nIn the Senate elections, Bielsko-Bia\u0142a is part of constituency No. 78 along with Bielsko and Pszczyna counties. For the 2032-2027 term, the constituency is represented by Agnieszka Gorgo\u0144-Komor of the Civic Coalition.\nBielsko-Biala is the seat of the Bielsko County authorities and one of the three\u2014along with \u017dilina and Fr\u00fddek-M\u00edstek\u2014capitals of the Euroregion Beskydy. It also houses the delegations of the Silesian Voivodeship Office and the Marshal's Office of the Silesian Voivodeship.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nBielsko-Bia\u0142a is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74604", "revid": "51019107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74604", "title": "Rzesz\u00f3w", "text": "City in Podkarpackie Voivodeship, Poland\nRzesz\u00f3w ( , ) is the largest city in southeastern Poland. It is located on both sides of the Wis\u0142ok River in the heartland of the Sandomierz Basin. Rzesz\u00f3w is the capital of the Subcarpathian Voivodeship and the seat of Rzesz\u00f3w County.\nThe history of Rzesz\u00f3w dates back to the Middle Ages. It received city rights and privileges from King Casimir III the Great in 1354. Local trade routes connecting Europe with the Middle East and the Ottoman Empire resulted in the city's early prosperity and development. In the 16th century, Rzesz\u00f3w had a connection with Gda\u0144sk and the Baltic Sea. It also experienced growth in commerce and craftsmanship, especially under local rulers and noblemen. Following the Partitions of Poland, Rzesz\u00f3w was annexed by the Austrian Empire and did not regain its position until it returned to Poland after World War I.\nRzesz\u00f3w has found its place in the group of the most elite cities in Poland, with a growing number of investments, rapid progress and a high standard of living. In 2011 Forbes awarded Rzesz\u00f3w with the second place in the ranking of the most attractive semi-large cities for business. Moreover, the city is home to a number of higher education institutions and foreign consulates. Rzesz\u00f3w is also developing as a regional tourist destination; its Old Town, Main Market Square, churches and synagogues are among the best preserved in the country.\nIn recent years, the population of Rzesz\u00f3w has grown from 159,000 (2005) to over 198,000 (2024), mainly owing to an influx of Ukrainian refugees after the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Further plans for extending the city's borders include incorporating surrounding counties to strengthen its function as a metropolitan center in southeastern Poland. Rzesz\u00f3w is served by an international airport and is a member of Eurocities.\nHistory.\nIn the area of Rzesz\u00f3w, the first early European modern humans appeared in the late Paleolithic Age; archaeologists have excavated a tool made in that period at site Rzesz\u00f3w 25. In the mid-6th century BC, the first farmers came to the area of the city, most likely through the Moravian Gate. Later on, Rzesz\u00f3w was a settlement of the Lusatian culture, which was followed by the Przeworsk culture.\nIn the 7th century, the first Slavs appeared in the area, which is confirmed by numerous archaeological findings. Most probably, Rzesz\u00f3w was then inhabited by the Vistulans. In the 10th century, it became part of the emerging Duchy of Poland. Sometime between 11th and 13th century the town was conquered and subsequently annexed by the East Slavic Ruthenians from the weakened and fragmented Polish state (see Testament of Boles\u0142aw III Wrymouth).\nPolish rulers of the Piast dynasty recaptured Rzesz\u00f3w in 1264. In Tarn\u00f3w, there was a meeting of Prince Boles\u0142aw V the Chaste, and Prince Daniel of Kingdom of Galicia\u2013Volhynia, during which both sides agreed that the border would go between Rzesz\u00f3w and Czudec (Rzesz\u00f3w belonged to Kingdom of Galicia\u2013Volhynia, while Czudec and Strzy\u017c\u00f3w to Lesser Poland).\nAfter the reunification of Poland following the fragmentation period, Rzesz\u00f3w remained in Ruthenian hands until 1340, when King Casimir III the Great eventually recaptured the area, inviting his knights to govern the re-acquired land. According to some sources, at that time Rzesz\u00f3w was inhabited by the Walddeutsche, and was called Rishof (during World War II, the Germans renamed it \"Reichshof\"). The town was granted Magdeburg rights, it had a parish church, a market place and a cemetery, and its total area was some . Magdeburg rights entitled Rzesz\u00f3w's local authorities to punish criminals, build fortifications and tax merchants.\nIn 1458 Rzesz\u00f3w was burned by the Vlachs and the Tatars. In 1502 the Tatars destroyed it again. Earlier, in 1427, Rzesz\u00f3w had burned to the ground in a big fire, but the town recovered after these events, thanks to its favorable location on the main West \u2013 East (Krak\u00f3w \u2013 Lw\u00f3w) and North \u2013 South (Lublin \u2013 Slovakia) trade routes. In the 15th century the first Jews settled in Rzesz\u00f3w.\nThe 16th century was the time of prosperity for the town, especially when Rzesz\u00f3w belonged to Miko\u0142aj Spytek Lig\u0119za (since the 1580s), who invested in infrastructure, building a castle, a Bernardine church and a monastery. Rzesz\u00f3w then had some 2,500 inhabitants, with a rapidly growing Jewish community. The town was granted several royal rights, including the privilege to organise several markets a year. At that time, Rzesz\u00f3w finally grew beyond its medieval borders, marked by fortifications.\nIn 1638 Rzesz\u00f3w passed into the hands of the powerful and wealthy Lubomirski family, becoming the center of its vast properties. At first, the town prospered and in 1658, the first college was opened there, which now operates as Konarski Secondary School. The period of prosperity ended, and furthermore, there were several fires and wars, which destroyed the town.\nRzesz\u00f3w was first captured by the Swedes during The Deluge, then by the troops of George II R\u00e1k\u00f3czi leading to the Treaty of Radnot. During the Great Northern War, the Swedes again captured Rzesz\u00f3w, in 1702, then several different armies occupied the town, ransacking it and destroying houses.\nIn the mid-eighteenth century, the town's population was composed of Poles (Roman Catholics) and Yiddish Jews in almost equal numbers (50.1% and 49.8%, respectively).\nRzesz\u00f3w under Austrian rule.\nIn 1772, following the First Partition of Poland, Rzesz\u00f3w became part of the Austrian Empire, to which it belonged for 146 years. In the late 18th century, Rzesz\u00f3w had 3,000 inhabitants. By the mid-19th century, the population grew to around 7,500, with 40% of them Jewish. In 1858, the Galician Railway of Archduke Charles Louis reached Rzesz\u00f3w, which resulted in further development of the town. In 1888 the first telephone lines were opened, in 1900 \u2013 gas street lamps, and in 1911 \u2013 a power plant and water system. The population grew to 23,000, with half of the inhabitants being Jews. A number of modern buildings were constructed, most of them in Secession style.\nDuring World War I, several battles took place near the town. Rzesz\u00f3w was home to a large garrison of the Austro-Hungarian Army, and in the city of Przemy\u015bl, located nearby, there was a major fortress. During the Battle of Galicia in the late summer of 1914, Russian troops moved towards Rzesz\u00f3w, and on 21 September, they captured it. The first Russian occupation lasted only 16 days, ending after an attack by the Austrians, on 4 October.\nUnder Russian pressure, the Austrians were unable to keep the town, and on 7 November, the Russians again appeared in Rzesz\u00f3w. In the late fall of 1914, the front line was established between Tarn\u00f3w and Gorlice, and Rzesz\u00f3w became an important center of the Imperial Russian Army, with large magazines of food and ammunition located there. The Russian occupation lasted until May 1915. After the Russians were pushed out of Galicia, Rzesz\u00f3w remained outside the area of military activity. The Austrian administration returned, but wartime reality and damage to the town had a negative effect on the population, and the quality of life deteriorated.\nInterwar period.\nOn 12 October 1918, Rzesz\u00f3w's mayor, together with the town council, sent a message to Warsaw, announcing loyalty to the independent Second Polish Republic. On November 1, after clashes with German and Austrian troops, Rzesz\u00f3w was liberated, and the next day, mayor Roman Krogulski took a pledge of allegiance to the reborn Polish state. During World War I some 200 residents of Rzesz\u00f3w died, rail infrastructure was destroyed, as well as approximately 60 houses.\nIn 1920, Rzesz\u00f3w became capital of a county in the Lw\u00f3w Voivodeship. The town grew, and the creation of the Central Industrial Region had an enormous impact on Rzesz\u00f3w. It became a major center of the defense industry, with PZL Rzesz\u00f3w opening there in 1937. It was also home to a large garrison of the Polish Army, with the 10th Motorized Cavalry Brigade stationed there. In 1939, Rzesz\u00f3w had 40,000 inhabitants, but its dynamic growth was stopped by the Invasion of Poland and outbreak of World War II.\nSecond World War.\nOn 6\u20138 September 1939, Rzesz\u00f3w was bombed by the Luftwaffe. The town was defended by the 10th Cavalry Brigade and 24th Uhlan Regiment from Kra\u015bnik. The German attack began on 8 September in the afternoon, and the Wehrmacht entered Rzesz\u00f3w the next morning. The \"Einsatzgruppe I\" entered the city to commit crimes against the population, and its members co-formed the local German police. Under German occupation, Rzesz\u00f3w, renamed into \"Reichshof\", became part of the General Government.\nThe occupiers established a Nazi prison, in which they imprisoned over 1,100 Poles, especially the intelligentsia, arrested in the region between October 1939 and June 1940, during the \"Intelligenzaktion\". Some people were eventually released, some were deported to prisons in Krak\u00f3w and Tarn\u00f3w, while many were executed at the prison yard. On 2 November 1939, the Germans carried out mass arrests of local priests and Bernardine friars, and afterwards, they also carried out executions of Polish intelligentsia at the local Bernardine monastery.\nPersecution of Polish intelligentsia was continued with the \"AB-Aktion\", and on 27 June 1940, 104 Poles from the local prison were exterminated in the forest of Lubzina. In 1941, the Germans established a ghetto, whose Jewish inhabitants were later murdered in Be\u0142\u017cec extermination camp (for more information see \"The Holocaust\" below).\nDuring the war, Rzesz\u00f3w was a main center of the Polish Underground State, with the Rzesz\u00f3w Inspectorate of the Home Army covering several counties. On 25 May, during Action Kosba, Home Army soldiers killed the Gestapo henchmen Friederich Pottenbaum and Hans Flaschke on a Rzesz\u00f3w street. In the summer of 1944, during Operation Tempest, units of the Home Army attacked German positions in the town, and on 2 August, Rzesz\u00f3w was in the hands of the Home Army.\nPolish authorities loyal to the Polish government-in-exile tried to negotiate with the Soviets, but without success. The NKVD immediately opened a prison in the cellars of the Rzesz\u00f3w Castle, sending there a number of Home Army soldiers. On the night of 7/9 October 1944, a Home Army unit under \u0141ukasz Ciepli\u0144ski attacked the castle, trying to release 400 inmates kept there. The attack failed, and Ciepli\u0144ski was captured and subsequently executed in 1951.\nThe Holocaust.\nBefore the outbreak of World War II, the Jews of Rzesz\u00f3w numbered 14,000, more than one-third of the total population. The town was occupied by the German Army on 10 September 1939 and was renamed \"Reichshof\". German persecution of the Jews began almost immediately. By the end of 1939, there were 10 forced labour camps in the Rzesz\u00f3w region and many Jews became slave labourers. Jews were forced to live in the Gestapo-controlled ghetto.\nMany Jews managed to flee to Soviet-occupied eastern Poland. By June 1940, the number of Jews in Rzesz\u00f3w had decreased to 11,800, of whom 7,800 were pre-war residents of the city; the rest were from the surrounding villages. As in all Jewish ghettos in German-occupied Poland, life in the ghetto was impossible and hundreds died of malnutrition and disease. During the war, some 20,000 Jews were murdered in the ghetto in Rzesz\u00f3w. This number includes thousands who were sent to Rzesz\u00f3w only to be deported or murdered soon after arrival.\nIn the summer of 1942, hundreds were murdered in forests near Rzesz\u00f3w. Hundreds more were sent to Belzec to be immediately gassed. Later in 1942, another round up sent nearly 1,500 children to their deaths and their parents to labor camps. In final \"Aktions\" in the fall of 1943, most Jewish slave labour was transported in Holocaust trains to the newly reopened Szebnie concentration camp. A month later, on 5 November 1943, some 2,800 Jews were deported to Auschwitz and murdered. Most of those who had been sent to labor camps were eventually murdered there or in an extermination camp.\nOf Rzesz\u00f3w's 14,000 Jews, only 100 survived the war, whether in Rzesz\u00f3w itself, hiding all over Poland, or in various camps. The secret Polish Council to Aid Jews, \"\u017begota\", established by the Polish resistance movement, operated in the region. Cases are also known of local Poles who were captured and either executed or sent to concentration camps for rescuing and aiding Jews. Poles who saved Jews in other places in the region were also temporarily imprisoned in the local castle or sentenced to death by the local German court. After the war, an additional 600 Rzesz\u00f3w Jews returned from the Soviet Union. Almost all of them subsequently left Rzesz\u00f3w and Poland.\nPeople's Republic and present times.\nAfter rumors of the murder of a Christian girl in the city surfaced, on 1 June 1945, or after the mutilated body of 9-year-old Bronis\u0142awa Mendo\u0144 was found in the basement of a tenement building largely inhabited by Holocaust survivors on 11 June 1945, the Polish Communist Citizens' Militia arrested all of Rzesz\u00f3w's remaining Jews, or the Jewish inhabitants of the area and some Jews transiting through the railway station, and led them through the city amidst an angry crowd, while at the same time looting the homes of the arrested Jews. All of the arrested people were released the same day, but the main suspect, who was linked to the crime through a sheet of paper from Mendo\u0144's notebook and bloodstains in his flat, was arrested on June 14 and held until September. As a result, more than 200 Jews fled Rzesz\u00f3w, so that a restoration of Jewish life in the city after 1945 failed to materialize.\nOn 7 July 1945, Rzesz\u00f3w became capital of the newly created Rzesz\u00f3w Voivodeship, which consisted of western counties of prewar Lw\u00f3w Voivodeship, and several counties of prewar Krak\u00f3w Voivodeship. This decision had a major impact on the city, as it quickly grew. New offices of the regional government were built, and in 1951, several neighbouring villages were included within the city limits of Rzesz\u00f3w, and the area of the city grew to .\nBefore the Polish People's Republic deported ethnic Ukrainians to the western \"Recovered Territories\" in Operation Vistula, the city was a major base of support for the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists during the Polish anti-communist resistance.\nIn 1971 and 1977, further villages were included within the city limits. In early 1981, Rzesz\u00f3w was a main center of farmer protests, who occupied local offices for fifty days, which resulted in the signing of the Rzesz\u00f3w \u2013 Ustrzyki Agreement, and the creation of Rural Solidarity.\nOn 1 January 1999, the city became the capital of Podkarpackie Voivodeship. Its population grew to 170,000, and area to .\nIn 2004, Rzesz\u00f3w hosted the Central European Olympiad in Informatics (CEOI).\nIn 2017\u20132021, Rzesz\u00f3w's city limits were greatly expanded by including the villages of Bzianka, Mi\u0142ocin and Pogwizd\u00f3w Nowy. The area of Rzesz\u00f3w increased to over 120 square kilometres and more than 188,000 inhabitants.\nIn 2022 following the February Russian invasion of Ukraine, Rzesz\u00f3w became a \"main artery\" and hub for resupply of military material being transshipped to Ukraine from a number of countries of the Western alliance, including Sweden, Turkey, Germany, the U.S., and the Czech Republic.\nIn June 2022, Rzesz\u00f3w formed a partnership agreement with Chernihiv, Ukraine to become sister cities.\nPapal visit.\nIn 1991 Pope John Paul II visited Rzesz\u00f3w. During the celebrations in which nearly 1,000,000 people participated, the pope beatified Bishop J\u00f3zef Sebastian Pelczar, former bishop of Przemy\u015bl. On 25 March 1992 Pope John Paul II established the new Diocese of Rzesz\u00f3w. The city of Rzesz\u00f3w became the administrative center of the new Diocese and the Church of the Sacred Heart became the new city cathedral.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to GUS data, as of July 2025, Rzesz\u00f3w had 198 317 inhabitants. In contrast to other cities close to the size of Rzesz\u00f3w in Poland, the population is growing.\nRzesz\u00f3w is the 15th largest Polish city in terms of population and the 20th largest city in terms of area.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nRzesz\u00f3w lies in the north temperate zone and has a continental climate with four distinct seasons. It is characterised by a significant variation between hot summers and cold, snowy winters. Average temperatures in summer range from and in winter from . The average annual temperature is .\nIn summer temperatures often exceed , and sometimes even . In winter the temperature drops to at night and about at day. During very cold nights the temperature drops to . With Rzesz\u00f3w being near the Carpathian Mountains, there is sometimes a halny \u2013 a f\u00f6hn wind, when the temperature can rise rapidly.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nIndustry.\nAt Wide\u0142ka substation, situated approximately north-northeast of Rzesz\u00f3w, the Rzesz\u00f3w\u2013Khmelnytskyi powerline, the only 750\u00a0kV powerline in Poland, ends.\nTransport.\nTransit.\nRzesz\u00f3w is located on the main West-East European E40 Highway, which goes from Calais in France via Belgium, across Germany, Poland, Ukraine and onto Russia and Kazakhstan. Within Poland the E40 follows the A4 Highway, passing through Wroc\u0142aw, Katowice, Krak\u00f3w and Korczowa. The S19 Expressway connects Rzesz\u00f3w with Belarus and Slovakia as part of planned Via Carpathia route from the Baltic to the Black Sea.\nIn recent years, communication has been improved by a modernization of the roads within the city. SCATS traffic system has been implemented.\nThe A4 highway and S19 expressway act as bypass of the city, running through the northern and eastern districts of Rzesz\u00f3w.\nAirport.\nRzesz\u00f3w-Jasionka Airport (Port Lotniczy Rzesz\u00f3w-Jasionka) is located in the village of Jasionka north of the city. As of June 2015 scheduled passenger services are offered by Ryanair, LOT Polish Airlines, and Lufthansa. This is supplemented seasonally by tourist charter flights to typical summer leisure destinations.\nBuses.\nThe city operates 49 bus lines including night and airport buses. Rzesz\u00f3w is also a gateway to the Bieszczady mountains, with many buses heading for Sanok.\nRailways.\nRzesz\u00f3w is an important rail hub is on the main west\u2013east rail route; Line 91. This runs from Silesia and Krak\u00f3w, Krak\u00f3w Main station \"(Krak\u00f3w G\u0142\u00f3wny)\" \u2013 Medyka on the Polish eastern border. This line then continues on to Ukraine. Its main railway station was established in the 19th century and apart from it, there are five additional stations in the city: \"Rzesz\u00f3w Staroniwa\", \"Rzesz\u00f3w Zwi\u0119czyca\", \"Rzesz\u00f3w Osiedle\", \"Rzesz\u00f3w Za\u0142\u0119\u017ce\" and \"Rzesz\u00f3w Zachodni\" (freight only). There are also two non-electrified lines stemming from Rzesz\u00f3w \u2013 to Jas\u0142o and to Tarnobrzeg.\nEducation.\nUniversities:\nNotable high schools:\nInternational relations.\nConsulates.\nThere are honorary consulates of the Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary and Slovakia in Rzesz\u00f3w.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nRzesz\u00f3w is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74605", "revid": "45782905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74605", "title": "Rybnik", "text": "Rybnik ( ; ) is a city in southern Poland, in the Silesian Voivodeship, around southwest of Katowice, the region's capital, and around from the Czech border. It is one of the major cities of the Katowice-Ostrava metropolitan area with a population of 5.3 million and the main city of the so-called \"\", previously also known as the Rybnik Coal Area. With a population of 135,994 as of January 1, 2022, it is the 25th most-populous city in Poland.\nRybnik is the center of commerce, business, transportation and culture for the southwestern part of the Silesian Voivodeship, a consolidated city-county and the seat of a separate suburban Rybnik county. Rybnik is particularly recognized for its contributions to music, with the Szafrankowie School of Music musicians such as Henryk G\u00f3recki or Lidia Grychto\u0142\u00f3wna, among others. It is also a seat of the Rybnik Philharmonic Orchestra.\nThe name Rybnik derives from an old Slavic word \"rybnik\", meaning a pond (Czech language still uses it, while in Polish the modern word is \"staw\"), which was located in the place of the current market square. In the middle ages, three settlements merged into one town, with a Magdeburg rights location dating back to 1308. Fishing, trade and artistry were the main industries. Rybnik's development accelerated in late 19th century upon discovery of rich coal fields, and continued until the 1980s. Since the 1990s, the city attempts to diversify its economy with commerce, health care and business industries.\nHistory.\nThe city's name derives from the Proto-Slavic word for \"fish\" (\"ryba\") and meant \"fishpond\" in the Old Polish language. The name highlights the importance of fish farming for the city's economy in the Middle Ages, which is reflected in its coat of arms until this day.\nThe city's origins can be traced back into the 9th and 10th century, when three Slavic settlements existed on Rybnik's present-day territory which eventually merged to form one town. It became part of the emerging Polish state under its first historic ruler Mieszko I in the 10th century. In the course of the medieval eastward migration of German settlers (), Rybnik, as many other Polish settlements, was incorporated (granted city status and right) according to the so-called Magdeburg Law at some point before 1308 (the exact date remains unknown). This, however, is not to be confused with a change in national affiliation; Rybnik continued to be part of the Kingdom of Poland, until most of Silesia became a fiefdom of the Bohemian Crown in 1327, however Rybnik was still ruled by local Polish dukes of the Piast dynasty until 1336.\nThe city continued to grow and developed into a regional trade centre. In the 15th century, the Hussites devastated the city, before being eventually defeated in a decisive battle on a hill nearby in 1433, with Poles and Czechs fighting on both sides. Around 1469 the city passed under Hungarian suzerainty, and in 1490 it fell back to Bohemia. From 1521 Rybnik was again ruled by Polish Piast dukes, as it was integrated with the Duchy of Opole and Racib\u00f3rz, before in 1532 it eventually was incorporated into Bohemia, which itself came under the authority of the Habsburg crown. Then the city became the capital of a state country held by various noble families, including the Polish W\u0119gierski family of Rola coat of arms from 1682 until the state country's dissolution in 1788.\nAt the beginning of the War of the Austrian Succession between Frederick II of Prussia (the Great) and the Habsburg empress Maria Theresa of Austria, most of Silesia, including Rybnik, was annexed by Prussia in 1740, which Austria eventually recognized in 1763. In the 18th century, Rybnik belonged to the tax inspection region of Prudnik. Coal mining gained importance for Rybnik's economy as early as the 18th century. In 1871, Prussia, including Rybnik, merged into the German Empire, the first modern German nation state. At this point, Poland had already ceased to exist as an independent state, having been divided between Prussia, Austria and Russia in the Third Partition of Poland of 1795.\nWith the intensification of Germanization and anti-Polish policies in the German Empire in the late 19th and early 20th century, the ethnically mixed region of Upper Silesia became affected by growing tensions between German nationalists and indigenous Poles. After the end of World War I in 1918, the Polish state was finally restored. Amidst an atmosphere of ethnic unrest, the Polish Silesian Uprisings broke out, the first of which (in 1919) was centered on Rybnik, and the Upper Silesia plebiscite was held in 1921 to determine the future state affiliation. The lowest share of pro-German votes was registered in the districts of Rybnik (34.7%) and Pszczyna (25.9%). However, in the city of Rybnik, 70.8% of the votes were in favour of Germany. The city and the larger part of the Rybnik district were attached to Poland. Rybnik thus became Polish-ruled for the first time since 1788.\nWithin the Second Polish Republic of the interwar period, Rybnik was part of the Silesian Voivodeship and enjoyed far-reaching political and financial autonomy. In 1933, brothers Karol and Antoni Szafranek, eminent Polish musicians, founded a music school, today known as the Karol and Antoni Szafranek Secondary and Tertiary State School of Music.\nDuring the joint German-Soviet invasion of Poland, which started World War II, in September 1939, Rybnik was captured by Germany, and the \"Einsatzgruppe I\" entered the city to commit atrocities against Poles. Under German occupation the city was directly annexed into Germany. The population was ethnically categorized and either \"re-Germanized\" or disfranchised and partially expelled into the General Government (German-occupied central Poland). Local teachers and school principals were among Polish teachers and principals murdered in Nazi concentration camps. The Germans operated a Nazi prison in the city. The \"Polenlager No. 97\", a forced labour camp for Poles, was operated in the city from 1942 to 1945. In the camp, the Germans mainly held children whose parents were either arrested or deported to Germany, and also elderly people. Nevertheless, the Polish resistance movement was active in Rybnik. In the final stages of the war, in January 1945, the Germans murdered 385 prisoners of the Auschwitz concentration camp in the city during a death march.\nAfter the eventual German defeat which ended World War II in the European theatre of war in 1945, Rybnik was once more integrated into Poland, the territory of which was shifted westward on Joseph Stalin's initiative. Rybnik thus ceased to be a German-Polish border city. A large portion of ethnic Germans from Rybnik eventually settled in the West German city of Dorsten, which eventually became one of Rybnik's twin towns in 1994.\nIn the post-war period, coal mining continued to gain importance. Under Poland's communist rule in 1945\u20131989 the city was projected to grow as a main mining centre of southern Poland. The 1970s saw the construction of an important coal-fired power plant. A reservoir on the river Ruda was constructed to provide it with cooling water. In 2002, the University of Economics (\"Akademia Ekomomiczna\"), the University of Silesia (\"Uniwersytet \u015al\u0105ski\"), both based in Katowice, and the Silesian Polytechnic University (\"Politechnika \u015al\u0105ska\") based in Gliwice established a joint campus in Rybnik to improve academic training opportunities in the area.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistorical population.\nHistorically, Rybnik was a small town, with population exceeding 1,000 people only in the late 1700s. It was similar in size to neighboring \u017bory and Wodzis\u0142aw \u015al\u0105ski, around half the size of Gliwice and 1/3 the size of Racib\u00f3rz. The population development accelerated after Upper Silesia was annexed by Prussia in 1740. In 1818, Rybnik became a county seat and in 1856 Rybnik was connected with Racib\u00f3rz by rail. Two years later, in 1858, Rybnik gained a rail connection with Katowice, further accelerating growth. While the discovery of large coal deposits around Rybnik in late 1800s and early 1900s caused capital inflow and population growth of neighboring villages and settlements, Rybnik continued to be primarily a market town rather than transform into a large industrial city like other towns in the region, particularly in the Upper Silesian Industrial Region. This changed after World War II, when the Polish communist government doubled-down on its heavy industrialization platform, increasing coal production in existing coal mines around Rybnik and building a new city for miners nearby. Due to its central location and existing infrastructure, Rybnik became the center of the Rybnik Coal Area, growing to 44,400 people in 1972.\nIn the 1970s, under administrative reform, Rybnik annexed a number of neighboring mining towns and villages, growing to 118,200 by the end of the decade. Labor shortages on the local market, created in part by emigration to Germany through the family reunification schemes since the 1950s, motivated large state enterprises to recruit workers in other parts of the country. As a result, by 1970s and 80s approximately 30% of people in Rybnik were recent internal migrants. That migration was a source of ethnic conflict since the 1950s, given that in the eyes of Poles from other parts of the country, indigenous Silesians were Germans, and the anti-German sentiment was still strong in Poland at the time. Rybnik's population continued to grow until the peak in 1997 at 144,943.\nCurrent population estimates.\nOn January 1, 2021, Rybnik had 137,128 inhabitants, with a population density of 955.3 per km\u00b2.\nIn 2020, age breakdown was as follows: 25,166 (18.4%) under 18, 50,183 (36.6%) aged 18\u201344, 31,248 (22.8%) aged 45\u201364, 30,531 (22.3%) 65 and older. Total fertility rate in Rybnik is 1.39 as of 2020, below the replacement level of 2.1 but above the country average of 1.38.\nAs of the 2011 national census, education breakdown among 15-year-olds and older was as follows: 17,919 (15.8%) had a college degree, 35,709 (31.6%) had a high school diploma, 36,249 (32%) had a vocational school diploma, and 21,265 (20.6%) did not have a high school or vocational school diploma.\nNationality, language and religion.\nAccording to the 2011 census, 85.2% of Rybnik citizens declared Polish nationality, while 28.6% declared nationality other than Polish (since 2011, in the Polish census, one can declare up to two nationalities). Silesians were the largest national minority, at 28.6% (40,311 people), followed by Germans at 0.5% (707). Polish was the most-common language spoken at home, with 94.5% inhabitants declaring it. 24,372 people (17.3%) declared they speak Silesian at home. Since the 2011 census, Poland has experienced a significant influx of immigrants, particularly from Ukraine. In Rybnik, the city hall estimates the Ukrainian immigrant population at around 10,000 as of 2021.\nCatholicism was the largest religious denomination in Rybnik according to the 2011 census, with 127,809 adherents (90.69% of all inhabitants). The only other denomination with more than 300 adherents were Jehovah's Witnesses, at 434 adherents (0.31%). 2,270 (1.61%) people declared they had no religion, while 6,785 (4.81%) refused to answer the question and for 2,790 (1.98%) people the question could not be answered. Other religions with places of worship in Rybnik include: Buddhists, Seventh Day Adventists, Lutherans (with a parish since 1742, and a church from 1853), and Pentecostals.\nNeighborhoods.\nRybnik is divided into 27 neighborhoods that are considered auxiliary administrative units. Most of them are suburban areas, including: Chwa\u0142\u0119cice, Golej\u00f3w, Gotartowice, Grabownia, Kamie\u0144, K\u0142okocin, Ligota-Ligocka Ku\u017ania, Meksyk, Ochojec, Orzepowice, Popiel\u00f3w, Radziej\u00f3w, Rybnicka Ku\u017ania, Rybnik \u2013 P\u00f3\u0142noc, Stodo\u0142y, Wielopole, Zamys\u0142\u00f3w and Zebrzydowice. There are also four former towns that have been merged with Rybnik: Boguszowice Stare, Chwa\u0142owice, Niedobczyce and Niewiadom. Two districts (Boguszowice Osiedle and Maroko-Nowiny) are typical Polish housing estates, with large blocks of flats and supporting buildings (such as shops and schools) built in communist time. The remaining three districts, Smolna, \u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie and Paruszowiec-Piaski formed the pre-war town of Rybnik. Those areas are densely built-up, with old town, city hall, most of schools, offices and shopping malls in \u015ar\u00f3dmie\u015bcie (literally: \"city centre\" in Polish) and 19th century factories and houses in Paruszowiec.\nGovernment and politics.\nLocal politics.\nSince the 1999 administrative reform, Rybnik is a consolidated city-county (\"miasto na prawach powiatu\"), with the mayor (\"prezydent miasta\") who is the executive branch of local government, and a city council (\"rada miasta\") of 25 people, which is the legislative branch. The mayor is elected in a citywide election, while the city council is elected in a proportional elections from four voting districts. Additionally, city charter divides Rybnik into 27 districts with a council each. These district councils have auxiliary status, and their main tasks are: organizing public consultations for decisions such as the zoning plan, social control over city investments in their respective areas, lobbying in the city hall for the district. Rybnik is also the seat of the surrounding suburban Rybnik county but is not a part of it.\nThe current mayor of Rybnik is Piotr Kuczera of the Civic Platform party - due to term limits, he will not be eligible to be elected again in the next election. In the city council, the Civic Platform-Wsp\u00f3lnie dla Rybnika (\"Together for Rybnik\") coalition is in power, with the Law and Justice party and a local Blok Samorz\u0105dowy Rybnik (\"Self-governing Bloc Rybnik\") in opposition.\nNational politics.\nIn Sejm elections, Rybnik is part of the 30th voting district together with Jastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j, \u017bory, Miko\u0142\u00f3w, Racib\u00f3rz, Rybnik and Wodzis\u0142aw counties, electing 9 MPs. In the most-recent, 2019 parliamentary election, the district elected 5 MPs from Law and Justice Party, 3 from Civic Coalition (Civic Platform, Modern Party and the Greens) and 1 from the Democratic Left Alliance. In Rybnik proper, the results were as follows:\nIn the Senate elections, Rybnik is part of the 73rd voting district together with Rybnik and Miko\u0142\u00f3w counties, represented by Wojciech Piecha (Law and Justice). The most-recent election results in Rybnik city were:\nTourism.\nIn contrast to the central part of the Upper Silesian Industry Area a short distance to the north, Rybnik enjoys the reputation of a \"green\" city having a relatively clean environment. While the city is not a centre of tourism, it does have various interesting sights and opportunities for recreation. To the north-east of the built-up area, there is a reservoir (\"Zalew Rybnicki\") on the river Ruda, which serves as a cooling water source for the power station. Surrounded by forests, it offers swimming, fishing, sailing and surfing opportunities, and due to the power station's waste heat it is warm enough all year to be a habitat for grass carps. The Beskidy Mountains, a popular recreational area, also for skiing, are within a 1\u20132 hour drive.\nSights worth visiting:\nSports.\nIn 2006, the 8th European Glider Aerobatic Championships took place in Rybnik.\nThe aeroclub of Rybnik is very successful in national and international glider aerobatic competitions: Jerzy Makula won the European Glider Aerobatic Championships two times and the World Glider Aerobatic Championships six times. Other current or former members of the Polish national glider aerobatics team from Aeroklub ROW are Ma\u0142gorzata Marga\u0144ska, Krzysztof Brzikalik, Lucjan Fizia, Stanis\u0142aw Makula and Ireneusz Boczkowski.\nClimate.\nRybnik has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\").\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nRybnik is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74606", "revid": "38469862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74606", "title": "Wa\u0142brzych", "text": "City in Lower Silesian Voivodeship, Poland\nWa\u0142brzych (; ; or \"Walmbrich\"; or ) is a city located in the Lower Silesian Voivodeship, in southwestern Poland, seat of Wa\u0142brzych County. Wa\u0142brzych lies approximately southwest of the voivodeship capital Wroc\u0142aw and about from the Czech border. Wa\u0142brzych has the status of municipality. Its administrative borders encompass an area of with 110,000 inhabitants, making it the second-largest city in the voivodeship and the 33rd largest in the country.\nWa\u0142brzych was once a major coal mining and industrial center alongside most of Silesia. The city was left undamaged after World War II and possesses rich historical architecture; among the most recognizable landmarks is the Ksi\u0105\u017c Castle, the largest castle of Lower Silesia and the third-largest in Poland.\nIn 2015 Wa\u0142brzych became widely known due to the search for an allegedly buried Nazi gold train, which however was not found.\nEtymology.\nAccording to the city's official website, the earliest Polish name of the settlement was ('forest castle'). The German name is also the exact translation of the original Polish \u2018forest castle\u2019 (also referred to the castle Nowy Dw\u00f3r, translated into German as: ), whose ruins stand south of the city; the name came to be used for the entire settlement. It first appeared in the 15th century. The modern Polish name Wa\u0142brzych comes from the German name , a late medieval variation of the older names or .\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nPolish sources indicate the city's predecessor, Lasogr\u00f3d, was an early medieval Slavic settlement whose inhabitants engaged in hunting, honey gathering, and later agriculture. Lasogr\u00f3d eventually developed into a defensive fort, the remains of which were destroyed in the 19th century during expansion of the city. However, some German sources say no archaeological or written records support notions of an early West Slavic or Lechitic settlement nor the existence of a castle before the late 13th century. They also denounce the idea that during the Middle Ages the area of Wa\u0142brzych was part of an unpopulated Silesian forest, known as the Silesian Przesieka. In April 2022, a coin hoard was discovered near Wa\u0142brzych dating from the first half of the 13th century.\nAccording to 17th-century Polish historian Ephraim Naso, Wa\u0142brzych was a small village by 1191. This assertion was rejected by 19th-century German sources and by German historian Hugo Weczerka, who says the city was founded between 1290 and 1293, and was mentioned as \"Waldenberc\" in 1305.\nHe places the city near Nowy Dw\u00f3r (), built by Bolko I the Strict of the Silesian Piasts. The city website, however, cites the building of the castle as a separate event in 1290. A part of Nowy Dw\u00f3r castle, a manor built in the 17th century, was destroyed in the 19th century. Nevertheless, the region became part of Poland after the establishment of the state under the Piast dynasty in the 10th century and during the fragmentation of the realm, it was part of various Polish-ruled duchies, the last of which was the Duchy of \u015awidnica until 1392, later it was also part of the Bohemian Crown and Hungary.\nThe settlement was first mentioned as a town in 1426, but it did not receive the rights to hold markets or other privileges due to the competition of nearby towns and the insignificance of the local landlords. Subsequently, the city became the property of the Silesian knightly families, initially the Schaffgotsches in 1372, later the Czettritzes, and from 1738, the H\u00f6chberg family, owners of Ksi\u0105\u017c Castle.\nModern era.\nCoal mining in the area was first mentioned in 1536. The settlement was transformed into an industrial centre at the turn of the 19th century, when coal mining and weaving flourished.\nAs a result of the First Silesian War the city was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia in 1742, and subsequently became part of Germany in 1871. In 1843 the city obtained its first rail connection, which linked it with Breslau (now Wroc\u0142aw, Poland). In the early 20th century a glassworks and a large china tableware manufacturing plant, which are still in operation today, were built. During World War I, the German administration operated three forced labour camps for Allied prisoners of war in the city.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the German invasion of Poland at the start of World War II in September 1939, some 2,000 young men from the city were conscripted to the \"Wehrmacht\".\nThe first forced labourers, Poles, were probably brought to the city in early 1940, whereas Allied prisoners of war were brought to forced labour in the city probably since 1941. Several thousands POWs, Serbian, British, Italian, Belgian, Soviet, Polish, French and others, were held in various labour camps in the city, including subcamps of the Stalag VIII-A and Stalag VIII-B/344 POW camps. There were also several other forced labour camps, for Poles, Jews, Ukrainians, including camps solely for women, two subcamps of the Gross-Rosen concentration camp, intended for Jews, located in the present Gaj and Ksi\u0105\u017c districts, and a Nazi prison. There are known cases when Polish civilian workers gave food to starving Soviet prisoners of war. The forced laborers made several attempts to escape, and those caught were either beaten by the Gestapo, sent to the Gross-Rosen camp or murdered. The camp in Ksi\u0105\u017c was dissolved in February 1945, and its prisoners were sent on a death march towards Trutnov in German-occupied Czechoslovakia.\nIt was conquered by the Soviet Red Army on 8 May 1945, a few hours before the German surrender and the end of World War II in Europe. Some 600 prisoners of the subcamp of Gross-Rosen in Gaj were liberated, and some stayed in the city after the war.\nPost-war period.\nAfter World War II, Waldenburg became again part of Poland under border changes demanded by the Soviet Union at the Potsdam Conference and was renamed to its historic Polish name Wa\u0142brzych. Many of the Germans living in the city fled or were expelled in accordance to the Potsdam Agreement. The town was repopulated by Poles, initially those who already were brought to the city as forced labourers by the Germans after the fall of the Warsaw Uprising, then prisoners of the nearby Gross-Rosen concentration camp and prisoners-of-war. Afterwards they were joined by Poles from central Poland and those expelled from former eastern Poland annexed by the Soviet Union, particularly from Borys\u0142aw, Drohobycz and Stanis\u0142aw\u00f3w, as well as Poles returning from France and Belgium and from forced labour in Germany. Also some Jews, Czechs, Romanis and Yugoslavs came to the city. Wa\u0142brzych was one of the few areas where a number of Germans were held back as they were deemed indispensable for the economy, e.g. coal mining. Also nearly 700 Greeks, refugees of the Greek Civil War, settled in Wa\u0142brzych in the 1950s, however, most returned to Greece after 1983.\nThe city was relatively unscathed by the Second World War, and as a result of combining the nearby administrative districts with the town and the construction of new housing estates, Wa\u0142brzych expanded geographically. In 1951, city limits were expanded by including Bia\u0142y Kamie\u0144, Rusinowa, and parts of Glinik, Konrad\u00f3w, Lubiech\u00f3w, Opoka, Podg\u00f3rze, Sobi\u0119cin and Szczawienko as new districts.\nAfter the Treaty of Zgorzelec, remaining Germans were treated less harshly and an ethnic German society was established in 1957. The cultural activities however disappeared by the 1960s and the schools with German as the language of instruction gradually closed. The remaining German-speakers had little contact with the German spoken and written language and the local German-Silesian dialect became moribound.\nFrom 1958 to the mid-1980s, the Kleks Poetry Theater, a leading school theater in Poland, was active in the city.\nFrom 1975 to 1998 it was the capital of Wa\u0142brzych Voivodeship. At the beginning of the 1990s, because of new social and economic conditions, a decision was made to close down the town's coal mines. In 1995, a Museum of Industry and Technology was set up on the facilities of the oldest coal mine in the area, KWK THOREZ. In 2001, the Wa\u0142brzych Scientific Society was founded. The 2005 the film \"The Collector\" was filmed in and around Wa\u0142brzych.\nIn 2016, a hoard of 1,385 late medieval coins, Prague groschen of Kings Charles IV and Wenceslaus IV, was found on the border of Wa\u0142brzych and Bogusz\u00f3w-Gorce. The hoard may have been hidden after 1420 during the Hussite Wars. It is one of the largest groschen hoards found in Poland.\nGeography.\nWa\u0142brzych is located in the Central Sudeten Mountains, near the border with the Czech Republic and Germany. The city is located by the Pe\u0142cznica River at 450\u2013500 m above sea level in a picturesque structural basin of Wa\u0142brzych above which there are wooded ranges of the Wa\u0142brzych Mountains. The highest elevation in the city is Mount Borowa, also known as the Black Mountain, 853\u00a0m (2798\u00a0ft) above sea level, with an observation tower since 2007, which is the highest peak of the Wa\u0142brzych mountains.\nThere are seven city parks in the city, and in the main city park (King Jan III Sobieski Park) is the only mountain shelter in Poland, located in the city center PTTK Harc\u00f3wka.\nNature protection.\nProtected areas in Wa\u0142brzych\nThere are several natural monuments in the city; among them is the coat of arms oak, a descendant of the oak which was the inspiration for the coat of arms of the city, as evidenced by a nearby stone with the inscription \"\" ('City oak planted in 1933 in place of the coat of arms oak'). The mildest winter in the city was in 2006/2007 and 1992/1993.\nTransport.\nRoads.\nNational roads\n ( A4 autostrada/ Bielany Wroc\u0142awskie-\u015awidnica-Wa\u0142brzych-Goli\u0144sk- Czech border)\nVoivodeship roads\nPublic transport.\nThere are 14 bus lines in the city\nRailway.\nThere are two main directions of passenger railways in the city, which include:\nThere are railway stations throughout the city: Wa\u0142brzych Miasto, Wa\u0142brzych Fabryczny, Wa\u0142brzych Szczawienko, Wa\u0142brzych Centrum, and Wa\u0142brzych G\u0142\u00f3wny, from which from May to the end of September, the starting station for weekend holiday connections to Mezim\u011bst\u00ed / Adr\u0161pach-Teplice Rocks.\nAviation.\nThe nearest airport is Wroc\u0142aw airport located from the city, in the closer distance, about , is located light aircraft landing ground in \u015awiebodzice.\nCity districts.\nIncluding date of incorporation into the city\nPolitics.\nWa\u0142brzych constituency.\nMembers of Parliament (Sejm) elected from Wa\u0142brzych constituency:\nSports.\nThere are many semi-professional or amateur football clubs (like Czarni Wa\u0142brzych, Juventur Wa\u0142brzych, Podg\u00f3rze Wa\u0142brzych, Gwarek Wa\u0142brzych) and one basketball club (KS Dark Dog plays in the Polish 3rd league).\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nWa\u0142brzych is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "74607", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74607", "title": "Big cats", "text": ""}
{"id": "74608", "revid": "754658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74608", "title": "Tychy", "text": "Tychy ( ; ) is a city in Silesia in southern Poland, approximately south of Katowice. Situated on the southern edge of the Upper Silesian industrial district, the city borders Katowice to the north, Miko\u0142\u00f3w to the west, Bieru\u0144 to the east and Kobi\u00f3r to the south. The Gostynia river, a tributary of the Vistula, flows through Tychy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSince 1999, Tychy has been located within the Silesian Voivodeship, a province consisting of 71 regional towns and cities. Tychy is also one of the founding cities of the Metropolitan Association of Upper Silesia, a pan-Silesian economic and political union formed with the eventual aim of bringing the most populous Silesian areas under a single administrative body.\nTychy is well known for its brewing industry and the Tyskie brand of beer, which dates back to the 17th century. Since 1950, Tychy has grown rapidly, mainly as a result of post-war socialist planning policies enacted to disperse the population of industrial Upper Silesia.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nThe moniker Tychy is derived from the Polish word \"cichy\", meaning \"quiet\" or \"still\". Although appropriate for most of Tychy's history, the name is now somewhat ironic considering the growth of the city from 1950 onwards.\nOrigins and development.\nOriginally established as a small agricultural settlement on the medieval trade route between O\u015bwi\u0119cim and Miko\u0142\u00f3w, Tychy was first documented in 1467. In 1629 the first trace of serious economic activity was recorded in the shape of the Ksi\u0105\u017c\u0119cy Brewery, which is now one of the largest breweries in Poland.\nFrom 1526 onwards the area on which Tychy is built was part of the Austrian Habsburg monarchy. In 1742 Prussia annexed the land after winning the First Silesian War against the Austrian Hasburg monarchy. In 1871 the territory became part of the German Empire until in 1918, for a short period between 1918 and 1921 Tychy was just inside the border of the newly formed Weimar Republic and still a part of the German Province of Silesia. On 16\u201317 August 1919 the Battle of Paprocany (present-day district of Tychy) was fought as one of the first battles of the Silesian Uprisings (1919\u20131921). After the uprisings Tychy was reintegrated with the re-established Polish state. Additionally, due to the Polish majority in 1921 in Tychy and the few Germans, 84% of the inhabitants voted for joining Poland during the plebiscite.\nShortly after its cession to Poland, Tychy began to develop into a small urban settlement, acquiring a hospital, a fire station, a post office, a school, a swimming pool, a bowling hall and a number of shops and restaurants. In 1922 it was visited by leader of interwar Poland, J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski. Its population also grew between World War I and World War II, reaching a population of 11,000 at its highest point during this time.\nWorld War II.\nAlong with the rest of industrial Upper Silesia Tychy was occupied by Nazi Germany forces after the invasion of Poland and annexed into the Third Reich, while many of its inhabitants who were not expelled or exterminated were forced to change their nationality to German in order to comply with the racist policies of Nazi Germany. Mass arrests and executions of Polish activists and former Polish insurgents of 1919\u20131921 were carried out in the first days of the occupation in September 1939. As early as September 3, 1939, the Germans murdered several Polish residents of the city, of whom 13 were later identified, the youngest was 16 years old. The Germans also carried out manhunts of Polish insurgents who were hiding in the forest between Tychy and Miko\u0142\u00f3w, and established and operated a \"Polenlager\" forced labor camp for Poles in the city, and the E701 labor subcamp of the Stalag VIII-B/344 prisoner-of-war camp in the present-day Czu\u0142\u00f3w district. The last public execution was carried out on September 22, 1944, when five members of the underground Polish resistance movement were killed. Tychy received minimal damage during the invasion because most of the nearby fighting took place in the Miko\u0142\u00f3w-Wyry area. In the final stages of the war, in 1945, a German-conducted death march of thousands of prisoners of the Auschwitz concentration camp and its subcamps passed through the city towards Gliwice.\nTychy was liberated on January 28, 1945.\nNew Tychy.\nThe \"New City\" was designated by the Polish government in 1950 and deliberately located near to Katowice with the intention that it would not be a self-sustaining city. It was granted town rights in 1951. Tychy is the largest of the so-called \"new towns\" in Poland and was built from 1950 to 1985, to allow for urban expansion in the southeast of the Upper Silesian industrial region. In the 1950s the neighbourhood \"Osiedle A\" was built, designed by Tadeusz Teodorowicz-Todorowski, and the design and planning of the next neighbourhoods was entrusted to Kazimierz Wejchert and his wife Hanna Adamczewska-Wejchert. In the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s numerous industrial enterprises were created. In 1951 and 1973 the city limits were greatly expanded by including Paprocany and Wilkowyje (in 1951), and Cielmice, Urbanowice, Jaroszowice (in 1973) as new districts. By 2006, the population had reached 132,500.\nIn the administrative reforms which came into effect in 1999, Tychy was made a city with the status of a powiat (city county). Between 1999 and 2002, it was also the administrative seat of (but not part of) an entity called Tychy County (\"powiat tyski\"), which is now known as the Bieru\u0144-L\u0119dziny County.\nThe Tyskie Brewing Museum was founded in 2004, and the Municipal Museum in 2005.\nDistricts.\nTychy is divided into 17 districts (\"dzielnicas\"):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIndustry.\nThe global car manufacturer Stellantis has a major presence in the city. The first car factory was opened by FSM in 1975, and was fully acquired by the Italian manufacturer Fiat in 1992. In 2008, the factory (FCA Poland) had a production of nearly half a million cars. It produces the new Fiat 500 and the Lancia Ypsilon. It was the exclusive manufacturing site for the second generation Fiat Panda until 2012, when it ended production, and of the 2nd generation Ford Ka (under an OEM agreement between the two manufacturers) until May 2016.\nAlso located in Tychy is a powertrain factory producing automobile engines for Opel cars. This plant was opened by Isuzu as \"Isuzu Motors Polska (ISPOL)\" in 1996; in 2002 General Motors took a 60% interest in that company, and in 2013 the remaining 40%. In 2017 Groupe PSA acquired GM's operations in Europe. In January 2021 both the former Fiat and Opel plants became part of Stellantis.\nThe Tyskie beer is produced in Tychy, by Kompania Piwowarska, a subsidiary of the multinational brewing company Asahi Breweries. It is reportedly one of the best selling brands of beer in Poland, with around 18% share of the Polish market as of 2009[ [update]].\nTransport.\nOne of three remaining trolleybus systems in Poland operates in Tychy. The other cities where you can find them are Lublin and Gdynia.\nSports.\nTychy is home to two major sporting teams, both named GKS Tychy. GKS stands for G\u00f3rniczy Klub Sportowy, (), which is a common prefix for Polish sports teams situated near mines or in mining regions.\nIce hockey.\nThe GKS Tychy ice hockey club is among the most successful in Poland and plays in its premier league, the Ekstraliga. Established in 1971, the team won the Polish Championships in 2005, 2015, 2018, 2019 and 2020 and has won the Polish Cup eight times. The club is housed in the newly refurbished Tychy Winter Stadium (), which seats 2,700 people.\nSeveral players from the club have gone on to play in the American and Canadian NHL. These include Mariusz Czerkawski and Krzysztof Oliwa.\nFootball.\nThe GKS Tychy football club football club was also established in 1971 and currently plays in the Polish Second League. Throughout a varied career the club reached its peak classification between 1974 and 1977, when it made it into the , Poland's top league, where it finished second in 1976. During those glory days GKS Tychy also participated in the 1976\u201377 UEFA Cup. It played in the top division again in 1995\u20131997. Tychy City Stadium () is home to the club and seats 15,300 spectators.\nA few notable footballers were either born in Tychy or spent some of their career at the club, the most famous being Real Madrid and Poland goalkeeper Jerzy Dudek. Ekstraklasa player Bartosz Karwan started his career there, as did retired player Rados\u0142aw Gilewicz. Napoli and Poland national team striker Arkadiusz Milik was born in Tychy, as well as former Bayer Leverkusen defender Lukas Sinkiewicz, who now holds German citizenship.\nTychy hosted several matches of the 2019 FIFA U-20 World Cup.\nAmerican Football.\nTychy Falcons are an American Football team established in 2008. They currently competed in PFL2 - second tier of American Football in Poland. \nOther sporting teams.\nTychy is also home to several other sports teams, including basketball team GKS Tychy, futsal team GKS Futsal Tychy and floorball team TKKF Pionier Tychy.\nNotable people.\nTychy has been the birthplace and home of notable people, both past and present. German sculptor August Kiss (1802\u20131865) was born in Paprotzan, which is now situated within modern day Tychy. Most famous for his grand neoclassical works, Kiss also sculpted the fine pulpit of St. Adalbert's church in Tychy's neighbouring town of Miko\u0142\u00f3w. Augustyn Dyrda (born 1926) is a sculptor who currently resides in the city and is best known for his socialist realist and modernist works, including several in Tychy itself.\nSoldier Roman Polko (born 1962) is one son of Tychy whose achievements hold national importance today. His distinguished career has led him to the post of acting chief in Poland's Bureau of National Security.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nTychy is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "74609", "revid": "50529220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74609", "title": "P\u0142ock", "text": "City in Masovian Voivodeship, Poland\nP\u0142ock ( ), officially the Ducal Capital City of P\u0142ock, is a city in central Poland, on the Vistula river, in the Masovian Voivodeship. According to the data provided by GUS on 31 December 2021, there were 116,962 inhabitants in the city.\nP\u0142ock is a seat of the county (\"powiat\") in the west of the Masovian Voivodeship. From 1079 to 1138 it was the capital of Poland. The Cathedral Hill (\"Wzg\u00f3rze Tumskie\"), along with P\u0142ock Castle and the Catholic Cathedral containing the sarcophagi of some Polish monarchs, is listed as a Historic Monument of Poland. It was the main city and administrative center of Mazovia in the Middle Ages before the rise of Warsaw, and later it remained a royal city of Poland. It is the cultural, academic, scientific, administrative and transportation center of the west and north Masovian region. P\u0142ock is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of P\u0142ock, one of the oldest dioceses in the country, founded in the 11th century, and it is also the global headquarters for the Mariavite Church. Poland's oldest school and largest oil refinery are located in P\u0142ock.\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe area was long inhabited by pagan peoples. In the 10th century, a fortified location was established high of the Vistula River's bank. This location was at a junction of shipping and trade routes and was strategic for centuries. Its location was a great asset. In 1009 a Benedictine monastery was established here. It became a center of science and art for the area.\nDuring the rule of the first monarchs of the Piast dynasty, even prior to the Baptism of Poland, P\u0142ock served as one of the monarchial seats, including that of Duke Mieszko I and King Boles\u0142aw I the Brave. The king built the original fortifications on Cathedral Hill (), overlooking the Vistula River. From 1037 to 1047, P\u0142ock was capital of the independent Mazovian state of Miec\u0142aw. P\u0142ock has been the residence of many Mazovian dukes. In 1075, a diocese seat was created here for the Roman Catholic church. From 1079 to 1138, during the reign of the Polish monarchs W\u0142adys\u0142aw I Herman and Boles\u0142aw III Wrymouth, the city was the capital of Poland, then earning its title as the Ducal Capital City of P\u0142ock (). As a result of the fragmentation of Poland into smaller duchies, from 1138 it was the capital of the Duchy of Masovia, and afterwards the Duchy of P\u0142ock. In 1180 the present-day Marshal Stanis\u0142aw Ma\u0142achowski High School (\"Ma\u0142achowianka\"), the oldest still existing school in Poland and one of the oldest in Central Europe, was established. Among its notable graduates is scholar and jurist Pawe\u0142 W\u0142odkowic, a precursor of religious freedom in Europe, who studied there in the late 14th century.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1237 P\u0142ock was officially granted town rights, renewed in 1255. P\u0142ock was located on a trade route connecting Toru\u0144 with Warsaw, Lublin, Che\u0142m and W\u0142odzimierz. In the 14th century King Casimir III the Great vested P\u0142ock with vast privileges. The first Jewish immigrants came to the city in the 14th century, responding to the extension of rights by the Polish kings. In 1495 the Duchy of P\u0142ock was integrated directly with the Polish Crown as a reverted fief.\nModern era.\nIn the early modern period, P\u0142ock was a royal city of Poland and capital of the P\u0142ock Voivodeship within the larger Greater Poland Province. The 16th century was the golden age of the city, before it suffered major losses in population due to plague, fire, and horrific warfare, with wars between Sweden and Poland in the late 17th and early 18th centuries.\nIn the 17th century, the Swedes destroyed much of the city, but the people rebuilt and recovered. In the late 18th century, it took down the old city walls, and made a New Town, and after Germans of Prussia partitioned Poland Second Partition of Poland, they filled P\u0142ock with many German migrants.\nIn the Second Partition of Poland in 1793 the city was annexed by Prussia. The Polish 4th and 5th Infantry Regiments were formed in P\u0142ock in 1806. From 1807 it was part of the short-lived Polish Duchy of Warsaw, within which it was the capital of the P\u0142ock Department. In 1815 it became part of Congress Poland, later on fully annexed by the Russian Empire. The Polish 3rd Rifle Regiment, which later fought against Russia in the November Uprising, was stationed in P\u0142ock. In 1827 Fryderyk Chopin visited P\u0142ock. In 1831, the last sejm of Congress Poland was held in the P\u0142ock Town Hall. It was a seat of provincial government and an active center; its economy was closely tied to major grain trade. It laid out a new city plan in the early 19th century, as new residents continued to arrive. Many of its finest buildings were constructed in this period in the Neoclassical style. In 1820 the P\u0142ock Scientific Society was founded, and in the late 19th century the city began to industrialize. In 1863 local Poles fought in the January Uprising against Russia. The leader of the uprising in the P\u0142ock region, Zygmunt Padlewski, was executed by the Russians in P\u0142ock in May 1863. In 1905, large demonstrations of Polish youth and workers took place in P\u0142ock.\nDuring World War I, P\u0142ock was occupied by Germany from 1915 to 1918, and in 1918 Poland regained independence, and P\u0142ock was immediately reintegrated with Poland. In August 1920, the city became famous for its successful heroic defense against the Soviets during the Polish\u2013Soviet War. 250 Polish defenders, including 100 civilians, were killed in the battle. In 1921, Marshal J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski visited P\u0142ock and awarded the city with the Cross of Valour, making P\u0142ock the second Polish city to be awarded with a Polish military decoration (shortly after Lw\u00f3w). \nWorld War II.\nWhen Germany invaded Poland in September 1939, the city of P\u0142ock was annexed into the Reich as part of the Regierungsbezirk Zichenau. The Germans renamed the city \"Schr\u00f6ttersburg\" on 21 May 1941 after the former Prussian Baron of the Empire Friedrich Leopold von Schr\u00f6tter.\nAs part of the \"Intelligenzaktion\", Germans carried out mass arrests of Poles, who were then imprisoned in the local prison, and around 200 of whom were murdered in large massacres in \u0141\u0105ck between October 1939 and February 1940. Among the victims were Polish teachers, activists, shopowners, notaries, local officials, pharmacists, directors and members of the Polish Military Organisation. Next mass arrests of about 2,000 Poles from P\u0142ock and the P\u0142ock County were carried out in April 1940, and in June 1940, another 200 Poles from various settlements in the region were imprisoned in the local prison. Some prisoners were then deported and murdered in the Soldau concentration camp, and some teachers from P\u0142ock were among Polish teachers murdered in the Mauthausen concentration camp. In 1940, Germans murdered 80 elderly and disabled people from P\u0142ock in the nearby village of Brwilno. The Archbishop of P\u0142ock Antoni Julian Nowowiejski and the auxiliary Bishop Leon Wetma\u0144ski were imprisoned in the nearby village of S\u0142upno, and then in 1941 also murdered in the Soldau concentration camp, where also many other local priests were killed. Nowowiejski and Wetma\u0144ski are now considered two of the 108 Blessed Polish Martyrs of World War II by the Catholic Church. Poles were also subjected to expulsions, 1,300 Poles were expelled in November and December 1939, and over 4,000 also in February and March 1941. Nazi Germany also subjected the inhabitants to forced labour. Even 10 to 14-year-old children were used for forced labour in the city and its environs, whereas older ones were deported to forced labour in Germany. The Germans also established and operated two forced labour subcamps of the local prison, and an additional forced labour \"education\" camp in the city. In the winter of 1942\u20131943, a freight train with kidnapped Polish children arrived to the P\u0142ock-Radziwie station, and around 300 of the children froze to death and were buried by the Germans in the forests of nearby \u0141\u0105ck. Since 1943, the local \"Sicherheitspolizei\" carried out deportations of Poles including teenage boys to the Stutthof concentration camp.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAt the same time, the Nazis were also brutalizing the Jewish population of P\u0142ock. They conscripted them for forced labor and established a Jewish ghetto in P\u0142ock in 1940. In that ghetto, up to ten people shared each room. Medical supplies were inadequate and diseases spread. Germans murdered many Jews in P\u0142ock but most were deported to other areas and then on to be murdered in Treblinka. By the war's end, only 300 Jewish residents were known to have survived, of more than 10,000 in the region (for more information see \"Jewish history\" below). Some Poles in P\u0142ock tried to assist their Jewish neighbors by smuggling food to them and sneaking food to them when they were rounded up and had to stand in the street for an entire day on a bitterly cold day waiting to be deported.\nGermans closed Polish institutions, schools and the Polish press, and looted or destroyed numerous Polish cultural monuments, collections and archives, including the rich collection of the P\u0142ock Scientific Society. The collections of local museums, the cathedral's ancient treasury, church archives and the diocesan library were stolen and taken to museums in K\u00f6nigsberg, Wroc\u0142aw and Berlin. The local seminary was converted by the Germans into barracks of the \"SS\".\nDespite such circumstances, the city remained the center of the Polish underground resistance movement. Secret Polish schooling was organized. In September 1942, the Germans publicly hanged 13 Polish resistance members in the Old Town. On 19 January 1945, the Gestapo carried out a massacre of 79 Poles, who were either shot or burned alive. The city was restored to Poland, although with a Soviet-installed communist regime, which remained in power until the Fall of Communism in the 1980s. \nRecent history.\nIn 1975\u20131998, P\u0142ock was the capital of the P\u0142ock Voivodeship. In 1976, P\u0142ock was one of the centers of large anti-communist protests.\nClimate.\nP\u0142ock has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Cfb\") using the isotherm or a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Dfb\") using the isotherm.\nCulture.\nArchitecture.\nMain sights include:\nIn popular culture.\nVarious Polish films were shot in P\u0142ock, including \"Satan from the Seventh Grade\", \"The Scar\", \"The Doubles\", \"Loving\", as well as the 1960s TV series \"Stawka wi\u0119ksza ni\u017c \u017cycie\".\nCuisine.\nThe officially protected traditional foods originating from P\u0142ock (as designated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of Poland) include \"kie\u0142basa tumska\", a local type of kie\u0142basa named after \"Wzg\u00f3rze Tumskie\" (Cathedral Hill), and \"baleron p\u0142ocki\", a local type of baleron, a popular Polish smoked lunch meat.\nReligion.\nCatholic Church.\nP\u0142ock is the oldest legislated seat of the Roman Catholic diocese; the Masovian Blessed Virgin Mary Cathedral was built here in the first half of the 12th century and houses the sarcophagi of Polish monarchs. It is one of the five oldest cathedrals in Poland.\nMoreover, the city is famous for the Divine Mercy Sanctuary, where the apparition of Jesus to Saint Faustina Kowalska is reported to have taken place, and the Divine Mercy devotion was revealed.\nMariavite Church.\nFrom the visions of Feliksa Koz\u0142owska in 1893, the Mariavite order of priests originated, originally working to renew clergy within the Roman Catholic Church. Despite repeated attempts, they were not recognized by the Vatican and in the early 20th century established a separate and independent denomination. This site is the main seat of the Mariavite bishops. Their most important church was built here in the beginning of the 20th century; it is called the Temple of Mercy and Charity and is situated in a pleasant garden on the hill on which the historical centre of P\u0142ock is built, near the Vistula River. Poland in total has about 25,000 members of the Old Catholic Mariavite Church, as it is now named, with another 5,000 in France. A smaller breakaway church, the Catholic Mariavite Church, which has an integrated female priesthood (since 1929), has 3,000 members in Poland.\nJewish history.\nThe Jewish presence in P\u0142ock (Yiddish: \"Plotzk\") dates back many centuries, probably to the 13th and 14th centuries, when records include them. The Polish kings extended rights to them in 1264 and the 14th century, and provided continued political support through the centuries. At the beginning of the 19th century, their more than 1,200 residents comprised more than 48% of the city's population in what is considered the city's Old Town; through the century, their proportions ranged from 30 and 40 percent. It varied as German migrants were arriving in the region, and the area was becoming urbanized, as more people moved to the city. After P\u0142ock fell to Russia in the 19th century, it was part of the Pale of Settlement, where Russians allowed the settlement of Jews. As in other parts of the Russian Partition of Poland, they were restricted to employment in trades and crafts.\nIn the late 19th century, Moszek Szlama Sarna (1838\u20131908) established two https:// to produce farm machines and tools, and the first iron foundry in the city. The Jewish community had two synagogues and two cemeteries (dating to the 15th century), religious and secular schools, and established a library and hospital. They contributed strongly to the economy and culture of the city. In the early 20th century, and had two newspapers, representing active political parties.\nIn 1939, P\u0142ock had a Jewish population of 9,000, an estimated 26% of the city's total. After the 1939 invasion of Poland, German Nazi persecution began, about 2,000 Jews fled the city, with half going to Soviet-controlled territory. They were assigned to locations far from the front. In 1940, the Nazis established a ghetto in P\u0142ock. They started actions against the Jews, killing those in an old people's home and sick children, and transporting others to be killed at Brwilski Forest. Ultimately, they transported the Jews to 20 camps and sites in the Radom district, where in 1942 those still alive were sent to Treblinka to be murdered. There is evidence that a few Poles tried to help their Jewish neighbors in P\u0142ock by smuggling food into the ghetto, sneaking food to them while they were awaiting deportation, and throwing loaves of bread to them on the transport trucks. By 1946, only 300 Jews survived in P\u0142ock. While they were active in the new politics, gradually the Jews left, and by 1959 three remained. Herman Kruk, a survivor and notable chronicler of life inside the Nazi concentration camps, was born in P\u0142ock in 1897.\nThe small synagogue, built in 1810, was one of the few to survive World War II in the Masovia region of Poland. The Great Synagogue was destroyed during the Holocaust. The small synagogue was designated as a historic building about 1960, but deteriorated in physical condition while vacant. It was renovated and adapted for use as a museum, opening in April 2013 as the Museum of Masovian Jews, a branch of the Museum of P\u0142ock Mazowiecki.\nEconomy.\nThe main industry is oil refining, which was established in 1960. The country's largest oil refinery (P\u0142ock refinery) and its parent company, Orlen, are located here. It is served by a large pipeline leading from Russia to Germany. Associated industrial activities connected with the refinery are servicing and construction. A Levi Strauss &amp; Co. factory is located in P\u0142ock and provides manufacturing jobs.\nTransport.\nMass transit.\nBus service covers the entire city, with 41 routes.\nAir.\nThere is no airport in the city. The nearest airports are Warsaw's Modlin Airport, located to the east and Chopin Airport, located south east of P\u0142ock.\nPolitics.\nMembers of Parliament (Sejm) elected from P\u0142ock constituency\nTwin towns - sister cities.\nP\u0142ock is twinned with:\nFormer twin towns:\nIn March 2022, P\u0142ock suspended its partnership with the Russian city of Mytishchi and the Belarusian city of Novopolotsk as a response to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74610", "revid": "45782905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74610", "title": "Opole", "text": "City in Southern Poland\nOpole (; ; ; ) is a city located in southern Poland on the Oder River and the historical capital of Upper Silesia. With a population of approximately 127,387 as of the 2021 census, it is the capital of Opole Voivodeship (province) and the seat of Opole County. Its metropolitan area was home to 146,522 inhabitants. It is the largest city in its province.\nIts history dates to the 8th century, and Opole is one of the oldest cities in Poland. An important stronghold in Poland, it became a capital of a duchy within medieval Poland in 1172, and in 1217 it was granted city rights by Duke Casimir I of Opole, the great-grandson of Polish Duke Boles\u0142aw III Wrymouth. During the Medieval Period and the Renaissance, the city was known as a centre of commerce; several main trade routes intersected here, which helped to generate steady profits from transit trade. The rapid development of the town was also caused by the establishment of a seat of regency in Opole in 1816. The first railway connection between Opole, Brzeg and Wroc\u0142aw was opened in 1843 and the first manufacturing plants were constructed in 1859, which greatly contributed to the city's regional significance.\nThe city's extensive heritage entails several cultures of Central Europe, as it was under periods of Polish, Bohemian, Austrian, Prussian, and German rule. Opole formally became part of Poland again in 1945 after the end of World War II. Many German Upper Silesians and Poles of ethnic German ancestry still reside in the Opole region; but, following the 1945\u201346 expulsions, in the city of the 21st century, ethnic Germans make up less than 3% of the population.\nThere are four higher education establishments in the city: the Opole University, Opole University of Technology, a Medical College and the private Higher College of Management and Administration. The National Festival of Polish Song has been held here annually since 1963. Each year new regular events, fairs, shows and competitions take place.\nOpole is sometimes referred to as \"Polish Venice\", because of its picturesque Old Town and several canals and bridges connecting parts of the city.\nNames and etymology.\nThe name \"Opole\" likely originated from the medieval Slavic term for a group of settlements.\nNames for the city in other relevant languages include , , , or .\nHistory.\nIn Medieval Poland.\nOpole's history begins in the 8th century. At this time, according to the archeological excavations, the first settlement was founded on the Ostr\u00f3wek \u2013 the northern part of the Pasieka Island in the middle of the Oder river. In the early 10th century it developed into one of the main \"gords\" of the Lechitic (Polish) Opolans tribe.\nAt the end of the century Silesia became part of Poland and was ruled by the Piast dynasty; the land of the pagan Opolanie was conquered by Duke Mieszko I in 992. From the 11th\u201312th centuries it was also a castellany. After the death of Duke W\u0142adys\u0142aw II the Exile, Silesia was divided in 1163 between two Piast lines \u2013 the Wroc\u0142aw line in Lower Silesia and the Opole-Racib\u00f3rz of Upper Silesia. Opole would become a duchy in 1172 and would share much in common with the Duchy of Racib\u00f3rz, with which it was often combined. In 1281 Upper Silesia was divided further between the heirs of the dukes. The Duchy of Opole was temporarily reestablished in 1290.\nIn the early 13th century, Duke Casimir I of Opole decided to move the settlement from the Pasieka Island to the right shore of the Oder river (since the 17th century, the old stream bed of the Oder, known as the M\u0142yn\u00f3wka). All of the inhabitants had to be moved in order to accommodate the castle that was built in place of the old city. Former inhabitants of Ostr\u00f3wek, together with German merchants that immigrated from the West, received the first town rights probably as early as around 1217, although this date is disputed. Opole received German town law in 1254, which was expanded with Neumarkt law in 1327. Opole developed during the rule of duke Bolko I of Opole. The castle was finally completed around this time and new buildings, including the city walls and the Holy Cross Church, were constructed.\nAlong with most of Silesia, in 1327 the Duchy of Opole came under the sovereignty of the Kingdom of Bohemia, itself part of the Holy Roman Empire. In 1521 the Duchy of Opole inherited the Duchy of Racib\u00f3rz (\"Ratibor\"), by then also known by its German equivalent \u2013 Oppeln. The second castle of Opole was probably founded in the 14th century by duke Vladislaus II, though some sources claim that it was originally a wooden stronghold of Opole's castellan dating into 12th century.\nAustrian Habsburgs and Polish Vasas rule.\nWith the death of King Ludv\u00edk II of Bohemia at the Battle of Moh\u00e1cs, Silesia was inherited by Ferdinand I, placing Opole under the sovereignty of the Habsburg monarchy of Austria. The Habsburgs took control of the region in 1532 after the last Piast duke of Opole, Jan II the Good, died. At that time the city was still mainly Polish-speaking (around 63%), with other nationalities represented mainly by Germans, Czechs and Jews. The last two dukes of Opole, Nicholas II and Janusz II the Good, did not master the German language.\nBeginning in 1532 the Habsburgs pawned the duchy to different rulers including several monarchs of Poland (see Dukes of Opole). After the Swedish invasion of Poland, in 1655 the King of Poland, John II Casimir Vasa, stayed with his entire court in Opole. In Opole in November 1655, the Universal of Opole (\"Uniwersa\u0142 opolski\") was issued by the King, calling for Poles to rise against the Swedes, who at that time occupied a large part of Poland.\nWith the abdication of King John II Casimir of Poland as the last Duke of Opole in 1668, the region passed to the direct control of the Habsburgs. At the beginning of the 18th century, the German population of Opole was estimated at 20%.\nIn Prussian Silesia.\nKing Frederick II of Prussia conquered most of Silesia from Austria in 1740 during the Silesian Wars; Prussian control was confirmed in the Peace of Breslau in 1742. In the 18th century, Opole belonged to the tax inspection region of Prudnik. Under Prussian rule the ethnic structure of the city began to change. In the early 20th century the number of Polish and bilingual citizens of Opole, according to the official German statistics, varied between 25% and 31%. Nonetheless, Opole remained an important cultural, social and political center for the Poles of Upper Silesia. From 1849 the Polish newspaper \"Gazeta Wiejska dla G\u00f3rnego \u015al\u0105ska\" was published in Opole. Polish reporter and opponent of Germanisation Bronis\u0142aw Koraszewski founded the newspaper \"Gazeta Opolska\" in 1890 and the People's Bank in Opole (\"Opolski Bank Ludowy\") in 1897. Another Polish newspaper, the \"Nowiny\" was founded by Franciszek Kurpierz in 1911.\nFrom 1816\u20131945 Opole was the capital of Regierungsbezirk Oppeln within Prussia. The city became part of the German Empire during the unification of Germany in 1871.\nAfter World War I.\nAfter the defeat of Imperial Germany in World War I, a plebiscite was held on 20 March 1921 in Oppeln to determine if the city would be in the Weimar Republic or become part of the Second Polish Republic, which had just regained independence. 20,816 (94.7%) votes were cast for Germany, 1,098 (5.0%) for Poland, and 70 (0.3%) votes were declared invalid. Voter participation was 95.9%. Results of the plebiscite in the Oppeln-Land county were different, with 30% of the population voting for Poland. The local newspaper \"Oppelner Nachrichten\" was published in Oppeln.\nOppeln was the administrative seat of the Province of Upper Silesia from 1919\u20131939. In the years 1928\u20131931, by the decision of the German regional administration, the Piast Castle was demolished. Thanks to the strong opposition of the local Polish community and protests of the Union of Poles in Germany, the castle tower was saved from demolition. Nowadays called the \"Piast Tower\" it is one of the city's landmarks. In 1929, a Polish theatre from Katowice came to Opole to perform the opera \"Halka\" by Stanis\u0142aw Moniuszko. After the performance, the actors were brutally beaten by a German militia with the silent consent of the German police.\nLocal Polish activists were intensively persecuted from 1937 onwards. The local \"Gestapo\" terrorized and spied on Polish activities in the German-held part of Upper Silesia, participated in espionage and sabotage in the Polish part of Silesia and prepared border provocations against Poland. There was strong anti-Polish propaganda in the city and region.\nThe local Polish newspaper \"Nowiny Codzienne\" was frequently confiscated from 1937 and its editors were harassed, its work obstructed, its distributors persecuted, and its readers threatened. In 1938\u20131939, the local \"Gestapo\" carried out expulsions of Polish activists from the region, which the local Polish press could still report. On 2 July 1939 a Nazi militia attacked and severely beat Poles going to a Polish service in the Saint Sebastian Church.\nWorld War II.\nOn August 31, the day before the German invasion of Poland that began World War II, the Germans began mass arrests of prominent Poles in the city, which were continued in September. Among the arrested Poles were activists, entrepreneurs, journalists, editors, scout leaders, the director of the local Polish bank and the director of the local Polish library. The \"Nowiny Codzienne\" newspaper was closed down on September 1, and its editorial team, including editor-in-chief Jan \u0141angowski, was deported to concentration camps. In September 1939, local Polish organizations were closed down by the German police and \"Gestapo\", and the assets of the local Polish bank were confiscated. On 13 September and 4 October 1939, arrested Poles were deported from the city to concentration camps, men to Buchenwald and women to Ravensbr\u00fcck. Some local Poles avoided arrest by escaping earlier to Poland.\nThe German 10th Army and 14th Army attacked Poland from the city, and the \"Einsatzgruppe\" I and II followed the armies from Opole to various Polish cities to commit crimes against the Polish people. After the defeat of Poland, Polish Eastern Upper Silesia was re-annexed to the Province of Upper Silesia and Oppeln lost its status as provincial capital to German-occupied Katowice (renamed \"Kattowitz\").\nPolish prisoners from the city co-founded the secret resistance movement in Buchenwald, while Polish escapees from the city participated in the Polish resistance in occupied Poland. Local members of the Polish resistance were expelled from the city.\nDuring the war, the Nazis operated thirteen forced labour subcamps of the Stalag VIII-B/344 prisoner-of-war camp for Allied POWs in the city, and two in the present-day district of Groszowice.\nThe New Synagogue was built in 1893\u20131897, designed by Felix Henry. During the Kristallnacht on 9\u201310 November 1938 Nazis forced Rabbi Hans Hirschberg to set the building on fire.\nIn modern Poland.\nAfter the end of the Second World War in 1945, Oppeln was transferred from Germany to Poland, pursuant to the agreements of the Potsdam Conference, and given its original Slavic name of Opole. Opole became part of the Katowice Voivodeship from 1946\u20131950, after which it became part of the Opole Voivodeship. Unlike other parts of the so-called Recovered Territories, Opole and the surrounding region's indigenous population partly remained and was only partly expelled as elsewhere. Over 1 million Silesians who considered themselves Poles or were treated as such by the authorities due to their language and customs were allowed to stay after they were verified as Poles in a special verification process. It involved declaring Polish nationality and an oath of allegiance to the Polish nation. Additionally, many Poles displaced from the former Polish Kresy annexed by the USSR (for example Lw\u00f3w) came to Opole and the surrounding area and settled here after the Second World War.\nIn later years, however, many Germans (and German Silesians) left for West Germany to flee the communist Eastern Bloc (see Emigration from Poland to Germany after World War II). Today, Opole, along with the surrounding region, is known as a centre of the German minority in Poland that recruits mainly from the descendants of the positively verified autochthons. In the city itself, however, only 2.46% of the inhabitants declared German nationality according to the last national census of 2002.\nOn 1 January 2017 Borki, Chmielowice, Czarnow\u0105sy, Krzanowice, S\u0142awice, \u015awierkle, Win\u00f3w, Wrzoski, \u017berkowice as well as parts of Brzezie, Dobrze\u0144 Ma\u0142y and Karcz\u00f3w became a part of Opole, enlargening its population by about 9,500, and its area by over 5,300 ha, despite the protests of inhabitants.\nHistorical population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the early 20th century the number of Polish and bilingual citizens of Opole, according to the official German statistics, varied from 25 to 31%.\nGerman minority.\nAlongside German and Polish, many citizens of the city before 1945 used a strongly German-influenced Silesian dialect (sometimes called \"wasserpolnisch\" or \"wasserpolak\"). Because of this, the post-war Polish state administration after the annexation of Silesia in 1945 did not initiate a general expulsion of all former inhabitants of Opole, as was done in Lower Silesia, for instance, where the population almost exclusively spoke the German language. Because they were considered \"autochthonous\" (Polish), the Wasserpolak-speakers instead received the right to remain in their homeland after declaring themselves as Poles. Some German speakers took advantage of this decision, allowing them to remain in Opole, even when they considered themselves to be of German nationality. The city surroundings currently contain the largest German and Upper Silesian minorities in Poland. However, Opole itself is only 2.46% German. (See also Germans of Poland.)\nMain sights.\nOpole hosts the annual National Festival of Polish Song. The city is also known for its 10th-century Church of St. Adalbert and the 14th-century Church of the Holy Cross. There is a zoo, the Ogr\u00f3d Zoologiczny w Opolu.\nStructures and buildings\nMuseums\nCemetery\nGeography.\nOpole is one of the warmest cities in Poland. The national all-time heat record was measured in Pr\u00f3szk\u00f3w, near Opole. The climate is oceanic with sizeable continental influences.\nPolitics.\nMembers of Parliament (Sejm) elected from Opole constituency\nEconomy.\nOpole is the Opole Voivodeship's centre for commerce, banking, industrial complexes and other major service sector industries.\nPrior to World War II, due to major limestone deposits in Opole's vicinity, the city developed as a centre for cement production in Germany, with the \"Cementownia \"Odra\"\" being active till this day. The French building materials company Lafarge is also active in the area, having its roofing division, Lafarge Roofing, together with its German subsidiary Schiedel (chimney manufacturing) based in Opole.\nOther companies in the city include: IT companies: Atmoterm SA, the German valve manufacturer Kludi; the German men's fashion manufacturer Ahlers and the American automotive manufacturer Tower Automative. As is the case with the entire Opole Voivodeship, there is a strong presence of food industry services in the city. The largest companies in the food sector include: Zott, the Dutch baby food and nutrition company Nutricia, part of the Danone food-products corporation.\nOpole has branches of all major banks, including: PKO, Pekao, Deutsche Bank and Raiffeisen Zentralbank.\nThe retail sector in Opole includes major Metro AG brand stores: Metro Cash and Carry and Media-Saturn-Holding, as well as Real. The city has a plethora of other major supermarket chains, namely: the Polish supermarket chains Biedronka, Lidl, Aldi and Netto. Other major brand stores include the shoe retailer Deichmann and Rossmann drugstores.\nFurthermore, the city has three major shopping centres. The Solaris Center, with a total of 86 shops, opened in May 2009 and is located in the centre of Miko\u0142aj Kopernik Square. In the city's suburbs, by Wroc\u0142awska Street (\"ul. Wroc\u0142awska\") is the location of Karolinka Shopping Centre (\"Centrum Handlowe Karolinka\"). The shopping centre, which opened in September 2008, has a total area of 38,000\u00a0m2, with a total of 99 stores, including fashion, hardware and electronics stores. To the east of the city, by the National Road 46, is the smallest of the three shopping centres, Turawa Park, with a total of 50 stores. Other shopping centres include \"Galeria Opolanin\", built between 1974 and 1981 and upon its completion, was the largest shopping centre in Poland.\nSports.\nAmong the city's sports team are:\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nOpole is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCitations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74611", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74611", "title": "Gorzow Wielkopolski", "text": ""}
{"id": "74612", "revid": "19158033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74612", "title": "Chorz\u00f3w", "text": "Chorz\u00f3w ( ; ; ) is a city in the Silesia region of southern Poland, near Katowice. Chorz\u00f3w is one of the central cities of the Metropolis GZM \u2013 a metropolis with a population of 2\u00a0million. It is located in the Silesian Highlands, on the Rawa River (a tributary of the Vistula).\nAdministratively, Chorz\u00f3w is in the Silesian Voivodeship since 1999, previously Katowice Voivodeship, and before then, the Silesian Voivodeship. Chorz\u00f3w is one of the cities of the 2.7\u00a0million conurbation \u2013 the Katowice urban area and within a greater Katowice-Ostrava metropolitan area with a population of about 5,294,000 people. The population within the city limits is 105,628 as of December 2021.\nChorz\u00f3w is particularly known as the location of the Silesian Stadium, one of the largest and historically most important stadiums in Poland. Ruch Chorz\u00f3w, one of the most accomplished Polish football clubs, is based in the city.\nHistory.\nCity name.\nThe city of Chorz\u00f3w was formed in 1934\u20131939 by a merger of four adjacent cities: Chorz\u00f3w, Kr\u00f3lewska Huta, Nowe Hajduki and Hajduki Wielkie. The name of the oldest settlement \"Chorz\u00f3w\" was applied to the amalgamated city.\nThe etymology of the name is not known. Chorz\u00f3w is believed to be first mentioned as \"Zversov\" or \"Zuersov\" in a document of 1136 by Pope Innocent II as a village with peasants, silver miners, and two inns. Another place-name likely indicating Chorz\u00f3w is Coccham or Coccha, which is mentioned in a document of 1198 by the Patriarch of Jerusalem, who awarded this place to the Equestrian Order of the Holy Sepulchre of Jerusalem. Chorz\u00f3w is then mentioned as \"Chareu\" or \"Charev\" in 1257 and then \"Charzow\" in 1292. The last name may originate from the personal name \"Charz\", short for \"Zachary\" and may mean \"Zachary's place\". The \"a\" in the early names may have been later modified to the current pronunciation with \"o\" perhaps due to similarity to the common adjective \"chory\"=\"ill\" and a presence of a hospital (which was moved in 1299 to Rozbark at the gates of Bytom). Today, the place of the old village is a subdivision called \"Chorz\u00f3w III\" or \"Chorz\u00f3w Stary\" (\"Old Chorz\u00f3w\").\nThe industrial and residential settlement south-west of Chorz\u00f3w constructed since 1797 around the \"Royal Coal Mine\" and \"Royal Iron Works\" was named \"Kr\u00f3lewska Huta\" by the Poles or \"K\u00f6nigsh\u00fctte\" by the Germans, both names meaning \"Royal Iron Works\". As it was growing quickly this settlement was granted city status in 1868. Today this neighbourhood is called \"Chorz\u00f3w I\" or \"Chorz\u00f3w-Miasto\" meaning \"Chorz\u00f3w Centre\".\nThe etymology of \"Hajduki\" is ambiguous and is interpreted as either related to the German word for moorland (German: die Heide), or adopted from the German/Polish/Silesian term for hajduk(s) (Polish (plural): Hajduki; German (singular): Heiduck), which locally meant bandits. The place was first mentioned in 1627 as \"Hejduk\" and shown on 18th century maps as \"Ober Heiduk\" and \"Nieder Heiduk\" (i.e., Upper and Lower Heiduk). The later names \"Hajduki Wielkie\" and \"Nowe Hajduki\" mean \"Great Hajduks\" and \"New Hajduks\", respectively. The two settlements were merged in 1903 and named after the Bismarck Iron Works \"Bismarckh\u00fctte\". When the international borders shifted, the name of Bismarck was replaced with the name of the Polish king Batory (so-chosen to preserve that initial \"B\", which appeared on an economically important local trademark). Today this city subdivision is called \"Chorz\u00f3w IV\" or \"Chorz\u00f3w-Batory\".\nVillage of Chorz\u00f3w.\nIn the 12th century, the castellany of Bytom, including the Chorz\u00f3w area, belonged to the Seniorate Province (Krak\u00f3w Duchy) of Poland. In 1179 it was awarded by Duke Casimir the Just to the Duke of Opole, and since that time the history of Chorz\u00f3w has been connected to the history of Upper Silesia (Duchy of Opole).\nThe oldest part of the city, the village of Chorz\u00f3w, today called \"Chorz\u00f3w Stary\", belonged since 1257 to the Equestrian Order of the Holy Sepulchre of Jerusalem. Already at that time silver and lead ores were mined nearby, later also the ores of iron. There is more documentation for 16th century developments.\nFrom 1327, the Upper Silesian duchies were ruled by the dukes of the Piast dynasty and were subject to Bohemian overlordship. The Crown of Bohemia elected Polish-Lithuanian Jagiellons kings from 1471 and Austrian Habsburgs kings after 1526. In 1742, the area was conquered by the Prussian Hohenzollerns in Silesian Wars, setting the stage for the Prussian industrial might. The Prussian and then German period lasted for about 180 years and overlapped with the time of rapid industrialization.\nIndustrial revolution.\nWith the discovery of bituminous coal deposits at the end of the 18th century by the Polish local priest Ludwik Bojarski, new industrial sectors developed in the Chorz\u00f3w area. In the years 1791\u20131797, the Prussian state-owned Royal Coal Mine was constructed (\"Kopalnia Kr\u00f3l\", \"K\u00f6nigsgrube\", later renamed several times with the changing political winds). In 1799, the first pig iron was made in the Royal Iron Works (\"Kr\u00f3lewska Huta\", \"K\u00f6nigsh\u00fctte\"). At the time, it was a pioneering industrial establishment of its kind in continental Europe. In 1819, the ironworks consisted of four blast furnaces, producing 1,400 tons of pig-iron. In the 1800s, the modern Lidognia Zinc Works was added in the area.\nSettlements grew near the new coal and ironworks. Since 1797, one group of settlements was called \"K\u00f6nigsh\u00fctte\" (\"Kr\u00f3lewska Huta\" in Polish) after the ironworks. In 1846, Kr\u00f3lewska Huta received a railway track to \u015awi\u0119toch\u0142owice and Mys\u0142owice and in 1857 to Bytom and until 1872 to all major cities in the Silesian region. Kr\u00f3lewska Huta received city status in 1868 as part of Bytom County, and in 1898, it was made a separate city-county. The population was increasing rapidly: from 19,500 inhabitants in 1870 to 72,600 in 1910. Among them 17,300 workers were employed in the industry (similar number for 1939). In 1871, there was a workers' rebellion in the city.\nThe Royal Iron Works were taken over in 1871 by the holding called \"Vereingte K\u00f6nigs- und Laurah\u00fctte AG f\u00fcr Bergbau und H\u00fcttenbetrieb\", which added a steel mill, rail mill and workshops. In the vicinity of the Royal Coal Mine, \"Countess Laura\" Coal Mine was opened in 1870, and by 1913\u20131914 coal production increased to 1 million tons a year. In 1898, a thermal power plant was commissioned which was, until the 1930s, the biggest electricity producer in Poland with a power of 100 MW (electrical). Today, it operates as \"ELCHO\". In 1915, nitrogen chemical works (Oberschlesische Stickstoffwerke) were built nearby to produce fertilizers and explosives by newly invented processes: from the air, water and coal (see Haber-Bosch process). Today, it operates as \"Zak\u0142ady Azotowe SA\".\nAnother ironworks, Bismarck Iron Works (\"Bismarckh\u00fctte\"), later called Bathory Iron Works (\"Huta Batory\"), was opened in 1872 in the village of Hajduki Wielkie, just south of Chorz\u00f3w and Kr\u00f3lewska Huta. A large carbochemical plant was started nearby in 1889, the first such chemical plant in what was to later become the Polish state. Today the company operates as \"Zak\u0142ady Koksochemiczne Hajduki SA\".\nTowards the end of the 19th century, Chorz\u00f3w experienced a revival of Polish national feelings. Ethnic tensions were mixed with the religious and class conflicts. Karol Miarka was the editor of Polish books and newspapers including \"Katolik\" (The Catholic) published in Kr\u00f3lewska Huta since 1868, \"Poradnik Gospodarski\" (\"Economic Advisor\") since 1879. He was also the founder of several organizations: Upper Silesian Union, Upper Silesian Peasants Union. Juliusz Ligo\u0144 was a Polish activist and poet. In 1920, the football club Ruch Chorz\u00f3w was founded in the city. Later on, it would become one of the most successful Polish football teams.\nInterwar Poland (1922\u20131939).\nIn the Upper Silesia plebiscite a majority of 31,864 voters voted to remain in Germany while 10,764 votes were given for Poland. Following three Silesian Uprisings, the eastern part of Silesia, including Chorz\u00f3w and Kr\u00f3lewska Huta, was separated from Germany and awarded to Poland in 1922. Migrations of people followed. Because of its strategic value, the case of the nitrogen factory Oberschlesische Stickstoffwerke was argued for years before the Permanent Court of International Justice, finally setting some new legal precedents on what is \"just\" in international relations. In 1934, the industrial communities of Chorz\u00f3w, Kr\u00f3lewska Huta and Nowe Hajduki were merged into one municipality with 81,000 inhabitants. The name of the oldest settlement \"Chorz\u00f3w\" was given to the whole city. In April 1939, the settlement of Hajduki Wielkie with 30,000 inhabitants was added to Chorz\u00f3w.\nIn part due to the German-Polish trade war in the 1920s, the industry of Chorz\u00f3w, a border city at that time, stagnated until 1933. In 1927, a division of Huta Pi\u0142sudski was separated into a company making rail cars, trams and bridges; today it operates as Alstom-Konstal. The State Factory of Nitrogen Compounds (Pa\u0144stwowa Fabryka Zwi\u0105zk\u00f3w Azotowych) was in 1933 merged with a similar company (largely its copy) in Tarn\u00f3w-Mo\u015bcice.\nGerman occupation during World War II (1939\u20131945).\nOn the day of the outbreak of World War II in September 1939, Chorz\u00f3w was taken by Nazi Germany. Polish irregulars, mainly Silesian uprising veterans and scouts, put up resistance to the regular German forces for three days, afterwards the city was occupied by Germany, and on September 6, 1939, the \"Einsatzgruppe I\" entered the city to commit various atrocities against Poles. Most of the Polish defenders were murdered in mass executions. An execution of three Poles was carried out by the German \"Freikorps\" already on September 3, 1939. A unit of the \"Einsatzgruppe I\" was stationed in Chorz\u00f3w, and it was responsible for many crimes against Poles committed in Chorz\u00f3w and the nearby cities of Czelad\u017a and Siemianowice \u015al\u0105skie. Polish property was confiscated, and Chorz\u00f3w was promptly re-incorporated into German Silesia; the Upper Silesian industry being one of the pillars of the Nazi Germany war effort. In 1939 and 1940, the Germans carried out mass arrests of Polish intelligentsia, especially teachers, for which a prison was operated in the city (see \"Intelligenzaktion\"). Local Polish teachers were among Poles murdered in 1939 in Chorz\u00f3w and Strzybnica (present-day district of Tarnowskie G\u00f3ry), and later in the Dachau concentration camp.\nThere were several forced labour camps in Chorz\u00f3w, including one \"Polenlager\" solely for Poles, two camps solely for Jews, the E246, E594 and E725 subcamps of the Stalag VIII-B/344 prisoner-of-war camp, and, in years 1944\u20131945, a subcamp of the Auschwitz concentration camp, in which approximately 200 Jews from German-occupied France, Belgium and Czechoslovakia were imprisoned. In January 1945, the prisoners of the subcamp of Auschwitz were evacuated on foot to Gliwice, and then deported to the Nordhausen-Dora concentration camp. Chorz\u00f3w was occupied by the Soviet Red Army in January 1945 with the subsequent persecution of many ethnic Polish Silesians and Germans.\nAfter 1945.\nAt the end of World War II, Chorz\u00f3w was given to Poland. Generally, the Chorz\u00f3w industry suffered little damage during World War II due to its inaccessibility to Allied bombing, a Soviet Army enveloping manoeuvre in January 1945, and perhaps Albert Speer's slowness or refusal to implement the scorched earth policy. This intact industry now played a critical role in the post-war reconstruction and industrialization of Poland. After the war, businesses were nationalized and operated, with minor changes, until 1989. Some were used as Soviet labour and concentration camps. Some industrial hardware and at least 100,000 Polish Silesians were deported to the Ukrainian Donbass region. At the \"fall of communism\" in 1989, the area was in decline. Since 1989, the region has been transitioning from heavy industry to a more diverse economy.\nIn 1954 as many as 103 miners died in the \"Barbara-Wyzwolenie\" coal mine disaster.\nOn 28 January 2006, a roof collapsed at an exhibition hall, killing 65 people.\nIn 2007, Chorz\u00f3w became a part of the Upper Silesian Metropolitan Union (predecessor to the Metropolis GZM), a voluntary union of a continuous chain of cities aimed at increasing the poor visibility of the area, improving its competitiveness, and modernizing the infrastructure.\nThe region experienced several waves of migrations, including those commencing in 1945 (to Germany and from Poland and Ukraine), in 1971\u20131976 (to Germany), in 1982 (to Western countries), and from 2003 (to other countries of the EU).\nGeography.\nLocation.\nChorz\u00f3w is in the middle of the largest urban center in Poland. The Metropolis GZM is the largest legally recognized urban entity in Poland with a population of two million.\nNine million people live within of Stadion \u015al\u0105ski in Chorz\u00f3w. Six European capitals are located within : Berlin, Vienna, Prague, Bratislava, Budapest and Warsaw.\nClimate.\nThe average annual temperature in Chorz\u00f3w is . The annual precipitation is . Weak West winds (less than 2\u00a0m/s) prevail.\nDemographics.\nDetailed data as of 31 December 2021:\nEconomy.\nChorz\u00f3w used to be one of the most important cities in the largest Polish economic area (the Upper Silesian Industry Area) with extensive industry in coal mining, steel, chemistry, manufacturing, and energy sectors. Many heavy-industry establishments were closed or scaled down in the last two decades because of environmental issues in the center of a highly urbanized area, and also because of decades-long lack of investment. Others were restructured and modernized. Wedged between a dozen of other cities, the population has been decreasing. The city character has been evolving towards the service economy as new industrial development takes mostly place at the border of the industrial area. The unemployment rate is high (12.6% on 2007-12-31) but decreasing; the workforce is generally highly technically skilled.\nMajor industrial establishments are:\nTransport.\nCar:\nThree railway stations on two major routes:\nAir:\nPublic transport:\nHigher education.\nWithin the city limits of Chorz\u00f3w:\nThe nearby cities of Katowice and Gliwice are far larger academic centers than Chorz\u00f3w.\nSights.\nSilesian Central Park.\nThe nationally known Silesian Central Park covers about 30% of the city area and features:\nChorz\u00f3w also features other notable nature areas, including:\nSports.\nClubs:\nHistorically notable is the former club AKS Chorz\u00f3w.\nStadion \u015al\u0105ski is a former home stadium for the Poland national football team, and used for international football games and other events (for example, it has held the Speedway World Championships four times, with the 1973 World Final attracting over 120,000 spectators, the world record attendance for Motorcycle speedway). From year 2009 have held there track and field competitions. Kamila Skolimowska Memorial, which was part of the inaugural meeting World Athletics Continental Tour in 2020 and Diamond League series since 2022. At the 2024 edition of the meeting, two world records were set, one by Jakob Ingebrigtsen (3000m 7.17,55) and the other by Armand Duplantis (pole vault 6.26, just 20 days after last set up in Olympic Games). The stadium also hosts large music concerts. Throughout its history it has featured such artists and groups as The Rolling Stones, Metallica, Guns N' Roses, AC/DC, U2, Iron Maiden, Linkin Park, Pearl Jam, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Genesis and The Police.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nChorz\u00f3w is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74613", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74613", "title": "Tarn\u00f3w", "text": "City in Lesser Poland Voivodeship, Poland\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTarn\u00f3w () is a city in southeastern Poland with 105,922 inhabitants and a metropolitan area population of 269,000 inhabitants. The city is situated in the Lesser Poland Voivodeship. It is a major rail junction, located on the strategic east\u2013west connection from Lviv to Krak\u00f3w, and two additional lines, one of which links the city with the Slovak border.\nTarn\u00f3w is known for its traditional Polish architecture, which was influenced by foreign cultures and foreigners that once lived in the area, most notably Jews, Germans and Austrians. The Old Town, featuring 16th century tenements, houses and defensive walls, has been preserved. Tarn\u00f3w is also the warmest city of Poland, with the highest long-term mean annual temperature in the whole country.\nCompanies headquartered in the city include Poland's largest chemical industry company Grupa Azoty and defence industry company ZMT. The city is currently subdivided into 16 districts and is a member of the Association of Polish Cities (\"Zwi\u0105zek Miast Polskich\").\nNames and etymology.\nThe first documented mention of the settlement dates back to 1105, spelled as \"Tharnow\". The name later evolved to \"Tarnowo\" (1229), \"Tarn\u00f3w\" (1327), and \"Tharnow\" (1473). The place name Tarn\u00f3w is widely used in different forms across Slavic Europe, and lands which used to be inhabited by Slavs, such as eastern Germany, Hungary, and northern Greece. There is a German town, Tarnow, Greek Tyrnavos (also spelled as Tirnovo), Czech Trnov, Bulgarian Veliko Tarnovo and Malko Tarnovo, as well as different Trnovos/Trnowos in Slovenia, Slovakia, Serbia, Bosnia, and North Macedonia. The name \"Tarn\u00f3w\" comes from an early Slavic word \"trn/tarn\", which means \"thorn\", or an area covered by thorny plants.\nHistory.\nAlready in the mid-9th century, on the Tarn\u00f3w's St. Martin Mount (G\u00f3ra sw. Marcina, 2.5 kilometers from the centre of today's city), a Slavic gord was established, probably by the Vistulans. Due to efforts of local archaeologists, we know that the size of the gord was almost 16 hectares, and it was surrounded by a rampart. The settlement was probably destroyed in the 1030s or the 1050s, during either a popular rebellion against Christianity (see Baptism of Poland), or Czech invasion of Lesser Poland. In the mid-11th century, a new gord was established on the Bia\u0142a river. It was a royal property, which in the late 11th or early 12th century was handed over to the Tyniec Benedictine Abbey. The name Tarn\u00f3w, with a different spelling, was for the first time mentioned in a document of Papal legate, Cardinal Gilles de Paris (1124).\nThe first documented mention of Tarn\u00f3w occurs in the year 1309, when a list of miracles of Kinga of Poland specifies a woman named Marta, who was resident of the settlement. In 1327, a knight named Spicymir (Leliwa coat of arms) purchased a village of Tarn\u00f3w Wielki, and three years later, founded his own private town. On 7 March 1330, King W\u0142adys\u0142aw I the Elbow-high granted Magdeburg rights to Tarn\u00f3w. One year later, construction of a castle on the St. Martin Hill was completed by Castellan of Krak\u00f3w, Spycimir Leliwita of Leliwa coat of arms (its ruins can still be seen).\nTarn\u00f3w remained in the hands of the Leliwa family, out of which in the 15th century the Tarnowski family emerged. In the 14th century, numerous German settlers immigrated from Krak\u00f3w and Nowy S\u0105cz (see Walddeutsche, Ostsiedlung). During the 17th century Scottish immigrants began to come in large numbers. In 1528 the exiled King of Hungary J\u00e1nos Szapolyai lived in the town. The town prospered during the Polish Golden Age, when it belonged to Hetman Jan Tarnowski (1488\u20131561). In the mid-16th century, its population was app. 1,200, with 200 houses located within town's defensive wall (the wall itself had been built in the mid-15th century, and expanded in the early 16th century). In 1467, the waterworks and sewage systems were completed, with large cisterns filled with drinking water built in the main market square. In the 16th century, during the period known as the Polish Golden Age, Tarn\u00f3w had a school, a synagogue, a Calvinist prayer house, Roman Catholic churches, and up to twelve guilds.\nPolish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth.\nAfter the death of Jan Tarnowski (16 May 1561), Italian sculptor Jan Maria Padovano began creating one of the most beautiful examples of Renaissance headstones in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. The monument of hetman Tarnowski is almost 14 meters tall, and stands in St. Anne Chapel, which is located in northern nave of the Tarn\u00f3w Cathedral. Padovano completed his work in 1573; furthermore, he designed the Renaissance town hall, and oversaw its remodelling in the 1560s. At that time, in 28 niches of the town hall were portraits of members of the Tarnowski family \u2013 from Spicymir Leliwita to Jan Krzysztof Tarnowski, who died in 1567. In 1570 Tarn\u00f3w became property of the Ostrogski family, after Zofia Tarnowska, the daughter of the hetman, married prince Konstanty Wasyl Ostrogski. In 1588, after Konstanty's death, the town changed hands several times, belonging to different families, which slowed its development. Until the Partitions of Poland, Tarn\u00f3w belonged to the County of Pilzno, Sandomierz Voivodeship. The town, like almost all locations of Lesser Poland, was devastated in October 1655, during the Swedish invasion of Poland, and as a result, its population declined from 2,000 to 768. In 1723, the town became the property of the Sanguszko family, which purchased it from the Lubomirski family.\nHabsburg Empire.\nAfter the first partition of Poland (1772), Tarn\u00f3w was annexed by the Habsburg Empire, and remained in Austrian Galicia until late 1918. Austrian subjugation brought changes, as the town ceased to be private property, became the seat of a county (German: kreis), and of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Tarn\u00f3w (1783). On 14 March 1794, J\u00f3zef Bem was born in Tarn\u00f3w. In the 1830s, under the influence of events in Congress Poland (see November Uprising), Tarn\u00f3w emerged as a center of Polish conspiratorial organizations. Plans for a national uprising in Galicia failed in early 1846, when local peasants began murdering the nobility in the Galician slaughter. The massacre, led by Jakub Szela (born in Smar\u017cowa), began on 18 February 1846. Szela's peasant units surrounded and attacked manor houses and settlements located in three counties \u2013 Sanok, Jas\u0142o, and Tarn\u00f3w. According to Austrians, the revolt got out of hand and the Austrians had to put it down as they were subjugating a previously free people.\nTarn\u00f3w went through the period of quick development in the second half of the 19th century, due to the program of construction of the railway system. In 1852, the town received rail connection with Krak\u00f3w, due to the Galician Railway of Archduke Charles Louis, and in 1870, its population was 21,779. In 1878, gas lighting was introduced, and three years later, the first daily newspaper appeared. In 1888, the Diocese Museum was founded by Rev. Jozef Baba, and in 1910, Tarn\u00f3w received modern waterworks, a power plant and a new complex of the main rail station. The city remained a hotspot of Polish conspirational activities, with up to 20% of all members of the Polish Legions in World War I coming from Tarn\u00f3w and its area. On 10 November 1914, units of the Russian Imperial Army captured Tarn\u00f3w, and remained in the city until 6 May 1915 (see Gorlice\u2013Tarn\u00f3w Offensive). In the early stages of the offensive, Tarn\u00f3w was shelled by German-Austrian heavy artillery, which brought destruction to some of its districts.\nSecond Polish Republic.\nTarn\u00f3w was one of the first Polish cities to be freed during the rebirth of Poland following World War I. The Polish Legions liberated the city on the night of 30\u201331 October 1918. In the Second Polish Republic, Tarn\u00f3w belonged to Krak\u00f3w Voivodeship, and gave the newly established country many outstanding figures, such as Franciszek Latinik and Wincenty Witos. In early 1927, construction of a large chemical plant was initiated in the suburban village of \u015awierczk\u00f3w, which is now a part of the industrial borough of Mo\u015bcice, a district of the city. Before the outbreak of World War II, the population of Tarn\u00f3w was 40,000, of which almost half were Jewish. On 28 August 1939, a German Nazi saboteur conducted the Tarn\u00f3w rail station bomb attack killing 20 civilians and wounding 35, four days before the invasion of Poland by Nazi Germany and the outbreak of World War II in Europe.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the German invasion of Poland, the city was overrun by the German forces on 7 September 1939. Under German occupation, Tarn\u00f3w was incorporated into the General Government territory as the seat of the \"Kreishauptmanschaft Tarnow\" administrative unit in the Krak\u00f3w District on 26 October 1939.\nIn September 1939, the \"Einsatzgruppe I\" entered the city to commit atrocities against Poles, and the \"Einsatzgruppe zbV\" entered to take over the Polish industry. Poles expelled in December 1939 from various places in German-annexed western Poland were deported in freight trains to Tarn\u00f3w. On 14 June 1940, the first mass transport left the Tarn\u00f3w station to Auschwitz concentration camp, with 728 Polish political prisoners, including at least 67 underage boys. All throughout the German occupation of Poland Tarn\u00f3w was an important center of the Armia Krajowa (AK) and other resistance organizations. In mid-1944 AK's 16th Infantry Regiment \"Barbara\" took part in Operation Tempest. After the Warsaw Uprising, in October 1944, the Germans deported 3,000 Varsovians from the Dulag 121 camp in Pruszk\u00f3w, where they were initially imprisoned, to Tarn\u00f3w. Those Poles were mainly old people, ill people and women with children. The Wehrmacht retreated from Tarn\u00f3w on 18 January 1945, and the city was captured by the Red Army, and then restored to Poland.\nThe Jews of Tarn\u00f3w.\nBefore World War II, about 25,000 Jews lived in Tarn\u00f3w. Jews, whose recorded presence in the town went back to the mid-15th century, comprised about half of the town's total population. A large portion of Jewish business in Tarn\u00f3w was devoted to garment and hat manufacturing. The Jewish community was ideologically diverse and included religious Hasidim, secular Zionists, and many more.\nImmediately following the German occupation of the city on 8 September 1939, the persecution of the Jews began. German units burned down most of the city's synagogues on 9 September and drafted Jews for forced-labor projects. Tarn\u00f3w was incorporated into the Generalgouvernement. Many Tarn\u00f3w Jews fled to the east, while a large influx of refugees from elsewhere in occupied Poland continued to increase the town's Jewish population. In early November, the Germans ordered the establishment of a Jewish council (Judenrat) to transmit orders and regulations to the Jewish community. Among the duties of the Jewish council were enforcement of special taxation on the community and providing workers for forced labor.\nDuring 1941, life for the Jews of Tarn\u00f3w became increasingly precarious. The Germans imposed a large collective fine on the community. Jews were required to hand in their valuables. Roundups for labor became more frequent and killings became more commonplace and arbitrary. Deportations from Tarn\u00f3w began in June 1942, when about 13,500 Jews were sent to the Belzec extermination camp. The first major act in the extermination of the Jews of Tarn\u00f3w was the so-called \"first operation\" from 11\u201319 June 1942. The Germans gathered thousands of Jews in the Rynek (market place), and then they were tortured and killed. During this time period, on the streets of the town and in the Jewish cemetery, about 3,000 Jews were shot; in the woods of Zbylitowska G\u00f3ra a few kilometers away from Tarn\u00f3w a further 7,000 were murdered. According to a document from Michal Borawski born in 1926, featured at the entry of the Bimah as part of the panel offered by the Batory Foundation, the street stairs (\"ma\u0142e schody\" or little stairs) from the town-center to the Bernardynski street (where the Bernardine Monastery is located), had to be cleaned of the blood by the local fire brigade for three days. \nPoles gave shelter to several Jewish escapees from the ghetto, however, several Poles were eventually captured and murdered by the Germans for rescuing Jews. Many Poles were imprisoned by the Germans in the local prison for rescuing and helping Jews and then often deported to Auschwitz and other concentration camps, in which some died, while some fortunately survived until the end of the war.\nAfter the June deportations, the Germans forced the surviving Jews of Tarn\u00f3w, along with thousands of Jews from neighboring towns, into the new Tarn\u00f3w Ghetto. The ghetto was surrounded by a high wooden fence. Living conditions in the ghetto were deplorable, marked by severe food shortages, a lack of sanitary facilities, and a forced-labor regimen in factories and workshops producing goods for the German war industry. In September 1942, the Germans ordered all ghetto residents to report to Targowica Square, where they were subjected to a 'selection' in which those deemed 'non-essential' were singled out for deportation to Belzec. About 8,000 people were deported. Thereafter, deportations from Tarn\u00f3w to extermination camps continued sporadically; the Germans deported a group of 2,500 in November 1942.\nHolocaust resistance.\nIn the midst of the 1942 deportations, some Jews in Tarn\u00f3w organized a Jewish resistance movement. Many of the resistance leaders were young Zionists involved in the Hashomer Hatzair youth movement. Many of those who left the ghetto to join the partisans fighting in the forests later fell in battle with SS units. Other resisters sought to establish escape routes to Hungary, but with limited success. The Germans decided to destroy the Tarn\u00f3w ghetto in September 1943. The surviving 10,000 Jews were deported, 7,000 of them to Auschwitz and 3,000 to the Plaszow concentration camp in Krak\u00f3w. In late 1943, Tarn\u00f3w was declared \"free of Jews\" (Judenrein). By the end of the war, the overwhelming majority of Tarn\u00f3w Jews had been murdered by the Germans. Although 700 Jews returned in 1945, some of them soon left the city. Many moved to Israel.\nProperty restoration.\nThe church of Our Lady of the Scapular in Tarn\u00f3w was built on a plot that was illegally obtained by the parish from the descendants of Jewish Holocaust survivors. In 2016, following a lengthy legal battle, a three judge panel found the Church had acted in bad faith and had no legal rights to the property. A year later the case was re-opened after the Church appealed to the local district attorney, with the personal involvement of Minister of Justice Zbigniew Ziobro.\nPost-war period.\nA few months later, the Museum of Tarn\u00f3w Land was opened, and Tarn\u00f3w began a postwar recovery. In 1957, State Theatre of Ludwik Solski was opened. From 1975 to 1998, it was the capital of the Tarn\u00f3w Voivodeship.\nGeography.\nTarn\u00f3w lies at the Carpathian foothills, on the Dunajec and the Bia\u0142a rivers. The area of the city is . It is divided into sixteen districts, known in Polish as osiedla. A few kilometers west of the city lies the district of Mo\u015bcice, built in the late 1920s, together with a large chemical plant. Located to the southeast is Saint Martin's Peak. The district was named after President of Poland, Ignacy Mo\u015bcicki.\nClimate.\nIts climate is classified as marine west coast (\"Cfb\") by K\u00f6ppen. Tarn\u00f3w is one of the warmest cities in Poland. The average temperature in January is and in July. It is claimed that Tarn\u00f3w has the longest summer in Poland spreading from mid May to mid September (above 118 days).\nEconomy.\nTarn\u00f3w is an important center of economy and industry. The city has chemical plants including Zak\u0142ady Azotowe w Tarnowie-Mo\u015bcicach S.A., which is part of Poland's biggest company operating within the chemical sector Grupa Azoty, Becker Farby Przemys\u0142owe Sp. z o.o., Summit Packaging Polska Sp. z o.o.; as well as food plants (Fritar), building materials (Leier Polska S.A., Bruk-Bet), textiles (Sp\u00f3\u0142dzielnia \"Tarnowska Odzie\u017c, Tarnospin, Tarkonfex\"), and several warehouses, as well as a distribution center of the Lidl supermarket chain. Tarn\u00f3w is an important center of natural gas industry, with headquarters of three different gas corporations.\nAnother significant company based in Tarn\u00f3w is the Zak\u0142ady Mechaniczne Tarn\u00f3w operating in the defence industry. It manufactures handguns, assault rifles, sniper rifles and anti-air guns. It is part of the state-controlled Bumar Corporation.\nAmong the major shopping malls in Tarn\u00f3w are the Gemini Park Tarn\u00f3w and Galeria Tarnovia.\nTransport.\nTarn\u00f3w is an important road and rail hub. It lies at the intersection of two major roads \u2013 the motorway along European route E40, and the National Road No. 73, which goes from Kielce to Jas\u0142o. Furthermore, the city is a rail junction, with four lines: three main electrified routes (westward to Krak\u00f3w, eastward to D\u0119bica and southward to Nowy S\u0105cz), as well as secondary-importance local connection to Szczucin. The history of rail transport in Tarn\u00f3w dates back to the year 1856, when the Galician Railway of Archduke Charles Louis reached the city. The architectural complex of Tarn\u00f3w Main Station, fashioned after the Lviv railway station was completed in 1906 in the Austrian Partition of Poland. Since 2010, Tarn\u00f3w station houses a gallery of modern art, the only such gallery located in a rail station in Poland. Tarn\u00f3w also has three additional stations: Tarn\u00f3w Mo\u015bcice, as well as Tarn\u00f3w P\u00f3\u0142nocny and Tarn\u00f3w Klikowa, both of which are currently out of service.\nThe city's public transport system consists of 29 municipal bus routes, which provide convenient transportation to all districts. In 1911\u20131942 Tarn\u00f3w had a tram line, with the length of 2.5 kilometres, since replaced by buses.\nPolitics.\nMembers of Parliament (Sejm) elected from Tarn\u00f3w constituency in 2005 included: Urszula Augustyn, PO, Edward Czesak, PiS, Aleksander Grad, PO, Barbara Marianowska, PiS, J\u00f3zef Rojek, PiS, Wies\u0142aw Woda, PSL and Micha\u0142 Wojtkiewicz, PiS. Member of the European Parliament elected in 2007, and Consul General at the Consulate General of the Republic of Poland in New York City, was Urszula Gacek, PO, EPP-ED.\nTourism.\nTarn\u00f3w is an important tourist, cultural and economic center in Lesser Poland Voivodeship. The old town of Tarn\u00f3w, called the \"pearl of the Polish Renaissance\", is one of the most beautiful examples of the Renaissance architectural layout of Polish cities. In 2022, CNN included Tarn\u00f3w on the list of \"Europe's most beautiful towns\".\nTourist Information\nDetailed information about the city, tourist attractions, cultural events and other things are provided by Tourist Information Center, located in the southern part of Main Square. Office is well equipped with a wide variety of brochures and souvenirs, it also serves as a bike rental spot, luggage storage and small guesthouse (4 rooms/8 beds).\nTourist Information Center\nAttractions.\nPoints of interest around the city include:\nSports.\nThe list features selected sport teams based in Tarn\u00f3w:\nReligion.\nBesides Catholics, other Christian denominations are also present in Tarn\u00f3w including Baptist Church, Free Brothers Church, Jehovah's Witnesses, Methodist Church, Pentecostal Church, Seventh-day Adventist Church and the non-denominational Evangelical Movement \"The Lord is my Banner\". Before World War II there was a large population of Jews comprising half of the city's population, but now there remain just monuments of their past presence.\nAccording to 2007 Catholic Church statistics provided by the Instytut Statystyki Ko\u015bcio\u0142a Katolickiego SAC, Tarn\u00f3w is the most religious city in Poland, with 72.5% of the congregation of the Diocese of Tarn\u00f3w attending Mass.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 Sister cities.\nTarn\u00f3w is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormer twin towns:\nIn June 2021, the Tarn\u00f3w city council decided to suspend its partnership with the Ukrainian town of Ternopil as a reaction to the naming of a stadium in Ternopil in honour of Roman Shukhevych, one of the leaders of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army responsible for massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia perpetrated between 1943\u20131945.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "74614", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74614", "title": "Koszalin", "text": "Koszalin (; ; , ) is a city in northwestern Poland, in Western Pomerania. It is located south of the Baltic Sea coast, and intersected by the river Dzier\u017c\u0119cinka. Koszalin is also a county-status city and capital of Koszalin County of West Pomeranian Voivodeship.\nFounded in the Middle Ages, Koszalin was a seaport until the 17th century, and one of the main cities of Central Pomerania (along with Ko\u0142obrzeg and S\u0142upsk). From 1950 to 1998 it was the administrative capital of Central Pomerania, as the Koszalin Voivodeship, and remains its largest city. Located on the main highway and railroad between the Tricity and Szczecin, Koszalin is an important regional industrial, cultural and educational center. It is home to the Koszalin University of Technology, Polish Air Force Training Center and the Polish Border Guard Academy. Its Gothic Cathedral serves as the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Koszalin\u2013Ko\u0142obrzeg. Koszalin is the host city of an annual festival of choirs of the Polish diaspora from various parts of the world.\nHistory.\nHuman settlement in Koszalin dates back to prehistoric times. Various traces of human settlement of the Funnelbeaker, Globular Amphora and Lusatian cultures and from ancient Roman times and Early Middle Ages were discovered during archaeological excavations.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe territory became part of the emerging Polish state under Mieszko I around 967. According to the Medieval Chronicle of Greater Poland (\"Kronika Wielkopolska\") Koszalin was one of the Pomeranian cities captured and subjugated by Duke Boles\u0142aw III Wrymouth of Poland in 1107 (other towns included Ko\u0142obrzeg, Kamie\u0144 and Wolin). Afterwards, in the 12th century the area became part of the Griffin-ruled Duchy of Pomerania, a vassal state of Poland, which separated from Poland after the fragmentation of Poland into smaller duchies, and became a vassal of Denmark in 1185 and a part of the Holy Roman Empire from 1227.\nIn 1214, Bogislaw II, Duke of Pomerania, made a donation of a village known as Koszalice/Cossalitz by Che\u0142mska Hill in Ko\u0142obrzeg Land to the Norbertine monastery in Bia\u0142oboki near Trzebiat\u00f3w. New, mostly German, settlers from outside of Pomerania were invited to settle the territory. In 1248, the eastern part of Ko\u0142obrzeg Land, including the village, was transferred by Duke Barnim I to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Kammin.\nOn 23 May 1266, Kammin bishop Hermann von Gleichen granted a charter to the village, granting it L\u00fcbeck law, local government, autonomy and multiple privileges to attract German settlers from the west. When in 1276 the bishops became the sovereign in neighboring Ko\u0142obrzeg, they moved their residence there, while the administration of the diocese was done from Koszalin. In 1278 a Cistercian monastery was established, which took care of the local parish church and St. Mary chapel on Che\u0142mska Hill.\nThe city obtained direct access to the Baltic Sea when it gained the village of Jamno (1331), parts of Lake Jamno, a spit between the lake and the sea and the castle of Unie\u015bcie in 1353. Thence, it participated in the Baltic Sea trade as a member of the Hanseatic League (from 1386), which led to several conflicts with the competing seaports of at Ko\u0142obrzeg and Dar\u0142owo. From 1356 until 1417/1422, the city was part of the Duchy of Pomerania-Wolgast. In 1446 Koszalin fought a victorious battle against the nearby rival city of Ko\u0142obrzeg. In 1475 a conflict between the city of Koszalin and the Pomeranian duke Bogislaw X broke out, resulting in the kidnapping and temporary imprisonment of the duke in Koszalin.\nEarly Modern Age.\nAs a result of German colonization, the town became mostly German-speaking, putting indigenous Slavic speakers at disadvantage. In 1516 local Germans enforced a ban on buying goods from Slavic speakers. It was also forbidden to accept native Slavs to craft guilds, which indicates ethnic discrimination.\nIn 1531 riots took place between supporters and opponents of the Protestant Reformation. In 1534 the city became mostly Lutheran under the influence of Johannes Bugenhagen. In 1568, John Frederick, Duke of Pomerania and bishop of Cammin, started constructing a residence, finished by his successor Casimir VI of Pomerania in 1582. After the 1637 death of the last Pomeranian duke, Bogislaw XIV, the city passed to his cousin, Bishop Ernst Bogislaw von Cro\u00ff of Kammin. Occupied by Swedish troops during the Thirty Years' War in 1637, some of the city's inhabitants sought refuge in nearby Poland. The city was granted to Brandenburg-Prussia after the Treaty of Westphalia (1648) and the Treaty of Stettin (1653), and with all of Farther Pomerania became part of the Brandenburgian Pomerania.\nNow renamed C\u00f6slin as part of the Kingdom of Prussia, the city was heavily damaged by a fire in 1718, but was rebuilt in the following years. In 1764 on the Che\u0142mska Hill, now located within the city limits, a Pole Jan Gelczewski founded a paper mill that supplied numerous city offices.\nLate Modern Age.\nThe city was occupied by French troops in 1807 after the War of the Fourth Coalition. Following the Napoleonic Wars, it became the capital of F\u00fcrstenthum District (county) and Regierungsbezirk C\u00f6slin (government region) within the Province of Pomerania. The F\u00fcrstenthum District was dissolved on 1 September 1872 and replaced with the C\u00f6slin District on December 13. Between 1829 and 1845, a road connecting C\u00f6slin (Koszalin) with Stettin (Szczecin) and Danzig (Gda\u0144sk) was built. Part of this road, from C\u00f6slin (Koszalin) to the nearby town of Sian\u00f3w, was built in 1833 by around one hundred former Polish insurgents. In 1869, the Saint Joseph church was built by local Poles.\nThe town became part of the German Empire in 1871 during the unification of Germany. The railroad from Stettin through C\u00f6slin and Stolp (S\u0142upsk) to Danzig was constructed from 1858 to 1878. A military cadet school created by Frederick the Great in 1776 was moved from Kulm (Che\u0142mno) to the city in 1890. The \"K\u00f6sliner Zeitung\" was as a local newspaper published in K\u00f6slin.\nAfter the Nazi Party took power in Germany in 1933, a Gestapo station was established in the city and mass arrests of Nazi opponents were carried out. After the Nazis had closed down Dietrich Bonhoeffer's seminar in Finkenwalde (Zdroje) in 1937, Bonhoeffer chose the town as one of the sites where he illegally continued to educate vicars of the Confessing Church.\nDuring the Second World War K\u00f6slin was the site of the first school for the \"rocket troops\" created on orders of Walter Dornberger, the Wehrmacht's head of the V-2 design and development program. The Polish resistance conducted espionage of German activity and distributed Polish underground press in the city. The Nazis brought many prisoners of war and forced labourers to the city, mainly Poles, but also Italians and French. The Germans operated several forced labour camps in the city, including a subcamp of the Stalag II-B POW camp. Polish forced labourers constituted up to 10% of the city's population during the war. Germany also operated a prison in the city, with forced labour subcamps in the region. After crushing the Warsaw Uprising, the Germans brought several transports of Poles from Warsaw to the city, mainly women and children.\nAfter World War II.\nOn 4 March 1945, the city was captured by the Red Army. Under the border changes forced by the Soviet Union in the post-war Potsdam Agreement, Koszalin became part of Poland as part of the so-called Recovered Territories. The city's German population that had not yet fled was expelled to the remainder of post-war Germany in accordance to the Potsdam Agreement. The city was resettled by Poles and Kashubians, many of whom had been expelled from Polish territory annexed by the Soviets.\nAs early as March 1945 a Polish police unit was established, consisting of former forced labourers and prisoners of war, however, the Soviets, still present in the city, plundered local industrial factories in April. From May 1945, life in the destroyed city was being organized, the first post-war schools, shops and service premises were established. In 1946, the first public library was opened, whose director was later Maria Pilecka, the sister of Polish national hero Witold Pilecki. In March 1946, the anti-communist Home Army 5th Wilno Brigade was active in Koszalin. In July 1947, the last units of the Soviet Army left Koszalin, and from that time only Polish troops were stationed in the city. In 1953 a local radio station was founded in Koszalin.\nInitially, Koszalin was the first post-war regional capital of Polish Western Pomerania, before the administration finally moved to Szczecin in February 1946, after which the region was named the Szczecin Voivodeship. In 1950 this voivodeship was divided into a truncated Szczecin Voivodeship and Koszalin Voivodeship. In years 1950-75 Koszalin was the capital of the enlarged Koszalin Voivodeship sometimes called Middle Pomerania due to becoming the fastest growing city in Poland. In years 1975-98 it was the capital of the smaller Koszalin Voivodeship. As a result of the Local Government Reorganization Act (1998) Koszalin became part of the West Pomeranian Voivodeship (effective 1 January 1999) regardless of an earlier proposal for a new Middle Pomeranian Voivodeship covering approximately the area of former Koszalin Voivodeship (1950\u201375).\nIn 1991, Koszalin was visited by Pope John Paul II. On the fifth anniversary of his visit, his monument was unveiled in the city center.\nLandmarks.\nThe city borders on Che\u0142mska Hill (), a site of pagan worship in prehistory, and upon which is now built the tower \"sanctuary of the covenant\", which was consecrated by Pope John Paul II in 1991, and is currently a pilgrimage site. Also an observation tower is located on the hill. At the entrance to the sanctuary there is a monument dedicated to the Polish November insurgents of 1831, who, imprisoned by Prussian authorities, built a road connecting Koszalin with nearby Sian\u00f3w.\nKoszalin's most distinctive landmark is the Gothic St. Mary's Cathedral, dating from the early 14th century. Positioned in front of the cathedral is a monument commemorating John Paul II's visit to the city.\nOther city landmarks include the Park of the Dukes of Pomerania (\"Park Ksi\u0105\u017c\u0105t Pomorskich\"), the Koszalin Museum, the main post office, the 16th-century Wedding Palace and the Culture Centre 105 (\"\").\nThe city also has monuments dedicated to Polish national heroes: J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski, W\u0142adys\u0142aw Anders, Kazimierz Pu\u0142aski, W\u0142adys\u0142aw Sikorski, as well monuments of the 19th-century Polish poets Cyprian Norwid and Adam Mickiewicz.\nNearby cities and villages.\nNearby cities:\nNearby villages:\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nThe climate is oceanic (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\") with some humid continental characteristics (\"Dfb\"), usually categorized if the 0\u00a0\u00b0C isotherm is used (for the same classification). Being in Western Pomerania and near the Baltic Sea, it has a much more moderate climate than the other large Polish cities. The summers are warm and practically never hot as in the south and the winters are often more moderate than the northeast and east, although still cold, yet it is not as mild as Western Europe. Daily averages below freezing point can be found in January and February, while in the summer they are between 15 and 16\u00a0\u00b0C, relatively cool. The average annual precipitation is 704\u00a0mm, distributed during the year. Koszalin is one of the sunniest cities in the country.\nFilm festival.\nThe city has organised an annual film festival since 1973 titled the Koszalin Festival of Film Debuts \"The Youth and Film\" (Polish: \"Koszali\u0144ski Festiwal Debiut\u00f3w Filmowych \"M\u0142odzi i Film\"\") with the aim to promote young filmmakers. Since 2007, the festival has been a competition review of Polish debuts (feature and short films, documentaries and animations). Besides the competition, there are retrospectives, workshops, and discussions about young cinema entitled \"Honesty to Honesty\" (Polish: \"Szczero\u015b\u0107 za szczero\u015b\u0107\"). The festival is known to be the oldest festival of young cinema in Poland. Among the filmmakers who debuted with their films at the festival are Krzysztof Zanussi, Krzysztof Kie\u015blowski, Agnieszka Holland, Filip Bajon and Barbara Sass.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nKoszalin is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74615", "revid": "1320092070", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74615", "title": "Kalisz", "text": "Place in Greater Poland, Poland\nKalisz () is a city in central Poland, and the second-largest city in the Greater Poland Voivodeship, with 97,905 residents (December 2021). It is the capital city of the Kalisz Region. Situated on the Prosna river in the southeastern part of Greater Poland, the city forms a conurbation with the nearby towns of Ostr\u00f3w Wielkopolski and Nowe Skalmierzyce.\nKalisz is one of the oldest cities in Poland and one of the two traditional capitals of Greater Poland (alongside Pozna\u0144). It has served as an important regional center in Poland since the Middle Ages as a provincial capital and notable royal city. It is one of the historical burial sites of medieval Polish monarchs and dukes of the Piast dynasty and the site of a number of significant events in Polish history as well as several battles. Since the 19th century it has been the center of an industrial district. It is the cultural, scientific, educational and administrative center of the eastern and southern Greater Poland region, and the seat of Roman Catholic Diocese of Kalisz.\nHistory.\nThere are many artefacts from Roman times in the area of Kalisz, indicating that the settlement had once been a stop of the Roman caravans heading for the Baltic Sea along the trade route of the Amber Trail. \"Calisia\" had been mentioned by Ptolemy in the 2nd century AD, although the connection is doubted by some historians who claim that the location mentioned by Ptolemy was situated in the territory of the Diduni in Magna Germania.\nMiddle Ages.\nArchaeological excavations have uncovered early medieval settlement from the Piast dynasty period, c. 9th\u201312th centuries. Modern Kalisz was most likely founded in the 9th century as a provincial capital castellany and a minor fort. As part of the region of Greater Poland, i.e. the cradle of the Polish state, the town formed part of Poland since the country's establishment in the 10th century.\nIn 1106, Boles\u0142aw III Wrymouth captured the town, and made it a part of his feudal domain. Between 1253 and 1260 the town was incorporated according to the German town law called the \u015aroda \u015al\u0105ska Law (after \u015aroda \u015al\u0105ska), a local variation of the Magdeburg Law, and soon began to grow. One of the richest towns of Greater Poland, during the feudal fragmentation of Poland it formed a separate duchy ruled by a local branch of the Piast dynasty.\nIn 1264, the Statute of Kalisz was issued in the city by Boles\u0142aw the Pious. It was a unique protective privilege for Jews during their persecution in Western Europe, which in the following centuries made Poland the destination of Jewish migration from other countries. After Poland was reunited, the town became a centre of weaving and wood products, as well as one of the cultural centres of Greater Poland.\nIn 1282 the city laws were confirmed by Przemys\u0142 II of Poland, and in 1314 it was made the capital of the Kalisz Voivodeship by King Ladislaus the Short. Located roughly in the centre of Poland (as its borders stood in that era), Kalisz was a centre of trade. In 1331, the city was successfully defended by the Poles during a siege by the Teutonic Knights. Because of its strategic location, King Casimir III the Great signed a peace treaty with the Teutonic Order there in 1343. As a royal city, Kalisz managed to defend many of its initial privileges, and in 1426 a new town hall was built. The Polish Duke Mieszko III the Old was buried in Kalisz. In the 14th century, Jews of the town were attacked during epidemics by mobs which accused them of poisoning the wells of the town.\n1500\u20131914.\nIn 1574 the Jesuits came to Kalisz and in 1584 opened a Jesuit College, which became a centre of education in Poland; around this time, however, the importance of Kalisz began to decline somewhat, its place being taken by nearby Pozna\u0144.\nThe economic development of the area was aided by a large number of Protestant Czech Brothers, who settled in and around Kalisz after being expelled from Bohemia in 1620.\nIn the 18th century, one of two main routes connecting Warsaw and Dresden ran through the city, and Kings Augustus II the Strong and Augustus III of Poland often traveled that route. In 1789, 881 Jews lived in Kalisz, 29% of the city\u2019s population. In 1792, a fire destroyed much of the city centre.\nAt various times, the 1st and 7th Infantry Regiments of the Polish Crown Army were stationed in Kalisz.\nIn 1793, in the Second Partition of Poland, the Kingdom of Prussia absorbed the city, called \"Kalisch\" in German. That year Jews were 40% of the population. In 1801, Wojciech Bogus\u0142awski set up one of the first permanent theatre troupes in Kalisz.\nIn 1806, the 8th Polish Infantry Regiment was formed in Kalisz and the 6th Polish Infantry Regiment was formed in the present-day district of Dobrzec. After the successful Greater Poland uprising of 1806, it was regained by Poles and became a provincial capital within the short-lived Duchy of Warsaw. During Napoleon's invasion of Russia, following Yorck's Convention of Tauroggen of 1812, von Stein's Treaty of Kalisz was signed between Russia and Prussia in 1813, confirming that Prussia now was on the side of the Allies.\nAfter the defeat of Napoleon Bonaparte, Kalisz became a provincial capital of Congress Poland and then the capital of a province of the Russian Empire. In the 1820s a special Jewish quarter was created where the third of the town that was Jewish was required to live; it existed until 1862. Fryderyk Chopin visited Kalisz in 1826, 1828 and 1830. Prussia and Russia held joint military exercises near the town in 1835. The proximity to the Prussian border accelerated economic development of the city and Kalisz (\"\u041a\u0430\u043b\u0438\u0448\" in Russian Cyrillic) began to attract many settlers, not only from other regions of Poland and other provinces of the Russian Empire, but also from German states. In 1860, 4,423 Jews lived in the town, 34.5% of its residents. During the January Uprising, on April 15, 1863, Polish insurgents fought two victorious clashes against the Russians near the city. In 1881, Russian authorities expelled Jewish residents who lacked Russian citizenship. In 1897, the Jewish population of the town was 7,580, about one-third of the total population.\nIn 1902, a new railway linked Kalisz to Warsaw and \u0141\u00f3d\u017a. Since the 19th century, Kalisz has been one of the leading Polish centers of piano manufacturing. In the early 20th century, it became the leading center, surpassing Warsaw.\nWorld War I and interwar period.\nWith the outbreak of World War I, the proximity of the border proved disastrous for Kalisz; it was one of the first cities destroyed in 1914. Between 2 and 22 August, Kalisz was shelled and then burned to the ground by German forces under Major Hermann Preusker, even though Russian troops had retreated from the city without defending it and German troops \u2013 many of them ethnic Poles \u2013 had initially been welcomed peaceably. Eight hundred men were arrested and then several of them slaughtered, while the city was set on fire and the remaining inhabitants were expelled. Out of roughly 68,000 citizens in 1914, only 5,000 remained in Kalisz a year later. By the end of the Great War, however, much of the city centre had been more or less rebuilt and many of the former inhabitants had been allowed to return.\nAfter the war Kalisz became part of the newly independent Poland. On December 13, 1918, the First Border Battalion, composed of volunteers from Kalisz and Ostr\u00f3w Wielkopolski, was sworn in Kalisz, before joining the ongoing Greater Poland uprising (1918\u201319) against Germany. The reconstruction continued and in 1925 a new city hall was opened. In the 1931 Polish census, Kalisz had a population of 15,300 Jews, nearly 30% of the city's total population. In 1939 the population of Kalisz was approximately 81,000. The Jewish population of Kalisz at the time was 27,000.\nWorld War II.\nAfter the German invasion of Poland in September 1939, the proximity of the border once again proved disastrous. Kalisz was captured by the Wehrmacht after Polish resistance, and the city was annexed by Germany. In revenge for resistance, the Wehrmacht carried out massacres of Polish defenders, who were executed both in the city and in the nearby settlement of Winiary (today, a district of Kalisz). Over 1,000 people were arrested as hostages. Numerous Poles were arrested and murdered during the \"Intelligenzaktion\" aimed at annihilation of the Polish intelligentsia. Around 750 Poles from Kalisz, Ostr\u00f3w Wielkopolski, and other nearby settlements were imprisoned in the Kalisz prison from September 1939 to March 1940, and most were murdered in large massacres in the Winiary forest. In November 1939, the \"Einsatzgruppe VI\" Nazi paramilitary killing squad murdered 41 Poles at the local Jewish cemetery; among the victims was pre-war Polish mayor of Kalisz, Ignacy Bujnicki. In April and May 1940, many Poles arrested in the region, especially teachers, were imprisoned in the local prison, and afterwards deported to the Mauthausen and Dachau concentration camps, where they were murdered.\nIn Kalisz, the Germans established a Germanisation camp for Polish children taken away from their parents (\"Gaukinderheim\"). The children were given new German names and surnames, and were punished for any use of the Polish language, even with death (\"e.g.\", a 14-year-old boy Zygmunt \u015awiat\u0142owski was murdered). After their stay in the camp, the children were deported to Germany; only some returned to Poland after the war, while the fate of many remains unknown to this day. The occupiers also established a forced labour subcamp of the Stalag XXI-D prisoner-of-war camp.\nBy the end of World War II approximately 30,000 local Jews had been murdered, and 20,000 local Catholics were either murdered or expelled to the more eastern part of German-occupied Poland (General Government) or to Germany as slave workers. In 1945 the population of the city was 43,000 \u2013 approximately half the pre-war figure. In 1945, Kalisz was restored to Poland, although with a Soviet-installed communist regime, which stayed in power until the Fall of Communism in 1989.\nFollowing the war, Jewish Holocaust survivors returned to the city, by 1946 numbering some 500. By the late 1940s only some 100 remained, and those few who stayed blended into Polish society.\n1950-present.\nIn 1975, after Edward Gierek's reform of the administrative division of Poland, Kalisz again became the capital of a province \u2013 Kalisz Voivodeship; the province was abolished in 1998, however, and since then Kalisz has been the county seat of a separate powiat within the Greater Poland Voivodeship. In 1976, the city limits were greatly expanded by the incorporation of the surrounding settlements of Majk\u00f3w, Nosk\u00f3w, Piwonice and Szczypiorno as new districts. The Polish anti-communist resistance Movement for Defence of Human and Civic Rights issued independent underground press in the city. In August 1980, employees of local factories joined the nationwide anti-communist strikes, which led to the foundation of the Solidarity organization, which played a central role in the end of communist rule in Poland.\nIn 1991 the city festival was inaugurated on 11 June to commemorate the confirmation of the incorporation of the city in 1282. In 1992, Kalisz became the seat of a separate diocese of the Catholic Church. In 1997 Kalisz was visited by Pope John Paul II.\nThe city was the site of the former 'Calisia' piano factory, until it went out of business in 2007. The factory building was transformed into the Calisia One Hotel, which opened in 2019.\nClimate.\nKalisz has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Cfb\") using the isotherm or a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Dfb\") using the isotherm.\nReligion.\nThere are 19 Catholic churches, five Protestant churches, and one Eastern Orthodox church in Kalisz. The city contains the Cathedral of St. Nicholas. Synagogues were built in Kalisz beginning in 1698, and a New Synagogue was built in 1879. Before World War II there were 25,000 Jews in Kalisz, but most of them were murdered by Germans in the Holocaust in Poland and by the summer of 1942 the Jewish community in Kalisz was entirely destroyed.\nEducation.\nKalisz is a centre of education in the region. It is home to 29 primary schools, 15 junior high schools, and five high schools. Seven colleges and a dozen or so vocational schools are also located there. The city is also home to branches of Pozna\u0144 University, Pozna\u0144 University of Economics, and Pozna\u0144 University of Technology, as well as other institutions of higher education. It is a home to the Henryk Melcer Music School.\nEconomy.\nAlthough there is little heavy industry within the city limits, Kalisz is home to several large enterprises. It has the Winiary (part of the Nestl\u00e9 group) and Colian food processing plants and the Big Star jeans factory. Two plane engine production factories, WSK-Kalisz and Pratt &amp; Whitney Kalisz (a branch of Pratt &amp; Whitney Canada), are located in Kalisz.\nCuisine.\nThe Andruty kaliskie wafers originated in Kalisz, and are the most well-known traditional food from the city in Poland.\nAnother officially protected traditional specialty of the area (as designated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of Poland) are homemade cold pressed juices from fresh fruits of the Kalisz Region, produced according to traditional recipes without any additional ingredients. These include juices from apples, pears, cherries, blackcurrant, redcurrant, strawberries and raspberries. The tradition dates back several centuries.\nSports.\nThe district of Szczypiorno, as the place of pioneering games of handball in Poland, is the namesake for \"szczypiorniak\", the Polish name of the sport. Other popular sports in Kalisz include football and volleyball. Notable sports teams include:\nKalisz is also the location of Kaliskie Towarzystwo Wio\u015blarskie, one of the oldest Polish rowing clubs, founded in 1894.\nTransport.\nKalisz railway station was built in 1902 as the destination of the Warsaw\u2013Kalisz Railway. It is currently served by Przewozy Regionalne and PKP Intercity.\nEtymology.\nThe name Kalisz is thought to stem from the archaic \"kal\", meaning swamp or marsh.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nKalisz is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74616", "revid": "753832", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74616", "title": "L'Hospitalet de Llobregat", "text": "L'Hospitalet de Llobregat (; ), often shortened to L'Hospitalet or just L'H, is a city and municipality in the autonomous community of Catalonia in Spain. It is part of the Barcelona metropolitan area, the Barcelona province, the Barcelon\u00e8s \"comarca\" and of the Barcelona conurbation. With a population of 282,299 as of 2024, it is the 15th-largest city in Spain and the 2nd-largest city in Catalonia.\nBy population, it is the second largest municipality in Catalonia and the sixteenth in Spain. It is one of the most densely populated cities in the European Union.\nEtymology.\nThe name of L'Hospitalet (literally, 'the small hospital' in Catalan) makes reference to a hostel. The name of the river Llobregat is added to differentiate it from other towns with the same name.\nHistory.\nThe first records of the settlement date to the Neolithic era with artefacts showing human habitation in the Llobregat river area. Roman artefacts have been found dating to the 2nd century BC such as a funeral decoration representing the head of Medusa, now in the Archaeological Museum of Catalonia. However it is not until the 10th century that written references to \"Proven\u00e7ana\" (the city's original name) appear.\nThe place had about 5,000 inhabitants by the turn of the 20th century. Throughout the early 20th century, it consisted of three different urban settlements, Centre, Sta. Eul\u00e0lia and Collblanc. Local agricultural output and profitability experienced a peak in this period. A chunk of the municipality (900 ha) was lost to the municipality of Barcelona in 1920. L'Hospitalet then became a primarily industrial municipality, focused on textile, metalworking, ceramic and building materials industries.\nThe 1960s and 1970s saw a second population boom, caused by immigration from poorer regions of Spain: however this was not matched by construction of the necessary amenities and it was only in the 1990s that public investment resulted in additional schools, leisure facilities and housing.\nGeography.\nL'Hospitalet's surface is . The area on which the city is constructed may be divided in two different geological areas. \nOne of them follows the coast typology and is called La Marina, similarly to two coast areas of neighbouring Barcelona's Zona Franca: La Marina del Prat Vermell and La Marina de Port. The latter half of L'Hospitalet is called El Samont\u00e0, which consists of hills and a more elevated area.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;As of 2020, the registered population stands at 274,320, of which 126,237 were born in Catalonia, 54,098 were born in other Spanish regions, 93,984 were born abroad and 1 person was born in former Spanish territories.\nAs of 2024, the foreign-born population of the city is 107,950, equal to 38.2% of the total population. The 5 largest foreign nationalities are Ecuadorians (12,970), Peruvians (10,905), Dominicans (9,605), Bolivians (9,332) and Colombians (8,891).\nEconomy.\nThe city's reputation is largely still that of a depressed suburb, drawing on its proletarian origins and its reliance on Barcelona. But its economy has improved recently, as can be seen from the city's new skyline and relocation of companies to the city's new financial centre. Urban regeneration and construction took place during the 2000s, as well as ongoing work on improving public transportation in the second municipality of the Barcelona metropolitan area. The former airline Spanair's headquarters were in L'Hospitalet. Former mayor Celestino Corbacho campaigned to improve the city's infrastructure from his position in the Ministry of Work.\nAdministrative units.\nDistrict I.\nEl Centre is the historical centre of the city, the oldest neighbourhood, where the City Council is, as well as the centre of activities such as La Farga and many of the cultural buildings, such as the History Museum, the Can Sumarro library, the cultural centre \"Barradas\" or the \"Sala Alexandre Cirici\". It borders the district of Sanfeliu and Can Serra to the north, Bellvitge to the south, Sant Josep to the east, and the city of Cornell\u00e0 de Llobregat to the west.\nSant Josep remains framed by the square that is formed by the avenue of the Fabregada and that of Isabella The Catholic (\"Isabel la Cat\u00f2lica\") to the west, the Torrent Gornal to the east, the railroad on the north side Carrilet to the south. In this area, all the industrial activities that Hospitalet had through the ages left their mark: from the flour mills and the distilleries, up to the different energetic exploitation of the waterfalls of the Canal de la Infanta or the ceramic, textile, metallurgical and chemical industries. In fact, Sant Josep was originally an industrial suburb, but the subsequent disappearance of many factories, as well as the population increase, have given it a residential character.\nCivic life in this quarter centres on the avenue of the Cirerers and the Communities Square (\"Pla\u00e7a de les Comunitats\"). This public space is the scene of the greatest holiday celebrations, such as the festival of Sant Joan, the Carnival, and many other popular events. The cultural centre is also at the heart of many of the activities.\nDistrict II.\nThis ward has a marked commercial character, centred near the Collblanc Metro stop. The Market Square (\"Pla\u00e7a del Mercat\") and the surroundings are the main centre of cultural life.\nIts origins has been linked to Collblanc. Today, the Spanish Square (\"Pla\u00e7a Espanyola\") and the new park of La Torrassa are at the heart of this neighbourhood and is where the holiday celebrations at the beginning of every summer are largest.\nDistrict III.\nIts origins are dated back to Medieval times thanks to the presence of the Santa Eul\u00e0lia de Proven\u00e7ana hermitage (dated in the 12th century thanks to an inscription in the fa\u00e7ade). Also it was very important during the Industrial Revolution thanks to the presence of many industries in the quarter, such as Can Trinxet, L'Aprestadora or Can Pareto.\nIt is the smallest quarter in the town.\nDistrict IV.\nLa Florida is a majority-immigrant neighborhood that is the densest neighborhood in Europe.\nDistrict VI.\nIn 1964 the Inmobiliaria Ciudad Condal S.A. (ICC) company initiated the construction of this neighbourhood as it stands nowadays, beside the hermitage, on land which had been bought from local farmers. It was designed as a residential area to house the large number of immigrants who came to Catalonia from elsewhere in Spain \u2013 more than 126,000 people in 1964 \u2013 in search of work.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nL'Hospitalet is twinned with the following cities:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74617", "revid": "753832", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74617", "title": "Mah\u00f3n", "text": "Mah\u00f3n (), officially Ma\u00f3 (, ; formerly spelled Mah\u00f3), and also written as Mahon or Port Mahon in English, is the capital and second largest city of Menorca. The city is located on the eastern coast of the island, which is part of the archipelago and autonomous community of the Balearic Islands.\nMah\u00f3n has one of the longest natural harbours in the world: long and up to wide. The water is deep but remains mostly clear due to the port's enclosed nature. Mayonnaise is considered to have originated in Mah\u00f3n.\nIts population in 2021 was estimated to be 29,125.\nHistory.\nThe name's origin is attributed to the Carthaginian general Mago Barca, brother to Hannibal, who is thought to have taken refuge there in 205\u00a0BC. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, it became part of the Eastern Roman Empire; it suffered raids from Vikings and Arabs until the Islamic Caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba conquered it in 903.\nMah\u00f3n was captured in 1287 from the Moors by Alfonso III of Aragon and incorporated into the Kingdom of Majorca, a vassal kingdom of the Crown of Aragon. Its harbour, one of the most strategically important in the western Mediterranean, was refortified.\nIn 1535, the Ottomans, under Hayreddin Barbarossa, attacked Mah\u00f3n and took 600 captives as slaves back to Algiers, in the Sack of Mahon.\nBritish rule.\nMenorca was captured in 1708 by a joint British\u2013Dutch force on behalf of Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI, during the War of the Spanish Succession. The British saw the island's potential as a naval base and sought to take full control. Its status as a British possession was confirmed by the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713. During the island's years as a British dependency, the capital was moved from Ciutadella de Menorca to Mahon, which then served as residence for the governor, the most famous being General Richard Kane. During this period the natural harbour leading to the town and surrounding settlements were sometimes collectively known as \"Port Mahon\" (see adjacent map).\nThe island was lost to the French in 1756 following the naval Battle of Menorca and the final Siege of Fort St Philip, which took place several miles from the town. After their defeat in the Seven Years' War, France returned the island to the British in 1763. In a joint Franco-Spanish effort and following a long five month invasion, the British surrendered the island again in 1782; It was transferred to Spain in 1783 as part of the Peace of Paris. The British recaptured the island in 1798, during the French Revolutionary Wars. The British and the French tried (and failed) to end their hostilities with the Treaty of Amiens in 1802. Both nations agreed to cede or withdraw from certain territories, with the island of Menorca passing to the Spanish, with whom it has remained since.\nThe Royal Navy.\nA small but important Royal Navy Dockyard was established by the British on the north side of the harbour, opposite the town, in 1715. It served as the Royal Navy's principal Mediterranean base for much of the 18th century, and remains in use today as a Spanish Naval station. Several Dockyard buildings, dating from the 1760s, can still be seen on Illa Pinto (formerly known as Saffron Island) including a Naval Storehouse with clock tower. There recently have been moves to establish a maritime museum here. The island has a distinctive octagonal shape, formed when wharves were constructed around it in the 1760s to enable several warships to be careened there all at once.\nThe ruins of a former Royal Naval Hospital, founded in 1711, stand on another nearby island (Illa del Rei). They recently have been restored. Hauser &amp; Wirth has established a gallery on the island.\n20th century.\nDuring the Spanish Civil War, the island remained loyal to the Republic, but was captured by the Nationalists in 1939. During the battle to capture the islands from the republicans, Mah\u00f3n was bombed by Francisco Franco's Nationalist bomber planes, with support from Benito Mussolini's Italian Fascist government.\nGeneral Franco visited the city on 11 May 1960 to open a new thermal power station. The event was used by the authorities to further promote Francoist Spain.\nModern era.\nToday it serves as the seat of the Island Council of Menorca (\"Consell Insular de Menorca\").\nTowards the end of the 20th century, the renovation of its historic centre was made possible by income from tourism.\nA traditional cheese made on the island (\"Mah\u00f3n cheese\") is named after the city. In Spanish \"mah\u00f3n\" is also the name of nankeen, especially the blue cloth.\nSport.\nMah\u00f3n has an athletics track in the Carrer de Vasallo, as well as several other sport facilities. The city also has a sports centre with a municipal pool, and 2 tennis clubs.\nFootball.\nMah\u00f3n has several football teams, including UD Mah\u00f3n, CD Menorca and CF Sporting de Mah\u00f3n. The most noteworthy and successful club in Menorcan history, Sporting Mahon\u00e9s CF, was the only football club in Menorca ever to reach Segunda Divisi\u00f3n B. The team disbanded in 2013, and Sporting de Mah\u00f3n took its place. As of 2024, no team in Mah\u00f3n is in the Tercera Federaci\u00f3n or higher.\nBasketball.\nIn basketball, Mah\u00f3n has the Pavell\u00f3 Menorca, with capacity of 5000 spectator. The venue is most known for hosting one of the few teams in the Balearic Islands to be at the Spanish first division of basketball, Liga ACB; that team was Menorca B\u00e0squet. After staying 5 seasons in their history at Liga ACB, the directors closed the club due to debts. \nMah\u00f3n had to wait 5 years to get another basketball club, CB Menorca, considered by many to be Menorca B\u00e0squet's phoenix club. After 5 seasons in LEB Plata, on the 2022-23 LEB Plata season CB Menorca gained promotion to LEB Oro, making Menorca host basketball second division matches after a decade, and, in their first LEB Oro season, the team finished 12th.\nClimate.\nMah\u00f3n/Menorca has a Hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: Csa) with mild, somewhat humid winters and dry, hot summers. Autumn is the wettest season and heavy rain is not rare during October and November.\nOther.\nAt , there is a large military Wullenweber antenna for radio direction finding.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74619", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74619", "title": "La Jonquera", "text": "La Jonquera (; ) is a municipality in the \"comarca\" of l'Alt Empord\u00e0, in Catalonia, Spain. It is situated next to the border with Northern Catalonia, nowadays France, opposite the municipality of Le Perthus.\nHistory.\nThe area has always been an important passage through the Pyrenees. The contemporary AP-7 highway extends not far from the ancient Roman road, the Via Augusta. Nearby there is an altar erected by Pompey on the Coll de Panissars. The name comes precisely from the Roman mansion of Iuncaria, which is not located under the current population but several kilometers away, in Figueras.6\nLa Junquera was the scene of a conflict involving retreating French crusaders in 1285 that ended in their defeat.\nFrom the 13th century until the end of the manorial regime, in the mid-19th century, it was the possession of the Rocabert\u00ed family. The Treaty of the Pyrenees (1659) placed the new border between the Spanish and French monarchies in the Albera mountain range, a fact that marked the subsequent history of La Junquera.\nGeography.\nList of toponyms in La Jonquera (Topography: mountains, ranges, hills, places...; hydrography: rivers, fountains...; buildings: houses, farmhouses, churches, etc.).\nIt is located at the northern end of the Alt Empord\u00e0, on the border with the northern Catalan region of Vallespir through the Pert\u00fas Pass, the current border between the Spanish and French states. Crashed in the Sierra de l'Albera. Cork oak forests predominate there.\nThe old town of Requesens (to the east of the town) has been part of the Albera Natural Site of National Interest since 1986.\nThe N-II road and the AP-7 highway (access exit number 2) connect La Jonquera with the rest of the region and Catalonia, and give it access to one of the main international communication routes between the Spanish states and French.\nCivil parishes.\nLa Jonquera (2,888 inhabitants in the village) has 4 civil parishes (\"poblaciones\"). The village of Els L\u00edmits is situated on the French-Spanish border, contiguous to its French twin town, Le Perthus. \nShield.\nThe shield of La Jonquera is a cantoned shield, made of silver, a bundle of reeds made of chinople with a gold binding. The shield is crowned by a villa mural crown. The reeds are a traditional speaking element, related to the name of the town.\nThe shield was approved on 17 December 1990.\nInteresting places.\nCastles declared cultural assets of national interest:\nRomanesque hermitages:\nMegalithic monuments:\nForest fires.\nThe area around La Jonquera was seriously affected by fatal wildfires that devastated large swathes of forestry in northern Catalonia in July 2012.\nEconomy.\nRainfed farming and cork handling were traditionally the most important economic activities. At present, the basis of the municipal economy is the activity derived from the Port\u00fas customs office - the name of the town of Pert\u00fas in Emporda, part of which (the L\u00edmits district) belongs to La Jonquera.\nProstitution.\nThe New York Times reported that one of Europe's largest brothels opened in La Jonquera in 2010, taking advantage of Europe's open borders and \"tax laws\". Many of its clients reportedly come from France, where prostitution was made illegal in April 2016. According to the paper, \"Advocates and police officials say that most of the women are controlled by illegal networks \u2014 they are modern-day slaves.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74620", "revid": "293907", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74620", "title": "Ch\u00e2teau de Malmaison", "text": "The Ch\u00e2teau de Malmaison () is a French ch\u00e2teau situated near the left bank of the Seine, about west of the centre of Paris, in the commune of Rueil-Malmaison.\nFormerly the residence of Empress Jos\u00e9phine de Beauharnais, along with the Tuileries it was the headquarters of the French government from 1800 to 1802, and Napoleon's last residence in France at the end of the Hundred Days in 1815.\nHistory.\nJos\u00e9phine de Beauharnais bought the manor house in April 1799 for herself and her husband, General Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte, the future Napol\u00e9on I of France, at that time away fighting the Egyptian Campaign. Malmaison was a run-down estate, west of central Paris that encompassed nearly of woods and meadows.\nUpon his return, Bonaparte expressed fury at Jos\u00e9phine for purchasing such an expensive house with the money she had expected him to bring back from the Egyptian campaign. The house, for which she had paid well over 300,000 francs, needed extensive renovations; she spent a fortune doing them. However, Malmaison would bring great happiness to the Bonapartes. Jos\u00e9phine's daughter, Hortense de Beauharnais would call it \"a delicious spot\".\nJos\u00e9phine endeavored to transform the large estate into \"the most beautiful and curious garden in Europe, a model of good cultivation\". She located rare and exotic plants and animals to enhance the gardens. Jos\u00e9phine wrote: \"I wish that Malmaison may soon become the source of riches for all [of France].\" In 1800, she built a heated orangery large enough for 300 pineapple plants. Five years later, she ordered the building of a greenhouse, heated by a dozen coal-burning stoves. From 1803 until her death in 1814, Josephine cultivated nearly 200 new plants in France for the first time.\nThe property achieved enduring fame for its rose garden. Empress Jos\u00e9phine had the Belgian artist Pierre-Joseph Redout\u00e9 (1759\u20131840) record her roses (and lilies), and prints of these works sell quite well, even today. She created an extensive collection of roses, gathering plants from her native Martinique and from other places around the world. She grew some 250 varieties of roses. From the foreword to \"Jardin de la Malmaison\" (1803):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You have gathered around you the rarest plants growing on French soil...as we inspect them in the beautiful gardens of Malmaison, an impressive reminder of the conquests of your illustrious husband.\nBirds and animals of all sorts began to enrich her garden, where they were allowed to roam free among the grounds. At the height of her days at Malmaison, Jos\u00e9phine had the company of kangaroos, emus, black swans, zebras, sheep, gazelles, ostriches, chamois, a seal, antelopes and llamas to name a few. Some were from the Baudin expedition.\nAfter her divorce from Napol\u00e9on, Jos\u00e9phine received Malmaison in her own right, along with a pension of 5\u00a0million francs a year, and remained there until her death in 1814. Napol\u00e9on returned and took residence in the house after his defeat at the Battle of Waterloo (1815), before his exile to the island of Saint Helena. After Josephine's death in 1814, the house was vacant at times, the garden and house ransacked and vandalised, and the garden's remains were destroyed in a battle in 1870.\nIn 1842, Malmaison was purchased by Queen mother Maria Christina, widow of King Ferdinand VII of Spain. She lived there with her second husband Agust\u00edn Fernando Mu\u00f1oz, Duke of Ri\u00e1nsares (made a duke by his step-daughter, Isabella II of Spain, in 1844). In 1861, Maria Christina sold the property to Napoleon III, Josephine's grandson through her daughter Hortense. Damaged by fighting during the War of 1870, then by the installation of barracks in the ch\u00e2teau, the estate was sold by the State in 1877 to a goods merchant who gradually sold off parcels of land from the park. In 1896, the patron and philanthropist Daniel Iffla, known as Osiris, purchased the ch\u00e2teau along with its park, by then reduced to 6 hectares, and donated it to the State in 1903. A museum was opened on the estate in 1905. Malmaison was fully restored by the famous French architect Pierre Humbert in the early 20th century. It is now considered an important historical monument.\nPresent times.\nThe public can visit the manor house as a Napoleonic \"mus\u00e9e national\". The museum lies on RN 13 (\"route nationale\" 13) from Paris and bus 258 from RER A \"Grande Arche\" station.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74621", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74621", "title": "John Sladek", "text": "American science fiction author (1937\u20132000)\nJohn Thomas Sladek (December 15, 1937 \u2013 March 10, 2000) was an American science fiction author, known for his satirical and surreal novels.\nLife and work.\nBorn in Waverly, Iowa, in 1937, Sladek was in England in the 1960s for the New Wave movement and published his first story in the magazine\" New Worlds\". His first science fiction novel, published in London by Gollancz as \"The Reproductive System\" and in the United States as \"Mechasm\", dealt with a project to build machines that build copies of themselves, a process that gets out of hand and threatens to destroy humanity. In \"The M\u00fcller-Fokker Effect\", an attempt to preserve human personality on tape likewise goes awry, giving the author a chance to satirize big business, big religion, superpatriotism, and men's magazines, among other things. \"Roderick\" and \"Roderick at Random\" offer the traditional satirical approach of looking at the world through the eyes of an innocent, in this case a robot. Sladek revisited robots from a darker point of view in the BSFA Award winning novel \"Tik-Tok\", featuring a sociopathic robot who lacks any moral \"asimov circuits\", and \"Bugs\", a wide-ranging satire in which a hapless technical writer (a job Sladek held for many years) helps to create a robot who quickly goes insane.\nSladek was also known for his parodies of other science fiction writers, such as Isaac Asimov, Arthur C. Clarke, and Cordwainer Smith. These were collected in \"The Steam-Driven Boy and other Strangers\" (1973). Under the pseudonym of \"James Vogh\", Sladek wrote \"Arachne Rising\", which purports to be a nonfiction account of a thirteenth sign of the zodiac suppressed by the scientific establishment, in an attempt to demonstrate that people will believe anything. In the 1960s he also co-wrote two pseudonymous novels with his friend Thomas M. Disch, the Gothic \"The House that Fear Built\" (1966; as \"Cassandra Knye\") and the satirical thriller \"Black Alice\" (1968; as \"Thom Demijohn\").\nAnother of Sladek's notable parodies is of the anti-Stratfordian citation of the \"hapax legomenon\" in \"Love's Labour's Lost\" \"honorificabilitudinitatibus\" as an anagram of \"hi ludi, F. Baconis nati, tuiti orbi\", Latin for \"these plays, F. Bacon's offspring, are preserved for the world\", \"proving\" that Francis Bacon wrote the play. Sladek noted that \"honorificabilitudinitatibus\" was also an anagram for \"I, B. Ionsonii, uurit [writ] a lift'd batch\", thus \"proving\" that Shakespeare's works were written by Ben Jonson.\nSladek returned from England to Minneapolis, Minnesota, in 1986, where he lived until his death in 2000 from pulmonary fibrosis. He was married twice, to Pamela Sladek, which ended in divorce in 1986, and to Sandra Gunter whom he married in 1994. He had a daughter from his first marriage.\nSkepticism.\nA strict materialist, Sladek subjected the occult and pseudoscience to merciless scrutiny in \"The New Apocrypha\". The book critically examined the claims of dowsing, homeopathy, parapsychology, perpetual motion and Ufology.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74623", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74623", "title": "Castell\u00f3n de la Plana", "text": "Castell\u00f3n de la Plana (), or simply Castell\u00f3n (), is the capital city of the province of Castell\u00f3n, in the Valencian Community, Spain. It is located near the eastern coastline of the Iberian Peninsula by the Mediterranean Sea. The main urban core lies some kilometres inland while the detached district of Grau was built around the port. The Desert de les Palmes mountain range rises to the north.\nAccording to the 2018 census, Castell\u00f3n has a population of 174,264 inhabitants, ranking as the fourth most populated municipality in the Valencian Community. Castell\u00f3n is part of a larger metropolitan area along with the neighbouring municipalities of Villarreal, Almassora, Benic\u00e0ssim, Borriol, and Borriana. The Prime Meridian, or Greenwich Meridian, intersects the 40th parallel at Castell\u00f3n de la Plana and is commemorated with a monolith in Meridian Park () located at the exact point where this occurs.\nHistory.\nThe town inherited the name from a Moorish castle on the top of the hill of Magdalena (the Castle of Fadrell), a \"\u1e25i\u1e63n\" dominating over a demarcation roughly consisting of the current-day municipalities of Castell\u00f3n and Almassora. The area capitulated to James I of Aragon in 1233. This was followed by a series of attempts to create new settlements in the area starting with the \"alqueria\" of Benimahomet, the first Christian project to leave the castle, with mixed results. Following the 1247 mud\u00e9jar revolt, James I decreed the expulsion of the \"mud\u00e9jares\" from the area in 1248. The current settlement was however not founded until the 1250s, after James I, on 8 September 1251, granted Xim\u00e9n P\u00e9rez d'Aren\u00f3s a privilege authorising him to move from the castle to a new unspecified place in the plains (\"plana\"). Tradition claims that the move was completed by the third Sunday of Lent, 1252.\nDuring the Middle Ages, the city was protected by moats, walls and towers, and a church was built, later becoming a cathedral. Due to its geographic proximity to Valencia, the city prospered as a port. During the late medieval period, many members of the community participated in maritime trade, or in industries supporting the merchant community. During the late Middle Ages, the Jewish community of Castell\u00f3n de la Plana maintained a synagogue and active communal life, but like many communities in Spain, it was dismantled following the 1492 expulsion.\nIn the 16th century the town was one of the last strongholds in the Revolta de les Germanies (local guilds). It also supported Archduke Charles of Austria in the War of the Spanish Succession (1701\u201314), but was later taken by the troops of Philip d'Anjou.\nIn the 19th century, the city walls were torn down and it slowly began to expand, a process interrupted by the War of Independence against Napoleon (1804\u201314) and the Carlist Wars (1833\u201363). In 1833 Castell\u00f3 became the capital of the newly constituted province. In the second half of the 19th century, the city again began to expand, marked by the arrival of the railway, the enlargement of the port and the construction of representative buildings (Provincial Hospital, Casino, Theater) and parks.\nIn 1991 a university (Jaume I University) was established, set upon a modern campus. The local economy is based on industry, tourism and craft-work.\nGeography and climate.\nCastell\u00f3n de la Plana has a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BSh\") with mild winters and hot, dry, muggy summers with high humidity levels. Autumn is the wettest season and the average sunshine hours are around 2,800 per year. Annual rainfall reaches 435\u00a0mm, with significant changes throughout the year, with very marked minimums in summer and maximums in the autumn months due to the effect of the meteorological phenomenon of the cold drop, with a secondary maximum in spring.\nMain sights.\nMost of the historical buildings are located in the diminutive old town, around the Pla\u00e7a Major (Main Square). These include:\nEvents.\nThe celebration of the city's founding, known as the Magdalena Festivities, is the main festival of the city. Lasting a week, it takes place three weeks before Easter. It commemorates the founding of the city when the inhabitants of the mountain areas moved down to the plains with the authorization of James I. The most notable event is the \"Romer\u00eda de las Ca\u00f1as\", a pilgrimage to the Hermitage of La Magdalena. The most striking symbol of these celebrations is the \"Gaiatas\"\u2014mobile structures that recreate the lanterns used by the first settlers\u2014built by different associations, each representing a neighborhood and also called \"Gaiatas\".\nSports.\nThe city has the professional basketball team AB Castell\u00f3, which plays in LEB Oro, Spanish second basketball division.\nThe local professional football club is CD Castell\u00f3n, which currently plays in the Segunda divisi\u00f3n (Spanish second division). It holds home games at Nou Estadi Cast\u00e0lia, which has a capacity of 15,500 seats. Despite its stadium and social support, the club financial problems and unstable history brought it to play in semi-pro and amateur regional divisions, not playing in La Liga since the 1990\u201391 season. On 21 March 2018, Castell\u00f3n beat the record of seasonal tickets in the fourth-tier division with 12,701, and is considered a giant amongst minnows. The presence of Villarreal CF in the adjacent town (only 8\u00a0km away) has created a fierce rivalry for geographical reasons, especially due to the success of Villarreal in the last decades.\nThe city is host to futsal club CFS Bisontes Castell\u00f3n, which under the name \"Playas de Castell\u00f3n\" was one of the best Spanish and European futsal clubs in the late 90s and early 2000s, having won the premier professional futsal league in Spain twice in 2000 and 2001, and the UEFA Futsal Cup three consecutive times in 2001, 2002 and 2003.\nEducation.\nJaume I University was founded in 1991, and in 2014 there were approximately 15,000 students enrolled who share a single campus.\nTransport.\nThe small Castell\u00f3n Airport offers charter and general aviation services, as well as scheduled passenger services to London, Bucharest and Pozna\u0144. The new Castell\u00f3n-Costa Azahar Airport is designed to support large international jet flights and was completed in 2011. It has become a symbol of the wasteful spending prior to the 2008\u201313 Spanish financial crisis. Valencia Airport is about south whilst Alicante Airport is another 185\u00a0km (115\u00a0mi) further down the coast.\nThe city is served by the Castell\u00f3n de la Plana railway station. The Euromed railway line links Alicante to Barcelona.\nSince 2008, the city has been served by a trolleybus system, which is branded as the TRAM.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74624", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74624", "title": "Object\u2013agent\u2013verb", "text": ""}
{"id": "74631", "revid": "26347579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74631", "title": "Galerius", "text": "Roman emperor from 305 to 311\nGalerius Valerius Maximianus (; Greek: \u0393\u03b1\u03bb\u03ad\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2; c. 258 \u2013 May 311) was Roman emperor from 305 to 311. He participated in the system of government later known as the Tetrarchy, first acting as \"caesar\" under Emperor Diocletian. In this period Galerius obtained victory warring against the Persian Sassanian Empire, defeating Narseh at the battle of Satala in 298 and possibly sacking the Sassanian capital of Ctesiphon in 299. He also campaigned across the Danube against the Carpi, defeating them in 297 and 300. Galerius was promoted to \"augustus\" upon the abdication of Diocletian in 305, but had to contend with multiple usurpers as the Tetrarchic system broke down. Although he was a staunch opponent of Christianity, he ended the Diocletianic Persecution by issuing the Edict of Serdica in 311.\nEarly life.\nGalerius was born in the Danube provinces, either near Serdica or at the place where he later built his palace named after his mother \u2013 Felix Romuliana (Gamzigrad), in the province later known as Dacia Ripensis. Under this palace, an older villa has been found that is sometimes interpreted as Galerius's birthplace. His mother, Romula, had left Roman Dacia (today Romania) and settled in New Dacia south of the Danube because of the Carpians' attacks. He originally followed his father's occupation, that of a herdsman, where he was nicknamed \"Armentarius\", herdsman (). His original \"cognomen\" was \"Maximinus\", but he changed it to \"Maximianus\" after becoming \"Caesar\".\nHe served with distinction as a soldier under Emperors Aurelian and Probus, and in 293, at the establishment of the Tetrarchy, was designated \"Caesar\" along with Constantius Chlorus, receiving in marriage Diocletian's daughter Valeria (later known as Galeria Valeria), and at the same time being entrusted with the care of the Illyrian provinces. After a few years campaigning against Sarmatians and Goths on the Danube, he received command of the legions on the eastern imperial limits. Soon after his appointment, Galerius was dispatched to Egypt to fight the rebellious cities Busiris and Coptos.\nWar with Persia.\nInvasion, counterinvasion.\nIn 294, Narseh, a son of Shapur I, who had been passed over for the Sassanid succession, came into power in Persia. Narseh probably moved to eliminate Bahram III, a young man installed by a noble named Vahunam in the wake of Bahram II's death in 293. In early 294, Narseh sent Diocletian the customary package of gifts, but within Persia, he was destroying every trace of his immediate predecessors, erasing their names from public monuments. He sought to identify himself with the warlike reigns of Ardashir (r. 226\u2013241) and Shapur (r. 241\u2013272), who had sacked Roman Antioch and captured Emperor Valerian.\nIn 295 or 296, Narseh declared war on Rome. He appears to have first invaded western Armenia, retaking the lands delivered to Tiridates in the peace of 287. He occupied the lands there until the following year. The historian Ammianus Marcellinus, circa 320\u2013395, is the only source detailing the initial invasion of Armenia. Southern (1999, 149) dates the invasion to 295; Barnes (1982, 17, 293) mentions an earlier, unsuccessful invasion by Narseh based on the fact that the title \"Persici Maximi\" was given to all four emperors; Odahl (2004, 59) concurs with Barnes and suggests that Saracen princes in the Syrian desert collaborated with Narseh's invasion. Narseh then moved south into Roman Mesopotamia, where he inflicted a severe defeat on Galerius, then commander of the eastern forces, in the region between Carrhae (Harran, Turkey) and Callinicum (Raqqa, Syria). Diocletian may or may not have been present at the battle, but presented himself soon afterwards at Antioch, issuing an official version of events which placed all the blame for the affair upon Galerius. In Antioch, Diocletian forced Galerius to walk a mile in advance of his imperial cart while still clad in the purple robes of an emperor. David Stone Potter reads a symbolic message in the display: the loss at Carrhae was due not to the failings of the empire's soldiers, but to the failings of their commander, and Galerius's failures would not be accepted. Another scholar, Roger Rees, suggests that Galerius's position at the head of the caravan was merely the conventional organization of an imperial progression, designed to show a \"Caesar\"'s deference to his \"Augustus\".\nGalerius's army was reinforced probably in the spring of 298 by new contingents collected from the empire's Danubian holdings. Narseh did not advance from Armenia and Mesopotamia leaving Galerius to lead the offensive in 298 with an attack on northern Mesopotamia via Armenia. Diocletian may or may not have been present to assist the campaign. Narseh retreated to Armenia to fight Galerius's force, putting himself at a disadvantage; the rugged Armenian terrain was favorable to Roman infantry, but not to Sassanid cavalry. Local aid gave Galerius the advantage of surprise over the Persian forces, and he defeated Narseh in two successive battles. During the second encounter, the Battle of Satala in 298, Roman forces seized Narseh's camp, his treasury, his harem, and his wife. Narseh's wife would live out the remainder of the war in Daphne, a suburb of Antioch, serving as a constant reminder to the Persians of the Roman victory.\nGalerius advanced into Media and Adiabene, winning continuous victories, most prominently near Theodosiopolis (Erzurum), and securing Nisibis (Nusaybin) before 1 October 298. The historian Timothy Barnes argues that he moved down the Tigris, taking Ctesiphon. Barnes's main argument for this is that Eusebius's biography of Constantine mentions that the later emperor had seen the ruins of Babylon according to this work. Patricia Southern also argues that he took Ctesiphon based on the uncertainty of the location where the seizure of Narseh's wife and harem took place. However, no source ever specifically claims that Ctesiphon was sacked and many other historians argue Diocletian prevented him from moving further into Sasanian territory.\nPeace negotiations.\nNarseh had previously sent an ambassador to Galerius to plead for the return of his wife and children, but Galerius had dismissed this ambassador, reminding him of how Shapur had treated Valerian. In any case, the Romans treated Narseh's captured family well, perhaps seeking to evoke comparisons to Alexander and his beneficent conduct towards the family of Darius III. Peace negotiations began in the spring of 299, with both Diocletian and Galerius presiding. Their \"magister memoriae\" (secretary) Sicorius Probus was sent to Narseh to present terms.\nThe conditions of the Peace of Nisibis were heavy: Persia would give up territory to Rome, making the Tigris the boundary between the two empires. Further terms specified that Armenia was returned to Roman domination with the fort of Ziatha as its border; Caucasian Iberia would pay allegiance to Rome under a Roman appointee; Nisibis, now under Roman rule, would become the sole conduit for trade between Persia and Rome; and Rome would exercise control over the five satrapies between the Tigris and Armenia: Ingilene, Sophanene (Sophene), Arzanene (Aghdznik), Corduene, and Zabdicene (near modern Hakk\u00e2ri, Turkey). These regions included the passage of the Tigris through the Anti-Taurus range; the Bitlis pass, the quickest southerly route into Persian Armenia; and access to the Tur Abdin plateau. With these territories, Rome would have an advance station north of Ctesiphon, and would be able to slow any future advance of Persian forces through the region. Under the terms of the peace, Tiridates would regain both his throne and the entirety of his ancestral claim, and Rome would secure a wide zone of cultural influence in the region. Because the empire was able to sustain such constant warfare on so many fronts, it has been taken as a sign of the essential efficacy of the Diocletianic system and the goodwill of the army towards the tetrarchic enterprise.\nRule as Augustus.\nAfter the abdication of Diocletian in 305 and the elevation of Constantius I and Galerius to the rank of \"Augustus\", two new \"Caesar\"s were required to take their place. Seeking to enhance his authority, Galerius gave the positions to men who were very much his creatures. Maximinus Daza, a nephew of Galerius with little experience or formal education, was assigned the command of Egypt and Syria. Valerius Severus, Galerius's comrade in arms, was sent to govern Italy and Africa from a base in Mediolanum. Officially Severus reported to the western emperor, but he was absolutely devoted to the commands of his benefactor Galerius, whose power was thus established over three-quarters of the empire.\nConstantius died at Eboracum in 306 and the legions elevated his son Constantine to the position of \"Augustus\". Galerius only discovered this when he received a letter from Constantine, who apologized for the informal nature of his promotion but nonetheless treated it as valid. The first emotions of Galerius were surprise, disappointment, and rage, and as he could seldom restrain his passions, he threatened to burn both the letter and the messenger. Calmer consideration made him reluctant to open a civil war: Constantine had the devotion of Constantius' legions, and the young man's character had impressed Galerius during an encounter at Nicomedia. Galerius decided on a compromise position, allowing Constantine to rule the provinces beyond the Alps but giving him only the title of \"Caesar\" and the fourth rank among the Tetrarchs. Severus received the title of \"Augustus\".\nSoon afterward, Maxentius, son of Maximian and husband of Galerius's daughter Valeria Maximilla, rebelled in Italy. A need for additional revenue had caused Galerius to disregard Italy's traditional exemption from any form of taxation, and Maxentius exploited local indignation to declare himself emperor. An army led by Severus hastened to Rome, hoping to catch the usurper by surprise, but Maximian, who had previously commanded many of the invading troops, came out of retirement in support of his son. The army switched sides, and Severus was arrested and later executed.\nLeaving his long-time friend and military companion Licinius to guard the Danube, Galerius personally invaded Italy with a powerful army collected from Illyricum and the East. He forced his way as far as Narni, within sixty miles of Rome, but skillful preparations by Maximian prevented him from capturing any territory along the way.\nThe strength of the enemy's position made Galerius send peace overtures to Rome, professing his fatherly affection for Maxentius and promising to be generous if the rebels cooperated. Maxentius refused the offer, and meanwhile compromised the loyalty of the invasion force by sending bribes to the Illyrian legions. Galerius was compelled to began a withdrawal from Italy, and it was only with great difficulty that he managed to stop his veterans deserting him. In frustration, Galerius allowed his legions to ravage the countryside as they passed northwards. Maxentius declined to make a general engagement.\nWith so many emperors now in existence, in 308 Galerius, together with the retired emperor Diocletian and the now active Maximian, called an imperial conference at Carnuntum on the River Danube to rectify the situation and bring some order back into the government. Here it was agreed that Licinius would become \"Augustus\" in the West, with Constantine as his \"Caesar\". In the East, Galerius remained \"Augustus\" and Maximinus remained his \"Caesar\". Maximian was to retire, and Maxentius was declared a usurper.\nGalerius's plan soon failed. Envious of Licinius's promotion, Maximinus also claimed the title of \"Augustus\". Maximian, still not willing to retire, declared himself emperor in Arles in opposition to Constantine, who was campaigning against the Franks. An additional usurper, Domitius Alexander, arose in Africa, bringing the number of claimants of imperial power up to seven. Galerius maintained his seniority and ceased trying to encroach on the other emperors' domains; he spent his later years in recreation and in public works, such as an extensive logging and drainage project at Lake Pelso (modern Lake Balaton).\nPersecution of Christians.\nChristians had lived pleasantly during most of the rule of Diocletian. The persecutions that began with an edict of 24 February 303, were credited by Christians to Galerius's work, as he was a fierce advocate of the old ways and old gods. Christian houses of assembly were destroyed, for fear of sedition in secret gatherings. Diocletian was not anti-Christian during the first part of his reign, and historians have claimed that Galerius decided to prod him into persecuting them by secretly burning the Imperial Palace and blaming it on Christian saboteurs. Regardless of who was at fault for the fire, Diocletian's rage was aroused and he began one of the last and greatest Christian persecutions in the history of the Roman Empire.\nIt was at the insistence of Galerius that the last edicts of persecution against the Christians were published, beginning in 303, and this policy of repression was maintained by him until the appearance of the general edict of toleration, issued in Serdica in April 311, apparently during his last bout of illness (see \"Edict of Toleration by Galerius\"). Galerius's last request was that Christians should pray for him as he suffered with a painful and fatal illness.\nInitially one of the leading figures in the persecutions, Galerius later admitted that the policy of trying to eradicate Christianity had failed, saying: \"wherefore, for this our indulgence, they ought to pray to their God for our safety, for that of the republic, and for their own, that the republic may continue uninjured on every side, and that they may be able to live securely in their homes.\" Lactantius gives the text of the edict in his moralized chronicle of the bad ends to which all the persecutors came, \"De Mortibus Persecutorum\". This marked the end of official persecution of Christianity, which was officially legalized two years later by Constantine and Licinius in the Edict of Milan.\nDeath.\nGalerius died in late April or early May 311 from a horribly gruesome disease described by Eusebius and Lactantius, possibly some form of bowel cancer, gangrene or Fournier gangrene.\nGalerius was buried in his mausoleum at Gamzigrad-Romuliana, which was part of the palace he built at his birthplace, today's Zaje\u010dar in Serbia. Several lumps composed of corroded iron ring mail (\"lorica hamata\") have been found at the site. This mail armour may have been worn by the wax figure of the emperor that was burned during the imperial funeral and apotheosis ceremony. The entire site has been inscribed into the World Heritage List in June 2007.\nAnti-Roman accusations.\nAccording to Lactantius, a Christian and adviser to Constantine, Galerius affirmed his Dacian identity and avowed himself the enemy of the Roman name once made emperor, even proposing that the empire should be called, not the Roman, but the Dacian Empire, much to the horror of the patricians and senators. Lactantius further states that Galerius exhibited anti-Roman attitude as soon as he had attained the highest power, treating the Roman citizens with ruthless cruelty, like the conquerors treated the conquered, all in the name of the same treatment that the victorious Trajan had applied to the conquered Dacians, forefathers of Galerius, two centuries before.\nHonours.\nGalerius Peak in Antarctica is named after Emperor Galerius.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nAncient sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74633", "revid": "49712780", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74633", "title": "Vladimir Steklov (mathematician)", "text": "Russian mathematician (1864\u20131926)\nVladimir Andreevich Steklov (; 9 January 1864 \u2013 30 May 1926) was a prominent Russian and Soviet mathematician, mechanician and physicist.\nBiography.\nSteklov was born in Nizhny Novgorod, Russia. In 1887 he graduated from the Kharkov University, where he was a student of Aleksandr Lyapunov.\nIn 1889\u20131906 he worked at the Department of Mechanics of this university. He became a full professor in 1896. During 1893\u20131905 he also taught theoretical mechanics in the Kharkov Polytechnical Institute (now known as Kharkiv Polytechnic Institute). In 1906 he started working at Petersburg University.\nIn 1921 he petitioned for the creation of the Institute of Physics and Mathematics. Upon his death, the institute was named after him. The Mathematics Department split from the Institute in 1934. It is now known as Steklov Institute of Mathematics. A lunar impact crater is also named after him.\nSteklov wrote a number of works on the history of science. He was an Invited Speaker of the ICM in 1924 in Toronto.\nIn 1926 he was elected a corresponding member of the G\u00f6ttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities.\nSteklov died in Gaspra, Crimea, USSR. He was interred in Saint Petersburg, Russia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74634", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74634", "title": "Aileron", "text": "Aircraft control surface used to induce roll\nAn aileron (French for 'little wing' or 'fin') is a hinged flight control surface usually forming part of the trailing edge of each wing of a fixed-wing aircraft. Ailerons are used in pairs to control the aircraft in roll (or movement around the aircraft's longitudinal axis), which normally results in a change in flight path due to the tilting of the lift vector. Movement around this axis is called rolling or banking.\nConsiderable controversy exists over credit for the invention of the aileron. The Wright brothers and Glenn Curtiss fought a years-long legal battle over the Wright patent of 1906, which described a method of wing-warping to achieve lateral control. The brothers prevailed in several court decisions which found that Curtiss's use of ailerons violated the Wright patent. Ultimately, the First World War compelled the U.S. Government to legislate a legal resolution. A much earlier aileron concept was patented in 1868 by British scientist Matthew Piers Watt Boulton, based on his 1864 paper \"On A\u00ebrial Locomotion\".\nHistory.\nThe name \"aileron\", from French, meaning \"little wing\", also refers to the extremities of a bird's wings used to control their flight. It first appeared in print in the 7th edition of Cassell's French-English Dictionary of 1877, with its lead meaning of \"small wing\". In the context of powered airplanes it appears in print about 1908. Prior to that, ailerons were often referred to as rudders, their older technical sibling, with no distinction between their orientations and functions, or more descriptively as \"horizontal rudders\" (in French, \"gouvernails horizontaux\"). Among the earliest printed aeronautical use of 'aileron' was that in the French aviation journal \"L'A\u00e9rophile\" of 1908.\nAilerons had more or less completely supplanted other forms of lateral control, such as wing warping, by about 1915, well after the function of the rudder and elevator flight controls had been largely standardised. Although there were previously many conflicting claims over who first invented the aileron and its function, i.e., lateral or roll control, the flight control device was invented and described by the British scientist and metaphysicist Matthew Piers Watt Boulton in his 1864 paper \"On A\u00ebrial Locomotion\". He was the first to patent an aileron control system in 1868.\nBoulton's description of his lateral flight control system was \"the first record we have of appreciation of the necessity for active lateral control as distinguished from [passive lateral stability]... With this invention of Boulton's we have the birth of the present-day three torque method of airborne control\" as was praised by Charles Manly. This was also endorsed by C.H. Gibbs-Smith. Boulton's British patent, No. 392 of 1868, issued about 35 years before ailerons were \"reinvented\" in France, became forgotten and lost from sight until after the flight control device was in general use. Gibbs-Smith stated on several occasions that if the Boulton patent had been revealed at the time of the Wright brothers' legal filings, they might not have been able to claim priority of invention for the lateral control of flying machines. The fact that the Wright brothers were able to gain a patent in 1906 did not invalidate Boulton's lost and forgotten invention.\nAilerons were not used on manned aircraft until they were employed on Robert Esnault-Pelterie's glider in 1904, although in 1871 a French military engineer, Charles Renard, built and flew an unmanned glider incorporating ailerons on each side (which he termed 'winglets'), activated by a Boulton-style pendulum controlled single-axis autopilot device.\nThe pioneering U.S. aeronautical engineer Octave Chanute published descriptions and drawings of the Wright brothers' 1902 glider in the leading aviation periodical of the day, \"L'A\u00e9rophile\", in 1903. This prompted Esnault-Pelterie, a French military engineer, to build a Wright-style glider in 1904 that used ailerons in lieu of wing warping. The French journal \"L'A\u00e9rophile\" then published photos of the ailerons on Esnault-Pelterie's glider which were included in his June 1905 article, and its ailerons were widely copied afterward.\nThe Wright brothers used wing warping instead of ailerons for roll control on their glider in 1902, and about 1904 their Flyer II was the only aircraft of its time able to do a coordinated banked turn. During the early years of powered flight the Wrights had better roll control on their designs than airplanes that used movable surfaces. From 1908, as aileron designs were refined it became clear that ailerons were much more effective and practical than wing warping. Ailerons also had the advantage of not weakening the airplane's wing structure as did the wing warping technique, which was one reason for Esnault-Pelterie's decision to switch to ailerons.\nBy 1911, most biplanes used ailerons rather than wing warping\u2014by 1915, ailerons had become almost universal on monoplanes as well. The U.S. Government, frustrated by the lack of its country's aeronautical advances in the years leading up to World War I, enforced a patent pool effectively putting an end to the Wright brothers patent war. The Wright company quietly changed its aircraft flight controls from wing warping to the use of ailerons at that time as well.\nOther early aileron designers.\nOthers who were previously thought to have been the first to introduce ailerons included:\nPatents and lawsuits.\nThe Wright Brothers' Ohio patent attorney Henry Toulmin filed an expansive patent application and on May 22, 1906, the brothers were granted U.S. Patent 821393. The patent's importance lay in its claim of a new and useful method of \"controlling\" an airplane. The patent application included the claim for the lateral control of aircraft flight that was not limited to wing warping, but through any manipulation of the \"...angular relations of the lateral margins of the airplanes [wings]... varied in opposite directions\". Thus the patent explicitly stated that other methods besides wing-warping could be used for adjusting the outer portions of an airplane's wings to different angles on its right and left sides to achieve lateral roll control. John J. Montgomery was granted U.S. Patent 831173 at nearly the same time for his methods of wing warping. Both the Wright Brothers patent and Montgomery's patent were reviewed and approved by the same patent examiner at the United States Patent Office, William Townsend. At the time Townsend indicated that both methods of wing warping were invented independently and were sufficiently different to each justify their own patent award.\nMultiple U.S. court decisions favoured the expansive Wright patent, which the Wright Brothers sought to enforce with licensing fees starting from $1,000 per airplane, and said to range up to $1,000 per day. According to Louis S. Casey, a former curator of the Smithsonian Air &amp; Space Museum in Washington, D.C., and other researchers, due to the patent they had received the Wrights stood firmly on the position that all flying using lateral roll control, anywhere in the world, would only be conducted under license by them.\nThe Wrights subsequently became embroiled with numerous lawsuits they launched against aircraft builders who used lateral flight controls, and the brothers were consequently blamed for playing \"...a major role in the lack of growth and aviation industry competition in the United States comparative to other nations like Germany leading up to and during World War I\". Years of protracted legal conflict ensued with many other aircraft builders until the U.S. entered World War I, when the government imposed a legislated agreement among the parties which resulted in royalty payments of 1% to the Wrights.\nOngoing controversy.\nThere are still conflicting claims today over who first invented the aileron. Other 19th century engineers and scientists, including Charles Renard, Alphonse P\u00e9naud, and Louis Mouillard, had described similar flight control surfaces. Another technique for lateral flight control, wing warping, was also described or experimented with by several people including Jean-Marie Le Bris, John Montgomery, Clement Ader, Edson Gallaudet, D.D. Wells, and Hugo Mattullath. Aviation historian C.H. Gibbs-Smith wrote that the aileron was \"...one of the most remarkable inventions... of aeronautical history, which was immediately lost sight of\".\nIn 1906, the Wright brothers obtained a patent not for the invention of an airplane (which had existed for a number of decades in the form of gliders) but for the invention of a system of aerodynamic control that manipulated a flying machine's surfaces, including lateral flight control, although rudders, elevators and ailerons had previously been invented.\nFlight dynamics.\nPairs of ailerons are typically interconnected so that when one is moved downward, the other is moved upward: the down-going aileron increases the lift on its wing while the up-going aileron reduces the lift on its wing, producing a rolling, also called \"banking\", moment about the aircraft's longitudinal axis (which extends from the nose to the tail of an airplane). Ailerons are usually situated near the wing tip, but may sometimes also be situated nearer the wing root. Modern airliners may also have a second pair of ailerons on their wings, with the two positions distinguished by the terms \"outboard aileron\" and \"inboard aileron\".\nAn unwanted side effect of aileron operation is adverse yaw, a yawing moment in the opposite direction to the roll. Using the ailerons to roll an aircraft to the right produces a yawing motion to the left. As the aircraft rolls, adverse yaw is caused partly by the change in drag between the left and right wing. The rising wing generates increased lift, which causes increased induced drag. The descending wing generates reduced lift, which causes reduced induced drag. Profile drag caused by the deflected ailerons may add further to the difference, along with changes in the lift vectors as one rotates back while the other rotates forward.\nIn a coordinated turn, adverse yaw is effectively compensated by the use of the rudder, which results in a sideforce on the vertical tail that opposes the adverse yaw by creating a favorable yawing moment. Another method of compensation is \"differential ailerons\", which have been rigged so that the down-going aileron deflects less than the up-going one. In this case the opposing yaw moment is generated by a difference in profile drag between the left and right wingtips. \"Frise ailerons\" accentuate this profile drag imbalance by protruding beneath the wing of an upward-deflected aileron, most often by being hinged slightly behind the leading edge and near the bottom of the surface, with the lower section of the aileron surface's leading edge protruding slightly below the wing's undersurface when the aileron is deflected upwards, substantially increasing profile drag on that side. Ailerons may also be designed to use a combination of these methods.\nWith ailerons in the neutral position, the wing on the outside of the turn develops more lift than the opposite wing due to the variation in airspeed across the wing span, which tends to cause the aircraft to continue to roll. Once the desired angle of bank (degree of rotation about the longitudinal axis) has been obtained, the pilot uses opposite aileron to prevent the angle of bank from increasing due to this variation in lift across the wing span. This minor opposite use of the control must be maintained throughout the turn. The pilot also uses a slight amount of rudder in the same direction as the turn to counteract adverse yaw and to produce a \"coordinated\" turn wherein the fuselage is parallel to the flight path. A simple gauge on the instrument panel called the slip indicator, also known as \"the ball\", indicates when this coordination is achieved.\nAileron components.\nHorns and aerodynamic counterbalances.\nParticularly on larger or faster aircraft, control forces may be extremely heavy. Borrowing a discovery from boats that extending a control surface's area forward of the hinge lightens the forces needed first appeared on ailerons during World War I when ailerons were extended beyond the wingtip and provided with a horn ahead of the hinge. Known as overhung ailerons, possibly the best known examples are the Handley Page Type O (first flight 17 December 1915), Sopwith Snipe, Fokker Dr.I and Fokker D.VII. Later examples brought the counterbalance in line with the wing to improve control and reduce drag. This is seen less often now, due to the Frise type aileron which provides the same benefit.\nTrim tabs.\nTrim tabs are small movable sections resembling scaled down ailerons located at or near the trailing edge of the aileron. On most propeller powered aircraft, the rotation of the propellers induces a counteracting roll movement due to Newton's third law of motion, in that every action has an equal and opposite reaction. To relieve the pilot of having to provide continuous pressure on the stick in one direction, which causes fatigue, trim tabs are provided to adjust or \"trim out\" the pressure needed against any unwanted movement. The tab itself is deflected in relation to the aileron, causing the aileron to move in the opposite direction. Trim tabs come in two forms, adjustable and fixed. A fixed trim tab is manually bent to the required amount of deflection, while the adjustable trim tab can be controlled from within the cockpit so that different power settings or flight attitudes can be compensated for. Some large aircraft from the 1950s (including the Canadair Argus) used free floating control surfaces that the pilot controlled only through the deflection of trim tabs, in which case additional tabs were also provided to fine-tune the control to provide straight and level flight.\nSpades.\nSpades are flat metal plates, usually attached to the aileron lower surface, ahead of the aileron hinge, by a lever arm. They reduce the force needed by the pilot to deflect the aileron and are often seen on aerobatic aircraft. As the aileron is deflected upward, the spade produces a downward aerodynamic force, which tends to rotate the whole assembly so as to further deflect the aileron upward. The size of the spade (and its lever arm) determines how much force the pilot needs to apply to deflect the aileron. A spade works in the same manner as a horn but is more efficient due to the longer moment arm.\nMass balance weights.\nTo increase the speed at which control surface flutter (aeroelastic flutter) might become a risk, the center of gravity of the control surface is moved towards the hinge-line for that surface. To achieve this, lead weights may be added to the front of the aileron. In some aircraft the aileron construction may be too heavy to allow this system to work without an excessive increase in the weight of the aileron. In this case, the weight may be added to a lever arm to move the weight well out in front to the aileron body. These balance weights are tear drop shaped (to reduce drag), which make them appear quite different from spades, although both project forward and below the aileron. In addition to reducing the risk of flutter, mass balances also reduce the stick forces required to move the control surface in maneuvers.\nAileron fences.\nSome aileron designs, particularly when fitted on swept wings, include fences like wing fences flush with their inboard plane, in order to suppress some of the spanwise component of the airflow running on the top of the wing, which tends to disrupt the laminar flow above the aileron, when deflected downwards.\nTypes of ailerons.\nSingle acting ailerons.\nUsed during aviation's pre-war \"pioneer era\" and into the early years of the First World War, these ailerons were each controlled by a single cable, which pulled the aileron up. When the aircraft was at rest, the ailerons hung vertically down. This type of aileron was used on the Farman III biplane 1909 and the Short 166. A \"reverse\" version of this, utilizing wing-warping, existed on the later version of the Santos-Dumont \"Demoiselle\", which only warped the wingtips \"downward\". One of the disadvantages of this setup was a greater tendency to yaw than even with basic interconnected ailerons. During the 1930s, a number of light aircraft used single acting controls but used springs to return the ailerons to their neutral positions when the stick was released.\nWingtip ailerons.\nUsed on the first-ever airframe to have the combination of \"joystick/rudder-bar\" controls that directly led to the modern flight control system, the Bl\u00e9riot VIII in 1908, some designs of early aircraft used \"wingtip\" ailerons, where the entire wingtip was rotated to achieve roll control as a separate, pivoting roll-control surface\u2014the AEA June Bug used a form of these, with both the experimental German Fokker V.1 of 1916 and the earlier versions of the Junkers J 7 all-duralumin metal demonstrator monoplane using them\u2014the J 7 led directly to the Junkers D.I all-duralumin metal German fighter design of 1918, which had conventionally hinged ailerons. The main problem with this type of aileron is the dangerous tendency to stall if used aggressively, especially if the aircraft is already in danger of stalling, hence the use primarily on prototypes, and their replacement on production aircraft with more conventional ailerons.\nFrise ailerons.\nEngineer Leslie George Frise (1897\u20131979) of the Bristol Aeroplane Company developed an aileron shape that is pivoted at about its 25 to 30% chord line and near its bottom surface http://, in order to decrease stick forces as aircraft became faster during the 1930s. When the aileron is deflected up (to make its wing go down), the leading edge of the aileron starts to protrude below the underside of the wing into the airflow beneath the wing. The moment of the leading edge in the airflow helps to move up the trailing edge, which decreases the stick force. The down moving aileron also adds energy to the boundary layer. The edge of the aileron directs air flow from the underside of the wing to the upper surface of the aileron, thus creating a lifting force added to the lift of the wing. This reduces the needed deflection of the aileron. Both the Canadian Fleet Model 2 biplane of 1930 and the 1938 popular US Piper J-3 Cub monoplane possessed Frise ailerons as designed and helped introduce them to a wide audience.\nA claimed benefit of the Frise aileron is the ability to counteract adverse yaw. To do so, the leading edge of the aileron has to be sharp or bluntly rounded, which adds significant drag to the upturned aileron and helps counterbalance the yaw force created by the other aileron turned down. This can add some unpleasant, nonlinear effect and/or potentially dangerous aerodynamic vibration (flutter). Adverse yaw moment is basically countered by aircraft yaw stability and also by the use of differential aileron movement.\nThe Frise-type aileron also forms a slot, so air flows smoothly over the lowered aileron, making it more effective at high angles of attack. Frise-type ailerons may also be designed to function differentially. Like the differential aileron, the Frise-type aileron does not eliminate adverse yaw entirely. Coordinated rudder application is still needed when ailerons are applied.\nDifferential ailerons.\nBy careful design of the mechanical linkages, the up aileron can be made to deflect more than the down aileron (e.g., US patent 1,565,097). This helps reduce the likelihood of a wing tip stall when aileron deflections are made at high angles of attack. In addition, the consequent differential in drag reduces adverse yaw (as also discussed above). The idea is that the loss of lift associated with the up aileron carries no penalty while the increase in lift associated with the down aileron is minimized. The rolling couple on the aircraft is always the difference in lift between the two wings. A designer at de Havilland invented a simple and practical linkage and their de Havilland Tiger Moth classic British biplane became one of the best-known aircraft, and one of the earliest, to use differential ailerons.\nRoll control without ailerons.\nWing warping.\nOn the earliest Pioneer Era aircraft, such as the Wright Flyer and the later, 1909-origin Bl\u00e9riot XI and Etrich Taube, lateral control was effected by twisting the outboard portion of the wing so as to increase or decrease lift by changing the angle of attack. This had the disadvantages of stressing the structure, being heavy on the controls, and of risking stalling the side with the increased angle of attack during a maneuver. By 1916, most designers had abandoned wing warping in favor of ailerons. Researchers at NASA and elsewhere have been taking a second look at wing warping again, although under new names. The NASA version is the X-53 Active Aeroelastic Wing while the United States Air Force tested the Adaptive Compliant Wing.\nDifferential spoilers.\nSpoilers are devices that when extended into the airflow over a wing, disrupt the airflow and reduce the amount of lift generated. Many modern aircraft designs, especially jet aircraft, use spoilers in lieu of, or to supplement ailerons, such as the F4 Phantom II and Northrop P-61 Black Widow, which had almost full width flaps (there were very small conventional ailerons at the wingtips as well).\nRoll induced by rudder.\nAll aircraft with dihedral have some form of yaw-roll coupling to promote stability. Common trainers like the Cessna 152/172 series can be roll controlled with rudder alone. The rudder of the Boeing 737 has more roll authority over the aircraft than the ailerons at high angles of attack. This led to two notable accidents when the rudder jammed in the fully deflected position causing rollovers (see Boeing 737 rudder issues).\nSome aircraft such as the Fokker Spin and model gliders lack any type of lateral control. Those aircraft use a higher amount of dihedral than conventional aircraft. Deflecting the rudder gives yaw and a lot of differential wing lift, giving a yaw induced roll moment. This type of control system is most commonly seen in the Flying Flea family of small aircraft and on simpler 2-function (pitch and yaw control) glider models or 3-function (pitch, yaw and throttle control) model powered aircraft, such as radio-controlled versions of \"Old Timer\" free-flight engine-powered model aircraft.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74635", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74635", "title": "Probus (emperor)", "text": "Roman emperor from 276 to 282\nMarcus Aurelius Probus (; 230\u2013235 \u2013 September 282) was Roman emperor from 276 to 282. Probus was an active and successful general as well as a conscientious administrator, and in his reign of six years he secured prosperity for the inner provinces while withstanding repeated invasions of barbarian tribes on almost every sector of the frontier.\nAfter repelling the foreign enemies of the empire, Probus was forced to handle several internal revolts but demonstrated leniency and moderation to the vanquished wherever possible. Despite the military basis of his power, he presented himself as a constitutional monarch who respected the authority of the Roman Senate.\nUpon defeating the Germans, Probus re-erected the fortifications of emperor Hadrian between the Rhine and Danube rivers, protecting the Agri Decumates, and exacted from the vanquished a tribute of manpower to resettle depopulated provinces within the empire and provide for adequate defense of the frontiers. Despite his widespread popularity, Probus was killed in a mutiny of the soldiers while in the middle of preparations for the Persian war, which would be carried out under his successor Carus.\nEarly life.\nProbus was born between 230 and 235 (exact date of birth unknown) in Sirmium (modern day Sremska Mitrovica, Serbia), Pannonia Inferior, the son of Dalmatius. According to the Alexandrian Chronicle, he was born sometime in the year 232. The \"Historia Augusta\" gives his father's name as Maximus and claims that his mother was of higher status than his father, that he had a sister named Claudia, that he was related to emperor Claudius Gothicus, his personal wealth was modest and his nearest kin unimportant. Besides his best known \"nomina\" Aurelius which can be found on most inscriptions, papyri and coinage, as well as Equitius attested on his coins from Ticinum and Pseudo-Aurelius Victor, the \"Historia Augusta\" gives him Valerius and Malalas Aelius. Patriarch Nikephoros I of Constantinople (806 - 815) claimed Probus had a brother named Dometius of Byzantium who was the Bishop of Byzantium from about 272 until his death in 284, and a nephew also called Probus, who would also become bishop. This, however, remains an unlikely familiar relation. No other source mentions this.\nMilitary career.\nProbus entered the army around 25 upon reaching adulthood. He rose rapidly through the ranks, repeatedly earning high military decorations. Appointed at a very young age as a military tribune by the emperor Valerian, in recognition of his latent ability, he justified the choice by a distinguished victory over the Sarmatians on the Illyrian frontier. During the chaotic years of the reign of Valerian, Illyria was the only province, generaled by such officers as Claudius, Aurelian and Probus, where the barbarians were kept at bay, while Gaul was overrun by the Franks, Rhaetia by the Alemans, Thrace and the Mediterranean by the Goths, and the east by Shapur I. Probus became amongst the highest placed lieutenants of Aurelian, reconquering Egypt from Zenobia in 273 A.D. Emperor Tacitus, upon his accession in 275, appointed Probus supreme chief of the east, granting him extraordinary powers in order to secure a dangerous frontier. Though the details are not specified, he is said to have fought with success on almost every frontier of the empire, before his election as emperor by the troops upon Tacitus' death in 276, in his camp in Asia Minor.\nAs emperor.\nFlorian, the half-brother of Tacitus, also proclaimed himself emperor, and took control of Tacitus' army in Asia Minor, but was killed by his own soldiers after an indecisive campaign against Probus in the mountains of Cilicia. In contrast to Florian, who ignored the wishes of the Senate, Probus referred his claim to Rome in a respectful dispatch. The Senate enthusiastically ratified his pretensions. Probus next travelled west, defeating the Goths along the lower Danube in 277, and acquiring the title of \"Gothicus\". However, the Goths came to respect his ability and implored a treaty with the empire.\nIn 278, Probus campaigned successfully in Gaul against the Alemanni and Longiones; both tribes had advanced through the Neckar valley and across the Rhine into Roman territory. Meanwhile, his generals defeated the Franks and these operations were directed to clearing Gaul of Germanic invaders (Franks and Burgundians), allowing Probus to adopt the titles of \"Gothicus Maximus\" and \"Germanicus Maximus\". Reportedly, 400,000 barbarians were killed during Probus' campaign, and the entire nation of the Lugii were extirpated.\nAfter the defeat of the Germanic invaders in Gaul, Probus crossed the Rhine to campaign successfully against the barbarians in their homeland, forcing them to pay homage. In the aftermath of the campaign, Probus repaired the ancient fortifications erected by Hadrian in the vulnerable space between the Rhine and Danube, in the territory of Swabia. Probus advanced possibly as far as the Elbe, but ultimately decided against annexing all Germany to the Roman Empire and instead accepted the submission of nine major tribes, who provided recruits for his army. More significantly, Probus, by forcing from the vanquished tribes a tribute of manpower, established the precedent of settling barbarians within the empire as auxiliaries on a large scale. The provinces were depopulated by war, disease and the chaotic administration, heavy taxation, and extensive army recruitment, during the Crisis of the Third Century, and the barbarian colonies, at least in the short term, helped to restore frontier defense and the practice of agriculture.\nThe army discipline which Aurelian had repaired was cultivated and extended under Probus, who was however more shy in the practice of cruelty. One of his principles was never to allow the soldiers to be idle, and to employ them in time of peace on useful works, such as the planting of vineyards in Gaul, Pannonia and other districts, in order to restart the economy in these devastated lands.\nIn 279\u2013280, Probus was, according to Zosimus, in Raetia, Illyricum and Lycia, where he fought the Vandals. In the same years, Probus' generals defeated the Blemmyes in Egypt. Either then, or during his previous command in Egypt, he ordered the reconstruction of bridges and canals along the Nile, where the production of grain for the Empire was centered.\nIn 280\u2013281, Probus put down three usurpers, Julius Saturninus, Proculus and Bonosus. The extent of these revolts is not clear, but there are clues that they were not just local problems (an inscription with the name of Probus erased has been found as far as Spain). Following this, Probus then put down a revolt by an unnamed rebel in Britain with the assistance of a certain Victorinus, who was later made consul in 282. During the winter of 281, the emperor was in Rome, where he celebrated a triumph.\nProbus was eager to start his eastern campaign, delayed by the revolts in the west. He left Rome in 282, travelling first towards Sirmium, his birth city.\nAssassination.\nDifferent accounts of Probus's death exist. According to Joannes Zonaras, the commander of the Praetorian Guard Marcus Aurelius Carus had been proclaimed, more or less unwillingly, emperor by his troops.\nProbus sent some troops against the new usurper, but when those troops changed sides and supported Carus, Probus' remaining soldiers assassinated him at Sirmium (September/October 282). According to other sources, however, Probus was killed by disgruntled soldiers, who rebelled against his orders to be employed for civic purposes, like draining marshes. Allegedly, the soldiers were provoked when they overheard him lamenting the necessity of a standing army. Carus was proclaimed emperor after Probus' death and avenged the murder of his predecessor.\nLegacy.\nAccording to the favorable treatment of Gibbon (whose account is largely derived from the \"Augustan History\"), Probus was the last of the benevolent constitutional emperors of Rome. While his successor Carus (Imp. 282\u2013284) simply disdained to seek the Senate's confirmation of his title, the latter's successor Diocletian (Imp. 284\u2013305) took active measures to undermine its authority, and established the autocratic nature and divine derivation of the Imperial power. Never again, after Diocletian's reforms, would the Roman Senate play an active role in the management of the empire. On the military sphere, Probus' victories continued the succession of martial Illyrian emperors begun by Claudius Gothicus, which restored the military supremacy of Rome after defeats sustained during the Crisis of the Third Century.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nModern sources.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "74636", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74636", "title": "Grudzi\u0105dz", "text": "City in Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship, Poland\nGrudzi\u0105dz ( ; , ) is a city in northern Poland, with 92,552 inhabitants (2021). Located on the Vistula River, it lies within the Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship and is the fourth-largest city in its province.\nGrudzi\u0105dz is one of the oldest cities in north-central Poland, founded by King Boles\u0142aw I the Brave over 1000 years ago. The well-preserved Old Town has various Gothic and Baroque landmarks, several included on the European Route of Brick Gothic, most notably the unique Grudzi\u0105dz Granaries, declared a Historic Monument of Poland. Grudzi\u0105dz is a former royal city of Poland, and became known as the \"City of Uhlans\" being the location of the former Polish Cavalry Training Centre. Situated at the crossroads of important highways, it is a city of industry and services, and a noted centre for water sports and motorcycle speedway racing.\nGeographical location.\nGrudzi\u0105dz is located close to the east shore of the river Vistula. It is located in Che\u0142mno Land.\nHistory.\nEarly medieval Poland.\nGrudzi\u0105dz was founded by the Duke of Poland, Boles\u0142aw I the Brave of the Piast dynasty.\nInitially Grudzi\u0105dz was a defensive stronghold, known as a gord. The fortress and tower were built to protect the Poles from attacks by the Baltic Prussians.\nMonastic State of the Teutonic Knights.\nThe settlement was re-fortified again from 1234 by the Teutonic Order. The erection of the castle, with the help of stone as building material, was begun around the middle of the 13th century. Under the protection of the castle the settlement gradually began to develop into a town.\nIn 1277 both \"the castle and the town\" were besieged heavily by the Yotvingians. The settlement adopted Kulm law in 1291 while under the rule of the monastic state of the Teutonic Knights.\nThe oldest building parts of the Catholic St. Nicholas' Church stem from the end of the 13th century. The Holy Spirit Church, which apparently was founded during the 13th century, is mentioned together with the town's hospital for the first time in 1345. Other documents reveal that in the 14th century the town already had a well-developed infrastructure. A document of 1380, as an example, refers to the construction of an aqueduct, a fountain and a town-hall cellar.\nIn the 14th century, papal verdicts ordered the restoration of the town and region to Poland, however, the Teutonic Knights did not comply and continued to occupy it. During the era of the Teutonic Knights, Graudenz had become a distinguished trade center in particular for textiles and agricultural products including grain. Around 1454, Graudenz had already reached about the same level of economic development as other towns in the western part of the State of the Teutonic Order, such as Danzig (\"Gda\u0144sk\"), Elbing (\"Elbl\u0105g\"), Thorn (\"Toru\u0144\"), Marienburg (\"Malbork\"), Kulm (\"Che\u0142mno\"), Konitz (\"Chojnice\"), Neumark (\"Nowe Miasto Lubawskie\") and Preu\u00dfisch Stargard (\"Starogard Gda\u0144ski\").\nKingdom of Poland.\nIn 1440, the city co-founded the Prussian Confederation which opposed the Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights. At the beginning of the Thirteen Years' War (1454\u201366), the citizens forced the Teutonic Order to hand over the castle. The confederation asked the King of Poland, Casimir IV Jagiellon to join Poland. The King agreed and signed the act of incorporation in Krak\u00f3w in March 1454. Although there was support the Knights inside the city walls during the entirety of the war, both the city and the castle remained under Polish control. The 1466 peace treaty confirmed the re-incorporation of Grudzi\u0105dz to Poland.\nBetween 1454 and 1772 the city was part of the Polish Che\u0142mno Voivodeship, which itself was since 1466 part of the Polish province of Royal Prussia, soon included in the larger Greater Poland Province. The Grudzi\u0105dz Castle was seat of the local starostas (royal administrative officials). It was often visited by Polish kings.\nAfter the great depression of the Thirteen Years' War, new economical growth in the town was slow before the middle of the 16th century. Economic progress was hampered by the religious struggles and by the Polish\u2013Swedish wars throughout the 17th century. At the end of 1655, during the Swedish Deluge, the city and its castle were captured by the Swedes and occupied for four years. In 1659, the Swedes had been besieged for several days and retreated. During their departure, part of the town was destroyed by fire.\nIn 1522, Nicolaus Copernicus, who aside from his astronomical work was also an economist, presented his treatise \"Monetae cudendae ratio\" in Grudzi\u0105dz. In it he postulated the principle that \"bad money drives out good\" which became known as the Gresham's law or the Gresham\u2013Copernicus law. This work included an early version of the quantity theory of money \u2013 a key concept in economics.\nFollowing Protestant Reformation, in 1569 the local Protestants were given access to the Holy Spirit Church; in 1572 Catholicism seemed to have vanished almost entirely in the town. In 1597 King Sigismund III Vasa gave order that the Protestants had to return all churches taken over by them in the past to the Catholics, including all accessories. The Protestants remained in possession solely of St. George's Church until in 1618 when the base of the building was washed away by the Vistula River and the church was torn down. For a while, they used once more the vacant Holy Spoirit Church, until in 1624 this building together with the hospital had to be handed over to nuns of the Order of Saint Benedict for the purpose of founding an affiliated institution.\nSince 1622 Jesuits from Toru\u0144 had a station in Grudzi\u0105dz, which in 1640 was already so strong that it was able to form a residence in Grudzi\u0105dz, despite objections from the side of the magistrate of the town. In 1648 construction work for building a Jesuit church was taken up. The Jesuits also founded the Jesuit College, which was the first high school in Grudzi\u0105dz.\nThe town proper was surrounded by town walls, except on the side of river Vistula, where instead of walls there stood huge massive grain silos, from where grain could be transported through wooden pipes to the embankment of the river.\nPrussian Partition of Poland.\nFollowing the First Partition of Poland declared on 5 August 1772, the city was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia. In 1773, it had a population of only 2,172 persons. In the late 18th and early 19th centuries, it was part of the area affected by the Partitions of Poland. To stimulate municipal trade, Frederick the Great brought in 44 colonist families. Grain trade flourished. Among the most successful grain traders were the Sch\u00f6nborn family. In 1776, a decision was made to build a fortress in the town. Between 1796 and 1804, by decision of the King of Prussia, the Grudzi\u0105dz Castle was demolished. During the Napoleonic invasion in Prussia in 1806\u20131807, the fortress was successfully defended by General of Infantry Wilhelm Ren\u00e9 de l'Homme de Courbi\u00e8re against attacks by French troops.\nIn 1871, Graudenz became part of the unified German Empire. Administratively it belonged to the administrative district of Regierungsbezirk Marienwerder in the Province of West Prussia. With the improvement of the railway network in Germany, Graudenz transiently lost its meaning as an important trading place for grain. In 1878, the railway line to Jab\u0142onowo Pomorskie (then Germanized as \"Go\u00dflershausen\") opened. After the construction of a railroad bridge across the Vistula in 1878, a railway line to Laskowice (\"Laskowitz\") opened. Graudenz became a rapidly growing industrialized city. In 1883 also the Thorn (Toru\u0144)-Graudenz-Marienburg (Malbork) railway line went into operation.\nIn 1899, the Chamber of Commerce was established in Graudenz. The Imperial German Navy named a light cruiser class and its lead ship, the SMS Graudenz, after the city. The newspaper \"Der Gesellige\", founded by book seller Rothe in 1826, belonged up to the end of World War I to the most widely spread newspapers of east Germany. Around the turn to the 20th century, Graudenz had become an important cultural centre in east Germany with numerous schools, municipal archives and a museum.\nThe city was the site of a military prison for Polish activists. In 1832, also 249 Polish insurgents the November Uprising were imprisoned by the Prussians in the local fortress and subjected to forced labour, malnutrition, beatings and insults. Released prisoners who left Europe formed the Gromada Grudzi\u0105dz in Portsmouth, England in 1835 as part of the Great Emigration movement.\nGermanisation of the Poles in the Prussian Partition.\nFrederick had nourished a particular contempt for the Polish state and people. Germanisation was enforced to assimilate residents. He brought in German and Frisian workers and peasants, who in his opinion, were more suitable for building up his new civilization. Frederick settled around 300,000 colonists in the eastern provinces of Prussia. Using state funds for colonization, German craftsmen were placed in all local Polish cities. A second colonization wave of ethnic Germans was pursued by Prussia after 1832. Laws were passed aimed at Germanisation of the Polish inhabited areas and 154,000 colonists were settled by the Prussian Settlement Commission before World War I.\nProfessor Martin Kitchen writes that in areas where the Polish population lived alongside Germans a virtual apartheid existed, with bans on the Polish language and religious discrimination, besides attempts to colonize the areas with Germans.\nApproximately 16,850 Poles and about 26,000 Germans lived in the district of Graudenz.\nTo resist Germanisation, Polish activists started to publish the newspaper \"Gazeta Grudzi\u0105dzka\" in 1894. It advocated the social and economic emancipation of rural society and opposed Germanization \u2013 publishing articles critical of Germany. German attempts to repress its editor Wiktor Kulerski only helped to increase its circulation. From 1898 to 1901, a secret society of Polish students seeking to restore Polish independence operated in the city, but the activists were tried by German courts in 1901, frustrating their efforts.\nIn Graudenz, German soldiers were stationed in the local fortress as part of the Germanization measures, and the authorities placed soldiers with the most chauvinistic attitude towards the Poles there. The German government brought in more stationed military, merchants and state officials to influence population figures. In the 1910 census 84% of the population of the town and 58% of the county was recorded as German.\nCensus figures published by the German Empire have been criticised as unreliable. Historians believe they have a high degree of falsification; formal pressure on census takers (predominantly school-teachers) was possible, and a new bilingual category was created to further complicate the results, as bilingual people (that is those who could speak both German and Polish) were classified as Germans. Some analysts have asserted that all people registering as bilingual were classified as Germans. The Polish population in this heavily Germanised city has been officially estimated at around 12\u201315% during this period.\nThe Polish population numbers rose steadily before the First World War. In the German election of 1912, the National Liberal Party of Germany received 53% of all votes, whilst Polish candidates won 23% of votes. In 1912, Wiktor Kulerski founded the Polish Catholic Peasant Party in the city, which aimed at protecting the local Polish population\nIn 1913, the \"Polish Gazeta Grudzi\u0105dzka\" reached a circulation of 128,000, making it the third largest Polish newspaper in the world.\nInterwar Poland.\nOn 23 January 1920, the regulations of the Treaty of Versailles became effective, the city was reincorporated under its Polish name Grudzi\u0105dz into the reborn Polish state (Second Polish Republic), although a majority of its inhabitants were German. At that time J\u00f3zef W\u0142odek, the newly appointed Polish mayor, described his impression of the town as \"modern but unfortunately completely German\".\nBetween 1926 and 1934 the number of Germans (34,194 in 1910) rose from 3,542 to 3,875. Some Polish authors emphasize a wider emigration pattern motivated chiefly by economic conditions and the unwillingness of the German minority to live in the Polish state. In 1935, Poles already constituted 93% of the inhabitants of Grudzi\u0105dz, so within a few years the city became ethnically Polish again after the ethnic Germans left the city.\nThe German author Christian Raitz von Frentz writes that after the First World War ended, the Polish government tried to reverse the systematic Germanization of the past decades.\nPrejudices, stereotypes and conflicts dating back to German harsh rule and discrimination of Poles influenced Polish policies towards minorities in the new independent Polish state.\nThe Polish authorities, supported by the public (e.g. the \"explicitly anti-German\" Zwi\u0105zek Obrony Kres\u00f3w Zachodnich), initiated a number of measures to further Polonization. The local press was also hostile towards the Germans.\nFearful of a re-Germanization of the city, the Polish paper \"S\u0142owo Pomorskie\" (23.19.1923) criticized the authorities of Grudzi\u0105dz for tolerating the local German amateur theatre \"Deutsche B\u00fchne\". The theatre was funded by money from Berlin. Created before the war, its actors were mostly German officers stationed with the local garrison.\nThe mayor responded by pointing out that the theatre was being monitored because of suspected \"anti-state activities\". According to Kotowski, this episode indicates that even the most minor activities of the German minority were closely scrutinized by the Polish authorities beginning with the earliest phase of Polish policy towards the German minority. \nThe German theatre was re-opened by the Nazis in 1943, while the last director of the Polish theatre in the city in the years 1922\u201324 was murdered by them.\nIn the interbellum, Grudzi\u0105dz served as an important centre of culture and education with one of the biggest Polish military garrisons and several military schools located both in and around the city. A large economic potential and the existence of important institutions like the Pomeranian Tax Office and the Pomeranian Chamber of Industry and Trade, helped Grudzi\u0105dz become the economic capital of the Pomeranian Voivodeship in the interwar period. Grudzi\u0105dz's economic potential was featured at the First Pomeranian Exhibition of Agriculture and Industry in 1925, officially opened by Stanis\u0142aw Wojciechowski, President of the Second Polish Republic.\nThe 64th and 65th Infantry Regiments and the 16th Light Artillery Regiment of the Polish Army were stationed in Grudzi\u0105dz during the 19 years of the inter-war period. They were part of the 16th Infantry Division, which had its headquarters in the city, as did the cavalry's famous 18th Pomeranian Uhlan Regiment. The Grudzi\u0105dz Centre of Cavalry Training educated many notable army commanders, including future Polish resistance hero Witold Pilecki. Military education in Grudzi\u0105dz was also provided by the Centre of the Gendarmerie, the Air School of Shooting and Bombarding, and the N.C.O. Professional School, which offered courses for infantry reserve officer cadets.\nIn 1920 a German-language school was founded. In 1931 the Polish government decreed a reduction in the number of German classes in the school and requested lists of Catholic children and those pupils with Polish-sounding names which they viewed as victims of Germanization, from the German school. Although the list was not prepared, some of the children were transferred, which led to a school-strike. The German school followed ideas and customs as those in Germany. It was headed by a Nazi sympathiser Hilgendorf who praised Nazi ideology.\nThe Polish authorities were alarmed when a notebook of one female student was discovered by them, which contained the Nazi party anthem, the Horst Wessel Lied and revisionistic text. The discovery caused outrage and calls to dismiss Hilgendorf due to his irredentist beliefs In November 1933 two German craftsmen were killed by a Polish mob during a local election campaign.\nWorld War II.\nOn 3 September 1939 units from the Wehrmacht entered the town after the Battle of Grudzi\u0105dz and then occupied it. From 26 October 1939 to 1945 the city was part of the administrative district of Regierungsbezirk Marienwerder in the new province of Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia.\nNazi atrocities.\nFollowing the German invasion, the \"Einsatzkommando 16\" and \"Einsatzgruppen\" IV and V entered the city to commit crimes against the population. They also carried out mass searches of Polish courthouses, organizations, police stations, etc., and seized large amounts of grain, textiles, coffee, equipment, and even homing pigeons. On 7 September, 25 Polish citizens were detained as hostages \u2013 priests, teachers and other members that enjoyed the respect of local society. They were threatened with execution if any harm came to the ethnic Germans from the city who were detained and held by the Polish authorities during the invasion of Poland. After their initial release on the return of the members of the German minority, they were re-arrested and most of them were shot.\nOn 9 September a further 85 Poles were imprisoned by the Germans.\nThe German authorities destroyed the city's monuments to Polish independence, and banned Polish priests from speaking Polish during church masses.\nOn 4 September, the Einsatzgruppe V demanded a list of names of all members of the 600-strong Jewish community within 14 hours, as well as a list of all their possessions. They were also fined 20,000 zlotych\nOn 6 September, the whole city was covered with posters demanding that Jews and \"mixed races\" of category I and IInd degree (so-called \"Mischlinge\", i.e. persons of mixed race) gather at the headquarters of the Einsatzgruppe V (established in the local school). Around 100 people responded to the demand and were immediately arrested and robbed. After this they were transported to an unknown destination and disappeared \u2013 it is believed that they were most likely executed by the Germans in the Mniszek-Grupa forests.\nOn 19 October, the city was visited by the NSDAP Gauleiter (regional chief) Albert Forster. In a public speech to the \"Volksdeutsche\", he declared that the area was to become \"one hundred percent\" German, and that Poles \"have nothing to do here, and should be evicted\"\nGrudzi\u0105dz was the location of the German concentration camp Graudenz, a subcamp of Stutthof concentration camp.\nSelbstschutz participation in mass murder.\nAlongside the military and \"Einsatzgruppen\" administration, the first structures of \"Selbstschutz\" were established \u2013 a paramilitary formation of members of the German minority in the region. The head of \"Selbstschutz\" in Grudzi\u0105dz was Doctor Joachim Gramse.\nIn October 1939, \"Selbstschutz\" created an internment camp for Poles seeking to restore Polish independence, whose commandant was a local German Kurt Gotze.\nTeachers, officials, social workers, doctors, merchants, members of patriotic organisations, lawyers, policemen, farmers and 150 Polish priests were held in this camp. There were also around 200 Polish boys, students of local schools, who were soon deported to forced labour in Germany. It is estimated that around 4,000 to 5,000 people went through the camp. Other arrested Poles were held in the cellars of the Grudzi\u0105dz Fortress. The local Germans who ran the camp established their own \"court\" which decided the fate of the prisoners. The \"court\" comprised: Kurt Gotze, Helmut Domke, Horst Kriedte, Hans Abromeit (owner of a drugstore), Paul Neuman (barber). Based on their decisions, some of the prisoners were sent to concentration camps, 300 were murdered \"en masse\"; only a few were released. Those sentenced to death were mostly executed through shooting by the \"Selbstschutz\" in Ksi\u0119\u017ce G\u00f3ry near Grudzi\u0105dz; in October and November 1939 several hundred people were murdered there and their bodies buried in five mass graves. The victims were usually shot at the edges of already dug out graves.\nFurther executions were carried out in desolate areas of Grudzi\u0105dz: on 11 November 1939 near Grudzi\u0105dz Fortress, the \"Selbstschutz\" executed ten Polish teachers, four Polish priests and four women. Additionally, 37 people were murdered in Grudzi\u0105dz city park. On 29 October 1939 a unit of \"Selbstschutz\" mass-murdered ten Polish hostages as revenge for posters that had appeared in the city calling for resistance against Nazi occupation.\nFinal months of World War II.\nAs the result of heavy fighting in 1945, over 60% of the city was destroyed. Soviet Major Lev Kopelev participated in those battles and covered the final surrender of the German garrison in his book \"To Be Preserved Forever\". He describes the joint psychological warfare in March 1945 by the Red Army and members of the NKFD. From March 9 to 12, 1945, the Russians removed residents from the city center, then looted it, including the personal property of the residents. In the following months, the Russians looted local factories and enterprises of several hundred tons of finished products, semi-finished goods, raw materials, scrap metal, machinery, tools, etc. In April, the Poles began rebuilding the industry, which had been looted more by the Russians than destroyed in the fighting. The NKVD operated a camp for arrested Poles from Pomerania in the city.\nAs the war ended, the German population of the city fled or was expelled to Germany in accordance with the Potsdam Agreement. Local Polish survivors were joined by Poles who had emigrated from Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union east of the Curzon line, where they had been asked by the Soviet authorities to either accept incorporation into the U.S.S.R. or to leave what had been their former homeland.\nDemographics.\nIn 2018, it was populated by 95,045 inhabitants. \nSport.\nGrudzi\u0105dz has two professional sports teams. The largest following has the popular speedway team GKM Grudzi\u0105dz, who race at the Grudzi\u0105dz Speedway Stadium and compete in the Ekstraliga (Poland's top division), whereas the local football team Olimpia Grudzi\u0105dz has a slightly more modest following, playing in the lower leagues (as of 2025). GKS Olimpia Grudzi\u0105dz is also a multi-sports club with athletics and judo sections.\nOne of the key elements of the city\u2019s sports infrastructure is the Bronis\u0142aw Malinowski Central Stadium, also referred to as the Grudzi\u0105dz Municipal Stadium. It serves as the home ground of the local football club, Olimpia Grudzi\u0105dz, and provides facilities not only for professional matches but also for community events and youth training. The stadium plays an important role in promoting physical activity and strengthening the city\u2019s identity through sport.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nGrudzi\u0105dz is twinned with:\n\"italicized\" that this city is suspended due to Russian Invasion of Ukraine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74637", "revid": "46643525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74637", "title": "S\u0142upsk", "text": "City in Pomeranian Voivodeship, Poland\nS\u0142upsk (; ; ) is a city with powiat rights located on the S\u0142upia River in the Pomeranian Voivodeship in northern Poland, in the historical region of Pomerania or more specifically in its part known in contemporary Poland as Central Pomerania () within the wider West Pomerania (). According to Statistics Poland, it has a population of 88,835 inhabitants while occupying , thus being one of the most densely populated cities in the country as of December 2021. In addition, the city is the administrative seat of S\u0142upsk County and the rural Gmina S\u0142upsk, despite belonging to neither.\nS\u0142upsk had its origins as a Pomeranian settlement in the early Middle Ages. In 1265, it was given city rights. By the 14th century, the city had become a centre of local administration and trade and a Hanseatic League associate. Between 1368 and 1478, it was a residence of the Dukes of S\u0142upsk, until 1474 vassals of the Kingdom of Poland. According to the peace treaty of 1648, S\u0142upsk became part of Brandenburg-Prussia. In 1815, it was incorporated into the newly formed Prussian Province of Pomerania. After World War II, the city again became part of Poland, and from 1975 to 1998 it was the capital of S\u0142upsk Voivodeship. It is a railway junction located on the main railroad between the Tricity and Szczecin. The local Renaissance Ducal Castle houses the Museum of Central Pomerania with the largest collection of paintings by popular early-20th-century artist Stanis\u0142aw Ignacy Witkiewicz.\nEtymology.\nSlavic names in Pomeranian \u2014 \"Stolpsk\", \"St\u00f4\u0142psk\", \"S\u0142\u00ebpsk\", \"S\u0142\u00ebpsk\u00f2\", \"St\u00f4\u0142p\" \u2014 and Polish \u2014 \"S\u0142upsk\" \u2014 may be etymologically related to the words \"s\u0142up\" 'pole' and \"sto\u0142p\" 'keep'. There are two hypotheses about the origin of those names: that it refers to a specific way of constructing buildings on boggy ground with additional pile support, which is still in use, or that it is connected with a tower or other defensive structure on the banks of the S\u0142upia River.\nLater, under German administration, the town was named \"Stolp\", to which the suffix \"in Pommern\" was attached in order to avoid confusion with other places similarly named. The Germanised name comes from one of five Slavic Pomeranian names of this settlement. The city was occasionally called \"Stolpe\", referring to the S\u0142upia River, whose German name is \"Stolpe\". \"Stolpe\" is also the Latin exonym for this place.\nHistory.\nMiddle Ages.\nS\u0142upsk developed from a few medieval settlements located on the banks of the S\u0142upia River, at the unique ford along the trade route connecting the territories of modern Pomeranian and West Pomeranian Voivodeships. This factor led to the construction of a grod, a West Slavic or Lechitic fortified settlement, on an islet in the middle of the river. Surrounded by swamps and mires, the fortress had perfect defence conditions. Archaeological research has shown that the grod was situated on an artificial hill and had a natural moat formed by the branches of the S\u0142upia, and was protected by a palisade. Records confirm that the area of S\u0142upsk was part of the Polish realm during the reign of Mieszko I and in the 11th century.\nAccording to several sources, the first historic reference to S\u0142upsk comes from the year 1015 when the king of Poland Boleslaus I the Brave took over the town, incorporating it into the Polish state. In the 12th century, the town became one of the most important castellanies in Pomerania alongside Gda\u0144sk and \u015awiecie. However, several historians stated that the first mention was in two documents dating to 1227, signed by the Pomeranian dukes Wartislaw III and Barnim I and their mothers, confirming the establishment of an abbey in 1224 and donating estates, among them a village \"in Stolp minore\" or \"in parvo Ztolp\", respectively, to that abbey. Another document dated to 1180, which mentions a \"castellania Slupensis\" and would thus be the oldest surviving record, has been identified as a late 13th-century or 14th-century duplicate.\nThe Griffin dukes lost the area to the Samborides during the following years, and the next surviving documents mentioning the area concern donations made by Samboride \u015awi\u0119tope\u0142k II, dating to 1236 (two documents) and 1240. In the earlier of the two 1236 documents, a Johann \"castellanus de Slupcz\" is mentioned as a witness, Schmidt considers this to be the earliest mention of the gard, since a castellany required the existence of a gard. The first surviving record explicitly mentioning the gard is from 1269: it notes a \"Christianus, castellanus in castro Stolpis, et Hermannus, capellanus in civitate ante castrum predictum\", thus confirming the existence of a fortress (\"castrum\") with a suburbium (\"civitas\"). Schmidt further says that the office of a capellanus required a church, which he identifies as Saint Peter's. This church is mentioned by name for the first time in a 1281 document of Samboride Mestwin II, which also mentions Saint Nicolai church and a Saint Mary's chapel in the fortress. The oldest mention of Saint Nicolai church dates to 1276.\nS\u0142upsk possibly received its city rights in 1265. Historians argue that city rights were granted for the first time in a document dated 9 September 1310 when Brandenburgian margraves Waldemar and Johann V granted those privileges under L\u00fcbeck law, which was confirmed and extended in a second document, dated 2 February 1313. The margraves had acquired the area in 1307. Mestwin II accepted them as his superiors in 1269, confirmed in 1273, but later on, in 1282, Mestwin II and Polish Duke Przemys\u0142 II signed the Treaty of K\u0119pno, which transferred the suzerainty over Gda\u0144sk Pomerania including S\u0142upsk to Przemys\u0142 II. After Mestwin II's death the city was reintegrated with Poland and remained Polish until 1307, when the Margraviate of Brandenburg took over, while leaving local rule in the hands of the Swienca family, whose members were castellans in S\u0142upsk. In 1337, the governors of S\u0142upsk (\"Stolp\") had purchased the village of Stolpm\u00fcnde (modern Ustka) and then constructed a port there, enabling a maritime economy to develop. After the Treaty of Templin in 1317 the city passed to the Duchy of Pomerania-Wolgast.\nIn 1368 Pomerania-Stolp (\"Duchy of S\u0142upsk\") was split off from Pomerania-Wolgast due to the Partitions of the Duchy of Pomerania. The grandson of Polish King Casimir III the Great and his would-be successor Casimir IV became duke of S\u0142upsk as a Polish vassal in 1374, after he failed to take the Polish throne. The succeeding dukes were also vassals of the Kings of Poland: Wartislaw VII paid homage in 1390 (to King W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o), Bogislaw VIII paid homage in 1410 (also to King W\u0142adys\u0142aw II). S\u0142upsk remained within Polish sphere of political influence until 1474. It became part of the Duchy of Pomerania in 1478.\nModern ages.\nThe Protestant Reformation reached the town in 1521, when Christian Ketelhut preached in the town. Ketelhut was forced to leave Stolp in 1522 due to an intervention by Bogislaw X, Duke of Pomerania. Peter Suawe, a Protestant from Stolp, however, continued his practices. In 1524, Johannes Amandus from K\u00f6nigsberg and others arrived and preached in a more radical way. As a consequence, Saint Mary's Church was profaned, the monastery's church was burned, and the clergy were treated poorly. The inhabitants of the town began the process of conversion to Lutheranism. In 1560 Polish pastor Pawe\u0142 Buntowski preached in the town, and in 1586 Polish religious literature spread locally.\nThe House of Griffins, which ruled Pomerania for centuries, died out in 1637. The territory was subsequently partitioned between Brandenburg-Prussia and Sweden. After the Peace of Westphalia (1648) and the Treaty of Stettin (1653), Stolp came under Brandenburgian control. In 1660, the Kashubian dialect was allowed to be taught, but only in religious studies. The Polish language in general, however, was experiencing very unfavourable conditions due to depopulation of the area in numerous wars and implied Germanization.\nAfter the Thirty Years' War, Stolp lost much of its former importance\u2014despite the fact that Szczecin was then ruled by Sweden, the province's capital was situated not in the second-largest city of the region, but in the one closest to the former ducal residence\u2014Stargard. However, the local economy stabilized. The constant dynamic development of the Kingdom of Prussia and good economic conditions saw the city develop. After the major state border changes (modern Vorpommern and Stettin joined the Prussian state after a conflict with Sweden) Stolp was only an administrative centre of the \"Kreis\" (district) within the \"Regierungsbezirk\" of K\u00f6slin (Koszalin). However, its geographical location led to rapid development, and in the 19th century, it was the second city of the province in terms of both population and industrialization.\nIn 1769, Frederick II of Prussia established a military school in the city, according to Stanis\u0142aw Salmonowicz its purpose was the Germanization of local Polish nobility.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars, the city was taken by 1,500 Polish soldiers under the leadership of general Micha\u0142 Sokolnicki in 1807. In 1815 S\u0142upsk became one of the cities of the Province of Pomerania, in which it remained until 1945. In 1869 a railway from Danzig (Gda\u0144sk) reached Stolp.\nDuring the 19th century, the city's boundaries were significantly extended towards the west and south. The new railway station was built about 1,000 metres from the old city. In 1901, the construction of a new city hall was completed, followed by a local administration building in 1903. In 1910 a tram line was opened. The football club Viktoria Stolp was formed in 1901. In 1914, before the First World War, Stolp had approximately 34,340 inhabitants.\nInterwar period.\nStolp was not directly affected by the fighting in the First World War. The trams did not operate during the war, returning to the streets in 1919. Demographic growth remained high, although development slowed, because the city became peripheral, the \"Kreis\" (district) being situated on post-war Germany's border with the so-called Polish Corridor. Polish claims to Stolp and its neighbouring area were refused during the Treaty of Versailles negotiations. The city, having become the regional center of the eastern part of Eastern Pomerania, thrived, becoming known as \"Little Paris\". A cultural highlight was an annual art exhibition.\nFrom 1926 the city became an active point of Nazi supporters, and the influence of NSDAP grew rapidly. The party with Hitler received 49.1% of the city's vote in the German federal election of March 1933, when however, the election campaign was marked by Nazi terror. During the Kristallnacht, the night of 9/10 November 1938, the local synagogue was burned down.\nSecond World War.\nThe beginning of the Second World War halted the development of the city. In 1941, the Nazis created a labour camp for people brought from various German-occupied territories, who were maltreated physically and psychologically and forced to undertake exhausting work while being subject to starvation. In 1944, the Germans established a subcamp of the Stutthof concentration camp at the local railway repair works, and a forced labour camp for women and children at a local school. Prisoners of the former were over 600 Jews from various German-occupied countries, mostly Estonia and Lithuania, both men and women, and from October 1944 also 20 Jewish boys aged 10 and 11 brought from the \u0141\u00f3d\u017a Ghetto, with the prisoners, especially women, being subjected to exhausting work, starvation and arbitrary beatings. Prisoners of the latter were women with children (around 2,000 people), mainly Polish, but also Estonian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Ukrainian, Russian and Belarusian, who were exposed to poor sanitary and nutritional conditions, lack of warming even in winter and no medical care, resulting in epidemics, and also regular violence. Over 200 children, mostly Polish, died in the other camp. In February 1945, the Germans marched some 400 women and children from the latter camp to a newly established camp in nearby Gogolewko, and sent the prisoners of the subcamp of Stutthof on a death march to an emptied camp in Kokoszki. The Germans also operated nine forced labour subcamps of the Stalag II-B prisoner-of-war camp in the city.\nThe Polish resistance movement conducted espionage of German activity and distributed Polish underground press in the city.\nThe Schutzstaffel (SS) committed a massacre of 24 Polish forced labourers (23 men and one woman) on 7 March 1945, just before the Red Army took over the city without any serious resistance on 8 March 1945. In fear of Soviet repression, up to 1,000 inhabitants committed suicide. \nThousands remained in the city; the others had fled and the German soldiers abandoned it. However, the Soviet soldiers were ordered to set fire to the historical central Old Town, which was almost completely destroyed.\nPost-war period.\nAfter the war, the city became again part of Poland and most of the German population either fled or was expelled in accordance with the Potsdam Agreement. The city was settled by Poles, most of whom were expelled from the former Polish eastern territories annexed by the Soviet Union (around 80% at the end of 1945) and the rest were mainly repatriates from the Soviet Union and Poles returning from Germany. Also Ukrainians and Lemkos settled into the town during Operation Vistula.\nThe town's name was changed into the historic Polish version of \"S\u0142upsk\" by the Commission for the Determination of Place Names on 23 April 1945. It was initially part of \"Okr\u0119g III\", comprising the whole territory of the former Province of Pomerania east of the Oder River. S\u0142upsk later became part of Szczecin Voivodeship and then Koszalin Voivodeship, and in 1975 became the capital of the new province of S\u0142upsk Voivodeship.\nLife in the devastated city was organized anew. In 1945, the first post-war craft workshops and public schools were opened, trams and a regional railway started to operate, and the amateur Polish Theater was established. In September 1946, the first Warsaw Uprising Monument in Poland was unveiled. From April 1947, the local Polish newspaper \"Kurier S\u0142upski\" was published. The city became a cultural centre. In the 1950s, the Puppet Theater \"T\u0119cza\", the Teachers' College and the Baltic Dramatic Theater were established. The puppet theatre \"T\u0119cza\" used to collaborate with the similar institution called \"Arcadia\" in Oradea, Romania, but the partnership ceased after 1989. The Millennium Cinema was one of the first in Poland to have a cinerama. The first Polish pizzeria was established in S\u0142upsk in 1975.\nDuring the 1970 protests there were minor strikes and demonstrations. None were killed during the militia's interventions.\nAfter 1989.\nMajor street name changes were made in S\u0142upsk after the Revolutions of 1989. Also, a process of major renovations and refurbishments began, beginning in the principal neighbourhoods. According to the administrative reform of Poland in 1999, S\u0142upsk Voivodeship was dissolved and divided between two larger regions: Pomeranian Voivodeship and West Pomeranian Voivodeship. S\u0142upsk itself became part of the former. The reform was criticized by locals, who wanted to create a separate Middle Pomeranian Voivodeship. In 1998 a major riot took place after a basketball game.\nIn 2014, S\u0142upsk elected Poland's first openly gay mayor, Robert Biedro\u0144. In the same year, the city was awarded the Europe Prize by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe for having made exceptional efforts to spread the ideal of European unity.\nGeography.\nBoundaries.\nAdministratively, the city of S\u0142upsk has the status of both an urban gmina and a city county (\"powiat\"). The city boundaries are generally artificial, with only short natural boundaries around the villages of Kobylnica and W\u0142ynk\u00f3wko on the S\u0142upia River. The boundaries have remained unchanged since 1949, when Ryczewo became a part of the city.\nS\u0142upsk shares about three-quarters of its boundaries with the rural district called Gmina S\u0142upsk, of which S\u0142upsk is the administrative seat (although it is not part of the district). The city's other neighbouring district is Gmina Kobylnica, to the south-west. The S\u0142upsk Special Economic Zone is not entirely contained within the city limits: a portion of it lies within Gmina S\u0142upsk, while some smaller areas are at quite a distance from S\u0142upsk (Debrzno), or even in another voivodeship (Koszalin, Szczecinek, Wa\u0142cz).\nThe city has a fairly irregular shape, with its central point at \"Plac Zwyci\u0119stwa\" (\"Victory Square\") at .\nTopography.\nS\u0142upsk lies in an \"pradolina\" of the S\u0142upia River. The city centre is situated significantly lower than its western and easternmost portions. Divided into two almost equal parts by the river, S\u0142upsk is hilly when compared to other cities in the region. About of the city's area is covered by forests, while is used for agricultural purposes.\nS\u0142upsk is rich in natural water bodies. There are more than twenty ponds, mostly former meanders of the S\u0142upia, within the city limits. There are also several streams, irrigation canals (generally unused and abandoned) and a leat. Except in the city centre, all these watercourses are unregulated.\nThere is generally little human influence on landform features visible within the city limits. However, in the northwestern part of the city there is a huge hollow, a remnant of a former sand mine. Although there were once plans to build a waterpark in this area, they were later abandoned and the site remains unused.\nClimate.\nS\u0142upsk has a temperate marine climate, like the rest of the Polish coastal regions. The city lies in a zone where the continental climate influences are very weak compared with other regions of Poland. The warmest month is July, with an average temperature range of . The coolest month is February, averaging . The wettest month is August with average precipitation of , while the driest is March, averaging only . Snowfalls are always possible between December and April.\nNeighbourhoods.\nThe neighbourhoods (, singular \"osiedle\") of S\u0142upsk do not have any administrative powers. Their names are used for traffic signposting purposes and are shown on maps. The neighbourhoods are as follows:\nParks.\nS\u0142upsk has many green areas within its boundaries. The most important are the Park of Culture and Leisure (\"Park Kultury i Wypoczynku\"), the Northern Wood (\"Lasek P\u00f3\u0142nocny\") and the Southern Wood (\"Lasek Po\u0142udniowy\"). There are also many small parks, squares and boulevards.\nTransport.\nRailways.\nS\u0142upsk is a railway junction, with four lines running north, west, east and south from the city. Currently, one station, opened January 10, 1991 serves the whole city. This is a class B station according to PKP (Polish Railways) criteria. The city has rail connections with most major cities in Poland: Bia\u0142ystok, Gda\u0144sk, Gdynia, Katowice, Krak\u00f3w, Lublin, \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, Olsztyn, Pozna\u0144, Szczecin, Warsaw and Wroc\u0142aw, and also serves as a junction for local trains from Ko\u0142obrzeg, Koszalin, L\u0119bork, Miastko, Szczecinek and Ustka.\nThe first railway reached S\u0142upsk (then Stolp) from the east in 1869. The first rail station was built north of its current location. The line was later extended to K\u00f6slin (Koszalin), and further lines were built connecting the city with Neustettin (Szczecinek), Stolpm\u00fcnde (Ustka), Zezenow (Cecenowo) (narrow gauge) and Budow (Budowo) (narrow gauge). The narrow-gauge tracks were rebuilt as standard gauge by 1933, but were demolished during the Second World War. After the war, the first train connection to be restored was that with L\u0119bork, reopened May 27, 1945. Between 1988 and 1989 almost all of the lines traversing the city were electrified. From 1985 to 1999 S\u0142upsk had a trolleybus system.\nRoads.\nS\u0142upsk used to be traversed east\u2013west by European route E28, which is known as National route 6 in Poland until a bypass running to the south of the town to carry the 6/E28 traffic was built. The bypass is a part of Expressway S6 which, when completed some time after 2015, will give S\u0142upsk a fast road connection to Szczecin and Gda\u0144sk. The city can also be accessed by the National route 21 from Miastko, Voivodeship route 210 from Ustka to Unichowo and Voivodeship route 213 from Puck. Local roads of lesser importance connect S\u0142upsk with surrounding villages and towns.\nThe city's network of streets is well developed, but many of them require general refurbishment. The city is currently investing significant sums of money in road development.\nAir.\nS\u0142upsk-Redzikowo Airport is now defunct, however, it once worked as a regular passenger airport of local significance. Several plans to eventually reopen it failed because of lack of funds. The facility was earmarked for use within the US missile defense complex as a missile launch site, which became operational in December 2023. Nowadays, the nearest airports are in Gda\u0144sk (Gda\u0144sk Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa Airport) and Szczecin (Solidarity Szczecin\u2013Goleni\u00f3w Airport).\nCulture.\nS\u0142upsk is the regular venue for a number of festivals, most notably:\nFor a long time here lived Anna \u0141ajming (1904\u20132003), Kashubian and Polish author.\nThe museum in S\u0142upsk holds the world's biggest collection of paintings by Stanis\u0142aw Ignacy Witkiewicz.\nTheatres.\nS\u0142upsk currently has three theatres:\nIn the 1970s the T\u0119cza Theatre collaborated with the \"Arcadia\" Theatre from Oradea, Romania. This partnership ended after 1989 for political reasons.\nCinemas.\nAt one time S\u0142upsk had five functioning cinemas, but only one, which belongs to the cinema chain Multikino remains open today, which is located in the Jantar Shopping Centre. There is also a small specialist cinema called \"Rejs\" on 3 Maja street. There was a cinema called 'Milenium', which has now been replaced by the Biedronka chain of supermarkets.\nEconomy.\nS\u0142upsk has a developing economy based on a number of large factories. The footwear industry has been particularly successful in the region, expanding its exports to many countries.\nThe Scania commercial vehicles plant also plays a very significant role in S\u0142upsk's economy, generating the highest revenue out of all companies currently based in S\u0142upsk. Most of the buses currently manufactured there are exported to Western Europe.\nDemographics.\nFollowing the medieval Christianization of the region, the vast majority of the town's population was composed of Catholics, then after the Reformation until the end of World War II of Protestants.\nIn 1994 the number of inhabitants reached the highest level.\nSports clubs.\nThe city's most notable sports club is basketball team Czarni S\u0142upsk, which competes in the Polish Basketball League (top division), where they finished 3rd four times (as of 2022). They are based in Hala Gryfia.\nOther clubs include:\nUS missile defense complex.\nThe European Interceptor Site (EIS) of the US was planned in nearby Redzikowo, forming a Ground-Based Midcourse Defense system in conjunction with a US narrow-beam midcourse tracking and discrimination radar system in the Czech Republic. It was supposed to consist of up to 10 silo-based interceptors, a two-stage version of the existing three-stage Ground Based Interceptor (GBI), with Exoatmospheric Kill Vehicle (EKV).\nThe missile shield has received much local opposition in the area, including several protests. This included a protest in March 2008, when an estimated 300 protesters marched on the proposed site of the missile base. The planned installation was later scrapped by President Obama on 17 September 2009.\nOn February 12, 2016, the US Army has awarded AMEC Foster Wheeler a $182.7 million contract with an option to support the Aegis Ashore missile defense system in Poland. The contract comes as part of Phase III of the European Phased Adaptive Approach program, which aims to boost land-based missile defense systems for NATO allies against ballistic missile threats. The project is located in Redzikowo.\nTwin towns and cities.\nS\u0142upsk is twinned with:\nFormer twin towns:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74638", "revid": "49255800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74638", "title": "Jastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j", "text": "Jastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j ( ; , originally ; ; ) is a city in the Silesian Voivodeship in southern Poland with 86,632 inhabitants (2021). Its name comes from the Polish words \"jastrz\u0105b\" (\"hawk\") and \"zdr\u00f3j\" (\"spa\" or \"spring\").\nFrom 1861 until the 20th century, it was a spa village situated in Upper Silesia. It was granted city rights in 1963. In the early 1980s, the city was one of the main centers of workers' protests, which resulted in the creation of Solidarity.\nHistory.\nThe first written documentation, relating to this area, date back to around 1305 (\"Liber fundationis episcopatus Vratislaviensis\"), when it was part of fragmented Piast-ruled Poland. Administratively, the town is made up of several old settlements, whose origins go back to the distant past. The original name of the town was Jastrzemb. The origin of the name, which means 'hawk' in Polish, is connected with the legend of the black knight. From the 16th century to the beginning of the 19th century, it was part of the administration of Wodzis\u0142aw. In the 18th century, it was annexed by Prussia. Between 1858 and 1860, trial excavations of hard coal were performed all over the area of Jastrz\u0119bie Dolne. These excavations ended up discovering springs containing iodine and bromine brine solutions. In 1860, the count of K\u00f6nigsdorff acquired the lands and suggested the construction of bath facilities. Thus, in 1862, the health resort of \"Bad K\u00f6nigsdorff-Jastrzemb\" was brought into life. Shortly after, the town joined the exclusive circle of the most prestigious health resorts in Europe.\nIn 1896, the natural health centre was taken over by a Polish doctor, Miko\u0142aj Witczak, who lent great service to the development of health resort in Bad K\u00f6nigsdorff-Jastrzemb. His managerial skills together with wise investment made Jastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j a highly appreciated and fashionable health resort inside the German Empire and the interbellum Poland. Consequently, numerous health facilities were then set up.\nIn the plebiscite in Silesia in 1921, about 85% of the inhabitants of Jastrz\u0119bie Zdr\u00f3j voted for Poland, a significant part of the inhabitants also took part in the Silesian uprisings in order to re-unite with Poland. Finally, in 1922, Jastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j was incorporated into Poland.\nDuring World War II, Jastrz\u0119bie was occupied by Germany.\nThe history of Jastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j as a health resort came to its end in the 1960s, when all over the area began the intensive exploitation of coking coal deposits. Within a period of 12 years, five coal mines were set up. Between 1954\u20131975, Jastrz\u0119bie was part of the Wodzis\u0142aw County. From 1975 to 1998, it was administratively located in the Katowice Voivodeship. During the time of political transformation in Poland, Jastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j went down in the annals of Polish modern history as the place where the Jastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j Agreement was concluded. The signing of the protocol initiated the process of political, economic and social changes in Poland.\nPopulation and location.\nThe city itself had 91,723 inhabitants; its density is 1,047.9 per km\u00b2 (as of January 31, 2012). Jastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j ranks as Poland's 36th largest city. Jastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j's unemployment rate is lower (7%) than the national average of 8.8% (as of November 2010).\nDistricts.\nJastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j is a powiat (county) divided into 15 districts and 6 so\u0142ectwos that have its own administrative body. Most of the districts are suburban, some are densely built with many blocks of flats generating huge housing estates, and the rest are of civic nature.\nSo\u0142ectwos:\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nJastrz\u0119bie-Zdr\u00f3j is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74639", "revid": "11692354", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74639", "title": "Licinius", "text": "Roman emperor from 308 to 324\nValerius Licinianus Licinius (; Greek: \u039b\u03b9\u03ba\u03af\u03bd\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2; c. 265 \u2013 325) was Roman emperor from 308 to 324. For most of his reign, he was the colleague and rival of Constantine I, with whom he co-authored the Edict of Milan that granted official toleration to Christians in the Roman Empire. He was finally defeated at the Battle of Chrysopolis (AD 324), and was later executed on the orders of Constantine.\nEarly reign.\nBorn to a Dacian peasant family in Moesia Superior, Licinius accompanied his close childhood friend and future emperor Galerius, on the Persian expedition in 298. He was trusted enough by Galerius that in 307 he was sent as an envoy to Italy, to attempt to reach some sort of agreement with the usurper Maxentius. When Galerius went to deal with Maxentius personally after the death of Severus II, he left the eastern provinces in Licinius's care.\nUpon his return to the east Galerius elevated Licinius to the rank of \"Augustus\" in the West on 11 November 308, and under his immediate command were the Balkan provinces of Illyricum, Thrace and Pannonia. In 310 he took command of the war against the Sarmatians, inflicting a severe defeat on them. On the death of Galerius in May 311, Licinius entered into an agreement with Maximinus Daza to share the eastern provinces between them. By this point, not only was Licinius the official \"Augustus\" of the west but he also possessed part of the eastern provinces as well, as the Hellespont and the Bosporus became the dividing line, with Licinius taking the European provinces and Maximinus taking the Asian.\nAn alliance between Maximinus and Maxentius forced the two remaining emperors to enter into a formal agreement with each other. So, in March of 313, Licinius married Flavia Julia Constantia, half-sister of Constantine I, at Mediolanum (now Milan); they had a son, Licinius the Younger, in 315. Their marriage was the occasion for the jointly-issued \"Edict of Milan\" that reissued Galerius's previous edict allowing Christianity (and any religion one might choose) to be professed in the Empire, with additional dispositions that restored confiscated properties to Christian congregations and exempted Christian clergy from municipal civic duties. The redaction of the edict as reproduced by Lactantius \u2013 who follows the text affixed by Licinius in Nicomedia on 14 June 313, after Maximinus's defeat \u2013 uses neutral language, expressing a will to propitiate \"any Divinity whatsoever in the seat of the heavens\".\nMaximinus Daza in the meantime decided to attack Licinius. Leaving Syria with 70,000 men, he reached Bithynia, although the harsh weather he encountered along the way had gravely weakened his army. In April 313, he crossed the Bosporus and went to Byzantium, which was held by Licinius's troops. Undeterred, he took the town after an eleven-day siege. He moved to Heraclea, which he captured after a short siege, before moving his forces to the first posting station. With a much smaller body of men, possibly around 30,000, Licinius arrived at Adrianople while Daza was still besieging Heraclea. Before the decisive engagement, Licinius allegedly had a vision in which an angel recited him a generic prayer that could be adopted by all cults which Licinius then repeated to his soldiers. On 30 April 313, the two armies clashed at the Battle of Tzirallum, and Daza's forces were crushed. Daza escaped, disguised as a slave, and fled to Nicomedia, where he fortified the area around the Cilician Gates. Licinius's army broke through and Daza retreated to Tarsus, where Licinius continued to press him on land and sea. The war between them ended only with Daza's death in August 313.\nLicinius sought out and killed multiple relatives of the Tetrarchs: Daza's wife and two children, Severus's son Flavius Severianus, Galerius's son Candidianus, Diocletian's wife Prisca, and Galeria Valeria, daughter of Diocletian and wife of Galerius.\nGiven that Constantine had already crushed his rival Maxentius in 312, the two men decided to divide the Roman world between them. As a result of this settlement, the Tetrarchy was replaced by a system of two emperors, called \"Augusti\": Licinius became \"Augustus\" of the East, while his brother-in-law, Constantine, became \"Augustus\" of the West.\nAfter making the pact, Licinius rushed immediately to the East to deal with another threat, an invasion by the Persian Sassanid Empire.\nConflict with Constantine I.\nIn 316, a civil war erupted between Licinius and Constantine, in which Constantine used the pretext that Licinius was harbouring Senecio, whom Constantine accused of plotting to overthrow him. Constantine prevailed at the Battle of Cibalae in Pannonia (8 October 316). As a result of this defeat Licinius named Valerius Valens as his co-emperor (whom he originally intended to replace Constantine), only for Licinius to suffer a humiliating defeat on the plains in the Battle of Mardia (also known as the Battle of Campus Ardiensis) in Thrace which occurred either in late 316 or early 317. The two emperors were reconciled after these two battles and Licinius had his co-emperor Valens killed.\nOver the next seven years, the two imperial colleagues maintained an uneasy truce. Licinius kept himself busy with a campaign against the Sarmatians in 318, but temperatures rose again in 321 when Constantine pursued some Sarmatians, who had been ravaging some territory in his realm, across the Danube into what was technically Licinius's territory. When he repeated this with another invasion, this time by the Goths who were pillaging Thrace under their leader Rausimod, Licinius complained that Constantine had broken the treaty between them.\nConstantine wasted no time going on the offensive. Licinius's fleet of 350 ships was defeated by Constantine's fleet in 323. Then in 324, Constantine, tempted by the \"advanced age and unpopular vices\" of his colleague, again declared war against him and having defeated his army of 165,000 men at the Battle of Adrianople (3 July 324), succeeded in shutting him up within the walls of Byzantium. The defeat of the superior fleet of Licinius in the Battle of the Hellespont by Crispus, Constantine's eldest son and Caesar, compelled his withdrawal to Bithynia, where a last stand was made; the Battle of Chrysopolis, near Chalcedon (18 September), resulted in Licinius's final submission. In this conflict Licinius was supported by the Gothic prince Alica. Due to the intervention of Flavia Julia Constantia, Constantine's sister and also Licinius's wife, both Licinius and his co-emperor Martinian were initially spared, Licinius being imprisoned in Thessalonica, Martinian in Cappadocia; however, both former emperors were subsequently executed. After his defeat, Licinius attempted to regain power with Gothic support, but his plans were exposed, and he was sentenced to death. While attempting to flee to the Goths, Licinius was apprehended at Thessalonica. Constantine had him hanged, accusing him of conspiring to raise troops among the barbarians.\nCharacter and legacy.\nAs part of Constantine's attempts to decrease Licinius's popularity, he actively portrayed his brother-in-law as a pagan supporter. This may not have been the case; contemporary evidence tends to suggest that he was at least a committed supporter of Christians at one point. He co-authored the Edict of Milan which ended the Great Persecution, and re-affirmed the rights of Christians in his half of the empire. He also added the Christian symbol to his armies, and attempted to regulate the affairs of the Church hierarchy just as Constantine and his successors were to do. His wife was a devout Christian. \nIt is possible that he converted. However, Eusebius of Caesarea, writing under the rule of Constantine, charges him with expelling Christians from the Palace and ordering military sacrifices to pagan gods, as well as interfering with the Church's internal procedures and organization. It has been theorized that he originally supported Christians along with Constantine, but later in his life turned against them and to paganism.\nFinally, on Licinius's death, his memory was branded with infamy; his statues were thrown down; and by edict, all his laws and judicial proceedings during his reign were abolished. Such official erasure from the public record has come to be called \"damnatio memoriae\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74641", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74641", "title": "George Gamow", "text": "Ukrainian-American theoretical physicist and cosmologist (1904\u20131968)\nGeorge Gamow (sometimes Gammoff; born Georgiy Antonovich Gamov; ; 4 March 1904 \u2013 19 August 1968) was a Soviet and American polymath, theoretical physicist and cosmologist. He was an early advocate and developer of Georges Lema\u00eetre's Big Bang theory. Gamow discovered a theoretical explanation of alpha decay by quantum tunneling, invented the liquid drop model (the first mathematical model of the atomic nucleus), worked on radioactive decay, star formation, stellar nucleosynthesis, Big Bang nucleosynthesis (which he collectively called nucleocosmogenesis), and predicted the existence of the cosmic microwave background radiation and molecular genetics. Gamow was a key figure in the development and understanding of quantum tunneling.\nIn his middle and late career, Gamow directed much of his attention to teaching and wrote popular books on science, including \"One Two Three... Infinity\" and the \"Mr Tompkins\" series of books (1939\u20131967). Some of his books remain in print more than a half-century after their original publication. The George Gamow Memorial Lectures at the University of Colorado at Boulder are given in his honor.\nEarly biography and career.\nGamow was born in Odessa, Russian Empire (now Odesa, Ukraine). His father taught Russian language and literature in secondary schools, and his mother taught geography and history at a school for girls. In addition to Russian, Gamow learned to speak some French from his mother and German from a tutor. Gamow learned English in his college years and became fluent. Most of his early publications were in German or Russian, but he later used English both for technical papers and for the lay audience.\nHe was educated at the Institute of Physics and Mathematics in Odessa (1922\u201323) and at the University of Leningrad (1923\u20131929). Gamow studied under Alexander Friedmann in Leningrad, until Friedmann's early death in 1925, which required him to change dissertation advisors. At the university, Gamow made friends with three other students of theoretical physics, Lev Landau, Dmitri Ivanenko and Matvey Bronshtein. The four formed a group they called the Three Musketeers, which met to discuss and analyze the ground-breaking papers on quantum mechanics published during those years. He later used the same phrase to describe the Alpher, Herman and Gamow group.\nUpon graduation, he worked on quantum theory in G\u00f6ttingen, where his research into the atomic nucleus provided the basis for his doctorate. He then worked at the Theoretical Physics Institute of the University of Copenhagen from 1928 to 1931, with a break to work with Ernest Rutherford at the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge. He continued to study the atomic nucleus (proposing the \"liquid drop\" model), but also worked on stellar physics with Robert Atkinson and Fritz Houtermans.\nIn 1931, Gamow was elected a corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR at age 28 \u2013 one of the youngest in its history. During the period 1931\u20131933, Gamow worked in the Physical Department of the Radium Institute in Leningrad headed by Vitaly Khlopin. Europe's first cyclotron was designed under the guidance and direct participation of Igor Kurchatov, Lev Mysovskii and Gamow. In 1932, Gamow and Mysovskii submitted a draft design for consideration by the Academic Council of the Radium Institute, which approved it. The cyclotron was not completed until 1937.\nRadioactive decay.\nIn the early 20th century, radioactive materials were known to have characteristic exponential decay rates, or half-lives. At the same time, radiation emissions were known to have certain characteristic energies. By 1928, Gamow in G\u00f6ttingen had solved the theory of the alpha decay of a nucleus via tunnelling, with mathematical help from Nikolai Kochin. The problem was also solved independently by Ronald W. Gurney and Edward U. Condon. Gurney and Condon did not, however, achieve the quantitative results achieved by Gamow.\nClassically, the particle is confined to the nucleus because of the high energy requirement to escape the very strong nuclear potential well. Also classically, it takes an enormous amount of energy to pull apart the nucleus, an event that would not occur spontaneously. In quantum mechanics, however, there is a probability the particle can \"tunnel through\" the wall of the potential well and escape. Gamow solved a model potential for the nucleus and derived from first principles a relationship between the half-life of the alpha-decay event process and the energy of the emission, which had been previously discovered empirically and was known as the Geiger\u2013Nuttall law. Some years later, the name Gamow factor or Gamow\u2013Sommerfeld factor was applied to the probability of incoming nuclear particles tunnelling through the electrostatic Coulomb barrier and undergoing nuclear reactions.\nDefection.\nGamow worked at a number of Soviet establishments before deciding to flee the Soviet Union because of increased oppression. In 1931, he was officially denied permission to attend a scientific conference in Italy. Also in 1931, he married Lyubov Vokhmintseva (), another physicist in the Soviet Union, whom he nicknamed \"Rho\" after the Greek letter. Gamow and his new wife spent much of the next two years trying to leave the Soviet Union, with or without official permission. Niels Bohr and other friends invited Gamow to visit during this period, but Gamow could not get permission to leave.\nGamow later said that his first two attempts to defect with his wife were in 1932 and involved trying to kayak: first a planned 250-kilometer paddle over the Black Sea to Turkey, and another attempt from Murmansk to Norway. Poor weather foiled both attempts, but they had not been noticed by the authorities.\nIn 1933, Gamow was suddenly granted permission to attend the 7th Solvay Conference on physics, in Brussels. He insisted on having his wife accompany him, even saying that he would not go alone. Eventually the Soviet authorities relented and issued passports for the couple. The two attended and arranged to extend their stay, with the help of Marie Curie and other physicists. Over the next year, Gamow obtained temporary work at the Curie Institute, University of London, and the University of Michigan.\nMove to America.\nIn 1934, Gamow and his wife moved to the United States. He became a professor at George Washington University (GWU) in 1934 and recruited physicist Edward Teller from London to join him at GWU. In 1936, Gamow and Teller published what became known as the \"Gamow\u2013Teller selection rule\" for beta decay. During his time in Washington, Gamow would also publish major scientific papers with M\u00e1rio Schenberg and Ralph Alpher. By the late 1930s, Gamow's interests had turned towards astrophysics and cosmology.\nWhen recruited in GWU, Gamow started the Washington Conference on Theoretical Physics. A series of small conferences from 1935\u20131947, that brought up experts in theoretical physics to discuss different subjects. During the 1939 conference, Bohr announced publicly the discovery of nuclear fission.\nIn 1935, Gamow's son, Igor Gamow was born (in a 1947 book, Gamow's dedication was \"To my son IGOR, Who Would Rather Be a Cowboy\"). George Gamow became a naturalized American in 1940. He retained his formal association with GWU until 1956.\nDuring World War II, Gamow continued to teach physics at George Washington University and consulted for the US Navy.\nGamow was interested in the processes of stellar evolution and the early history of the Solar System. In 1945, he co-authored a paper supporting work by German theoretical physicist Carl Friedrich von Weizs\u00e4cker on planetary formation in the early Solar System. Gamow published another paper in the British journal \"Nature\" in 1948, in which he developed equations for the mass and radius of a primordial galaxy (which typically contains about one hundred billion stars, each with a mass comparable with that of the Sun).\nBig Bang nucleosynthesis.\nGamow's work led the development of the hot \"big bang\" theory of the expanding universe. He was the earliest to employ Alexander Friedmann's and Georges Lema\u00eetre's non-static solutions of Einstein's gravitational equations describing a universe of uniform matter density and constant spatial curvature. Gamow's crucial advance would provide a physical reification of Lema\u00eetre's idea of a unique primordial quantum. Gamow did this by assuming that the early universe was dominated by radiation rather than by matter. Most of the later work in cosmology is founded in Gamow's theory. He applied his model to the question of the creation of the chemical elements and to the subsequent condensation of matter into galaxies, whose mass and diameter he was able to calculate in terms of the fundamental physical parameters, such as the speed of light \"c\", the Newtonian constant of gravitation \"G\", the fine-structure constant \"\u03b1\", and the Planck constant \"h\".\nGamow's interest in cosmology arose from his earlier interest in energy generation and element production and transformation in stars. This work, in turn, evolved from his fundamental discovery of quantum tunneling as the mechanism of nuclear alpha decay, and his application of this theory to the inverse process to calculate rates of thermonuclear reaction.\nAt first, Gamow believed that all the elements might be produced in the very high temperature and density early stage of the universe. Later, he revised this opinion on the strength of compelling evidence advanced by Fred Hoyle and others, that elements heavier than lithium are largely produced in thermonuclear reactions in stars and in supernovae. Gamow formulated a set of coupled differential equations describing his proposed process and assigned, as a PhD dissertation topic, his graduate student Ralph Alpher the task of solving the equations numerically. These results of Gamow and Alpher appeared in 1948 as the Alpher\u2013Bethe\u2013Gamow paper. Before his interest turned to the question of the genetic code, Gamow published about twenty papers on cosmology. The earliest was in 1939 with Edward Teller on galaxy formation, followed in 1946 by the first description of cosmic nucleosynthesis. He also wrote many popular articles as well as academic textbooks on this and other subjects.\nIn 1948, he published a paper dealing with an attenuated version of the coupled set of equations describing the production of the proton and the deuteron from thermal neutrons. By means of a simplification and using the observed ratio of hydrogen to heavier elements, he was able to obtain the density of matter at the onset of nucleosynthesis and from this the mass and diameter of the early galaxies. In 1953 he produced similar results, but this time based on another determination of the density of matter and radiation, at the time at which they became equal. In this paper, Gamow determined the density of the relict background radiation, from which a present temperature of 7 K was predicted \u2013 a value which was slightly more than twice the presently-accepted value.\nIn 1967, he published reminiscences and recapitulation of his own work as well as the work of Alpher and Robert Herman (both with Gamow and also independently of him). This was prompted by the discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation by Penzias and Wilson in 1965; Gamow, Alpher, and Herman felt that they did not receive the credit they deserved for their theoretical predictions of its existence and source. Gamow was disconcerted by the fact that the authors of a communication explaining the significance of the Penzias/Wilson observations failed to recognize and cite the previous work of Gamow and his collaborators.\nDNA and RNA.\nIn 1953, Francis Crick, James Watson, Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin discovered the double helix structure of the DNA macromolecule. Gamow attempted to solve the problem of how the ordering of four different bases (adenine, cytosine, thymine and guanine) in DNA chains might control the synthesis of proteins from their constituent amino acids. Crick has said that Gamow's suggestions helped him in his own thinking about the problem. As related by Crick, Gamow observed that the 43 = 64 possible permutations of the four DNA bases, taken three at a time, would be reduced to 20 distinct combinations if the order was irrelevant. Gamow proposed that these 20 combinations might code for the twenty amino acids which, he suggested, might well be the sole constituents of all proteins. Gamow's contribution to solving the problem of genetic coding gave rise to important models of biological degeneracy.\nThe specific system that Gamow was proposing (called \"Gamow's diamonds\") proved to be incorrect. The triplets were supposed to be overlapping, so that in the sequence GGAC (for example), GGA could produce one amino acid and GAC another, and also non-degenerate (meaning that each amino acid would correspond to one combination of three bases \u2013 in any order). Later protein sequencing work proved that this could not be the case; the true genetic code is non-overlapping and degenerate, and changing the order of a combination of bases does change the amino acid.\nIn 1954, Gamow and Watson co-founded the RNA Tie Club. This was a discussion group of leading scientists concerned with the problem of the genetic code, which counted among its members the physicists Edward Teller and Richard Feynman. In his autobiographical writings, Watson later acknowledged the great importance of Gamow's insightful initiative. However, this did not prevent him from describing this colorful personality as a \"zany\", card-trick playing, limerick-singing, booze-swilling, practical\u2013joking \"giant imp\".\nLate career and life.\nGamow worked at George Washington University from 1934 until 1954, when he became a visiting professor at the University of California, Berkeley. In 1956, he moved to the University of Colorado Boulder, where he remained for the rest of his career. In 1956, Gamow became one of the founding members of the Physical Science Study Committee (PSSC), which later reformed teaching of high-school physics in the post-Sputnik years.\nIn 1959, Gamow, Hans Bethe, and Victor Weisskopf publicly supported the re-entry of Frank Oppenheimer into teaching college physics at the University of Colorado, as the Red Scare began to fade (J. Robert Oppenheimer was the older brother of Frank Oppenheimer, and both of them had worked on the Manhattan Project before their careers in physics were derailed by McCarthyism). While in Colorado, Frank Oppenheimer became increasingly interested in teaching science through simple hands-on experiments, and he eventually moved to San Francisco to found the Exploratorium. Gamow would not live to see his colleague's opening of this innovative new science museum, in late August 1969.\nIn his 1961 book \"The Atom and its Nucleus\", Gamow proposed representing the periodic system of the chemical elements as a continuous tape, with the elements in order of atomic number wound round in a three-dimensional helix whose diameter increased stepwise (corresponding to the longer rows of the conventional periodic table).\nGamow continued his teaching at the University of Colorado Boulder and focused increasingly on writing textbooks and books on science for the general public. After several months of ill health, surgeries on his circulatory system, diabetes, and liver problems, Gamow was dying from liver failure, which he had called the \"weak link\" that could not withstand the other stresses.\nIn a letter written to Ralph Alpher on August 18, he had written, \"The pain in the abdomen is unbearable and does not stop\". Prior to this, there had been a long exchange of letters with his former student, in which he was seeking a fresh understanding of some concepts used in his earlier work, with Paul Dirac. Gamow relied on Alpher for deeper understanding of mathematics.\nOn August 19, 1968, Gamow died at age 64 in Boulder, Colorado, and was buried there in Green Mountain Cemetery. The physics department tower at the University of Colorado at Boulder is named after him.\nPersonal life.\nGamow had a son, Igor Gamow, with his first wife Rho in 1935. Their son later became a professor of microbiology at the University of Colorado, as well as an inventor.\nIn 1956, Gamow divorced his wife Rho. In 1958 he married Barbara Perkins, an editor for one of his publishers.\nGamow was a well-known prankster, who delighted in practical jokes and humorous twists embedded in serious scientific publications. His most famous prank was the pioneering Alpher\u2013Bethe\u2013Gamow paper (1948), which was serious in its style and content. However, Gamow could not resist adding his colleague Hans Bethe to the list of authors, as a pun on the first three letters of the Greek alphabet.\nGamow was an atheist.\nWritings.\nGamow was a highly successful science writer, with several of his books still in print more than a half-century after their initial publication. As an educator, Gamow recognized and emphasized fundamental principles that were unlikely to become obsolete, even as the pace of science and technology accelerated. He also conveyed a sense of excitement with the revolution in physics and other scientific topics of interest to the common reader. Gamow himself sketched the many illustrations for his books, which added a new dimension to and complemented what he intended to convey in the text. He was unafraid to introduce mathematics wherever it was essential, but he tried to avoid deterring potential readers by including large numbers of equations that did not illustrate essential points.\nIn 1946 Gamow was a proponent of human spaceflight propelled by atomic energy. \"We may prepare ourselves for a trip to the moon and to various planets of our solar system in a comfortable rocketship driven by atomic power.\" He also wrote \"the ordinary chemical fuels which could be used in the motor of such a rocketship could not possibly give it the necessary velocity...\".\nBy 1965 he moderated his expectations though he re-stated his atomic-power prognostication:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whereas we may be able to study the forms of life that may have developed on Mars and Venus (the best \"inhabitable\" planets of the solar system) in the not too distant future by means of an adventuresome trip to these planets on a \"nuclear power propelled space ship,\" the question about the possible existence and the forms of life in other stellar worlds hundreds and thousands of light-years away, will probably remain forever an unsolvable problem of science.\nBy that time the space race was underway with conventional chemical rockets.\nHis book, \"The Creation of the Universe\", was first published in 1952, concluding: \"It took less than an hour to make all the atoms in the universe, a few hundred million years to make the stars and planets but three billion years to make man.\"\nIn 1956, he was awarded the Kalinga Prize by UNESCO for his work in popularizing science with his \"Mr. Tompkins...\" series of books (1939\u20131967), his book \"One, Two, Three...Infinity\", and other works.\nBefore his death, Gamow was working with Richard Blade on a textbook \"Basic Theories in Modern Physics\", but the work was never completed or published under that title. Gamow was also writing \"My World Line: An Informal Autobiography\", which was published posthumously in 1970.\nA collection of Gamow's writings was donated to The George Washington University in 1996. The materials include correspondence, articles, manuscripts and printed materials both by and about George Gamow. The collection is currently under the care of GWU's Special Collections Research Center, located in the Estelle and Melvin Gelman Library.\nBooks.\nPopular.\n\"Mr Tompkins\" series.\nThroughout these books, Mr Tompkins is introduced as \"C. G. H. Tompkins\" to emphasize the notion of cGh physics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74643", "revid": "38004052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74643", "title": "Pinellas County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nPinellas County (, ) is located on the west central coast of the U.S. state of Florida. As of the 2020 census, the population was 959,107, making it the seventh-most populous county in the state. It is also the most densely populated county in Florida, with 1,326 residents per square kilometer. The county is part of the Tampa\u2013St. Petersburg\u2013Clearwater Metropolitan Statistical Area. Clearwater is the county seat. St. Petersburg is the largest city in the county, as well as the largest city in Florida that is not a county seat.\nHistory.\nPre-European settlement.\nThe first evidence of human habitation in what is now Pinellas County comes from Weedon Island. Various stone tools dated to the Middle Archaic Period (5000-3000 BCE) have been found on the island.\nWhen Europeans first reached the Pinellas peninsula, the Tampa Bay area was inhabited by people of the Safety Harbor culture. The Safety Harbor culture area was divided into chiefdoms. One documented chiefdom in what is now Pinellas County was that of the Tocobaga, who occupied a town and large temple mound, the Safety Harbor site, overlooking Safety Harbor in what is now the eponymous town of Safety Harbor.\nSpanish and British Florida.\nDuring the early 16th century Spanish explorers discovered and slowly began exploring Florida, including Tampa Bay. In 1528 P\u00e1nfilo de Narv\u00e1ez landed in Pinellas, and 10 years later Hernando de Soto is thought to have explored the Tampa Bay area. By the early 18th century the Tocobaga had been virtually annihilated, having fallen victim to European diseases from which they had no immunity, as well as European conflicts. Later Spanish explorers named the area \"Punta Pinal\" (Spanish for \"Point of Pines\" or \"Piney Point\"). After trading hands multiple times between the British and the Spanish, Spain finally ceded Florida to the United States in 1821, and in 1823 the U.S. Army established Fort Brooke (later Tampa).\nSettlement of West Hillsborough.\nIn 1834 much of west central Florida, including the Pinellas peninsula (then known simply as \"West Hillsborough\"), was organized as Hillsborough County. The very next year Odet Philippe, a French Huguenot from Charleston, South Carolina became the first permanent, non-native resident of the peninsula when he established a plantation near the site of the Tocobaga village in Safety Harbor. It was Philippe who first introduced both citrus culture and cigar-making to Florida.\nAround the same time, the United States Army began construction of Fort Harrison, named after William Henry Harrison, as a rest post for soldiers from nearby Fort Brooke during the Second Seminole War. The new fort was located on a bluff overlooking Clear Water Harbor, which later became part of an early 20th-century residential development (now historic district) called Harbor Oaks. University of South Florida archaeologists excavated the site in 1977 after Alfred C. Wyllie discovered an underground ammunition bunker while digging a swimming pool on his estate. Clearwater would later become the first organized community on the peninsula as well as the site of its first post office.\nThe Armed Occupation Act, passed in 1842, encouraged further settlement of Pinellas, like all of Florida, by offering 160 acres (0.65\u00a0km2) to anyone who would bear arms and cultivate the land. Pioneer families like the Booths, the Coachmans, the Marstons, and the McMullens established homesteads in the area in the years following, planting more citrus groves and raising cattle. During the American Civil War, many residents fought for the Confederate States of America. Brothers James and Daniel McMullen were members of the Confederate Cow Cavalry, driving Florida cattle to Georgia and the Carolinas to help sustain the war effort. John W. Marston served in the 9th Florida Regiment as a part of the Appomattox Campaign. Many other residents served in other capacities. Otherwise the peninsula had virtually no significance during the war, and the war largely passed the area by.\nOn September 27, 1848, a strong hurricane struck the West Coast of Florida. It separated the barrier island on the coast and created a waterway known today as John's Pass. John Levique, along with Joseph Silva, was the one who discovered it and named it after himself and is now a federally owned canal.\nTarpon Springs became West Hillsborough's first incorporated city in 1887, and in 1888 the Orange Belt Railway was extended into the southern portion of the peninsula. Railroad owner Peter Demens named the town that grew near the railroad's terminus St. Petersburg in honor of his hometown. The town would incorporate in 1892. Other major towns in the county incorporated during this time were Clearwater (1891), Dunedin (1899), and Largo (1905).\nConstruction of Fort De Soto, on Mullet Key facing the mouth of Tampa Bay, was begun in 1898 during the Spanish\u2013American War to protect Tampa Bay from potential invading forces. The fort, a subpost of Fort Dade on adjacent Egmont Key (which lies in the mouth of Tampa Bay), was equipped with artillery and mortar batteries.\nBirth of Pinellas County.\nEven into the early years of the 20th century, West Hillsborough had no paved roads, and transportation posed a major challenge. A trip to the county seat, across the bay in Tampa, was generally an overnight affair and the automobiles that existed on the peninsula at that time would frequently become bogged down in the muck after rainstorms. Angry at what was perceived as neglect by the county government, residents of Pinellas began a push to secede from Hillsborough. They succeeded, and on January 1, 1912, Pinellas County came into being. The peninsula, along with a small part of the mainland were incorporated into the new county.\nLand boom and prohibition.\nAviation history was made in St. Petersburg on January 1, 1914, when Tony Jannus made the world's first scheduled commercial airline flight with the St. Petersburg\u2013Tampa Airboat Line from St. Petersburg to Tampa. The popular open-air St. Petersburg concert venue Jannus Live (formerly known as Jannus Landing) memorializes the flight.\nThe early 1920s saw the beginning of a land boom in much of Florida, including Pinellas. During this period municipalities issued a large number of bonds to keep pace with the needed infrastructure, such as roads and bridges. The travel time to Tampa was cut in half\u2014from \u2014by the opening of the Gandy Bridge in 1924, along the same route Jannus' airline used. It was the longest automobile toll bridge in the world at the time.\nProhibition was unpopular in the area and the peninsula's inlets and islands were used by rum-runners bringing in liquor from Cuba. Others distilled moonshine in the county's still plentiful woods.\nGreat Depression and World War II.\nAs was the case in much of Florida, the Great Depression came early to Pinellas with the collapse of the real estate boom in 1926. Local economies came into severe difficulties, and by 1930, St. Petersburg defaulted on its bonds. Only after World War II would significant growth return to the area. During the war, the area's tourist industry collapsed, but thousands of recruits came to the area when the U.S. military decided to use the area for training. Area hotels became barracks. The Vinoy Park Hotel was used as an Army training school. The area's women and girls participated in the war effort as well. Hundreds of girls from the area's most prominent families formed a group called the Bomb-a-Dears, holding dances, socializing with recruits, and selling war bonds. After the war many of these same soldiers remembered their wartime experience in Pinellas well, and returned as tourists or residents.\nRecent history.\nWith the end of the Second World War, Pinellas would enter another period of rapid growth and development. In 1954 the original span of the Sunshine Skyway Bridge was opened, replacing earlier ferry service. By 1957 Clearwater was America's fastest growing city.\nTragedy struck on May 9, 1980, when the southbound span of the original Sunshine Skyway Bridge was struck by the freighter MV \"Summit Venture\" during a storm, sending over of the bridge plummeting into Tampa Bay. The collision caused seven personal vehicles and a Greyhound bus to fall into the water, killing 35 people. The new bridge opened in 1987 and has since been listed as number 3 of the \"Top 10 Bridges\" in the World by the Travel Channel.\nThe county operates a living history museum called Heritage Village containing more than 28 historic structures, some dating back to the 19th century, where visitors can experience what life was once like in Pinellas.\nPinellas County celebrated 100 years of existence on January 1, 2012.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (55.0%) is water. It is the second-smallest county in Florida by land area, larger than only Union County. Pinellas forms a peninsula bounded on the west by the Gulf of Mexico and on the south and east by Tampa Bay. It is long and wide at its broadest point, with of coastline.\nPhysical geography.\nElevation in the county ranges from mean sea level to its highest natural point of near the intersection of SR 580 and Countryside Blvd. in Clearwater. Due to its small size and high population, by the early 21st century Pinellas County has been mostly built out, with very little developable land left available. The county has maintained a fairly large system of parks and preserves that provide residents and visitors retreat from the city and a glimpse of the peninsula's original state.\nGeologically, Pinellas is underlain by a series of limestone formations, the Hawthorne limestone and the Tampa limestone. The limestone is porous and stores a large quantity of water. The Hawthorne formation forms a prominent ridge down the spine of the county, from east of Dunedin, south to the Walsingham area and east towards St. Petersburg.\nThe 35 miles of beaches and dunes which make up the county's 11 barrier islands provide habitat for coastal species, serve as critical storm protection for the inland communities, and form the basis of the area's thriving tourism industry. The islands are dynamic, with wave action building some islands further up, eroding others, and forming entirely new islands over time. Though hurricanes are infrequent on this part of Florida's coast, they have had a major impact on the islands, with the Hurricane of 1848 forming John's Pass between Madeira Beach and Treasure Island, a hurricane in 1921 creating Hurricane Pass and cleaving Hog Island into Honeymoon and Caladesi Islands, and 1985's Hurricane Elena sealing Dunedin Pass to join Caladesi with Clearwater Beach.\nBetween the barrier islands and the peninsula are several bodies of water, through which traverses a section of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway. From north to south they are: St. Joseph Sound between the islands and Dunedin, Clearwater Harbor between Clearwater and Clearwater Beach, and Boca Ciega Bay in the southern third of the county. Connecting Clearwater Harbor to Boca Ciega Bay is a thin, approximately stretch of water known as The Narrows, which runs next to the town of Indian Shores.\nExtending from northeastern Boca Ciega Bay, Long Bayou separates Seminole from St. Petersburg near Bay Pines. Long Bayou once extended significantly farther up the peninsula until the northern portion was sealed off to create Lake Seminole. Extending further still from Long Bayou, the Cross Bayou Canal traverses the peninsula, crossing Pinellas Park in a northeasterly direction before emptying into Tampa Bay on the northwest side of St. Pete\u2013Clearwater International Airport.\nCounty parks and preserves.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther protected areas.\nBoyd Hill Nature Preserve: A park on the shores of Lake Maggiore in south St. Petersburg, operated by the city and featuring a nature center, bird-of-prey aviary, and over three miles of trails through a variety of ecosystems.\nAdjacent counties.\nHillsborough County extends along the shipping channel towards Egmont Key and into the Gulf of Mexico, separating Pinellas County from Manatee County.\nEcosystems.\nPlant life.\nSeveral natural communities exist within the county, including areas of freshwater wetlands (dominated by bald cypresses and ferns), coastal mangrove swamps, sporadic hardwood hammocks (dominated by laurel oaks and live oaks, cabbage palms, and southern magnolias), low-lying, poorly drained pine flatwoods (dominated by longleaf pines and saw palmettos), and well-drained, upland sandhills (dominated by longleaf pines and turkey oaks) and sand pine scrub (dominated by sand pines, saw palmettos, and various oaks). Offshore ecosystems include the Tampa Bay estuary and numerous gulf seagrass beds. The county also maintains several artificial reefs.\nAnimal life.\nNumerous bird species can be sighted in Pinellas, either as permanent residents or during the winter migration, including wading birds like great blue herons, egrets, white ibises and roseate spoonbills, aquatic birds like brown pelicans, white pelicans, and cormorants, numerous species of shorebirds, and very-common birds like seagulls and passerines like the blue jay, mockingbird, and crow. Ospreys are a commonly seen bird-of-prey, with other birds of prey like turkey vultures, red tailed hawks, great horned owls, screech owls, barn owls, and bald eagles, among others, seen as well.\nGopher tortoises are found in many areas, the burrows they dig making them a keystone species. Coyotes, though often associated with the American West, are native-to and can be found in Pinellas. White-tailed deer, wild turkeys, bobcats, otters, and alligators can be found in the county as well.\nSea turtles nest on the shores or Pinellas' barrier islands and have been threatened by development. Offshore, dolphins, sharks, and manatees are numerous as well, while closer inshore stingrays are a common sight, leading those in-the-know to do the \"stingray shuffle\" (shuffling up the sand to scare nearby stingrays off) when entering gulf waters. Species of fish commonly caught in the waters surrounding the county include spotted seatrout, red drum or redfish, snook, pompano, sheepshead, Spanish mackerel, grouper, mullet, flounder, kingfish, and tarpon.\nInvasive species.\nLike much of Florida, Pinellas County is home to several invasive species that propagate easily outside their (and their natural predators') native range. Examples of commonly seen invasives include Brazilian pepper, water hyacinth, Australian pine, melaleuca and air potato. These species are considered serious pests, and varying methods have been tried to eradicate them. Examples of invasive animals include the wild boar, which poses significant health and agricultural problems in Florida and can sometimes be found in Pinellas, and the monk parakeet, small flocks of which can sometimes be seen in flight or building nests on electrical poles or telecommunications towers. There is also a large flock of feral peacocks residing in St. Petersburg's Jungle Terrace, Jungle Prada and Disston Heights neighborhoods.\nPinellas gained some national attention as the home of the \"Mystery Monkey of Tampa Bay\", a non-native, feral rhesus macaque that had been on the loose for approximately three years in the south of the county. No one was sure where the monkey came from, and a http:// set up for the monkey had over 84,000 likes (as of October 2012). The monkey was the subject of a sketch on the March 11, 2010, episode of \"the Colbert Report\". As of February 2012, the monkey had apparently taken up semi-permanent residence behind a family's home at an undisclosed location in St. Petersburg, according to the \"Tampa Bay Times\". Efforts to capture the monkey were reignited after it reportedly bit a woman living near where it had taken up residence, and the monkey was captured in late October 2012 and eventually was sent to live at Dade City's Wild Things, a zoo north of Tampa.\nClimate.\nPinellas, like the rest of the Tampa Bay area, has a humid subtropical climate, resulting in warm, humid summers with frequent thunderstorms, and drier winters. Pinellas County's geographic position- lying on a peninsula between Tampa Bay and the Gulf of Mexico introduces large amounts of humidity into the atmosphere and serves to moderate temperatures. The geography of the peninsula also causes some variance in the county's average temperatures. St. Petersburg, further south on the peninsula, tends to have warmer daily average lows (by about 3 degrees) than areas such as Dunedin and Palm Harbor further north, though daily highs are very close. The north of the county also has fewer overall days of rain, but higher total annual precipitation when measured in inches, the county's south being prone to shorter, more frequent thunderstorms especially in the late summer.\nFreezing temperatures occur only every 2\u20133 years, with freezing precipitation occurring extremely rarely. Springs are usually short, mild, and dry, with occasional late-season cold fronts. Summertime weather is very consistent, with highs in the low 90s \u00b0F (around 32\u00a0\u00b0C), lows in the mid-70s \u00b0F (around 24\u00a0\u00b0C), accompanied by high humidity and an almost daily chance of afternoon thundershowers. The area experiences significant rainfall during its summer months (approximately May through October), with nearly two-thirds of annual precipitation falling between the months of June and September. The area is occasionally affected by tropical storms and hurricanes, but has not suffered a direct hit since 1921. Fall, like spring, is usually mild and dry, with the hurricane season extending through November and sometimes affecting the area.\nMany portions of south Pinellas, especially near the bay and gulf, have tropical microclimates. Tropical trees such as coconut palms and royal palms and fruit trees like mangoes grow very well in these microclimates.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 959,107 people, 413,239 households, and 232,884 families residing in the county.\n2010 census.\nU.S. Census Bureau 2010 Ethnic/Race Demographics:\nIn 2010, 6.5% of the population considered themselves to be of only American ancestry (regardless of race or ethnicity.)\nThere were 415,876 households, out of which 19.89% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.33% were married couples living together, 11.86% had a female householder with no husband present, and 43.67% were non-families. 35.42% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.14% (4.53% male and 10.61% female) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.16 and the average family size was 2.79.\nThe age distribution is 17.8% under the age of 18, 7.3% from 18 to 24, 23.0% from 25 to 44, 30.8% from 45 to 64, and 21.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 46.3 years. For every 100 females there were 92.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.8 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $45,258, and the median income for a family was $58,335. Males had a median income of $41,537 versus $35,003 for females. The per capita income for the county was $28,742. About 8.1% of families and 12.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.7% of those under age 18 and 9.0% of those aged 65 or over.\nIn 2010, 11.2% of the county's population was foreign born, with 50.3% being naturalized American citizens. Of foreign-born residents, 33.6% were born in Europe, 32.1% were born in Latin America, 20.9% born in Asia, 9.8% in North America, 3.0% born in Africa, and 0.6% were born in Oceania.\nList of cities by population.\nThe following is a list of all cities, towns, and census-designated places in Pinellas County, Florida.\nSource: 2010 Florida Census of Population and Housing\n2000 census.\nAs of 2000, there were 921,482 people, 414,968 households, and 243,171 families residing in the county. The population density was 1,271/km2 (3,292/sq\u00a0mi), making it the most densely populated county in Florida. There were 481,573 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 85.85% White (82.8% were Non-Hispanic White,) 8.96% Black or African American, 0.30% Native American, 2.06% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 1.14% from other races, and 1.64% from two or more races. 4.64% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 414,968 households, out of which 22.10% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.80% were married couples living together, 10.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 41.40% were non-families. 34.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.50% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.17 and the average family size was 2.77.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 19.30% under the age of 18, 6.40% from 18 to 24, 27.30% from 25 to 44, 24.50% from 45 to 64, and 22.50% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43 years. For every 100 females there were 91.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.80 males.\nIn 2000, 87.8% of persons age 25 or above were high school graduates, slightly above Florida's average of 84.9% for Florida. 26.7% of persons age 25 or above held a bachelor's degree or higher, also slightly higher than Florida's rate of 25.6%.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $37,111, and the median income for a family was $46,925. Males had a median income of $32,264 versus $26,281 for females. The per capita income for the county was $23,497. About 6.70% of families and 10.00% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.90% of those under age 18 and 8.20% of those age 65 or over.\nIn 2000, as Florida's 6th and the nation's 53rd most populous county, Pinellas has a population greater than that of the individual states of Wyoming, Montana, Delaware, South Dakota, Alaska, North Dakota, and Vermont, as well as the District of Columbia. With a population density (as of the 2000 census) of 3292 inhabitants/mi2, Pinellas County is by far the most densely populated county in the state, more than double that of Broward County, the next most densely populated.\nLanguages.\nAs of 2010, 87.17% of all residents spoke English as their first language, while 5.56% spoke Spanish, 0.78% Vietnamese, 0.70% French, 0.65% Greek, 0.56% German, and 0.52% of the population spoke Serbo-Croatian as their mother language. In total, 12.83% of the population spoke languages other than English as their primary language.\nGovernment.\nThe Board of County Commissioners governs all unincorporated areas of the county under the state's constitution, with the power to adopt ordinances, approve the county budget, set millages, and provide services. The county's municipalities, while governing their own affairs, may call upon the county for specialized services. The county administrator, appointed by and reporting to the Board, oversees most of the day-to-day operations of the county.\nAs of 2025, The members of the Board are as follows:\nThe county's government website won a \"Sunny Award\" from Sunshine Review in 2010 for its proactive disclosure of government data.\nPolitics.\nIn national politics, Pinellas County, was one of the first areas of Florida to break from the Solid South and elect Republicans to public office. Riding on the coattails of Herbert Hoover's victory in the 1928 election, Albert R. Welsh was elected to the Florida Senate and Kenneth W. Kerr to the Florida House of Representatives. In that same election, Gladstone R. Beattie, became the Pinellas County Sheriff and first Republican sheriff in Florida since Reconstruction, and Harry R. Hewitt became the Pinellas County Judge and the first Republican county judge in Florida. In 1951, Pinellas was the first county to send a majority-Republican delegation to the Florida House of Representatives in the twentieth-century.\nFrom 1948 to 1988, it went Republican in every presidential election except Lyndon Johnson's 44-state landslide of 1964. However, for the last quarter-century, as part of the I-4 Corridor stretching from Tampa Bay to Orlando, Florida, it has been a powerful swing county in one of the nation's most critical swing states. Voter registration is almost tied, with Republicans having a small plurality of registered voters. It is closely divided between predominantly liberal St. Petersburg and its predominantly suburban and conservative north and beaches. Due in part to the more populated southern portion around St. Petersburg, it has supported a Democrat for president in all but three elections since 1992. The brand of Republicanism in Pinellas County has traditionally been a moderate one, so the county has become friendlier to Democrats as a result of the national GOP having shifted right.\nIn 2000, Al Gore became the first Democrat to win a majority of the county's vote since 1964, and only the second since Franklin D. Roosevelt. In 2004, Pinellas County swung the other way when George W. Bush carried the county by a narrow plurality of 49.56% (225,686 votes), with John Kerry following closely behind with 49.51% (225,460 votes)\u2014a margin of just 226 votes. In the 2012 Presidential Election, Barack Obama won Pinellas with 52% of the vote (239,104 votes) to Mitt Romney's 46.5% (213,258 votes), slightly narrower than Obama's 2008 election results in Pinellas of 53% (248,299 votes) to John McCain's 45% (210,066 votes). Republican victories in the county since Bush in 1988 have been narrow pluralities. The exception to this is Donald Trump in 2024, who won the county with nearly 52% of the vote.\nThe county is considered a bellwether politically.\nIn the 2012 U.S. Senate election, Pinellas voters helped re-elect U.S. Senator Bill Nelson over challenger Connie Mack IV with 59% of the vote, greater than his statewide average of 55%. In the 2010 U.S. Senate election, Pinellas was one of only four Florida counties won by outgoing Republican Governor Charlie Crist, a St. Petersburg native, who won 42% of Pinellas voters running as an Independent in a three-way race with Republican nominee (and eventual winner) Marco Rubio and former Democratic U.S. Representative Kendrick Meek, who won 37% and 16.8% of the Pinellas vote, respectively. Statewide, Rubio won almost 49% of the vote to Crist's 29.7% and Meek's 20% in a highly polarized election that would witness Crist depart from the Republican Party and eventually become a Democrat.\nIn the House of Representatives, most of Pinellas is represented by Republican Anna Paulina Luna of the 13th district. Most of the city of St. Petersburg, including the most Democratic parts of Pinellas, is represented by Democrat Kathy Castor of the 14th district, which spans the Tampa Bay. The way this map has been drawn has been considered an example of a pro-Republican gerrymander, given the previous Democratic lean of the 13th.\nIn state politics, portions of Pinellas are represented in the Florida Senate by Democratic State Senator Darryl Rouson (District 16) and Republican State Senators Nick DiCeglie (District 18) and Ed Hooper (District 21). In the Florida House parts of the county are represented by Republicans Adam Anderson (District 57-Palm Harbor, Tarpon Springs), Kim Berfield (District 58-Clearwater), Berny Jacques (District 59-Largo), and Linda Chaney (District 61), as well as Democrat Lindsay Cross (District 60-Pinellas Park). Portions of St. Pete are also included in District 62, represented by Michele Rayner-Goolsby.\nVoter registration.\nVoter registration data is as of April 2025.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nThe entire county is served by the Pinellas County School District. The current superintendent is Kevin Hendrick. The district, the nation's 24th largest, comprises 143 schools, including 72 elementary schools, 18 middle schools, two K\u20138 schools, 17 high schools, and 35 additional facilities including ESE, adult ed, career/technical, and charters. The district also operates the K\u201312 Pinellas Virtual School (PVS). Among the many notable magnet programs in the district are three International Baccalaureate (IB) programs, at St. Petersburg High School, Palm Harbor University High School, and Largo High School, Project Lead the Way's (PLTW) engineering program at East Lake High School, the Center for Advanced Technologies (CAT) at Lakewood High School, the Pinellas County Center for the Arts (PCCA) at Gibbs High School, four middle school Centers for Gifted Studies, at Thurgood Marshall Fundamental, Morgan Fitzgerald, John Hopkins and Dunedin Highland Middle Schools, and Florida's only Fundamental High School, at Osceola High School.\nThe county is also home to many private schools, including Admiral Farragut Academy, Canterbury School, Calvary Christian, Clearwater Central Catholic, Keswick Christian School, Shorecrest Preparatory School, Indian Rocks Christian School and St. Petersburg Catholic High School, among others.\nColleges and universities.\nPinellas County is home several institutions of higher learning, including Eckerd College, the University of South Florida St. Petersburg, Nova Southeastern University, the multi-campus St. Petersburg College, the Stetson University College of Law in Gulfport, and the main campus of Schiller International University in Largo, after previously being located in Dunedin.\nLibraries.\nThe Pinellas Public Library Cooperative (PPLC) has 14 member libraries:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Pinellas Public Library Cooperative was established by referendum in March 1989 to serve the unincorporated areas of Pinellas County. The original Interlocal Agreement, which described the legal basis, leadership and operations of the Cooperative, was signed by sixteen cities, the taxing district of Palm Harbor, and the County in 1989. In 1994, the City of Clearwater applied for and became a member of the Cooperative, which made all existing public libraries in the county members of the first countywide public library cooperative in Florida. The Pinellas Talking Book Library is administered through the Pinellas Public Library Cooperative. It serves county residents who are unable to read standard print material due to visual, physical or learning disabilities whether permanent or temporary. It provides free access to recorded, Braille, and Large print materials as well as a collection of descriptive videos. These materials are sent to members through postage free mail.\nMobile Book Bus.\nPart of the Pinellas Public Library Cooperative's efforts to reach out to underserved communities, is coordinating with the Juvenile Wellness Board, which hosts a Summer Book Bus Program. Under this program, mobile book buses go to each of the PPLC libraries and other community locations, giving away free books during the summers to encourage reading proficiency among children from beginner to the third grade. Each summer on average more than 12,000 books are given away to children in Pinellas County through this program.\nEconomy.\nHistorical economic strengths.\nAgriculture was the single most important industry in Pinellas until the early 20th century, with much of the best land devoted to citrus production. Cattle ranching was another major industry. In 1885 the American Medical Society declared the Pinellas peninsula the \"healthiest spot on earth\", which helped spur the growth of the tourist industry.\nEconomy today.\nAnchored by the urban markets of Clearwater and St. Petersburg, Pinellas has the second largest base of manufacturing employment in Florida.\nPinellas has diverse, yet symbiotic, industry clusters, including aviation/aerospace, defense/national security, medical technologies, business and financial services, and information technology.\nFortune 500 technology manufacturers Jabil Circuit and Tech Data and a Fortune 500 financial company Raymond James Financial are headquartered in the Gateway area in and adjacent to Pinellas. Other large companies include HSN, Nielsen, and Valpak.\nService industries such as healthcare, business services and education account for more than 200,000 jobs in the county, generating almost $19 billion in revenue. Other major sectors include retail, with close to 100,000 employees in jobs such as food service, bars, and retail sales generating $12 billion for the local economy in 2010, and industries related to finance, insurance and real estate with approximately 44,000 workers generating $8.5 billion in sales.\nCulture.\nPerforming arts venues.\nThe Florida Orchestra splits its performances between Ruth Eckerd Hall, the Mahaffey Theater, and the Straz Center for the Performing Arts in Tampa. Clearwater Jazz Holiday held every October in Coachman Park in downtown Clearwater; in its 32nd year.\nOther points of interest.\nLong established communities, particularly Old Northeast in St. Petersburg, Pass-a-Grille in St. Pete Beach, Harbor Oaks in Clearwater, and old Tarpon Springs contain notable historic architecture.\nThe area has embraced farmer's markets, with St. Petersburg's Saturday Morning Market drawing large crowds, and other markets located weekly in several other parts of the county also seeing a growth in popularity.\nDowntowns in St. Petersburg and Dunedin, and many of the beaches, especially Clearwater Beach, all attract a vibrant nightlife.\nIn addition to the above-mentioned Heritage Village in Largo, a number of small local history museums operate within the county: the St. Petersburg Museum of History on the downtown St. Petersburg waterfront, the Gulf Beaches Historical Museum in Pass-a-Grille, the Dunedin History Museum in Dunedin, the Palm Harbor Museum in Palm Harbor, and the Historic Depot Museum in Tarpon Springs all provide visitors a glimpse of the area's history.\nTwo botanical gardens are located within the county: the Florida Botanical Gardens, a part of the Pinewood Cultural Park in Largo, and Sunken Gardens, a former tourist attraction located in and now run by the City of St. Petersburg.\nIndian Shores is home to the Suncoast Seabird Sanctuary, currently the largest non-profit wild bird hospital in the United States and considered one of the top avian rehabilitation centers in the world. A variety of species can be found at the sanctuary, which is open 365 days a year and is free to the public.\nOn Clearwater Beach is the Clearwater Marine Aquarium, a non-profit dedicated to the rescue, rehabilitation and release of injured marine animals and public education. CMA's best-known permanent resident, is Winter, a bottlenose dolphin who was rescued in December 2005 after having her tail caught in a crab trap. Her injuries caused the loss of her tail; CMA successfully fitted Winter with a prosthetic tail which brought worldwide attention to the facility. Winter was the subject of the 2011 film \"Dolphin Tale\", shot partially on location at CMA.\nOn the south end of Anclote Key, off of Tarpon Springs, is the Anclote Key Light, a lighthouse built in 1887. The light is Pinellas County's only functioning lighthouse, and one of only two in the Tampa Bay area. The light was deactivated in 1984, but by 2003 had been restored and as of 2013 continues to be in use. The island forms Anclote Key Preserve State Park and is accessible only by private boat.\nDunedin is home to the Dunedin Brewery, Florida's oldest microbrewery.\nSports and recreation.\nSports teams.\nThe Tampa Bay area is home to three major professional sports teams and a number of minor-league and college teams. Regardless of the specific city where they play their games, all of the professional teams claim \"Tampa Bay\" in their name to signify that they represent the entire area.\nProfessionally, baseball's Tampa Bay Rays play at Tropicana Field in St. Petersburg, while football's Tampa Bay Buccaneers and hockey's Tampa Bay Lightning both play in nearby Tampa.\nTwo MLB teams come to Pinellas for spring training: the Philadelphia Phillies play at BayCare Ballpark in Clearwater while the Toronto Blue Jays play at TD Ballpark in Dunedin. Additionally, Minor League Baseball affiliates of those teams play at their spring training ballparks; the Clearwater Threshers play at BayCare Ballpark and the Dunedin Blue Jays play at TD Ballpark.\nThe Tampa Bay Rowdies of the USL Championship play at Al Lang Stadium in St. Petersburg\nThe Honda Grand Prix of St. Petersburg is held every spring on the downtown St. Petersburg waterfront.\nThe PGA Tour plays its Valspar Championship annually in March on the Copperhead Course at the Innisbrook Golf Resort in Palm Harbor.\nRecreational areas.\nOther popular fishing locations include Pier 60 on Clearwater Beach and the Gulf and Bay Piers at Fort De Soto Park, as well as countless spots along the bridges and passes of the area, among many others.\nPinellas County's coastal geography, with a long system of barrier islands on the Gulf and small-to-large mangrove islands dotting the waters on all sides, provides for an extensive series of blueways that are enjoyed by kayakers of all ability levels. The county also maintains a series of artificial reefs in the Gulf which are popular spots for fishing and scuba diving\nThe county's two largest freshwater lakes, Lake Tarpon (accessible through Chestnut and Anderson parks) and Lake Seminole (accessible through Lake Seminole Park), are popular for water skiing, jet-skiing, and sailing, as well as for fishing and kayaking.\nBoth the North Beach of Fort De Soto Park (2005) and Caladesi Island (2008) have been named by Dr. Beach as America's Top Beach.\nMedia.\nPinellas County, as a part of the Tampa Bay area (the nation's 14th largest television market), is served by fourteen local broadcast television stations, as well as a variety of cable-only local stations. More than 70 FM and AM stations compete for listenership in what is the nation's 19th largest radio market.\nMajor daily newspapers serving Pinellas are the \"Tampa Bay Times\", known as the \"St. Petersburg Times\" from 1884 to 2011 and first in circulation and readership, and \"The Tampa Tribune\". The \"Times\" also distributes a free daily (Monday-Friday) tabloid called \"tbt*\" in the most heavily populated areas of the county. \"Creative Loafing Tampa\" is the main alternative weekly.\nTransportation.\nRailroads.\nThe CSX railroad company operates the Clearwater Subdivision in Pinellas County, made up of segments of branch lines of the former Atlantic Coast Line Railroad and the Seaboard Air Line Railroad. Beginning in Tampa, the line has daily freight rail traffic through Oldsmar, Safety Harbor, Clearwater, Largo, Pinellas Park, and into St. Petersburg. Regularly scheduled passenger rail services in Pinellas County ended on February 1, 1984, when Amtrak discontinued its rail operations in the county, and the last passenger rail service in the county of any kind, a series of special excursion runs between Tarpon Springs and Dunedin, occurred on March 8, 1987. CSX owned the last remaining trackage in downtown St. Petersburg until March 2008 when it, along with the remaining trackage south of Central Avenue and east of 34th Street South, began to be dismantled. That right-of-way, as well as the right-of-way of several other former CSX railroad lines in the county beginning in the 1990s, was converted into a section of the Pinellas Trail.\nAs of 2012, proposals were being developed by community leaders for a light rail system which would connect the regional core cities of Clearwater, St. Petersburg, and Tampa. The proposal, which has won the backing of the Clearwater and St. Petersburg City Councils would rely on a 1% sales tax and would have to go before voters for approval.\nMass transit.\nThe Pinellas Suncoast Transit Authority (PSTA) operates 205 buses and trolleys servicing 37 routes across the county, with major stops at all commercial centers. Along the Gulf Beaches, PTSA operates the Suncoast Beach Trolley. PTSA also offers two express routes to downtown Tampa via the Howard Frankland and Gandy Bridges, connecting with Tampa's HartLine, and connects with Pasco's PCPT in Tarpon Springs to continue service in that county. The system's two main bus terminals are located in downtown Clearwater and downtown St. Petersburg. During fiscal year 2005\u201306, PSTA transported 11,400,484 passengers. Additionally, the city of St. Pete operates a rapid bus service, the \"SunRunner\", from downtown St. Pete to St. Pete Beach.\nEmergency management.\nFire departments.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEmergency Medical Services.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLaw enforcement agencies.\nThe Pinellas County Sheriff's Office (PCSO) was founded in 1912 at the founding of the county. The Sheriff's Office absorbed the County Patrol in 1960. As of 2022[ [update]] the sheriff is Bob Gualtieri.\nThe office provides law enforcement services to unincorporated areas of the county and these municipalities contract with the sheriff's office to be their primary law enforcement provider:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMany cities in the county have their own city police departments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHospitals.\nThere are several hospitals in Pinellas and the surrounding counties.\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther unincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn popular culture.\nMovies filmed or set in Pinellas County include:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74644", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74644", "title": "Polk County, Florida", "text": "Polk County () is located in the central portion of the U.S. state of Florida. The county population was 725,046 in the 2020 census, and was estimated to be 818,330 in July 2023. Its county seat is Bartow, and its largest city is Lakeland. Polk County comprises the Lakeland\u2013Winter Haven metropolitan statistical area (MSA). This MSA is the 77th-most populous one and the 89th-most populous primary statistical area of the United States as of July 1, 2012. \nThe center of Florida's population is located in Polk County, near the city of Lake Wales. Polk County is home to one public university, one state college, and four private universities.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe first people to inhabit the area now called Polk County were the Paleoindians who arrived in Florida at least 12,000 years ago, late in the last ice age. With large amounts of water locked up in continental ice caps, the sea level was more than lower than at present. The Florida peninsula was twice as wide as it is today, and Florida was cooler and much drier, with few, if any, flowing rivers. Both animals and humans were dependent on scattered water holes, such as sinkholes, deep holes in otherwise dry river beds, and rain-fed lakes perched on impervious clay. Most Paleoindian campsites found in Florida have been found at water holes. The largest collection of late, more than 9,500 years ago, Paleoindian microlithic tools known from Florida were found in Lake Weohyakapka, near Nalcrest in Polk County.\nAs sea levels rose and Florida became warmer and wetter, the Paleoindian period was followed by the Archaic period, which ended 2,500 to 3,000 years ago, with the emergence of recognizable archaeological cultures in Florida. In eastern Polk County, the Kissimmee River valley was occupied by people of the Belle Glade culture, which persisted from about 3,000 years ago until the collapse of the Native American population in Florida after 1700. Native American people in western Polk County were part of, or influenced by, the Manasota culture, which flourished from 2,500 years ago until around 800 AD, when it was replaced by the Safety Harbor culture, from \"circa\" 800 until after 1700. The Peace River valley may have hosted a distinct culture during the Safety Harbor period.\nIn 1539, Hernando de Soto sent a detachment of between 80 and 180 men of his expedition, from his landing place on Tampa Bay across northern Polk County to visit Urriparacoxi, a powerful chief based in southern Lake County or eastern Orange County. For the next 280 years, the Spanish, and, between 1763 and 1783, the British, ruled Florida, but did not venture into the interior of the Florida peninsula south of the Oklawaha River valley, Acuera Province. The indigenous peoples of the Florida peninsula declined in numbers, and the people who became known as the Seminole moved into central Florida.\nUnited States control.\nIn 1821, Florida became a U.S. territory as a result of the Adams-Onis Treaty. In 1823, the Treaty of Moultrie Creek created a reservation in central Florida for the Seminoles and other Native Americans in Florida. What is now Polk County was within the boundaries of that reservation. An attempt to remove all Native Americans in Florida to west of the Mississippi River, starting in 1832, led to the Second Seminole War. Most of the fighting in the early years of the war occurred north of Polk County.\nBy 1837, the Seminoles were being pushed south. Late that year, Colonel Zachary Taylor, as part of a coordinated push against the Seminoles, led a column east from Fort Brooke (today's Tampa) into what is now Polk County, and then south between the Kissimmee and Peace River valleys, culminating in the Battle of Lake Okeechobee. By 1843 the few Seminoles remaining in Florida were confined to an informal reservation in southern Florida.\nWhile Florida gained statehood in 1845, Polk County was created a month after Florida had seceded from the Union. It was formed from the eastern part of Hillsborough County and named in honor of former US President James K. Polk, who had been popular with Southerners for supporting the expansion of slavery and whose 1845 inauguration was on the day after Florida became a state.\nFollowing the Civil War, the county commission established the county seat on donated in the central part of the county. Bartow, the county seat, was named after Francis S. Bartow, a Confederate colonel from Georgia, who was the first Confederate brigade commander to die in battle. Colonel Bartow was buried in Savannah, Georgia, with military honors, and promoted posthumously to the rank of brigadier general. The original name of the town was Fort Blount. \nSeveral other towns and counties in the South changed their names to Bartow to honor the brigade commander. The first courthouse built in Bartow was constructed in 1867. It was replaced twice, in 1884 and in 1908. As the third courthouse to stand on the site, the present structure houses the Polk County Historical Museum and Genealogical Library. After the Civil War, some 400 Confederate veterans settled here with families before the end of the century.\nPost-Reconstruction era to World War II.\nIn 1883, in the post-Reconstruction period, black railway workers were among the first African Americans to settle in Polk County, south of Lake Wire. In 1884, they founded St. John's Baptist Church, which also served as the first school for freedmen's children. Other workers arrived for jobs in the phosphate industry. This area became the center of a predominately African-American community later known as Moorehead, after Rev. H.K. Moorehead, called to St. John's in 1906. The community developed its own businesses, professional class, and cultural institutions. Its students had to go to other cities for high school until 1928, when the first upper school to serve blacks was established here.\nFred Rochelle, 16, was burned alive in a public spectacle lynching before thousands in Polk County, Florida, in 1901.\nWhite violence rose against blacks in the late 19th century in a regionwide effort to establish and maintain white supremacy as Southern states disenfranchised most blacks and imposed Jim Crow. Whites lynched 20 African Americans in Polk County from 1895 to 1921. Three black men, whose names were not recorded, were murdered in a mass lynching on May 25, 1895, accused of rape. While others were killed for alleged crimes (never proven), one black man was lynched for supposedly insulting a white woman. The man, Henry Scott, was a porter on a train from Lakeland to Bartow. While he was preparing a berth for one woman on May 20, 1920, another white woman became angry that he made her wait. She sent a telegram to the next station where he was met by a sheriff, arrested, and then turned over to a mob that shot him 40-50 times. Columbia County had 20 such lynching murders. These two counties had the second-highest total of lynchings of African Americans of any county in Florida.\nIn the first few decades of the 1900s, thousands of acres of land around Bartow were purchased by the phosphate industry. The county seat became the hub of the largest phosphate industry in the United States, attracting both immigrants and African-American and white workers from rural areas.\nPolk County was the leading citrus county in the United States for much of the 20th century. Even the county seat Bartow has had several large groves. In 1941, the city built an airport northeast of town in the county. The airport was taken over by the federal government during World War II and was the training location for many Army Air Corps pilots during the war. The airport was returned to the city in 1967 and renamed as Bartow Municipal Airport.\nMid-20th century to present.\nIn the 20th century, the Ku Klux Klan revived and was active in Polk County, even after World War II. Klansmen were photographed in hoods and robes in 1958 in a church in Mulberry. During the 1960s, violence related to civil-rights movement was attributed to the Klan. In 1967, a white man shot and severely wounded a popular African-American high-school football player who was integrating Lake Ariana Beach. A Klan group marched in Lakeland in full regalia in 1979, their last public march by the Confederate monument in Munn Park.\nSince the late 20th century, growth in Polk County has been driven by its proximity to both the Tampa and Orlando metropolitan areas along the Interstate 4 corridor. Recent growth has been heaviest in Lakeland, closest to Tampa, and the northeast areas near Haines City, nearest to Orlando. From 1990 to 2000, unincorporated areas grew 25%, while incorporated areas grew only 11%. In addition to cottage communities that have developed for commuters, Haines City has suburban sprawl into unincorporated areas. Despite the impressive growth rate, the unemployment rate of Polk has typically been higher than that of Florida. For example, in August 2010, the county had an unemployment rate of 13.4%, compared to 11.7% for Florida.\nDuring the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season, three hurricanes, Charley, Frances, and Jeanne, all tracked over Polk County, intersecting in a triangle that includes the city of Bartow.\nWinter Haven was best known as the home of the Cypress Gardens theme park, which operated from 1936 to September 2009. Legoland Florida has since been built on the site of former Cypress Gardens, and has preserved the botanical garden section. Winter Haven was the location of the first Publix supermarket \"circa\" 1930. Today, Publix's corporate offices are located in Lakeland.\nIn 2018, the Lakeland City Commission voted to move the Confederate monument from Munn Park, where it was installed in 1910, to Veterans Memorial Park. What is now Veterans Memorial Park was first settled in 1883 as the community of Moorehead, the original African-American community in the area. Owners were bought out in 1967 by eminent domain for county civic development of a conference center and the later Veterans Memorial Park. Some members of the black community have objected to the Confederate monument being relocated to the site of what had been their historic community in Lakeland, saying it would be more appropriate to be located in the cemetery with numerous Confederate graves.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which (10.6%) are covered by water. It is the fourth-largest county in Florida by land area and fifth-largest by total area.\nPolk County is within the Central Florida Highlands area of the Atlantic coastal plain, with flatland interspersed with gently rolling hills. Part of the Lake Wales Ridge runs through eastern Polk County, which is known for its rolling hills with unique wildlife and plants. The highest elevation in the county is Crooked Lake Sandhill at 305 feet. The second-highest is Iron Mountain. Bok Tower is 295 feet above sea level. Several artificial raised phosphate tailings ponds in the center of the county rise up to 375 feet.\nAdjacent counties.\nAt its northeast corner, Polk County touches Orange County at a quadripoint called Four Corners, Florida. Lake and Osceola Counties lie between.\nClimate.\nPolk County, like most of Florida, has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfa\"). It lies in the USDA plant hardiness zone \"9b\", where the average annual minimum temperature is . The last measurable snow in the county fell in 1977. Snow flurries and sleet fell on January 8, 2010, over the course of an hour on an exceptionally cold day.\nDuring the summer rainy season from June to September, sea breezes from both coasts move inland, where the moist air is heated and rises to form thunderstorms. On many days, the sea-breeze thunderstorms from both coasts move inland, colliding in Polk County to form especially strong thunderstorms. Polk County is located in the middle of \"lightning alley\", which has more lightning annually than any region in the United States. Largely due to its size, the county receives the overall highest number of lightning strikes in the area.\nThe Green Swamp is prone to fog in winter. In the predawn hours of January 8, 2008, smoke from a prescribed burn contributed to especially dense fog on Interstate 4 that caused a major pileup, involving 70 vehicles in 10 separate crashes that resulted in five deaths.\nTropical cyclones.\nThe eyes of 12 hurricanes have passed through the county at hurricane strength in recorded history, including Hurricane Irma (2017, category 1), Hurricane Jeanne (2004, category 1), Hurricane Charley (2004, category 2), Hurricane Donna (1960, category 2), Hurricane King (1950, category 1), the 1949 Florida hurricane (category 2), the 1945 Homestead hurricane (category 1), the 1933 Treasure Coast hurricane (category 1), the 1928 Okeechobee hurricane (category 2), Hurricane Four of the 1894 season (category 1), and Hurricane Three of the 1871 season, and Hurricane Eight of the 1859 season (category 1). Additionally, four storms were downgraded from hurricane strength at a location outside the county to tropical storm force at some point within the county and, given the hours between National Hurricane Center updates (modern era) or earlier estimates, it is not clear whether these brought hurricane-force sustained winds to Polk County: Hurricane Frances (2004), Hurricane Erin (1995) Hurricane Two of the 1939 season, and the 1910 Cuba hurricane (category 1). Numerous tropical storms have passed through the county.\nHurricane Charley in 2004\u2014the first of three hurricanes to hit the county in six weeks\u2014is the strongest storm in recent history to pass through the county, mainly impacting the eastern half of the county. The Lake Wales Fire Department recorded an unofficial maximum wind speed of sustained and a gust of . The hurricane entered the county south of Fort Meade, shortly after it passed Wauchula (in Hardee County), where a maximum wind gust of was recorded by emergency management officials. The hurricane-force wind field was relatively narrow, with the most intense wind damage being within of the center of the eye. For example, maximum recorded winds were only sustained and a gust of at Gilbert Airport on the northwest side of the city.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 Census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, 725,046 people, 240,879 households, and 165,183 families lived in the county.\n2010 Census.\nU.S. Census Bureau 2010 Ethnic/Race Demographics:\nIn 2010, the largest ancestry groups were: 12.2% German, 11.6% American, 11.2% English, 10.8% Irish, 7.6% Mexican, 5.8% Puerto Rican, 4.1% Italian, 2.6% French, 2.1% Polish, 2.0% Scotch-Irish, 1.8% Scottish, 1.5% Dutch, and 1.2% Cuban.\nOf the 227,485 households, 27.3% had children under 18 living with them, 51.1% were married couples living together, 13.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.0% were not families. About 23.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.0% (3.4% male and 7.6% female) had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.59, and the average family size was 3.05.\nIn the county, the age distribution was 23.5% under 18, 8.8% from 18 to 24, 24.0% from 25 to 44, 25.6% from 45 to 64, and 18.0% who were 65 or older. The median age was 39.8 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.3 males. For every 100 females 18 and over, there were 93.7 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $43,946, and for a family was $51,395. Males had a median income of $37,768 versus $30,655 for females. The per capita income for the county was $21,881. About 11.5% of families and 15.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 23.5% of those under age 18 and 8.7% of those aged 65 or over.\nIn 2010, 10.7% of the county's population was foreign-born, with 37.8% being naturalized American citizens. Of foreign-born residents, 70.4% were born in Latin America, 11.5% Europe, 10.2% Asia, 4.9% North America, 2.6% Africa, and 0.4% were born in Oceania.\n2000 Census.\nIn the 2000 census, 483,924 people, 187,233 households, and 132,373 families resided in the county. The population density was . The 226,376 housing units had an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 79.58% White (74.6% were Non-Hispanic White), 13.54% Black or African American, 0.38% Native American, 0.93% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 3.82% from other races, and 1.71% from two or more races. About 9.49% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. In 2000, only 37% of county residents lived in incorporated metropolitan areas.\nOf the 187,233 households, 29.0% had children under 18 living with them, 54.4% were married couples living together, 12.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.3% were not families; 24.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.10% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.52, and the average family size was 2.96.\nIn the county, the age distribution was 24.4% under 18, 8.3% from 18 to 24, 26.4% from 25 to 44, 22.5% from 45 to 64, and 18.3% who were 65 or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.3 males. For every 100 females 18 and over, there were 93.1 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $36,036, and for a family was $41,442. Males had a median income of $31,396, versus $22,406 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,302. 12.90% of the population and 9.40% of families were below the poverty line. Of the total population, 19.1% were under 18 and 8.1% were 65 or older.\nLanguages.\nIn 2010, 81.80% of all residents spoke English as their first language. 14.34% spoke Spanish, 0.70% French Creole (mostly Haitian Creole,) and 0.51% of the population spoke French as their mother language. 18.20% of the population spoke languages other than English as their primary language.\nEconomy.\nPolk County's economy is supported by a workforce of over 275,000 in 2010. Traditionally, the largest industries in Polk County's economy have been phosphate mining, agriculture, and tourism.\nNotable companies headquartered in Polk County include Publix (an employee-owned grocery chain) and Florida's Natural (an agricultural cooperative).\nTop employers.\nThe top employers of Polk County are as follows:\n\"Employers and statistic last updated April 23, 2018\"\nSports.\nPolk County is home to professional baseball and basketball teams and boasts a rich history of collegiate sports competition at a number of its institutions of higher learning, including perennial NCAA Division II national championship contender and titleholder (in multiple sports), Florida Southern College.\nProfessional baseball, especially major league spring training, was historically a major generator of tourist traffic for Polk County. Today, only the Detroit Tigers remain for spring training. The Single-A Lakeland Flying Tigers play in Joker Marchant Stadium after spring training.\nProfessional basketball made its debut in 2017 when the Lakeland Magic took the court in its home venue, RP Funding Center. The team is the NBA G League developmental affiliate of the NBA's Orlando Magic. In 2023, the team relocated from Polk County to Osceola County.\nCollege sports are popular in Polk County. The Florida Southern Moccasins play in NCAA Division II in the Sunshine State Conference. The Southeastern Fire play in NAIA Sun Conference.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe executive and legislative powers of the county are vested in the five-member board of county commissioners. The county is divided into five separate districts. Each commissioner is elected at-large, countywide, requiring them to gain majority support. Each term lasts for four years. Odd-numbered districts hold elections in presidential election years, and even-numbered districts hold elections two years later. Like all elected officials in the state, county commissioners are subject to recall.\nThe commissioners elect a chairman and vice-chairman annually. The chairman selects the chairs of each committee, who work with the county manager to establish the policies of the board. The commission meets twice a month - generally every other Tuesday. Additional meetings take place as needed, but must be announced per the Florida sunshine laws.\nAmong the most important duties of the county commission is levying taxes and appropriations. The\" ad valorem \"millage rate levied by the county for county government purposes is 6.8665. The commission is responsible for providing appropriations for other countywide offices, including the sheriff, property appraiser, tax collector, and supervisor of elections. The county and circuit court systems are also partially supported by the county budget, including the state attorneys and public defenders. \nA portion of the county's budget is dedicated to providing municipal-level services and regulations to unincorporated areas, such as zoning, business codes, and fire protection. Other services benefit both those in municipalities and in unincorporated Polk County, such as those that provide recreational and cultural opportunities.\nThe current Sheriff of Polk County is Grady Judd.\nParty registration.\nAs of April 30, 2025.\nSince 1976, Polk County has supported the Republican candidate in every election, often by comfortable margins, though Democrats usually obtain over 40% of the vote. In 2024, Donald Trump performed better than any Republican in the county since George H. W. Bush in 1988, and held Kamala Harris under 40% of the vote for the first time since 1992.\nEducation.\nPolk County Public Schools serves the county.\nLibrary cooperative.\nThe Polk County Library Cooperative was formed in 1997, through an interlocal agreement between the 13 municipalities with public libraries and the board of county commissioners. The cooperative enables the city-owned and -operated public libraries to open their doors to all residents of the county, including those in the unincorporated areas.\nInterlibrary Loan.\nInterlibrary Loan (ILL) offers library patrons the opportunity to request and receive books that are not owned by the Winter Haven Public Library. Through ILL, patrons have access to the book collections of all the library systems in Polk County, and all of the library systems in Florida, and universities and public library systems in the United States.\nPolk County Historical and Genealogical Library.\nHistory.\nThe Polk County Historical and Genealogical Library was established in 1937, and opened to the public in January 1940. The library was first located in the office of the county attorney and its holdings were all housed in a metal bookcase. Since then, the library has been housed in different locations within the old Polk County Courthouse. In 1968, the library hired its first full-time employee. In 1974, the library added a second employee and was moved to a new location on Hendry Street. In 1987, the library relocated back to the 1908 Courthouse.\nIt was renovated during a 10-year process, incorporating all three floors of the eastern wing of the courthouse. As of 2013, the library is located in the east wing of the historical courthouse in Bartow. It is governed by the Polk County Board of County Commissioners and administered by the Neighborhood Services Department and the Leisure Services Division. The library holds one of the largest genealogical and historical collections in the Southeastern United States.\nCollections and services.\nThe Polk County Historical and Genealogical Library holds more than 40,000 items in its collection, which includes books, microfilm, and periodicals with information about the history and genealogy of the entire Eastern United States. The selection of materials related to the history of Polk County contains local newspapers dated back to 1881, aerial photography to 1938, city directories to 1925 and property tax rolls to 1882. Four full-time staff members are available for assistance at the library. The library also offers local obituary searches and basic looks-ups via email.\nMedia.\nPolk is part of the Tampa Bay media market.\nTransportation.\nIntercity rail.\nPolk County has two Amtrak train stations, in Winter Haven and Lakeland. Both stations are served by Amtrak's \"Floridian\", with the Winter Haven station alone also served by Amtrak's \"Silver Meteor.\"\nCommunities.\nIn the 2010 Census, just under 38% of the county's population lives in one of Polk's seventeen incorporated municipalities. The largest city, Lakeland, has over 112,000 residents and is located in the western edge of the county. The other core city of the metropolitan area, Winter Haven, is located in the eastern part of the county and has 34,000 residents.\nThe county seat, Bartow, is located southeast of Lakeland and southwest of Winter Haven and has over 17,000 residents. The cities of Bartow, Lakeland, and Winter Haven form a roughly equilateral triangle pointed downward with Bartow being the south point, Lakeland the west point, and Winter Haven the east point.\nThe other major cities in the county with a population over 10,000 include Haines City, Auburndale, and Lake Wales. Haines City is in the northeast part of the county and has over 20,000 residents. Auburndale is located northwest of Winter Haven. Lake Wales is around 16 miles east of Bartow.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther unincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74646", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74646", "title": "St. Johns County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nSt. Johns County is a county in the northeastern part of the U.S. state of Florida. As of the 2020 United States census, its population was 273,425. The county seat and most populous incorporated city is St. Augustine, although the nearby community, St. Johns, has a higher population. St. Johns County is part of the Jacksonville, Florida Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nThe county was established in 1821. It is one of the two original counties established after Florida was ceded to the United States, at the start of the Florida Territorial period, and corresponded roughly to the former colonial province of East Florida. It was named for the St. Johns River, which runs along its western border.\nSt. Johns County primarily comprises residential bedroom communities for those who commute to Jacksonville. Tourism, primarily associated with St. Augustine and the many golf courses in the area, is the chief economic industry.\nHistory.\nSt. Johns County's history begins in 1821, when Colonel Robert Butler received Spanish East Florida from Captain-General Colonel Jos\u00e9 M. Coppinger. Butler represented Major General Andrew Jackson, federal military commissioner for the Florida provinces (las Floridas) with the powers of governor, exercising the powers of the Captain General and the Intendants of the Island of Cuba and the governors of the said provinces, respectively, who ordained that all the country east of the river Suwannee should be designated the County of St. Johns.\nSt. Johns was established, along with Escambia County (in the former West Florida province), on July 21, 1821, 11 days after Butler received Florida for the United States, and five days after the city of St. Augustine was incorporated.\nThe name Saint John's was derived from the Spanish mission (c. 1580) \"San Juan del Puerto\" (\"Saint John of the Harbor\"). The U.S. Department of the Interior dropped the apostrophe in 1932 because an apostrophe implied ownership.\nIt was a huge county, encompassing most of peninsular Florida, more than 39,000 square miles; it was 475 miles long by 165 miles wide. Much of the land was uninhabited. Saint Augustine (1565) was the oldest permanent European settlement, and there were Native Americans in the county as well.\nCoat of arms.\nAs described in Certification of the Coat of Arms:\nIn a field of green an Agnus Dei of silver, suspended on the dexter [*left side of the drawing] side of the Agnus Dei is a silver banner with red cross (as a direct allusion and symbol of the name of the County). On a heraldic chief of red is a gold castle with towers, with masonry joints in black, and with the windows and doors in red (in recognition of the fortress that was constructed in the military garrison of St. Augustine which is a part of the County).\nAn overall border is composed of eight parts; alternating, a red quadrilateral, with a gold castle and quadrilateral of silver with a purple lion rampant (that is to say, alternating the simplified Arms of Castille and Leon).\nGiven for a crest is a mural crown of a province. This is a circle of gold walls with in reality twelve gold towers with all the masonry joints in black. Only seven of the towers are visible in the drawing.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has an area of , of which is land and (26.9%) is water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 273,425 people, 91,253 households, and 67,548 families residing in the county.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 123,135 people, 49,614 households, and 34,084 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 58,008 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 90.92% White, 6.29% African American, 0.26% American Indian, 0.95% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.55% from other races, and 0.97% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 15.8% of the population.\nThere were 49,614 households, of which 29.2% had children under age 18 living with them, 56.8% were married couples living together, 8.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.3% were non-families. 24.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.4% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 2.90.\nThe age of the population was spread out, with 23.1% under 18, 7.0% from 18 to 24, 27.6% from 25 to 44, 26.4% from 45 to 64, and 15.9% who were 65 or older. The median age was 41. For every 100 females there were 94.5 males. For every 100 females 18 and older, there were 91.5 males.\nThe median household income was $50,099, and the median family income was $59,153. Males had a median income of $40,783 versus $27,240 for females. The per capita income was $28,674. About 5.1% of families and 8.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.3% of those under 18 and 6.2% of those 65 or older.\nGovernment.\nThe St. Johns County Board of County Commissioners is an elected five-member commission, which appoints a county administrator. The main environmental and agricultural body is the St. Johns County Soil and Water Conservation District, which works closely with other area agencies.\nSt. Johns County Animal Control operates the St. Johns County Pet Adoption and Holding Center at 130 North Stratton Road.\nVoter registration.\nAccording to the Secretary of State's office, Republicans are a majority of registered voters in St. Johns County.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nPublic schools are run by the St. Johns County School District, headed by the St. Johns County School Board, an elected five-member board which appoints a superintendent to administer school operations. The system has grown considerably since 2000 to accommodate the county's rapid population growth. It is Florida's top-performing school district in Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test scores, the state's standardized test for public schools. The district also received the 2011 Energy Star Top Performer and Leader from the EPA.\nFor the 2014\u201315 school year the district comprised:\nThe St. Johns County School District has a robust special education department serving the needs of students with autism, cerebral palsy, and cognitive disabilities. The Florida School for the Deaf and Blind is a residential school for deaf and blind students, funded and operated by the state of Florida. The Catholic Diocese of St. Augustine operates St. Joseph Academy, a private high school in St. Augustine.\nSt. Johns County schools have received a state government grade of \"A\" for their work with the students and FCAT grading from 2004 to 2014.\nHigher education.\nSt. Johns River State College, a state college in the Florida College System, has a campus in St. Johns County near St. Augustine. It is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools to award associates degrees and two bachelor's degrees.\nFlagler College is a private liberal arts institution in downtown St. Augustine. \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" has recognized it as a \"Best Value College\".\nUniversity of St. Augustine for Health Sciences is a school for physical and occupational therapy education.\nLibraries.\nThe St. Johns County Public Library System has six branches:\nSt. Augustine Historical Society\nCommunities.\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther unincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74647", "revid": "28427534", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74647", "title": "Valentinian III", "text": "Western Roman emperor from 425 to 455\nValentinian III (; 2 July 419\u00a0\u2013 16 March 455) was Roman emperor in the West from 425 to 455. Starting in childhood, his reign over the Roman Empire was one of the longest, but was dominated by civil wars among powerful generals and the barbarian invasions. He was the youngest sole emperor in the Western Roman Empire (aged 6).\nHe was the son of Galla Placidia and Constantius III, and as the great-grandson of Valentinian I (r.\u2009364\u00a0\u2013\u00a0375) he was the last emperor of the Valentinianic dynasty. As a grandson of Theodosius I (r.\u2009379\u00a0\u2013\u00a0395), Valentinian was also a member of the Theodosian dynasty, to which his wife, Licinia Eudoxia, also belonged. A year before assuming the rank of \"augustus\", Valentinian was given the imperial rank of \"caesar\" by his half-cousin and co-emperor Theodosius II (r.\u2009402\u00a0\u2013\u00a0450). The \"augusta\" Galla Placidia had great influence during her son's rule, as did the military commander Flavius Aetius, who defended the western empire against Germanic and Hunnic invasions. Attila the Hun repeatedly menaced Valentinian's domains, being repulsed by a coalition under Aetius's leadership at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains and calling off a subsequent invasion after negotiations led by Pope\u00a0Leo\u00a0I. \nThe emperor later fell out with Aetius and killed him. Valentinian was assassinated in turn by Aetius's bodyguards, ending a reign marked by the ongoing collapse of the Western Roman Empire.\nFamily and infancy.\nValentinian was born on 2 July 419 in Ravenna, the capital of the Western Roman Empire, as the only son of Galla Placidia and Constantius III, who briefly ruled as emperor in 421. His mother was the younger half-sister of the western emperor Honorius (r.\u2009393\u00a0\u2013\u00a0423), while his father was at the time a patrician and the power behind the throne.\nThrough his mother, Valentinian was a descendant both of Theodosius I, who was his maternal grandfather, and of Valentinian I, who was the father of his maternal grandmother. It was also through his mother's side of the family that he was the nephew of Honorius and first cousin to Theodosius II (the son of Honorius' brother Arcadius), who was eastern emperor for most of Valentinian's life. Valentinian had a full sister, Justa Grata Honoria. His mother had previously been married to Ataulf of the Visigoths, and had borne a son, Theodosius, in Barcelona in 414; but the child had died early in the following year, thus eliminating an opportunity for a Romano-Visigothic line.\nIn either 421 or 423, Valentinian was given the title of \"nobilissimus\" by Honorius, although this title was not initially recognized in the eastern court of Theodosius II. After the death of Constantius in 421, court intrigue forced Galla Placidia to flee from Honorius and move to Constantinople, where she, Valentinian and Honoria were taken in by Theodosius.\nEarly reign (423\u2013437).\nCaesar.\nIn 423, Emperor Honorius died, and his \"primicerius notariorum\" Joannes took power in Rome. To counter this threat to his power, Theodosius posthumously recognised Valentinian's father as \"augustus\" (emperor) and nominated the 5-year-old Valentinian \"caesar\" (heir-apparent) for the West in 23 October 424. Theodosius also betrothed his daughter Licinia Eudoxia to Valentinian, who would eventually marry her in 437 when he was 18. On 23 October 425, after Joannes had been defeated in a combined naval and land campaign, Helion, the eastern \"patricius et magister officiorum\", installed Valentinian as \"augustus\" in Rome.\nAugustus.\nGiven his minority, the new \"augustus\" ruled under the influence of his mother Galla Placidia, one of whose first acts was to install Felix as the \"magister utriusque militiae\" in the west. This period was marked by a vigorous imperial policy and an attempt to stabilize the western provinces as far as the stretched resources of the empire could manage.\nIn 425, the court at Ravenna negotiated with the Huns who had accompanied Aetius to Italy in support of Joannes. The Huns agreed to leave Italy, and to evacuate the province of Pannonia Valeria, which was returned to the empire. This allowed Felix and the imperial government to restructure the defences along the Danubian provinces in 427 and 428. In addition, there were significant victories over the Visigoths in Gaul in 426/7 and 430 and the Franks along the Rhine in 428 and 432.\nNevertheless, there were significant problems that threatened the viability of the Roman state in the west. The Visigoths were a constant presence in south-eastern Gaul and could not be dislodged. The Vandals in Hispania continued their incursions, and, in 429, commenced an invasion of Mauretania Tingitana. The loss of these territories seriously impacted the state's ability to function. The burden of taxation became more and more intolerable as Rome's power decreased, and the loyalty of its remaining provinces was impaired in consequence.\nThe initial period of Valentinian's reign was further troubled by a power struggle among the three principal military leaders of the west \u2013 Felix, the senior \"magister militum praesentalis\", Bonifatius, the \"magister militum per Africam\" and Aetius, the \"magister militum per Gallias\". In 427, Felix accused Bonifatius of treason and demanded that he return to Italy. Bonifatius refused and defeated an army sent by Felix to capture him. Weakened, Felix was unable to resist Aetius who, with the support of Galla Placidia, replaced him as \"magister militum praesentalis\" in 429, before having him killed in 430.\nBonifatius, in the meantime, had been unable to defeat Sigisvultus, whom Galla Placidia had sent to deal with the rebel. Bonifatius, therefore, entered into an agreement with the Vandals to come to his aid and, in return, they would divide the African provinces between themselves. Concerned by this turn of events and determined to hold onto the African provinces at all costs, the court at Ravenna sought reconciliation with Bonifatius, who agreed in 430 to affirm his allegiance to Valentinian III and stop the Vandal king Gaiseric.\nIn 431, Bonifatius was crushed and fled to Italy, abandoning western North Africa. The imperial court, and especially Galla Placidia, worried about the power being wielded by Aetius, stripped him of his command and gave it to Bonifatius. In the civil war that followed, Bonifatius defeated Aetius at the Battle of Ravenna, but died of his wounds. Aetius fled to the Huns and, with their help, was able to persuade the court to reinstate him to his old position of \"magister militum praesentalis\" in 434. As a consequence, in 435, Valentinian was forced to conclude a peace with Gaiseric, whereby the Vandals kept all their possessions in North Africa in return for a payment of tribute to the empire, while the Huns were granted new territory in Pannonia Savia to occupy.\nGalla Placidia's regency came to an end in 437 when Valentinian travelled to Constantinople to marry his fianc\u00e9e, Licinia Eudoxia. On his return to Rome, he was nominally the emperor, but in truth the management of imperial policy in the west was in the hands of Aetius.\nAscendancy of Aetius (437\u2013455).\nFrom 436 to 439, Aetius was focused on the situation in Gaul. Serious Gothic defeats in 437 and 438 were undone by a Roman defeat in 439, which saw the status quo restored through a new truce. He also enjoyed initial success against the Franks and the Burgundians, as well as putting down a revolt by the Bagaudae by 437. In 438, peace was also achieved with the Suebi in Spain, the same year Valentinian's daughter, Eudocia, was born.\nWith Aetius occupied in Gaul, Valentinian was unable to do anything to prevent the Vandals completely overrunning the remaining western African provinces, culminating in the fall of Carthage on 19 October 439. This was a major blow because taxes and foodstuffs from these wealthy provinces supported Rome. By 440, Vandal fleets were ravaging Sicily and Aetius coordinated a joint response with the eastern court, with large numbers of Roman troops sent to defend the island from Gaiseric. Hunnic invasions forced the government to abandon this defense and transfer the troops to the Danube. \nIn 442, Aetius and Valentinian were compelled to acknowledge the Vandal conquests of Proconsular Africa, western Numidia, and Byzacena, in exchange for which Rome was returned the now devastated provinces of Tripolitana, Mauretania Sitifensis, Mauretania Caesariensis, and the remainder of Numidia. Gaiseric soon disregarded this arrangement and retook Mauretania Sitifensis and Mauretania Caesariensis, as well as taking Sardinia and Corsica and conducting devastating raids on Sicily.\nUnable to pacify Gaiseric by military means, Aetius decided that linking him to the imperial dynasty would be the next best thing. Consequently, sometime before 446, he convinced Valentinian to agree to a marriage between his eldest daughter, Eudocia, and Gaiseric's son, Huneric. The idea came to nothing, since Huneric was already married to the daughter of the king of the Visigoths.\nThe imperial presence in Hispania continued to diminish during the early-to-mid 440s as the Suebi extended their control. By 444 the Spanish provinces of Lusitania and Hispania Baetica had been lost, and Roman authority in Hispania Tarraconensis was challenged by continued Bagaudic uprisings. This loss of territory caused severe financial problems, with the Roman state openly acknowledging that there was insufficient revenue to meet its military needs. \nThe emperor issued a law on 14 July 444, ending bureaucrats' exemption from the recruitment tax. In that year, two additional taxes were issued in Valentinian's name, one a sales tax of around four percent and another on the senatorial class, specifically to recruit and supply new troops. Senators of illustrious rank were required to contribute the money for maintaining three soldiers, senators of the second class money for one soldier, and senators of the third class one-third the cost of maintaining a soldier. Valentinian himself was not exempt, sacrificing part of his reduced personal income to help the State in its financial straits.\nHunnic invasions.\nIn the 440s Valentinian made the Hunnic chieftain Attila honorary \"magister militum\" of the western empire, hoping thereby to reduce the threat the Huns posed to the Danubian provinces. To the relief of the western court, Attila concentrated on raiding the eastern empire's provinces in the Balkans from 441 through to 449. In 449, Honoria wrote to Attila, offering him half the western empire if he would rescue her from an unwanted political marriage arranged by her brother Valentinian.\nAttila had been looking for a pretext to invade the West. In 450 he secured peace with the eastern court and entered the Gallic provinces, having allegedly been bribed by the Vandal king Gaiseric to attack Gaul's population of Visigoths. Valentinian was furious over the invasion. The man who had carried Honoria's message to Attila was tortured to reveal all the details of the arrangement and then beheaded, and the emperor spared Honoria herself only after a great deal of persuasion from Galla Placidia.\nIn early 451, Attila crossed the Rhine and entered the Belgic provinces, capturing Divodurum Mediomatricum (Metz) on 7 April. Aetius gathered together a coalition of forces, including Visigoths and Burgundians, and raced to prevent Attila from taking the city of Aurelianum (Orl\u00e9ans), successfully forcing the Huns to retreat. The Roman-Germanic forces met Hunnic forces at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains, resulting in a victory for Aetius, who sought to retain his position by allowing Attila and a significant number of his troops to escape.\nAttila regrouped, and, in 452, invaded Italy. He sacked and destroyed Aquileia and took Verona and Vincentia (Vicenza) as well. Aetius was shadowing the Huns but did not have the troops to attack, so the road to Rome was open. Although Ravenna was Valentinian's usual residence, he and the court moved back to Rome as Attila approached.\nValentinian sent Pope Leo I and two leading senators to negotiate with Attila. This embassy, combined with a plague among Attila's troops, the threat of famine, and news that the Eastern Emperor Marcian had launched an attack on Hun homelands along the Danube, forced Attila to turn around and leave Italy. The death of Attila in Pannonia in 453 and the power struggle that erupted between his sons ended the Hunnic threat to the empire.\nAssassination.\nWith the Hun invasion thwarted, Valentinian felt secure enough to begin plotting to have Aetius killed, egged on by Petronius Maximus, a high ranking senator who bore Aetius a personal grudge, and his chamberlain, the eunuch Heraclius. Aetius, whose son had married Valentinian's youngest daughter, Placidia, was murdered by Valentinian on 21 September 454. The ancient historian Priscus reported that Aetius was presenting a financial statement before the Emperor when Valentinian suddenly leapt from his throne and accused him of drunken depravity. He held him responsible for the empire's tribulations and accused him of plotting to take the empire away from him. Valentinian then drew his sword and together with Heraclius, rushed at the weaponless Aetius and struck him on the head, killing him on the spot. When Valentinian later boasted that he had done well to dispose of Aetius in such a way, a counsellor famously replied \"Whether well or not, I do not know. But know that you have cut off your right hand with your left.\"\nOn March 16 of the following year, the emperor himself was assassinated in Rome by two Scythian followers of Aetius: Optelas and Thraustelas. According to Priscus, these men were put up to it by Petronius Maximus, whose aims of political advancement were thwarted by Heraclius. He may also have been taking revenge for the rape of his wife Lucina by Valentinian. The assassination occurred as Valentinian rode his horse on the Campus Martius. As the emperor dismounted to practise archery, the conspirators attacked. Optelas struck Valentinian on the side of the head, and when he turned to see who had hit him, Optelas delivered the death-blow. Meanwhile, Thraustelas slew Heraclius. Priscus reports a curious occurrence: a swarm of bees descended on the corpse of Valentinian and sucked up his blood.\nThe day after the assassination Petronius Maximus had himself proclaimed emperor by the remnants of the Western Roman army after paying a large donative. He was not as prepared as he thought to take over and stabilize the depleted empire, however; after a reign of only 11 weeks, Maximus was stoned to death by a Roman mob. King Gaiseric and his Vandals captured Rome a few days later and sacked it for two weeks.\nCharacter and legacy.\nValentinian's reign is marked by the dismemberment of the Western Empire; by the time of his death, virtually all of North Africa, all of western Spain, and the majority of Gaul had passed out of Roman hands. He is described as spoiled, pleasure-loving, and heavily influenced by sorcerers and astrologers, but also devoted to religion, contributing to churches of Saint Lawrence in both Rome and Ravenna.\nSome historians throughout 18th to 20th century, including Edward Gibbon and John Bagnall Bury, had unfavourable views of Valentinian III.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74648", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74648", "title": "St. Lucie County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nSt. Lucie County () is a county located in the southeastern portion of the U.S. state of Florida. As of the 2020 census, the population was 329,226. The county's seat is Fort Pierce, while the largest city is Port St. Lucie, making up 62% of the county's population. St. Lucie County is the principal county of the Port St. Lucie, FL Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nThe area was originally inhabited by the Ais tribe, a hunter-gatherer culture whose territory extended from south of the St. John's river to the St. Lucie Inlet. Spanish explorers frequently encountered the fierce tribe as the Spanish treasure routes ran parallel in order to take advantage of the strong Gulfstream current. The area was given several names by the Spanish including \"Rio de Ays\" (later changed to Indian River) as well as Santa Lucia, named after the short-lived late 16th-century Spanish fort that bore its name farther south. The fabled 1715 Spanish treasure fleet sank off the area that is now St. Lucie County, leading to the regional naming of the area as the Treasure Coast.\nDuring the early 19th century, the Spanish government issued several land grants in the area, one of which went to settler James Hutchinson. The grant contained and today the barrier island Hutchinson Island still retains his name. During the mid-1800s, Seminoles and runaway slaves sought refuge in the virtually uninhabited area. By 1837 the Second Seminole war had broken out in Florida. In December 1837, a group of soldiers under the command of Lt. Colonel Benjamin K. Pierce sailed down the Indian River and established a fort, naming it after their commander. Today the county seat of St. Lucie County is still known as Fort Pierce. In 1841, the United States government began issuing land grants under the Armed Occupation Act to Americans who were willing to settle the area. Several of these grants were within the boundaries of today's St. Lucie County. The Third Seminole War in 1851 saw the building of a second major American fort in the area, Fort Capron, located in the area that is today's St. Lucie Village.\nFrom this point on the area became gradually more populated as settlers ventured down for health and economic reasons. The Flagler railroad reached the area in the 1890s. Major industries at the end of the 19th century in the area included pineapple, fishing and seafood canning and cattle. Citrus would not become a major crop until the early 1900s. The city of Fort Pierce was chartered in 1901.\nUp until 1905 the area had been under Brevard County (although Brevard County had been named St. Lucie County from 1844 until 1855 when it was renamed Brevard County). During the summer of 1905, St. Lucie County was created from the southern part of Brevard County with the county seat being at Fort Pierce. Other settlements at the time in St. Lucie County's boundaries included Jensen, Eden, Anknona, Walton, Eldred, White City, Viking, St. Lucie, Oslo, Vero, Quay, Sebastian and others. In 1925, Indian River County was created out of the northern part of St. Lucie County, while Martin County was created from a small part of southeastern St. Lucie County and the northern part of Palm Beach County during that same year. Much of western St Lucie County had already gone in 1917 to form Okeechobee County.\nThe 1920s saw increased land speculation and planned developments such as Indrio and San Lucie that never came to fruition due to the bust in 1929. During World War II the United States Naval Amphibious Training Base was established in Fort Pierce on North and South Hutchinson Island. During its operation over 140,000 troops were processed through the base. The post-war years saw a major population boom in the area, some of which were returning sailors and their families that had undergone training at the Navy base.\nIn 1958, the General Development Corporation, a subsidiary of Mackle Brothers, bought tens of thousands of acres of land along the St. Lucie River in the southern part of the county in order to build a new community. Colorful and clever advertising soon drew thousands of northeastern retirees and families to the area, laying the foundation for the future city of Port St. Lucie. Population and building booms in the late 20th century led to the formation of other areas west and south of Port St. Lucie including St. Lucie West and the new master planned community of Tradition. The early 21st century brought many trials for the county including two major hurricanes in 2004 and an economic and housing slump starting in 2008. In 2005, St. Lucie County celebrated its 100th birthday.\nHurricane Milton tornado outbreak.\nOn October 9, 2024, St. Lucie County was part of a prolific tornado outbreak caused by Hurricane Milton. Six fatalities occurred in the county after a 155\u00a0mph EF-3 tornado struck the Spanish Lakes neighborhood of Lakewood Park.\n This intense tornado destroyed the largest warehouse on the Treasure Coast, located in Fort Pierce, before moving into Lakewood Park.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (16.9%) is water.\nTransportation.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPublic bus service.\nSt. Lucie County is served by the St. Lucie Transportation Planning Organization (TPO). The TPO is a Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO), a federally mandated and federally funded transportation policy-making organization responsible for transportation planning, programming, and financing of State and Federal Transportation Funds for St. Lucie County. The TPO is governed by a TPO Board, which is composed of elected officials, representatives from the St. Lucie County School Board, and representatives from Community Transit, a division of The Council on Aging of St. Lucie, Inc. The original bus system started out as a demand response service bus in the 1990s, it only served St. Lucie County. Soon it expanded to a fixed route system, going to predetermined locations along a route. On June 3, 2002, the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) approved funding, expanding the bus service to Martin County, and became the Treasure Coast Connector.\nPassenger trains.\nUntil 1968, the Florida East Coast Railway provided service between Jacksonville and Miami, with stops in Fort Pierce and Jensen Beach. Until 1963, long-distance passenger trains of the Illinois Central (the \"City of Miami\") and the Louisville and Nashville (the \"Dixie Flagler\" and the \"South Wind\") from Chicago, and the Atlantic Coast Line from New York City (the \"East Coast Champion,\" the \"Havana Special,\" and the winter-only \"Florida Special\"), made stops in Fort Pierce.\nIn 2023, Brightline, an inter-city rail route that currently runs between Miami and Orlando, announced that it was looking for a site for a new station on the Treasure Coast. As of 2024, there are no plans to add a station in St. Lucie County, but rather in nearby Martin County for the Stuart station.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nThe 2020 United States census counted 329,226 people, 128,997 households, and 88,835 families in St. Lucie County, Florida. The population density was 575.9 per square mile (222.4/km2). There were 147,884 housing units at an average density of 258.7 per square mile (99.9/km2). The racial makeup was 58.38% (192,202) white or European American (53.62% non-Hispanic white), 20.17% (66,407) black or African-American, 0.42% (1,398) Native American or Alaska Native, 1.77% (5,818) Asian, 0.06% (185) Pacific Islander or Native Hawaiian, 6.73% (22,160) from other races, and 12.47% (41,056) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race was 20.14% (66,320) of the population.\nOf the 128,997 households, 27.5% had children under the age of 18; 49.0% were married couples living together; 26.9% had a female householder with no spouse or partner present. 24.5% of households consisted of individuals and 13.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.7 and the average family size was 3.2. The percent of those with a bachelor\u2019s degree or higher was estimated to be 16.6% of the population.\n19.9% of the population was under the age of 18, 7.3% from 18 to 24, 21.7% from 25 to 44, 26.9% from 45 to 64, and 24.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 45.9 years. For every 100 females, there were 106.0 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older, there were 108.9 males.\nThe 2016-2020 5-year American Community Survey estimates show that the median household income was $55,237 (with a margin of error of +/- $1,568). The median family income was $62,950 (+/- $2,262). Males had a median income of $35,327 (+/- $1,197) versus $26,564 (+/- $1,036) for females. The median income for those above 16 years old was $30,891 (+/- $541). Approximately, 9.0% of families and 13.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.0% of those under the age of 18 and 10.2% of those ages 65 or over.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 277,789 people, 108,523 households, and 74,963 families residing in the county. The population density was 485.7 people per square mile. There were 137,029 housing units at an average density of 239.6 per square\u00a0mile. The racial makeup of the county was 71.8% White, 19.1% African American, 0.4% Native American, 1.6% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 4.5% from other races, and 2.6% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 16.6% of the population.\nAccording to the 2015 American Community Survey, 90.7% spoke English, 14.6% Spanish, 5.0% Other Indo-European languages, and 1.2% Asian and Pacific Island languages.\nAccording to census of 2000, the largest ancestry groups in St. Lucie County were: English 34%, African 15%, Irish 14%, German 13%, Italian 10%. For every 100 females, there were 95.50 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.80 males.\nIn 2010 there were 108,523 households, out of which 26.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.0% were married couples living together, 12.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.9% were non-families. 24.2% of all non-family households were made up of individuals living alone, and 11.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 2.99.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 77.7% 18 years of age and over; 23.2% from 25 to 44, 26.8% from 45 to 64, and 19.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42.4 years.\nAccording to the 2010 census, the median income for a household in the county was $36,363, and the median income for a family was $41,381. Males had a median income of $30,047 versus $22,684 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,790. About 9.60% of families and 13.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.50% of those under age 18 and 7.70% of those age 65 or over.\nFauna.\nSix bird species in St. Lucie County are listed as \"highly vulnerable\" to climate change:\nPolitics.\nAccording to St. Lucie County Supervisor of Elections website, registered voters as of September 10, 2020, totaled 217,666: Democratic 85,714, Republican 72,554, NPA 56,500, Other 2,898. In recent decades, St. Lucie County had previously favored the Democratic Party, but it voted for Republican Party candidate Donald Trump in the last three elections, signaling a significant rightward shift along with the state as a whole. \nEducation.\nSchools in the county are managed by St. Lucie County Public Schools.\nLibraries.\nSt. Lucie County is served by the St. Lucie County Library System.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "74650", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74650", "title": "Far From the Madding Crowd", "text": ""}
{"id": "74651", "revid": "46159970", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74651", "title": "Santa Rosa County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nSanta Rosa County is a county located in the northwestern portion of the U.S. state of Florida. As of 2020, its population was 188,000. The county seat is Milton, which lies in the geographic center of the county. Other major communities within Santa Rosa County are Navarre, Pace, and Gulf Breeze. Navarre is the most populated community with a population of approximately 45,000 residents. Santa Rosa County is included in the Pensacola\u2014Ferry Pass\u2014Brent, Florida metropolitan statistical area, which also includes Escambia County.\nHistory.\nThe first European in Santa Rosa County Florida may have been Diego Maldonado, a member of Tristan de Luna's failed expedition. Natives dominated the area until the late 1700s. A Spanish mission serving Apalachees, Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de la Soledad y San Lu\u00eds, may have been located in Floridatown from 1718 until 1740.\nSanta Rosa County was created in 1842, when it was divided from Escambia County. It was named after the barrier island along its southern coast, which in turn had been named for the Roman Catholic saint, Rosa de Viterbo.\nSanta Rosa County repealed its prohibition on alcohol in 2005.\nSanta Rosa County has seen unprecedented growth in population, specifically in the communities of Navarre, Pace, and Gulf Breeze. The county is a quickly growing tourist destination because of its access to beaches and protected wilderness areas for kayaking, hiking, and camping.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which (13.8%) are covered by water.\nRegions.\nSanta Rosa County can be divided into three distinct sections: South Santa Rosa, Central Santa Rosa, and North Santa Rosa. The sections are centered on the main east\u2013west roads that pass through the county.\nSouth Santa Rosa County comprises the area from Holley and Navarre in the east to Gulf Breeze]at the western end of the Fairpoint Peninsula, and along U.S. Highway 98. A section of Santa Rosa Island, containing the unincorporated community of Navarre Beach, is also part of South Santa Rosa County. Major bodies of water including Santa Rosa Sound, Pensacola Bay, and East Bay strongly influence the housing and lifestyle of citizens in the southern part of the county. This fast-growing region serves primarily as \"bedroom communities\" for Pensacola to the west and Hurlburt Field, Fort Walton Beach, and Eglin Air Force Base to the east.\nCentral Santa Rosa County is the area north of the bays and south of the extensive forests separating it from North Santa Rosa. The central section developed along the so-called Old Spanish Trail that ran from St. Augustine to New Orleans, and further points west. Today, U.S. Highway 90 closely parallels the old trail, and is the main highway that connects the region. Despite recent growth, the Central Region is best identified by its rural roots, and can be best characterized by traditional Southern culture. The Pace and Milton communities compose the Central Region, with both having populations roughly around 30,000. The county seat, Milton is located where the trail crossed the Blackwater River. To the west of Milton bordering the Escambia River, Pace has experienced exponential growth, both residential and commercial. Interstate 10 also passes through this section of the county. The U.S. Navy presence is marked by Whiting Field and NOLF Spencer Field.\nNorthern Santa Rosa County is forest and farming country. The only town in the north is Jay. Most development has been along State Road 4, which runs through the northern sections of Escambia, Santa Rosa, and Okaloosa Counties. A large oil and natural gas field around Jay produced a great deal of oil, and made many farmers millionaires in the 1970s and 1980s, but the field has been depleted and is producing little oil today. The citizens have, for the most part, returned to farming and forestry for their livelihoods.\nState Road 87 traverses the county from north to south, between U.S. Highway 98 and the border with Escambia County, Alabama, near Brewton, where it connects with State Route 41. This road is a primary emergency evacuation route for the county during hurricanes.\nGovernment.\nBoard of county commissioners.\nThe Santa Rosa County Board of County Commissioners serves as the legislative and policy-setting body of the county as established under Section 125 of the Florida Statutes. As such, the board enacts all legislation and authorizes programs and expenditures within the county. The board appoints a professionally trained county administrator, who is responsible for policy and budget development and implementation.\nThe board comprises five members, elected countywide. Members must reside within the particular districts for which they seek election. Each year, the board organizes itself, selecting a chair and vice chair from among its members to preside at commission meetings.\nThe commission meets in regular session beginning at 9:00\u00a0am the second and fourth Thursday of the month in the Commissioner's Board Room in the Administrative Center, 6495 Caroline Street, in Milton. Called meetings and workshops are scheduled periodically and are advertised and open to the public.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, 188,000 people, 65,697 households, and 47,876 families were residing in the county.\nAs of the census of 2000, 117,743 people, 43,793 households, and 33,326 families resided in the county. The population density was . The 49,119 housing units had an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 90.72% White, 4.25% African American, 1.01% Native American, 1.30% Asian, 0.08% Pacific Islander, 0.67% from other races, and 1.98% from two or more races. About 2.52% of the population were Hispanics or Latinos of any race.\nOf the 43,793 households, 36.5% had children under 18 living with them, 62.2% were married couples living together, 10.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23.9% were not families. About 19.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.6% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.63 and the average family size was 3.00.\nIn the county, the age distribution was 26.6% under 18, 7.2% from 18 to 24, 31.1% from 25 to 44, 24.1% from 45 to 64, and 11.0% who were 65 or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.6 males. For every 100 females 18 and over, there were 97.9 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $41,881 and for a family was $46,929. Males had a median income of $34,878 versus $22,304 for females. The per capita income for the county was $20,089. About 7.9% of families and 9.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.6% of those under 18 and 7.5% of those 65 or over.\nLibraries.\nThe Santa Rosa County Library System has five branches located in: Navarre, Gulf Breeze, Jay, Milton, and Pace.\nCommunities.\nThe largest communities are Navarre and Pace.\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nSanta Rosa County is a stronghold of the Republican Party. It has supported the Republican candidate in each presidential election since 1972, consistently by overwhelming margins.\nTransportation.\nHighways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nNewspapers.\nPrint:\nDigital only:"}
