{"id": "75042", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75042", "title": "Transvaal Colony", "text": "British colony from 1877 to 1881 and 1902 to 1910\nThe Transvaal Colony () was the name used to refer to the Transvaal region during the period of direct British rule and military occupation between the end of the Second Boer War in 1902 when the South African Republic was dissolved, and the establishment of the Union of South Africa in 1910. The borders of the Transvaal Colony were larger than the defeated South African Republic (which had existed from 1856 to 1902). In 1910 the entire territory became the Transvaal Province of the Union of South Africa.\nHistory.\nBoth the Boer republics, the South African Republic (ZAR) and the Orange Free State were defeated in the Anglo-Boer War and surrendered to the UK. The peace treaty (Treaty of Vereeniging) contained the following terms:\nIn 1902, with peace following the signing of the Treaty of Vereeniging, the new Transvaal colony was faced with intertwined economic and political issues that needed to be resolved. The economic issues faced included the restoration of the mining industry to pre-war levels, then growing it further with the need for extra labour, the restoration of the Boers to their lands and increasing the agricultural output of those farms. The political issue faced depended on what side of politics one stood on. The existing British administrators under Alfred Milner wished to anglicise the population through two main means. One by increasing the English-speaking population of the Transvaal and the other by teaching the Boer children in English with very little Dutch used, followed by self-rule. The Transvaal Boers' political objectives were the restoration of self-rule in the colony and the political environment to be dominated by the Boers.\nRepatriation and reconstruction.\nAs the war ended the British were faced with a large proportion of Boer men as prisoners of war and their families in concentration camps. As the British followed a scorched earth policy in the Transvaal, Boer lands, stock and farms had been destroyed.\nAt the conclusion of the war, it was necessary to reconstruct a \"government\" for the new colony and this was begun with the appointment of a Resident Magistrate in every district of the colony who became District Commissioners while an Assistant Magistrate carried out the legal and magisterial duties of the area. Roman-Dutch law was translated into English so the law courts could continue, with some old acts repealed and a considerable amount of new law promulgated by the authorities in Johannesburg.\nThe Resident Magistrate then submitted the names of three members of the district to the Governor for district commission under the magistrate. They would consist of one British subject, and two Boers, one from those who had surrendered early on in the war and one who had fought until the end. The commission would have two functions, one to provide assistance and issuing of rations, equipment, transport and plough animals to those affected by the war, and the second to investigate claims for compensation for actual damages sustained during the war.\nRepatriation depots were established in the districts and they were stocked with food, seed, agricultural equipment, transport, plough animals, stone and building material. The rail transport network struggled to compete with the army transport requirement to maintain a garrison and civilian requirements to repair the colony. All feed for transport animals had to be brought to the depots as the process started in the winter of 1902. Refugees from the concentration camps and prisoners of war were returned to their districts in a system of drafts. At the depots, they would receive farm equipment, tents and rations to start again and transport to their destinations. Food rations were provided for almost a year. Families would receive a token grant irrespective of their ability to pay it back and additional material and equipment required were obtained via interest-free loans with small cash loans also attracting no interest, with larger loans attracting four percent interest by a mortgage. The loan scheme was never going to compensate a person for the actual loss experienced by the war. Damage and the reconstruction required varied from district to district.\nIn the larger towns, municipal or health boards were \"appointed\" to manage them under the Resident Magistrate. They had limited functions and the only rates they levied were for sanitary functions. Within fifteen months of the end of the war, the municipal government was introduced with preparations made for fair elections based on property valuation and the creation of voters' rolls with the registration process explained in English and Dutch.\nEconomic issues.\nThe British administrators set out to place most Boer farmers back on their land by March 1903 with nineteen million pounds spent on war damages, grants and loans. The administrators reformed the state agricultural departments to modernise farming in the colony which resulted in a maize and beef surplus by 1908. They also attempted to solve the poor white problem by settling them as tenant farmers on state land, but the lack of capital and labour caused the scheme to fail. An attempt was made to place English settlers on farmland so as to anglicise the Transvaal and increase the English-speaking population but this failed, too, as the policy attracted too few settlers.\nBy the end of 1901, gold mining finally resumed on the Rand around Johannesburg, having virtually stopped since 1899. Backed by the mining magnates and the British administrators, there was a need to restart the industry but labour was required. Just prior to the war, white miners wages were high and magnates weren't keen to increase the wages and since black miners wages had been reduced before the war and not increased, so black labourers weren't interested in working the mines. Unskilled white labour was ruled out as their wages would be too high for the work done, so the mining magnates and their Chamber of Mines in 1903 sought alternative labour in the form of cheap Chinese workers. The legislation to import Chinese labour was introduced to the Transvaal Legislative Council on 28 December 1903 by George Farrar and was debated for 30 hours and successfully voted on after its three readings on 30 December 1903, coming into law in February 1904. Having been rubber-stamped by the British and mining appointed Transvaal Legislative Council it outlined extremely restrictive employment contracts for the Chinese workers and the idea had been sold via a fear campaign aimed at white miners about the need for this labour or face the possibility of loss of mining and their jobs. By 1906, the gold mines of the Witwatersrand were in full production and by 1907, South African gold mines represented thirty-two percent of the worlds gold output. By 1910, Chinese labour ended on the Witwatersrand and the restrictive job reservation laws preventing Chinese miners doing certain jobs was replicated for Black miners.\nPolitical issues.\nFrom the end of the war in 1902, the political administration of the Transvaal colony was controlled by members of a legislative and executive council, all appointed by the British Administrators under Alfred Milner and the Colonial Secretary in London. In 1903, three seats in the Transvaal Legislative council were offered to Louis Botha, Jan Smuts and Koos de la Rey, but they turned the British down. Due to a lack of a hearing given to the opinions of the Boer generals by the English administrators concerning Chinese mine labour, due to a belief that they did not represent the Boer population, and due to the lack of self-rule, Louis Botha and others met in 1904 at a \"Volkskongres\". The result of this people congress was the unification of the Boer political movement in the Transvaal into a new party called Het Volk in January 1905 by Louis Botha and Jan Smuts. This new party's objective was to seek reconciliation with Britain, which would be favoured by the British opposition Liberal Party, and Boer self-rule for the Transvaal.\nEnglish political movements included the Transvaal Responsible Government Association, the Transvaal Progressive Association and labour groups under an Industrial Labour Party. The Transvaal Responsible Government Association was formed in late 1904 by E.P Solomon and made up of a loose gathering of ex-colonial and ZAR officials and diamond mining magnates, labour and businessmen. They called for the allowance of the colony to create its own policy and strive for self-government and for the party to be eventually renamed the Nationalists. The Transvaal Progressive Association, formed in November 1904 and active from February 1905, had a similar membership but was linked to the mining industry's opposed self-rule and preferred a legislature nominated by the High Commissioner with strong links to Britain. They were led by George Farrar and Percy Fitzpatrick.\nThe pro-Boer Liberal Party in Britain came to power in January 1906 with a new policy for the two former Boer colonies, one of self-rule. Jan Smuts visited London and managed to persuade the new government to formulate a system that would favour the Boers and Het Volk in a new political assembly. More than a year later in February 1907 an election was held with Het Volk running on two issues; Chinese labour needing to be ended when new labour sources were found and reconciliation with Britain with which they hoped would attract the English labourer vote as well as selling themselves as an alternative to the mining capitalistic Progressive Party.\n1907 election.\nThe election was held on 20 February 1907 and Het Volk won the election gathering 37 of 69 seats. It stood 43 candidates and won 34 seats outright, all the country seats were gained except Barberton, three seats in Pretoria and four on the Witwatersrand with three independents aligning themselves with the party. The Progressive Party stood 34 candidates and won 21 seats, twenty on the Witwatersrand and one in Pretoria with five Randlords winning seats. Other parties included the Nationalists (old Transvaal Responsible Government Association) that won 6 seats, four on the Witwatersrand and two in Pretoria but their leader Richard Solomon failed to win his seat. The Transvaal Independent Labour Party won three seats in the Witwatersrand after contesting 14, but their leader Frederic Creswell failed to gain a seat.\nLouis Botha became Prime Minister of the Transvaal and Agriculture minister with Jan Smuts as its colonial secretary. Other new cabinet ministers included J de Villiers, Attorney-General and Mines, Henry Charles Hull, Treasurer, Johann Rissik, Land and Native Affairs, Harry Solomon held Public Works and Edward Rooth as whip. The Progressives in opposition would be led by George Farrar and Abe Bailey as the opposition whip. They all assembled for the first time in March 1907. After the 1907 election, the issue of Chinese mining labour was revisited with Het Volk believing there was enough labour in the form of black and white miners. Taking into account the economic interests of the Transvaal, Botha ensured a gradual policy of repatriation of Chinese labour.\nBy 1908, the Boers had won control, in elections, of the Natal, Orange River and Transvaal colonies, but under British influence there was the need now to unite the country under one government.\nProgression to Union.\nIn May 1908, Jan Smuts, Transvaal Colonial Secretary proposed a gathering of representatives from all four colonies and decide on a customs and railways agreement and also included a proposal that the colonies appoint delegates to discuss a constitution for a united country in the form of a National Convention. The objective of the convention was to find a solution to the political, racial and economic problems encountered by these colonies and find common ground between the Boers and the English. On 12 October 1908, the thirty delegates of the four colonies met in Durban under the Chairmanship of Sir Henry de Villiers. Twelve delegates came from the Cape Colony, eight from the Transvaal and five each from the Orange River and Natal Colonies representing a gathering of sixteen from an English background with the remaining fourteen of Boer origin.\nThe main issues discussed were whether the four colonies would become a country made up of a union or a federation, who would be allowed to vote, and the number of voters who would make up a constituency in rural and urban seats. All three objectives were eventually finalised with South Africa to become a union which was the wish of both the Liberal British government and Jan Smuts. On the question of black enfranchisement, the British government was prepared to accept the final wishes of the National Convention. The colonies of the Transvaal, Orange River and Natal wanted no black enfranchisement while the Cape Colony wished to keep what limited enfranchisement it had for all other races. A compromise was reached and all the colonies' wishes concerning their racial make-up for enfranchisement were accepted, though subject to a repeal by a two-thirds majority in both houses of parliament. As to the objective of rural and urban constituencies, it was decided to allow fifteen percent fewer constituents for a rural seat while an urban seat would have fifteen percent more constituents. This system for the constituencies would ensure that the Afrikaner would dominate politics in years to come and would be one of the many reasons why Jan Smuts would lose the 1948 South African general election, sweeping D.F. Malan to power and the beginning of Apartheid. The results of the negotiations at the Convention became the draft South Africa Act which was released for viewing on 9 February 1909. By 19 August 1909, the South Africa Act passed through the British Parliament and into law.\nAs to the question of black enfranchisement, Milner saw this is a serious issue when it came to a peace treaty:\"If I did not have some conscience about the treatment of blacks I personally could win over the Dutch in the Colony and indeed all the South African dominion without offending the English. You have only to sacrifice \u2018the nigger\u2019 and the game is easy. Any attempt to secure fair play for them makes the Dutch fractious and almost unmanageable.\"\nColonial Administration.\nPrior to the grant of responsible self-government on 6 December 1906, the Colony was administered by an Executive Council appointed by the Governor. The first elected Cabinet of the Transvaal Colony was formed on 4 March 1907.\nGeography.\nThe Transvaal Colony lay between Vaal River in the south and the Limpopo River in the north, roughly between 22\u00bd and 27\u00bd S, and 25 and 32 E. To its south it bordered with the Orange Free State and Natal Colony, to its south-west were the Cape Colony, to the west was the Bechuanaland Protectorate (later Botswana), to its north was Rhodesia, and to its east were Portuguese East Africa and Swaziland. Except in the south-west, these borders were mostly well defined by natural features. Within the Transvaal lies the Waterberg Massif, a prominent ancient geological feature of the South African landscape.\nDivisions:\nCities in the Transvaal Colony:\nDemographics.\n1904 Census.\nPopulation statistics from the 1904 Census."}
{"id": "75043", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75043", "title": "Clean room", "text": ""}
{"id": "75044", "revid": "28699555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75044", "title": "Lepidus", "text": "Roman politician and general\nMarcus Aemilius Lepidus (; c. 89 BC\u00a0\u2013 late 13 or early 12 BC) was a Roman general and statesman who formed the Second Triumvirate alongside Octavian and Mark Antony during the final years of the Roman Republic. Lepidus had previously been a close ally of Julius Caesar. He was also the last \"pontifex maximus\" before the Roman Empire, and (presumably) the last \"interrex\" and \"magister equitum\" to hold military command.\nThough he was an able military commander and proved a useful partisan of Caesar, Lepidus has always been portrayed as the least influential member of the Triumvirate. He typically appears as a marginalised figure in depictions of the events of the era, most notably in Shakespeare's plays. While some scholars have endorsed this view, others argue that the evidence is insufficient to discount the distorting effects of propaganda by his opponents, principally Cicero and, later, Augustus.\nFamily.\nLepidus was the son of Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (consul in 78 BC); his mother may have been a daughter of Lucius Appuleius Saturninus. His brother was Lucius Aemilius Lepidus Paullus (consul in 50). His father was the first leader of the revived populares faction after the death of Sulla, and led an unsuccessful rebellion against the optimates in 78\u201377 (he was defeated just outside of Rome and fled to Sardinia where he died in 77).\nLepidus married Junia Secunda, half-sister of Marcus Junius Brutus and sister of Marcus Junius Silanus, Junia Prima and Junia Tertia, Cassius Longinus's wife. Lepidus and Junia Secunda had at least one child, Marcus Aemilius Lepidus the Younger.\nBiography.\nAlly of Caesar.\nLepidus joined the College of Pontiffs as a child. He started his \"cursus honorum\" as \"triumvir monetalis\", overseeing the minting of coins, from c.\u00a062 to 58 BC. Lepidus soon became one of Julius Caesar's greatest supporters. He was appointed as a praetor in 49 BC, being placed in charge of Rome while Caesar defeated Pompey in Greece. He secured Caesar's appointment as dictator, a position that Caesar used to get himself elected as consul, resigning the dictatorship after eleven days. Lepidus was rewarded with the position of propraetor in the Spanish province of Hispania Citerior. Lepidus was also nominated \"interrex\" by the Senate in 52, being the last known Roman to hold this office.\nIn Spain, Lepidus was called upon to quell a rebellion against Quintus Cassius Longinus, governor of neighbouring Hispania Ulterior. Lepidus refused to support Cassius, who had created opposition to Caesar's regime by his corruption and avarice. He negotiated a deal with the rebel leader, the quaestor Marcellus, and helped to defeat an attack by the Mauretanian king Bogud. Cassius and his supporters were allowed to leave and order was restored. Caesar and the Senate were sufficiently impressed by Lepidus's judicious mixture of negotiation and surgical military action that they granted him a triumph.\nLepidus was rewarded with the consulship in 46 after the defeat of the Pompeians in the East. Caesar also made Lepidus \"magister equitum\" (\"Master of the Horse\"), effectively his deputy. Caesar appears to have had greater confidence in Lepidus than in Mark Antony to keep order in Rome, after Antony's inflammatory actions led to disturbances in 47. Lepidus appears to have been genuinely shocked when Antony provocatively offered Caesar a crown at the Lupercalia festival, an act that helped to precipitate the conspiracy to kill Caesar.\nWhen in February 44 Caesar was elected dictator for life by the Senate, he made Lepidus \"magister equitum\" for the second time. The brief alliance in power of Caesar and Lepidus came to a sudden end when Caesar was assassinated on March 15, 44 (the Ides of March). Caesar had dined at Lepidus's house the night before his murder. One of the ringleaders of the conspiracy, Gaius Cassius Longinus, had argued for the killing of Lepidus and Mark Antony as well, but Marcus Junius Brutus had overruled him, saying the action was an execution and not a political coup d'\u00e9tat.\nAftermath of Caesar's death.\nAs soon as Lepidus learned of Caesar's murder, he acted decisively to maintain order by moving troops to the Campus Martius. He proposed using his army to punish Caesar's killers, but was dissuaded by Antony and Aulus Hirtius. Lepidus and Antony both spoke in the senate the following day, accepting an amnesty for the assassins in return for preservation of their offices and Caesar's reforms. Lepidus also obtained the post of \"pontifex maximus\", succeeding Caesar.\nAt this point, Pompey's surviving son Sextus Pompey tried to take advantage of the turmoil to threaten Spain. Lepidus was sent to negotiate with him. Lepidus successfully negotiated an agreement with Sextus that maintained the peace. The Senate voted him a public thanksgiving festival. Lepidus thereafter administered both Hispania and Narbonese Gaul as proconsul.\nWhen Antony attempted to take control of Cisalpine Gaul (northern Italy) by force and to displace Decimus Brutus, the Senate, led by Cicero, called on Lepidus to support Brutus\u00a0\u2013 one of Caesar's killers. Lepidus prevaricated, recommending negotiation with Antony. After Antony's defeat at the Battle of Mutina, the Senate sent word that Lepidus' troops were no longer needed. Antony, however, marched towards Lepidus's province with his remaining forces. Lepidus continued to assure the Senate of his loyalty, but engaged in negotiations with Antony. When the two armies met, large portions of Lepidus's forces joined up with Antony. Lepidus negotiated an agreement with him, while claiming to the Senate that he had no choice. It is unclear whether Lepidus' troops forced him to join with Antony, whether that was always Lepidus's plan, or whether he arranged matters to gauge the situation and make the best deal.\nSecond Triumvirate.\nAntony and Lepidus now had to deal with Octavian Caesar, Caesar's great-nephew, who had been adopted by Caesar in Caesar's will. Octavian was the only surviving commander of the forces that had defeated Antony at Mutina (modern Modena). The Senate instructed Octavian to hand over control of the troops to Decimus Brutus, but he refused. Antony and Lepidus met with Octavian on an island in a river, possibly near Mutina, but more likely near Bologna. Their armies lined along opposite banks. They formed the Second Triumvirate, legalized with the name of \"Triumvirs for Confirming the Republic with Consular Power\" (Triumviri Rei Publicae Constituendae Consulari Potestate) by the \"Lex Titia\" of 43. With the triumvirs in possession of overwhelming numerical superiority, Decimus Brutus' remaining forces melted away, leaving the triumvirs in complete control of the western provinces.\nUnlike the First Triumvirate of Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus, this one was formally constituted. In effect, it sidelined the consuls and the Senate and signalled the death of the Republic. The triumvirate's legal lifespan was for five years. At the beginning Lepidus was confirmed in possession of both the provinces of Hispania, along with Narbonese Gaul, but also agreed to hand over seven of his legions to Octavian and Antony to continue the struggle against Brutus and Cassius, who controlled the eastern part of Roman territory. In the event of a defeat, Lepidus' territories would provide a fall-back position. Lepidus was to become consul and was confirmed as Pontifex Maximus. He would assume control of Rome while they were away.\nAccording to Lepidus's biographer Richard D. Weigel, Lepidus' willingness to give up his legions inevitably consigned him to a subsidiary role in the triumvirate. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLepidus also agreed to the proscriptions that led to the death of Cicero and other die-hard opponents of Caesar's faction. Later historians were particularly critical of him for agreeing to the death of his brother Lucius Paullus, a supporter of Cicero. However, Cassius Dio hints that Lepidus helped Paullus to escape.\nAfter Philippi.\nAfter the pacification of the east and the defeat of the assassins' faction in the Battle of Philippi, during which he remained in Rome, Antony and Octavian took over most of Lepidus' territories, but granted him rights in the provinces of Numidia and Africa as proconsul. For a while he managed to distance himself from the frequent quarrels between his colleagues Antony and Octavian. When the Perusine War broke out in 41, Octavian tasked Lepidus with the defence of Rome against Lucius Antonius, Mark Antony's brother. Lucius, with superior forces, easily took the city. Lepidus was forced to flee to Octavian's camp. Lucius soon withdrew from Rome and Octavian retook the city. After this event, Lepidus was given six of Antony's legions to govern Africa. In 37 BC the treaty of Tarentum formally renewed the Triumvirate for another five years.\nDuring Lepidus' proconsulship of Africa, he promoted the distribution of land to veterans, possibly in order to build up a network of clients. He appears to have encouraged the Romanisation of Thibilis in Numidia and to have demolished illicit extensions to Carthage. In result, the formally cursed area of the old city, destroyed after the Third Punic War, was not built upon.\nFall from power.\nIn 36 BC, during the Sicilian revolt, Lepidus raised a large army of 14 legions to help subdue Sextus Pompey. However, this was to lead to an ill-judged political move that gave Octavian the excuse he needed to remove Lepidus from power. After the defeat of Sextus Pompey, Lepidus had stationed his legions in Sicily and a dispute arose over whether he or Octavian had authority on the island. Lepidus had been the first to land troops in Sicily and had captured several of the main towns. However, he felt that Octavian was treating him as a subordinate, instead of an equal. He asserted that Sicily should be absorbed into his sphere of influence. After negotiation, he suggested an alternative: Octavian could have Sicily and Africa, if he agreed to give Lepidus back his old territories in Spain and Gaul, which should legally have been his according to the Lex Titia. Octavian accused Lepidus of attempting to usurp power and fomenting rebellion. Humiliatingly, Lepidus' legions in Sicily defected to Octavian and Lepidus himself was forced to submit to him.\nOn 22 September 36 BC, Lepidus was stripped of all his offices except that of \"Pontifex Maximus\"; Octavian then confined him to Circeii. After the defeat of Antony in 31 BC, Lepidus' son Marcus Aemilius Lepidus Minor became involved in a conspiracy to assassinate Octavian, but the plot was discovered by Gaius Maecenas. The younger Lepidus was executed, but the former triumvir himself was left unmolested. His wife Junia was, however, implicated. Lepidus had to plead with his former enemy Lucius Saenius Balbinus to grant her bail.\nSpending the rest of his life in relative obscurity, Lepidus was apparently obliged to return to Rome periodically to participate in Senate business. Octavian, now known as \"Augustus\", is said to have belittled him by always asking for his vote last. Lepidus died peacefully in late 13 BC, upon which Augustus was elected to the position of \"Pontifex Maximus\" on 6 March 12 BC; afterwards, the chief priest's office was moved from the Regia to Augustus' palace, located on the Palatine Hill in Rome.\nReputation.\nLepidus's biographer Richard D. Weigel says that he has been typically caricatured by both ancient and modern historians as \"weak, indecisive, fickle, disloyal and incompetent\". Cicero condemned Lepidus for \"wickedness and sheer folly\" after Lepidus allowed his forces to join with Mark Antony's after Antony's initial defeat at the Battle of Mutina. Cicero also privately suggested that Lepidus' wife, Junia, had been unfaithful to him. Decimus Brutus called him a \"weathercock\", and Velleius Paterculus called him \"the most fickle of mankind\" and incapable of command. According to Cassius Dio, while Mark Antony and Octavian were away from Rome fighting Brutus and Cassius, Lepidus was nominally in control of the city, but Mark Antony's wife, Fulvia, was the real power. Dio wrote, \"She, the mother-in\u2011law of Octavian and wife of Antony, had no respect for Lepidus because of his slothfulness, and managed affairs herself, so that neither the senate nor the people transacted any business contrary to her pleasure\".\nSuch views are reflected in Shakespeare's portrayal of Lepidus in \"Julius Caesar\" in which Antony describes him as \"a slight, unmeritable man, meant to be sent on errands\", comparable to a donkey required to bear burdens. In \"Antony and Cleopatra\" he is portrayed as extremely gullible, asking Antony silly questions about Egypt while very drunk. Antony taunts him with an elaborately nonsensical description of a Nile crocodile. After Lepidus's fall from power, he is referred to as the \"poor third\" and \"fool Lepidius\".\nModern writers have often been equally dismissive. Ronald Syme called him \"a flimsy character...perfidious and despised\". Weigel argues that these views are coloured by evidence that was in large part politically motivated, and that Lepidus's career was no more perfidious or inconsistent than that of the other major players in the power struggles at the time. L\u00e9onie Hayne says that he acted \"skillfully and consistently in support of Antony and (indirectly) of the Caesarian faction\". She also argues that his power bid over Sicily was logical and justifiable. Alain Gowing has also argued that his actions in Sicily, though \"futile\", were no more than an \"attempt to regain a position from which he had been unfairly thrust\".\nFictional depictions.\nDespite his role as \"a slight, unmeritable man\" in Shakespeare's \"Julius Caesar\" and as a rambling drunk in \"Antony and Cleopatra\", other Renaissance-era writers portrayed Lepidus in a more positive way. Caspar Br\u00fclow's Latin play \"Caius Julius Caesar\" depicts Lepidus as Caesar's loyal ally, warning him against conspiracies and later planning revenge on his killers. Georges de Scud\u00e9ry's \"La Mort de C\u00e9sar\" portrays him in a similar light, warning Caesar, and later working closely with Antony, who refers to him as \"sage et prudent L\u00e9pide\". In Pierre Corneille's \"Mort de Pomp\u00e9e\" his is a non-speaking role, simply presented as one of Caesar's entourage of officers.\nLepidus appears in several 18th century French plays, such as Prosper Jolyot de Cr\u00e9billon's \"Le Triumvirat, ou la mort de Cic\u00e9ron\", in which he attempts to save Cicero's life, and is portrayed as a conflicted figure, who respects traditional Roman values, but is unable to resist the will of his colleagues. Cicero rejects compromise, but Lepidus is too weak to do so. Voltaire's \"Le Triumvirat\" refers to Lepidus as a pawn, merely used by Antony and Octavian.\nLepidus appears in a number of novels. He is the principal character of Alfred Duggan's 1958 historical novel \"Three's Company\". As the novel's title implies, it is centered on the second triumvirate, but relates the period through the lens of Lepidus' life and experiences. According to Weigel, he becomes a kind of \"a Don Quixote in a toga\". The novel follows the standard portrayal of him as \"cowardly, stupid, shying away from combat, dominated by women, and longing for someone to give him orders\". A reviewer at the time of publication referred to Duggan's Lepidus as \"the eternal conservative stuffed shirt without the moral strength to live by the traditional virtues he admires and pretends to possess.\" He is portrayed as a more competent figure in W. G. Hardy's \"The Scarlet Mantle\" and \"The Bloodied Toga\". In Allan Massie's \"Let the Emperor Speak\", he is a weasely politician. He is also mentioned in Robert Harris' \"Dictator\", told from the perspective of Cicero's secretary Tiro.\nIn the BBC/HBO TV series \"Rome\", Lepidus (Ronan Vibert) is portrayed in the familiar way, as an inadequate rival for the powerhouses of Octavian and Antony. Much of his involvement in the second Triumvirate is barely mentioned in the series. No mention is made of his alliance with Antony and Caesar before the assassination. He is depicted as a general sent to defeat the weakened Antony after Mutina. His whole army immediately defects to his enemy. He appears sporadically as a barely-noticed participant in later discussions about future plans.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75045", "revid": "50825685", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75045", "title": "Circumnavigation", "text": "Complete navigation around the Earth\nCircumnavigation is the complete navigation around an entire island, continent, or astronomical body (e.g. a planet or moon). This article focuses on the circumnavigation of Earth.\nThe first circumnavigation of the Earth was the Magellan Expedition, which sailed from Sanlucar de Barrameda, Spain in 1519 and returned in 1522, after crossing the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans. Since the rise of commercial aviation in the mid 20th century, circumnavigating Earth is straightforward, usually taking days instead of years. Today, the challenge of circumnavigating Earth has shifted towards human and technological endurance, speed, and less conventional methods.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"circumnavigation\" is a noun formed from the verb \"circumnavigate\", from the past participle of the Latin verb \"circumnavigare\", from \"circum\" \"around\" + \"navigare\" \"to sail\".\nDefinition.\nA person walking completely around either pole will cross all meridians, but this is not generally considered a \"circumnavigation\". The path of a true (global) circumnavigation forms a continuous loop on the surface of Earth separating two regions of comparable area. A basic definition of a global circumnavigation would be a route which covers roughly a great circle, and in particular one which passes through at least one pair of points antipodal to each other. In practice, people use different definitions of world circumnavigation to accommodate practical constraints, depending on the method of travel. Since the planet is quasispheroidal, a trip from one Pole to the other, and back again on the other side, would technically be a circumnavigation. There are practical difficulties (namely, the Arctic ice pack and the Antarctic ice sheet) in such a voyage, although it was successfully undertaken in the early 1980s by Ranulph Fiennes.\nHistory.\nThe first circumnavigation was that of the ship \"Victoria\" between 1519 and 1522, now known as the Magellan\u2013Elcano expedition. It was a Castilian (Spanish) voyage of discovery. The voyage started in Seville, crossed the Atlantic Ocean, and\u2014after several stops\u2014rounded the southern tip of South America, where the expedition named the Strait of Magellan. It then continued across the Pacific, discovering a number of islands on its way (including Guam), before arriving in the Philippines. The voyage was initially led by the Portuguese Ferdinand Magellan but he was killed on Mactan in the Philippines in 1521. The remaining sailors decided to circumnavigate the world instead of making the return voyage\u2014no passage east across the Pacific would be successful for four decades\u2014and continued the voyage across the Indian Ocean, round the southern cape of Africa, north along Africa's Atlantic coasts, and back to Spain in 1522. Of the 270 crew members who set out from Seville, only 18 were still with the expedition at the end including its surviving captain, the Spaniard Juan Sebasti\u00e1n Elcano.\nThe next to circumnavigate the globe were the survivors of the Castilian/Spanish expedition of Garc\u00eda Jofre de Loa\u00edsa between 1525 and 1536. None of the seven original ships of the Loa\u00edsa expedition nor its first four leaders\u2014Loa\u00edsa, Elcano, Salazar, and Mart\u00edn \u00cd\u00f1iguez de Carquizano\u2014survived to complete the voyage. The last of the original ships, the , was sunk in 1526 in the East Indies (now Indonesia) by the Portuguese. Unable to press forward or retreat, Hernando de la Torre erected a fort on Tidore, received reinforcements under Alvaro de Saavedra that were similarly defeated, and finally surrendered to the Portuguese. In this way, a handful of survivors became the second group of circumnavigators when they were transported under guard to Lisbon in 1536. A third group came from the 117 survivors of the similarly failed Villalobos Expedition in the next decade; similarly ruined and starved, they were imprisoned by the Portuguese and transported back to Lisbon in 1546.\nIn 1577, Elizabeth I sent Francis Drake to start an expedition against the Spanish along the Pacific coast of the Americas. Drake set out from Plymouth, England in November 1577, aboard \"Pelican\", which he renamed \"Golden Hind\" mid-voyage. In September 1578, the ship passed south of Tierra del Fuego, the southern tip of South America, through the area now known as the Drake Passage. In June 1579, Drake landed somewhere north of Spain's northernmost claim in Alta California, presumably Drakes Bay. Drake completed the second complete circumnavigation of the world in a single vessel on September 1580, becoming the first commander to survive the entire circumnavigation.\nThomas Cavendish completed his circumnavigation between 1586 and 1588 in record time\u2014in two years and 49 days, nine months faster than Drake. It was also the first deliberately planned voyage of the globe.\nJeanne Baret is recognized as the first woman to have completed a voyage of circumnavigation of the globe, which she did via maritime transport. A key part of her journey was as a member of Louis Antoine de Bougainville's expedition on the ships \"Boudeuse\" and \"\u00c9toile\" in 1766\u20131769.\nCaptain James Cook became the first navigator to record three circumnavigations through the Pacific aboard the \"Endeavour\" from 1769 to 1771 and \"Resolution\" from 1772 to 1779. He was among the first to complete west\u2013east circumnavigation in high latitudes.\nFor the wealthy, long voyages around the world, such as was done by Ulysses S. Grant, became possible in the 19th century, and the two World Wars moved vast numbers of troops around the planet. The rise of commercial aviation in the late 20th century made circumnavigation even quicker and safer.\nNautical.\nThe nautical global and fastest circumnavigation record is currently held by a wind-powered vessel, the trimaran IDEC 3. The record was established by six sailors: Francis Joyon, Alex Pella, Cl\u00e9ment Surtel, Gw\u00e9nol\u00e9 Gahinet, S\u00e9bastien Audigane and Bernard Stamm. On 26 January 2017, this crew finished circumnavigating the globe in 40\u00a0days, 23\u00a0hours, 30\u00a0minutes and 30\u00a0seconds. The absolute speed sailing record around the world followed the North Atlantic Ocean, Equator, South Atlantic Ocean, Southern Ocean, South Atlantic Ocean, Equator, North Atlantic Ocean route in an easterly direction.\nWind powered.\nThe map on the right shows, in red, a typical, non-competitive, route for a sailing circumnavigation of the world by the trade winds and the Suez and Panama canals; overlaid in yellow are the points antipodal to all points on the route. It can be seen that the route roughly approximates a great circle, and passes through two pairs of antipodal points. This is a route followed by many cruising sailors, going in the western direction; the use of the trade winds makes it a relatively easy sail, although it passes through a number of zones of calms or light winds.\nIn yacht racing, a round-the-world route approximating a great circle would be quite impractical, particularly in a non-stop race where use of the Panama and Suez Canals would be impossible. Yacht racing therefore defines a world circumnavigation to be a passage of at least 21,600\u00a0nautical miles (40,000\u00a0km) in length which crosses the equator, crosses every meridian and finishes in the same port as it starts. The second map on the right shows the route of the Vend\u00e9e Globe round-the-world race in red; overlaid in yellow are the points antipodal to all points on the route. It can be seen that the route does not pass through any pairs of antipodal points. Since the winds in the higher southern latitudes predominantly blow west-to-east it can be seen that there are an easier route (west-to-east) and a harder route (east-to-west) when circumnavigating by sail; this difficulty is magnified for square-rig vessels due to the square rig's dramatic lack of upwind ability when compared to a more modern Bermuda rig.\nFor around the world sailing records, there is a rule saying that the length must be at least 21,600\u00a0nautical miles calculated along the shortest possible track from the starting port and back that does not cross land and does not go below 63\u00b0S. It is allowed to have one single waypoint to lengthen the calculated track. The equator must be crossed.\nThe solo wind powered circumnavigation record of 42 days, 16 hours, 40 minutes and 35 seconds was established by Fran\u00e7ois Gabart on the maxi-multihull sailing yacht MACIF and completed on 7 December 2017. The voyage followed the North Atlantic Ocean, Equator, South Atlantic Ocean, Southern Ocean, South Atlantic Ocean, Equator, North Atlantic Ocean route in an easterly direction.\nMechanically powered.\nSince the advent of world cruises in 1922, by Cunard's \"Laconia\", thousands of people have completed circumnavigations of the globe at a more leisurely pace. Typically, these voyages begin in New York City or Southampton, and proceed westward. Routes vary, either travelling through the Caribbean and then into the Pacific Ocean via the Panama Canal, or around Cape Horn. From there ships usually make their way to Hawaii, the islands of the South Pacific, Australia, New Zealand, then northward to Hong Kong, South East Asia, and India. At that point, again, routes may vary: one way is through the Suez Canal and into the Mediterranean; the other is around Cape of Good Hope and then up the west coast of Africa. These cruises end in the port where they began.\nIn 1960, the American nuclear-powered submarine USS \"Triton\" circumnavigated the globe in 60 days, 21 hours for Operation Sandblast.\nThe current circumnavigation record in a powered boat of 60 days 23 hours and 49 minutes was established by a voyage of the wave-piercing trimaran \"Earthrace\" which was completed on 27 June 2008. The voyage followed the North Atlantic Ocean, Panama Canal, Pacific Ocean, Indian Ocean, Suez Canal, Mediterranean Sea route in a westerly direction.\nSolar powered.\nThe first solar-powered world tour was carried out by the ship MS Turanor PlanetSolar in 2012 by the Swiss explorer Rapha\u00ebl Domjan.\nAviation.\nIn 1922 Norman Macmillan (RAF officer), Major W T Blake and Geoffrey Malins made an unsuccessful attempt to fly a \"Daily News\"-sponsored round-the-world flight. The first aerial circumnavigation of the planet was flown in 1924 by aviators of the U.S. Army Air Service in a quartet of Douglas World Cruiser biplanes. The first non-stop aerial circumnavigation of the planet was flown in 1949 by Lucky Lady II, a United States Air Force Boeing B-50 Superfortress.\nSince the development of commercial aviation, there are regular routes that circle the globe, such as Pan American Flight One (and later United Airlines Flight One). Today planning such a trip through commercial flight connections is simple.\nThe first lighter-than-air aircraft of any type to circumnavigate under its own power was the rigid airship LZ 127 \"Graf Zeppelin\", which did so in 1929.\nIn 1936 American journalists Herbert R. Ekins, reporter for the \"New York World-Telegram\", Dorothy Kilgallen of the \"New York Journal\" and Leo Kieran of \"The New York Times\" compteted in a race to travel around the world on commercial airline flights. The race took 18 \u00bd days.\nAviation records take account of the wind circulation patterns of the world; in particular the jet streams, which circulate in the northern and southern hemispheres without crossing the equator. There is therefore no requirement to cross the equator, or to pass through two antipodal points, in the course of setting a round-the-world aviation record.\nFor powered aviation, the course of a round-the-world record must start and finish at the same point and cross all meridians; the course must be at least long (which is approximately the length of the Tropic of Cancer). The course must include set control points at latitudes outside the Arctic and Antarctic circles.\nIn ballooning, which is at the mercy of the winds, the requirements are even more relaxed. The course must cross all meridians, and must include a set of checkpoints which are all outside of two circles, chosen by the pilot, having radii of and enclosing the poles (though not necessarily centred on them). For example, Steve Fossett's global circumnavigation by balloon was entirely contained within the southern hemisphere.\nAstronautics.\nThe first person to fly in space, Yuri Gagarin, also became the first person to complete an orbital spaceflight in the Vostok 1 spaceship within 2 hours on April 12, 1961. The flight started at 63\u00b0\u00a0E, 45\u00b0\u00a0N and ended at 45\u00b0\u00a0E 51\u00b0\u00a0N; thus Gagarin did not circumnavigate Earth completely.\nGherman Titov in the Vostok 2 was the first human to fully circumnavigate Earth in spaceflight and made 17.5 orbits on August 6, 1961.\nHuman-powered.\nAccording to adjudicating bodies \"Guinness World Records\" and Explorersweb, Jason Lewis completed the first human-powered circumnavigation of the globe on 6 October 2007. This was part of a thirteen-year journey entitled Expedition 360.\nIn 2012, Turkish-born American adventurer Erden Eru\u00e7 completed the first entirely \"solo\" human-powered circumnavigation, travelling by rowboat, sea kayak, foot and bicycle from 10 July 2007 to 21 July 2012, crossing the equator twice, passing over 12 antipodal points, and logging in 1,026 days of travel time, excluding breaks.\nNational Geographic lists Colin Angus as being the first to complete a human-powered global circumnavigation in 2006. However, his journey did not cross the equator or hit the minimum of two antipodal points as stipulated by the rules of \"Guinness World Records\" and AdventureStats by Explorersweb.\nPeople have both bicycled and run around the world, but the oceans have had to be covered by air or sea travel, making the distance shorter than the \"Guinness\" guidelines. To go from North America to Asia on foot is theoretically possible but very difficult. It involves crossing the Bering Strait on the ice, and around of roadless swamped or freezing cold areas in Alaska and eastern Russia. No one has so far travelled all of this route by foot. David Kunst was the first person that Guinness verified to have walked around the world between 20 June 1970 and 5 October 1974, by \"[walking] 23,250 km (14,450 miles) through four continents\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75047", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75047", "title": "Aeroelasticity", "text": "Interactions among inertial, elastic, and aerodynamic forces\nAeroelasticity is the branch of physics and engineering studying the interactions between the inertial, elastic, and aerodynamic forces occurring while an elastic body is exposed to a fluid flow. The study of aeroelasticity may be broadly classified into two fields: \"static aeroelasticity\" dealing with the static or steady state response of an elastic body to a fluid flow, and \"dynamic aeroelasticity\" dealing with the body's dynamic (typically vibrational) response.\nAircraft are prone to aeroelastic effects because they need to be lightweight while enduring large aerodynamic loads. Aircraft are designed to avoid the following aeroelastic problems:\nAeroelasticity problems can be prevented by adjusting the mass, stiffness or aerodynamics of structures which can be determined and verified through the use of calculations, \"ground vibration tests\" and \"flight flutter trials\". Flutter of control surfaces is usually eliminated by the careful placement of \"mass balances\".\nThe synthesis of aeroelasticity with thermodynamics is known as \"aerothermoelasticity\", and its synthesis with control theory is known as \"aeroservoelasticity\".\nHistory.\nThe second failure of Samuel Langley's prototype plane on the Potomac was attributed to aeroelastic effects (specifically, torsional divergence). An early scientific work on the subject was George Bryan's \"Theory of the Stability of a Rigid Aeroplane\" published in 1906. Problems with torsional divergence plagued aircraft in the First World War and were solved largely by trial-and-error and ad hoc stiffening of the wing. The first recorded and documented case of flutter in an aircraft was that which occurred to a Handley Page O/400 bomber during a flight in 1916, when it suffered a violent tail oscillation, which caused extreme distortion of the rear fuselage and the elevators to move asymmetrically. Although the aircraft landed safely, in the subsequent investigation F. W. Lanchester was consulted. One of his recommendations was that left and right elevators should be rigidly connected by a stiff shaft, which was to subsequently become a design requirement. In addition, the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) was asked to investigate the phenomenon theoretically, which was subsequently carried out by Leonard Bairstow and Arthur Fage.\nIn 1926, Hans Reissner published a theory of wing divergence, leading to much further theoretical research on the subject. The term \"aeroelasticity\" itself was coined by Harold Roxbee Cox and Alfred Pugsley at the Royal Aircraft Establishment (RAE), Farnborough in the early 1930s.\nIn the development of aeronautical engineering at Caltech, Theodore von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n started a course \"Elasticity applied to Aeronautics\". After teaching the course for one term, K\u00e1rm\u00e1n passed it over to Ernest Edwin Sechler, who developed aeroelasticity in that course and in publication of textbooks on the subject.\nIn 1947, Arthur Roderick Collar defined aeroelasticity as \"the study of the mutual interaction that takes place within the triangle of the inertial, elastic, and aerodynamic forces acting on structural members exposed to an airstream, and the influence of this study on design\".\nStatic aeroelasticity.\nIn an aeroplane, two significant static aeroelastic effects may occur. \"Divergence\" is a phenomenon in which the elastic twist of the wing suddenly becomes theoretically infinite, typically causing the wing to fail. \"Control reversal\" is a phenomenon occurring only in wings with ailerons or other control surfaces, in which these control surfaces reverse their usual functionality (e.g., the rolling direction associated with a given aileron moment is reversed).\nDivergence.\nDivergence occurs when a lifting surface deflects under aerodynamic load in a direction which further increases lift in a positive feedback loop. The increased lift deflects the structure further, which eventually brings the structure to the point of divergence. Unlike flutter, which is another aeroelastic problem, instead of irregular oscillations, divergence causes the lifting surface to move in the same direction and when it comes to point of divergence the structure deforms.\nControl reversal.\nControl surface reversal is the loss (or reversal) of the expected response of a control surface, due to deformation of the main lifting surface. For simple models (e.g. single aileron on an Euler-Bernoulli beam), control reversal speeds can be derived analytically as for torsional divergence. Control reversal can be used to aerodynamic advantage, and forms part of the Kaman servo-flap rotor design.\nDynamic aeroelasticity.\nDynamic aeroelasticity studies the interactions among aerodynamic, elastic, and inertial forces. Examples of dynamic aeroelastic phenomena are:\nFlutter.\nFlutter is a dynamic instability of an elastic structure in a fluid flow, caused by positive feedback between the body's deflection and the force exerted by the fluid flow. In a linear system, \"flutter point\" is the point at which the structure is undergoing simple harmonic motion\u2014zero net damping\u2014and so any further decrease in net damping will result in a self-oscillation and eventual failure. \"Net damping\" can be understood as the sum of the structure's natural positive damping and the negative damping of the aerodynamic force. Flutter can be classified into two types: \"hard flutter\", in which the net damping decreases very suddenly, very close to the flutter point; and \"soft flutter\", in which the net damping decreases gradually.\nIn water the mass ratio of the pitch inertia of the foil to that of the circumscribing cylinder of fluid is generally too low for binary flutter to occur, as shown by explicit solution of the simplest pitch and heave flutter stability determinant.\nStructures exposed to aerodynamic forces\u2014including wings and aerofoils, but also chimneys and bridges\u2014are generally designed carefully within known parameters to avoid flutter. Blunt shapes, such as chimneys, can give off a continuous stream of vortices known as a K\u00e1rm\u00e1n vortex street, which can induce structural oscillations. Strakes are typically wrapped around chimneys to stop the formation of these vortices.\nIn complex structures where both the aerodynamics and the mechanical properties of the structure are not fully understood, flutter can be discounted only through detailed testing. Even changing the mass distribution of an aircraft or the stiffness of one component can induce flutter in an apparently unrelated aerodynamic component. At its mildest, this can appear as a \"buzz\" in the aircraft structure, but at its most violent, it can develop uncontrollably with great speed and cause serious damage to the aircraft or lead to its destruction, as in Northwest Airlines Flight 2 in 1938, Braniff Flight 542 in 1959, or the prototypes for Finland's VL Myrsky fighter aircraft in the early 1940s. Famously, the original Tacoma Narrows Bridge was destroyed as a result of aeroelastic fluttering.\nAeroservoelasticity.\nIn some cases, automatic control systems have been demonstrated to help prevent or limit flutter-related structural vibration.\nPropeller whirl flutter.\n\"Propeller whirl flutter\" is a special case of flutter involving the aerodynamic and inertial effects of a rotating propeller and the stiffness of the supporting nacelle structure. Dynamic instability can occur involving pitch and yaw degrees of freedom of the propeller and the engine supports leading to an unstable precession of the propeller. Failure of the engine supports led to whirl flutter occurring on two Lockheed L-188 Electra aircraft, in 1959 on Braniff Flight 542 and again in 1960 on Northwest Orient Airlines Flight 710.\nTransonic aeroelasticity.\nFlow is highly non-linear in the transonic regime, dominated by moving shock waves. Avoiding flutter is mission-critical for aircraft that fly through transonic Mach numbers. The role of shock waves was first analyzed by Holt Ashley. A phenomenon that impacts stability of aircraft known as \"transonic dip\", in which the flutter speed can get close to flight speed, was reported in May 1976 by Farmer and Hanson of the Langley Research Center.\nBuffeting.\nBuffeting is a high-frequency instability, caused by airflow separation or shock wave oscillations from one object striking another. It is caused by a sudden impulse of load increasing. It is a random forced vibration. Generally it affects the tail unit of the aircraft structure due to air flow downstream of the wing.\nThe methods for buffet detection are:\nPrediction and cure.\nIn the period 1950\u20131970, AGARD developed the \"Manual on Aeroelasticity\" which details the processes used in solving and verifying aeroelastic problems along with standard examples that can be used to test numerical solutions.\nAeroelasticity involves not just the external aerodynamic loads and the way they change but also the structural, damping and mass characteristics of the aircraft. Prediction involves making a mathematical model of the aircraft as a series of masses connected by springs and dampers which are tuned to represent the dynamic characteristics of the aircraft structure. The model also includes details of applied aerodynamic forces and how they vary.\nThe model can be used to predict the flutter margin and, if necessary, test fixes to potential problems. Small carefully chosen changes to mass distribution and local structural stiffness can be very effective in solving aeroelastic problems.\nMethods of predicting flutter in linear structures include the \"p-method\", the \"k-method\" and the \"p-k method\".\nFor nonlinear systems, flutter is usually interpreted as a limit cycle oscillation (LCO), and methods from the study of dynamical systems can be used to determine the speed at which flutter will occur.\nMedia.\nThese videos detail the Active Aeroelastic Wing two-phase NASA-Air Force flight research program to investigate the potential of aerodynamically twisting flexible wings to improve maneuverability of high-performance aircraft at transonic and supersonic speeds, with traditional control surfaces such as ailerons and leading-edge flaps used to induce the twist.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75049", "revid": "50869951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75049", "title": "Electrostatic discharge", "text": "Sudden flow of electric current between two electrically charged objects by contact\nElectrostatic discharge (ESD) is a sudden and momentary flow of electric current between two differently-charged objects when brought close together or when the dielectric between them breaks down, often creating a visible spark associated with the static electricity between the objects.\nESD can create spectacular electric sparks (lightning, with the accompanying sound of thunder, is an example of a large-scale ESD event), but also less dramatic forms, which may be neither seen nor heard, yet still be large enough to cause damage to sensitive electronic devices. Electric sparks require a field strength above approximately 4 million V/m in air, as notably occurs in lightning strikes. Other forms of ESD include corona discharge from sharp electrodes, brush discharge from blunt electrodes, etc.\nESD can cause harmful effects of importance in industry, including explosions in gas, fuel vapor and coal dust, as well as failure of solid state electronics components such as integrated circuits. These can suffer permanent damage when subjected to high voltages. Electronics manufacturers therefore establish electrostatic protective areas free of static, using measures to prevent charging, such as avoiding highly charging materials and measures to remove static such as grounding human workers, providing antistatic devices, and controlling humidity.\nESD simulators may be used to test electronic devices, for example with a human body model or a charged device model.\nCauses.\nOne of the causes of ESD events is static electricity. Static electricity is often generated through tribocharging, the separation of electric charges that occurs when two materials are brought into contact and then separated. Examples of tribocharging include walking on a rug, rubbing a plastic comb against dry hair, rubbing a balloon against a sweater, ascending from a fabric car seat, or removing some types of plastic packaging. In all these cases, the breaking of contact between two materials results in tribocharging, thus creating a difference of electrical potential that can lead to an ESD event.\nAnother cause of ESD damage is through electrostatic induction. This occurs when an electrically charged object is placed near a conductive object isolated from the ground. The presence of the charged object creates an electrostatic field that causes electrical charges on the surface of the other object to redistribute. Even though the net electrostatic charge of the object has not changed, it now has regions of excess positive and negative charges. An ESD event may occur when the object comes into contact with a conductive path. For example, charged regions on the surfaces of styrofoam cups or bags can induce potential on nearby ESD sensitive components via electrostatic induction and an ESD event may occur if the component is touched with a metallic tool.\nESD can also be caused by energetic charged particles impinging on an object. This causes increasing surface and deep charging. This is a known hazard for most spacecraft.\nTypes.\nElectrostatic discharge (ESD) phenomena vary in complexity and magnitude, with the electric spark being the most visible and dramatic example. This occurs when a strong electric field ionizes the air, creating a conductive channel that can convey an electric current. People may experience this as a small jolt of discomfort, but ESD can inflict severe damage on electronic components, potentially leading to malfunctions and failures. In hazardous environments where flammable gases or dust particles are present, ESD can trigger fires or explosions.\nNot all ESD events, however, are accompanied by a visible spark or noise. It is possible for a person to carry a charge that, while undetectable to the human senses, can still be potent enough to harm delicate electronics. Some components can be compromised by discharges as faint as 30\u00a0V, with such damage sometimes not becoming apparent until significant usage has occurred, thus affecting the lifespan and performance of the devices.\nCable discharge events (CDEs) are discharges occurring when connecting electrical cables to a device.\nSparks.\nA spark is triggered when the electric field strength exceeds approximately 4\u201330 kV/cm\u2014the dielectric field strength of air. This may cause a very rapid increase in the number of free electrons and ions in the air, temporarily causing the air to abruptly become an electrical conductor in a process called dielectric breakdown.\nPerhaps the best known example of a natural spark is lightning. In this case the electric potential between a cloud and ground, or between two clouds, is typically hundreds of millions of volts. The resulting current that cycles through the stroke channel causes an enormous transfer of energy. On a much smaller scale, sparks can form in air during electrostatic discharges from charged objects that are charged to as little as 380 V (Paschen's law).\nEarth's atmosphere consists of 21% oxygen (O2) and 78% nitrogen (N2). During an electrostatic discharge, such as a lightning flash, the affected atmospheric molecules become electrically overstressed. The diatomic oxygen molecules are split, and then recombine to form ozone (O3), which is unstable, or reacts with metals and organic matter. If the electrical stress is high enough, nitrogen oxides (NOx) can form. Both products are toxic to animals, and nitrogen oxides are essential for nitrogen fixation. Ozone attacks all organic matter by ozonolysis and is used in water purification.\nSparks are an ignition source in combustible environments that may lead to catastrophic explosions in concentrated fuel environments. Most explosions can be traced back to a tiny electrostatic discharge, whether it was an unexpected combustible fuel leak invading a known open air sparking device, or an unexpected spark in a known fuel rich environment. The result is the same if oxygen is present and the three criteria of the fire triangle have been combined.\nDamage prevention in electronics.\nMany electronic components, especially integrated circuits and microchips, can be damaged by ESD. Sensitive components need to be protected during and after manufacture, during shipping and device assembly, and in the finished device. Grounding is especially important for effective ESD control. It should be clearly defined, and regularly evaluated.\nProtection during manufacturing.\nIn manufacturing, prevention of ESD is based on an Electrostatic Discharge Protected Area (EPA). The EPA can be a small workstation or a large manufacturing area. The main principle of an EPA is that there are no highly-charging materials in the vicinity of ESD sensitive electronics, all conductive and dissipative materials are grounded, workers are grounded, and charge build-up on ESD sensitive electronics is prevented. International standards are used to define a typical EPA and can be found for example from International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) or American National Standards Institute (ANSI).\nESD prevention within an EPA may include using appropriate ESD-safe packing material, the use of conductive filaments on garments worn by assembly workers, conducting wrist straps and foot-straps to prevent high voltages from accumulating on workers' bodies, anti-static mats or conductive flooring materials to conduct harmful electric charges away from the work area, and humidity control. Humid conditions prevent electrostatic charge generation because the thin layer of moisture that accumulates on most surfaces serves to dissipate electric charges.\nIonizers are used especially when insulative materials cannot be grounded. Ionization systems help to neutralize charged surface regions on insulative or dielectric materials. Insulating materials prone to triboelectric charging of more than 2,000\u00a0V should be kept away at least 12 inches from sensitive devices to prevent accidental charging of devices through field induction. On aircraft, static dischargers are used on the trailing edges of wings and other surfaces.\nManufacturers and users of integrated circuits must take precautions to avoid ESD. ESD prevention can be part of the device itself and include special design techniques for device input and output pins. External protection components can also be used with circuit layout.\nDue to dielectric nature of electronics component and assemblies, electrostatic charging cannot be completely prevented during handling of devices. Most of ESD sensitive electronic assemblies and components are also so small that manufacturing and handling is done with automated equipment. ESD prevention activities are therefore important with those processes where components come into direct contact with equipment surfaces. In addition, it is important to prevent ESD when an electrostatic discharge sensitive component is connected with other conductive parts of the product itself. An efficient way to prevent ESD is to use materials that are not too conductive but will slowly conduct static charges away. These materials are called static dissipative and have resistivity values below 1012 ohm-meters. Materials in automated manufacturing which will touch on conductive areas of ESD sensitive electronic should be made of dissipative material, and the dissipative material must be grounded. These special materials are able to conduct electricity, but do so very slowly. Any built-up static charges dissipate without the sudden discharge that can harm the internal structure of silicon circuits.\nProtection during transit.\nSensitive devices need to be protected during shipping, handling, and storage. The buildup and discharge of static can be minimized by controlling the surface resistance and volume resistivity of packaging materials. Packaging is also designed to minimize frictional or triboelectric charging of packs due to rubbing together during shipping, and it may be necessary to incorporate electrostatic or electromagnetic shielding in the packaging material. A common example is that semiconductor devices and computer components are usually shipped in an antistatic bag made of a partially conductive plastic, which acts as a Faraday cage to protect the contents against ESD.\nSimulation and testing for electronic devices.\nFor testing the susceptibility of electronic devices to ESD from human contact, an ESD Simulator with a special output circuit, called the human body model (HBM) is often used. This consists of a capacitor in series with a resistor. The capacitor is charged to a specified high voltage from an external source, and then suddenly discharged through the resistor into an electrical terminal of the device under test. One of the most widely used models is defined in the JEDEC 22-A114-B standard, which specifies a 100 picofarad capacitor and a 1,500 ohm resistor. Other similar standards are MIL-STD-883 Method 3015, and the ESD Association's ESD STM5.1. For compliance to European Union standards for Information Technology Equipment, http://. Another specification referenced by equipment maker Schaffner calls for C = 150\u00a0pF and R = 330\u00a0\u03a9 which provides high fidelity results. While the theory is mostly there, very few companies measure the real ESD survival rate. Guidelines and requirements are given for test cell geometries, generator specifications, test levels, discharge rate and waveform, types and points of discharge on the \"victim\" product, and functional criteria for gauging product survivability.\nA charged device model (CDM) test is used to define the ESD a device can withstand when the device itself has an electrostatic charge and discharges due to metal contact. This discharge type is the most common type of ESD in electronic devices and causes most of the ESD damages in their manufacturing. CDM discharge depends mainly on parasitic parameters of the discharge and strongly depends on size and type of component package. One of the most widely used CDM simulation test models is defined by the JEDEC.\nOther standardized ESD test circuits include the machine model (MM) and transmission line pulse (TLP).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75053", "revid": "50792266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75053", "title": "First Triumvirate", "text": "Alliance between Roman politicians Caesar, Pompey and Crassus\nThe First Triumvirate (c.\u2009late 60 \u2013 53\u00a0BC) was an informal political alliance among three prominent politicians in the late Roman Republic: Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus, Marcus Licinius Crassus, and Gaius Julius Caesar. The republican constitution had many veto points. In order to bypass constitutional obstacles and force through the political goals of the three men, they forged an alliance in secret where they promised to use their respective influence to support each other. The \"triumvirate\" was not a formal magistracy, nor did it achieve a lasting domination over state affairs.\nIt was formed among the three men due to their mutual need to overcome opposition in the senate against their proposals in the previous years. Initially secret, it emerged publicly during Caesar's first consulship in 59\u00a0BC to push through legislation for the three allies. Caesar secured passage of an agrarian law which helped resettle Pompey's veterans, a law ratifying Pompey's settlements after the Third Mithridatic War, and legislation on provincial administration and tax collection. Caesar also was placed in a long-term governorship in Gaul. The early success of the alliance, however, triggered substantial political backlash. Political alliances at Rome reorganised to counterbalance the three men in the coming years.\nBy 55\u00a0BC, the alliance was fraying. The three men, however, came together in mutual interest to renew their pact. By force and with political disruption aided by their allies, they delayed consular elections into 55\u00a0BC and intimidated the \"comitia\" into electing Pompey and Crassus again as consuls. Caesar's command in Gaul was then renewed for another five years; plum provincial commands placed Pompey in Spain and Crassus in Syria. Amid even stronger backlash at Rome against the use of naked force and chaos to achieve political ends, Crassus died in 53\u00a0BC during his failed invasion of Parthia.\nCaesar and Pompey, the two remaining allies, maintained friendly relations for a few years. They remained allies even after Pompey's assumption of a sole consulship in 52\u00a0BC and the death of Julia (Caesar's daughter and Pompey's wife). Pompey, however, moved to form alliances to counterbalance Caesar's influence after Crassus' death. These drew him slowly into a policy of confrontation with Caesar. Deteriorating trust through 50\u00a0BC, along with the influence of Catonian anti-Caesarian hardliners on Pompey, eventually pushed Caesar into open rebellion in January 49\u00a0BC.\nNaming.\nThe term \"First Triumvirate\", while well-known, is a misleading one which is regularly avoided by modern scholars of the late republic. Boards of a certain number of men such as decemviri were a feature of Roman administration, but this alliance was not one of them. The term appears nowhere in any ancient source, refers to no official position, and is \"completely and obviously erroneous\". In the ancient world, the triple alliance was referred to with varying terms: Cicero, contemporaneously, wrote of \"three men\" (\"tris homines\") exercising a \"regnum\"; a satire by Marcus Terentius Varro called it a \"three-headed monster\"; later historians such as Suetonius and Livy referred to the three as a \"societas\" or \"conspiratio\"; the allies themselves \"would presumably have referred to it simply as \"amicitia\"\".\nThe usage of the term \"triumvirate\" to describe this political alliance was unattested during the Renaissance. First attested in 1681, the term emerged into widespread use only during the 18th century; for some time, knowledge that the term was a modern coinage was unknown, \"revealed\" only in 1807. By the 19th century, usage was somewhat regular \u2013 mostly in English and French sources, though not in German ones, \u2013 usually prefaced with clarifications that the term did not refer to any official position.\nMore recently, scholars have started to avoid the term in publications altogether. Harriet Flower in \"Roman Republics\" writes that \"First Triumvirate\" is \"misleading in equating the position of the 50s with the official triumvirate of Antony, Lepidus, and Octavian\", preferring \"alliance\" and \"Big Three\". Books by Andrew Lintott and Richard Billows also have avoided invocation of \"First Triumvirate\". Others add more reasons to avoid its use, for example, Robert Morstein-Marx in the 2021 book \"Julius Caesar and the Roman People\", \"it is almost impossible to use the phrase 'First Triumvirate' without adopting some version of the view that it was a kind of conspiracy against the republic... Nomenclature matters... I eschew the traditional 'First Triumvirate' altogether\". \nClassicists writing for more general audience also have shied away from use of the term \"First Triumvirate\". Mary Beard, for example, uses \"Gang of Three\" in her 2015 book \"SPQR\". Yet others, such as Adrian Goldsworthy, have not, staying with the traditional nomenclature while explaining that the term is inaccurate. The fourth edition of the \"Oxford Classical Dictionary\", for example, similarly says \"the coalition formed between Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus in 60\u00a0BCE was wholly unofficial and never described at the time as a triumvirate... 'First' and 'Second Triumvirate' are modern and misleading terms\".\nHistory.\nFormation.\nThe alliance between Pompey, Crassus, and Caesar emerged due to their failure to pass various core portions of their programmes in the gridlocked state of Roman politics in the years before 60\u00a0BC. All three had wanted something but were stymied by their rivals in the senate and assemblies.\nPompey.\nPompey, having returned two years earlier from the Third Mithridatic War, wanted ratification of his peace settlements in the east. He also sought lands for his veterans to retire on. After Pompey's return from the Sertorian War from Hispania in 71\u00a0BC, he had been able to secure a similar bill distributing land to his veterans; he also had sent subordinates back to Rome to stand for the tribunate in attempts to bring the relevant legislation forward (an attempt in 63\u00a0BC was opposed by then-consul Cicero in \"De lege agraria\"). Further attempts in 62\u00a0BC had led to his allied tribune fleeing the city. While he was successful in getting one of his men, Marcus Pupius Piso Frugi Calpurnianus, elected consul for 61\u00a0BC, an intervening religious scandal had made it impossible for him to push forward the appropriate land resettlement legislation. Through massive bribes, Pompey also secured the election of more of his men to offices in 60\u00a0BC (Lucius Afranius as consul; Lucius Flavius as one of the plebeian tribunes), but they too were stymied. Cato the Younger and Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer, motivated in part by their dislike of Pompey's having previously and irregularly displaced their friend Lucullus from a previous command against Mithridates, Pompey's recent divorce of Celer's half-sister in a failed attempt to form a marriage alliance with Cato, and also by their fear of Pompey's power, led to an obstructive coalition. Lucullus returned from his semi-retirement to demand an in-depth review of every aspect of Pompey's eastern arrangements; \"this would take a tremendous amount of time and would prevent passage of the bill for the foreseeable future\". Without capable allies in the magistracies \u2013 both Piso and Afranius were ineffective \u2013 Pompey was forced to look elsewhere for allies.\nCrassus.\nCrassus was one of the richest men in Rome, having made his fortune by profiting from the Sullan proscriptions. He was a patron for Rome's equestrian businessmen. With Pompey, he had served as consul in 70\u00a0BC. Those public contractors had massively over-bid on tax contracts for the province of Asia (parts of modern western Turkey) because they failed to account for the devastation of the Third Mithridatic War. His clients demanded a reduction in the taxes they were contractually obliged to deliver to the treasury, a goal also stymied by Cato and Celer in December 61\u00a0BC. While senators such as Cicero personally believed \"it was ridiculous for [the tax farmers] to seek to have their contracts renegotiated or cancelled simply because they had overestimated their potential profits\", the senate had been on the verge of approving the legislation before Celer's intervention. Crassus, a personal enemy of Pompey, also opposed Pompey's settlements and land bills in 60\u00a0BC, successfully mobilising his support among the lower-ranked senators to defeat Pompey's proposals. His opposition to Pompey may have been in attempt to win over the senators blocking his own goals, but this was evidently unsuccessful. Passing renegotiation of these tax contracts was vital for Crassus: \"his reputation and influence depended on his ability to act as a champion for the powerful equestrian order\".\nCaesar.\nCaesar in 60\u00a0BC was the recently returning governor of Hispania Ulterior. At this point, he was the least powerful of the three, although he had, in an upset, won election as pontifex maximus in 63\u00a0BC. Energetic and a capable supporter of Pompey for the last decade, he was also indebted to Crassus, who was a guarantor of Caesar's debts. Upon his early return from Spain in June 60\u00a0BC, he was forced to choose between entering the city to declare candidacy for the consulship, which would dissolve his military command and make him ineligible for a triumph, or staying outside of the city in an attempt to work a triumph from the senate. While the senate had regularly permitted candidacies \"in absentia\", Cato filibustered Caesar's request; Caesar, shockingly, gave up his triumphal eligibility to declare his candidacy. Caesar was the known favorite for the consulship; to hobble him, Cato and his allies took two actions. They sought to assign the yet-to-be-elected consuls of 59\u00a0BC to home defence in Italy and sought the election of an uncooperative consular colleague. In both respects, they were successful: the consuls of 59 received commands that put them in a holding pattern and Cato secured election of his son-in-law and a personal enemy of Caesar's, Marcus Calpurnius Bibulus, as Caesar's co-consul. Caesar won his election handily, but to turn his provincial assignment into glory and defeat Bibulus' obstruction, he would need allies.\nTiming.\nScholars have debated the specific date at which the alliance was formed. Plutarch, Livy, and Appian placed the formation of the alliance before Caesar's election; Velleius, Suetonius and Cassius Dio instead put its formation after his election.\nDuring the elections to the consulship, Caesar certainly received support from both Pompey and Crassus, though \"each for his own reasons... Crassus cultivated promising adherents[;] Pompey needed a strong figure in the consulship\". Against the later literary sources, however, a contemporaneous letter to Cicero, where Caesar asked to form a political alliance, also implies Caesar had not yet reconciled Pompey and Crassus by December of 60, months after his election in the summer. Erich Gruen, in \"Last Generation of the Roman Republic\", believes this letter, combined with the fact that Pompey and Crassus would have alienated each-other with any overt support for Caesar's candidacy, places the alliance's formation decisively after Caesar's consular election. Some historians believe Caesar, in his letter to Cicero, may have been coy (\"it may also be that Caesar was not yet showing Cicero all of his cards\") but it did show that Caesar \"was not specifically looking at building a triumvirate, but rather was looking to build as strong a coalition as possible\". This evidence \u2013 especially disclosure that a pact was sought \u2013 places the formation of the alliance some time between July 60 and January 59\u00a0BC.\nThe purpose of the alliance was to secure something that none of the three men could secure alone. If Pompey and Caesar aligned alone, they would not likely be able to overcome opposition to Pompey's proposals in the senate. Pompey and Crassus were personal rivals who could only align through an intermediary. Caesar was that intermediary. Crassus' motives are less clear. He must have wanted more than simply renegotiation of tax contracts. Crassus' additionally would be one of the administrators for the Pompeian land grants and, in doing so, \"the preeminence which Crassus could not quite attain on his own [came] within his grasp\". Caesar needed the alliance as well: he would fully become his own man, \"escap[ing] the subordinate stature of Pompey's other \"amici\"\", defeat the political opposition, and win a profitable command.\nCaesar's consulship, 59\u00a0BC.\nAgrarian law.\nIt was well known prior to Caesar's assumption of the consulship with the new year that he would propose a \"lex agraria\". With powerful and secret political allies, Caesar started his consulship of 59\u00a0BC relatively traditionally. After ordering that minutes of the senate's debates be published, he published a draft proposal for a \"lex Julia agraria\" and set it on the senate's agenda. He took a conciliatory approach, respecting the normal order of the senate and also writing a bill that rectified all the criticisms to Rullus' land bill in 63\u00a0BC (Cicero opposed that bill in \"De lege agraria\"): Caesar would preserve public lands in Campania, repopulate desolate areas of Italy, move citizens from Rome onto the land (reducing the chance of riots), distribute credit for the bill among twenty commissioners (of which Caesar was not to be one), purchase property for redistribution only from willing sellers based on censorial assessments, pay for the entire project from monies won by Pompey, and extend the land grants to Pompey's veterans in return for their service.\nCaesar had the bill read out line-by-line and promised to make any changes needed to receive the assent of the senate. Little reasoned opposition emerged. In general, that an agrarian bill was desirable and \"well justified... could not reasonably be denied... many senators must have felt that it was not high time to make good on the promise made long ago to the long-suffering veterans\". Some ancient sources describe Caesar's conciliatory tone as a cynical plot to roll over the senators; Caesar's goal may have been to provide the senators an opportunity to \"adopt symbolic leadership and demonstrate its solicitude for the interests... of the people... [giving] the body a chance to co-opt the cause of agrarian legislation in its own favour\".\nWhether a cynical ploy or not, the senate voiced little opposition until the speaking order eventually wound its way to Cato; Cato immediately started a filibuster, arguing instead that the people would be too gracious to Caesar for bringing the bill and that the current situation was fine. The extent to which Caesar's prestige during his first consulship was a topic of debate is unclear; the later sources may here be injecting their knowledge of Caesar's later victories into the narrative. Caesar, seeking to break the filibuster, therefore threatened to have Cato sent to the \"carcer\", Rome's small jail, which elicited mass indignation from the senators. In doing so, Cato succeeded in provoking Caesar into giving credence to Cato's claims that Caesar was a would-be tyrant. Recognising the mistake, Caesar quickly had Cato released. After facing these hurdles in the senate, Caesar moved to bring the agrarian law before the people on his own authority, without senatorial consent.\nMoving to the forum, Caesar summoned a \"contio\" (a meeting wherein a magistrate would address the people) where he requested Bibulus explain his opposition. When Bibulus failed to articulate any meaningful objections, beyond that \"he would not permit any innovation\", Caesar pled with him before the people, leading Bibulus to exclaim in frustration that \"you will not have this law this year, not even should you all want it!\", a violation of the norm of popular sovereignty. Seeking to avoid a tribunician veto, Caesar exposed his alliance, summoning Pompey and Crassus. Pompey, when asked what he would do if opponents should use violence to disrupt the bill's passage, said \"he would provide a shield if anyone dared to raise a sword in opposition\". Bibulus responded by mobilising three tribunes to veto the bill (alternatively, he may have wanted to declare bad omens to prevent voting, or both). During the attempt, he was assaulted by a mob, which threw him from the rostra and broke his \"fasces\", symbolically rejecting Bibulus' consular authority. The law was then passed; the next day, Bibulus called a meeting of the senate seeking to annul the law on grounds that it was passed contrary to the auspices and with violence; annulment on such grounds was extremely rare and the senate, regardless, refused. Caesar \"provocatively demanded from the senate an oath of obedience to the law and got it\" after some pushing and resistance from Cato and some of his allies.\nLaws for Pompey and Crassus.\nSome time after passage of the agrarian bill, Bibulus withdrew from public business to his home to declare unfavourable omens on all future voting days; the specific time in the year he did so, however, is not known. Caesar moved two further bills, first, for ratification of a one-third write-down of the tax bills owed by the \"publicani\" for Crassus, and second, for ratification of Pompey's eastern settlement. Both bills were passed with little or no debate in the senate. Lucullus, attempting to oppose Pompey's eastern settlement, was \"forced into public humiliation on his knees before Caesar\" when the consul threatened prosecution. When Cicero, defending his former co-consul Gaius Antonius Hybrida, made an off-hand remark complaining about the political situation, his \"deadly enemy P. Clodius [had] his long-obstructed 'transition' to the plebs rushed through by Caesar... in good time to stand for the tribunate\".\nCaesar then moved to lift the exemption of Campania from his agrarian bill some time in May; its passage may have proved the last straw for Bibulus, who then withdrew to his house. Pompey, shortly thereafter, also wed Caesar's daughter Julia to seal their alliance. An ally of Caesar's, Publius Vatinius (then-plebeian tribune), also secured the passage of a law granting to Caesar the provinces of Illyricum and Cisalpine Gaul for five years. Doing so replaced Caesar's assigned province of the woods and paths of Italy with Gaul; this was in response to growing tensions between the republic and the recent victors of a power struggle in Gaul, which had destabilised the geopolitical situation in the region. After the death of the governor of Transalpine Gaul \u2013 one of Cato's allies \u2013 the senate was persuaded also to assign to Caesar that province as well. Both bills were met with little resistance, likely due to Cato and his allies' boycotting of public business.\nPopular opinion turns.\nBy the summer, however, popular opinion had started to turn against Caesar's methods. Pompey also was distancing himself from Caesar. This was in part due to the success to Cato and Bibulus' campaign: Bibulus' choice to confine himself to his home \"presented the image of the city dominated by one man's sole power, unchecked by a colleague\". Pompey and Caesar attempted public protests against Bibulus' edicts and seclusion, respectively, to little response from the people. By then, the popular fervour of the agrarian bills had died down and the public likely desired a return to normal politics.\nThe ancient sources claimed that for most of the year, the senate was not called and that the people and senators were intimidated and cowed into passing whatever the three allies put before them. These claims are incompatible with the attested events of that year. For example, in that year, Caesar's ally Vatinius was defeated in an election to the augurate and later elections for the magistracies returned Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus and Gaius Memmius, both opponents of Pompey and Caesar, as praetors. He was also able to secure election of two allies \u2013 one was Caesar's soon-to-be father-in-law (Lucius Calpurnius Piso) and the other was Pompey's supporter Aulus Gabinius \u2013 to the consulship. Also passed during Caesar's consulship was the \"lex Julia de repetundis\", which was a wide-ranging reform on corruption in the provinces and before the republic's permanent courts.\nFraying of the pact, 59\u201355\u00a0BC.\nDuring the Caesar's consulship, the success of Cato and Bibulus' tactics at discrediting Caesar and Pompey made the two greatly unpopular during and after the summer: \"[Caesar and Pompey's] public appearances were received coldly or with open antagonism... Bibulus, far from being a pitiable figure, had never enjoyed such wide repute\". Cato and Bibulus, for their part, mobilised a large propaganda campaign seeking to brand Caesar a tyrant, with \"dire warnings of the impending overthrow of the republican government\" that discredited the alliance and forced senators to re-evaluate their tacit support. Crassus revelled in Pompey's discomfitures before the people; this unpopularity frayed at the alliance between the three men, which was meant only to secure for them aims which they could not achieve by themselves.\nUpon the conclusion of Caesar's consulship, he left after a few months for his provincial assignment to Gaul. His legislative activity, however, came under immediate attack from Domitius and Memmius, who had been elected as praetors during Caesar's electoral \"comitia\" the last year, claiming that Caesar had passed the legislation against the auspices. These efforts were utterly unsuccessful \u2013 the pro-triumviral consuls allowed debate on the topic for three days \u2013 and the senate rejected the claims. In later years, Caesar's laws were accepted writ large (perhaps with the exception of Bibulus), disregarding any technical religious objections: \"If Cicero and Cato both went along with the laws of Vatinius and Caesar, we can fairly assume the rest of the senators did so as well... For Bibulus, it was something of a personal campaign to seek to undermine... Caesar's legislation... but his protests in 59 and later hardly 'kept [it] technically invalid'\".\nAt Rome.\nPompey had the most to lose. After alienating the Metelli by divorcing Mucia, Pompey's alliance with Caesar and Crassus alienated some former allies in the 60s as well, including the Cornelii Lentuli. The triple alliance also led to other formerly rivalrous families mending their relationships. The Luculli and Servilii, who had been rivals for decades, \"combined to withstand the triumvirs\". Similarly, the Scibonii Curiones, Cornelii Sullae, and Memmii switched from supporting Pompey into opposing him and Caesar. In general, \"there can be no coincidence in the fact that, in almost every case, former \"amici\" of Pompey are first seen to be ranged with the opposition in the year 59... by maintaining a consciously moral posture, driving the triumvirs to extreme measures, and parading their own martyrdom, Cato and his associates ruined triumviral credit among the people and assembled aristocratic collaboration in resistance\".\nEarly in 59\u00a0BC, Caesar and Pompey had ratified the adoption of Publius Clodius Pulcher into a plebeian clan. Clodius was an independent agent who was adept at playing political enemies off of each other. Soon after Clodius' adoption was ratified, he, against Caesar's wishes, successfully stood for a tribunate for 58\u00a0BC. After some slights from Caesar and Pompey relating to assignment of a foreign mission, he broke with them. At the start of his tribunate, Clodius pushed forward four popular bills to expand grain imports, provide free grain to Roman citizens in the city, restore the (professional organisations), regulate the use of auspices as obstructive tactics, and regulate the power of the censors to remove senators. He also moved agitating against Cicero's illegal execution of the Catilinarian conspirators during his consulship in 63\u00a0BC. While Cicero had secured some promises of protection from Pompey, Crassus, Caesar, and the consuls for 58\u00a0BC, \"the promised assistance... never materialised\" because Clodius had quickly gained a powerful popular following which the fraying alliance was unwilling to oppose. He also quickly won over the consuls of that year by promising them the plum provincial assignments they needed to avoid bankruptcy.\nLater in the year 58, Clodius started to openly criticise the triumvirs, especially Pompey, forcing him into self-seclusion in his home. He also attacked Caesar's legislation on religious grounds. Pompey was somewhat successful in checking Clodius' influence when he formed a coalition to overturn Cicero's banishment, but Clodius' attacks continued, tacitly supported by Crassus and one Gaius Porcius Cato (a relative of Cato the Younger). Pompey also responded by supporting Titus Annius Milo and Publius Sestius, who raised their own urban mobs to contest the streets from Clodius' mobs, and, with the returned Cicero's support, was able to secure a prestigious command over Rome's grain supply in September 57\u00a0BC.\nHowever, Pompey's very success renewed the coalition against him: a coalition of the Claudii, including Clodius, the Lentuli, and the Catonians \u2013 with little meaningful opposition from Caesar and Crassus \u2013 were able to shut off any hope of Pompey being granted a new military command in Egypt to restore Ptolemy XII Auletes to the throne. In a clash of mutually exclusive proposals raised by different factions in January 56\u00a0BC, all proposals were unacceptable to at least one party, leading to nothing being done about Egypt. At the same time, Pompey's grain command had not produced reduced prices, further reducing his popularity; under attack by Clodius, whom Pompey suspected Crassus was supporting, the conservatives around Bibulus and Curio watched.\nAll the consuls of 57 and 56\u00a0BC were, if not opponents of, indifferent to both Caesar and Pompey; the failure to maintain their political influence put the alliance into a \"shambles\". Cicero, describing Pompey's plight, mentions the \"contio\"-goers estranged, the nobility hostile, and the senate unfair. Without the ability to make allies with the rest of the aristocracy, who had closed ranks against him, Pompey had to double down with his existing allies.\nIn Gaul.\nThrough this whole period, Caesar was fighting in the Gallic Wars. By early 56\u00a0BC, he had won enormous popularity both with the senate and the people: in 57, Caesar requested thanksgivings for his victory over the Belgae and, at a motion of Cicero, received fifteen days of \"supplicationes\", a new record. In his narrative of his campaign, \"Commentarii de Bello Gallico\", by 57, Caesar reported pacification of the whole region. These military achievements had undercut any political will to undermine Caesar's \"acta\" from his first consulship, and during 56 itself, Caesar received a series of favourable senatorial decrees to provide more funds for his troops in Gaul \u2013 above Cicero's objections that Caesar could have paid for them out of his spoils \u2013 and granted his request to have ten legates () sent to aid in administration and senatorial settlement of the region's affairs.\nCaesar's successes at this point had made him extremely popular among the people and in general across the political class; Cicero, who had been sullen during Caesar's consulship, sang his praises, saying \"If perhaps Gaius Caesar was too contentious in any matter, if the greatness of the struggle, his zeal for glory, if his irrepressible spirit and high nobility drove him on [that] should be tolerated in the case of a man of his quality\". This popularity, however, did not translate into political victories for his political allies: none of the magistrates for 57 were friendly; in the elections of 57 (for magistrates in 56) his allies were repulsed from both the aedileship and the praetorship, while his political enemies won two praetorships. Caesar's political support in Rome was largely dependent on Pompey and Crassus, rather than his own legates or allies.\nBy 56\u00a0BC, Caesar's enemies were mobilising against him: a tribune attempted to recall him for trial \u2013 which was vetoed, as Caesar was legitimately on government business \u2013 while Domitius only \"declared his intention to terminate Caesar's command as soon as possible\". Furthermore, Caesar's land bills were under attack by a tribune \u2013 perhaps under Pompey's influence \u2013 who wanted to deny Caesar's veterans from receiving land under his \"lex Julia agraria\" upon their retirement. And in the summer, fighting started back up, with campaigns against a Veneti uprising in northwestern Gaul. These campaigns led Caesar to seek a five-year extension of his command; to do this, he too would need the support of his allies once more.\nRenewal.\nLuca Conference.\nOver the summer of 56\u00a0BC, Caesar met with the leaders of various factions across Cisalpine Gaul. He met with Crassus at Ravenna and Pompey at the town of Luca, the southern-most city in Cisalpine Gaul. The agreement emerged from three relatively compatible aims: Crassus and Pompey desired a joint consulship; they also wanted good provincial assignments. Caesar needed an extension in his command to prevent a possible usurpation by Ahenobarbus.\nSome two hundred senators, mostly of lower rank, attended upon the three men, seeking to ingratiate themselves. The conference also forced a re-evaluation of alliances across the wider aristocracy: the Claudii \u2013 both Appius and Publius \u2013 and Gaius Cato switched sides back to the dynasts. Cicero, dependent on and indebted to Pompey for his return from exile, was also enlisted to lend rhetorical support. The alliance was renewed and expanded to include the Claudii Pulchri, turning Clodius from an opponent to a supporter. In return for their help, the allies would support Appius \u2013 whose chances of election to a consulship without their support was slim \u2013 in his goal of being elected consul for 54. The remaining opposition was also further reinvigorated. Cato had returned from a provincial assignment in Cyprus in late 56 and supported Domitius' campaign for the consulship. After 55\u00a0BC, when Pompey and Crassus assumed a joint consulship by violence, the political fortunates of the triple alliance quickly soured.\nThe development of the specific terms of their renewed agreement may have taken some time. Caesar responded to the threat of Domitius' consulship by asking Crassus to stand and veto any actions to take away his command. Pompey chose to stand for the consulship as well, possibly unilaterally, met with the support (if not entirely willing), of his allies. However, by the time this arrangement was decided, the current consul \u2013 Marcellinus \u2013 refused to accept their candidacy on grounds that they had passed the deadline. Faced with political disaster, they decided instead of \"scuttle the whole election process\" for 56\u00a0BC.\nJoint consulship, 55\u00a0BC.\nElection of Pompey and Crassus was by no means certain. By the time of the conference, to produce the conditions needed for victory, the alliance stoked mob violence and interposed a permanent tribunician veto \u2013 courtesy of Clodius' ally, Gaius Cato, who was tribune that year \u2013 to block elections until the following year. The terms of the consuls having expired, elections were conducted instead by temporary extraordinary magistrates, \"interreges\", and with the arrival of Caesar's soldiers from Gaul on winter furlough, elections were held. Employing force to drive other candidates away and distributing bribes to ensure their victory, Pompey and Crassus were elected consuls. They then used their control over the electoral \"comitia\" also to secure the election of their allies to the praetorship (both Milo and Vatinius were returned) while excluding opponents (Cato was not).\nThese strong-arm tactics were exceptional and resulted from the alliance's realisation that failure to secure the consulship in this year would result in their political extinction. While they certainly won a temporary victory, the longer-term fallout of intimidation tactics and the validation of Cato's warnings proved especially harmful \"among the basically conservative Roman voters\".\nPompey and Crassus moved first to elect censors and pass new legislation regulating juries and punishing bribery. The main piece of legislation was brought by an allied tribune, Gaius Trebonius, to grant for five years Crassus and Pompey the provinces of Syria and Hispania (they would draw lots for the specific assignment). Crassus envisioned possible campaigns against Egypt or the Parthians; Pompey envisioned similar campaigns against the Spanish hinterlands. Fearing vetoes from two of his tribunician colleagues, Trebonius had one of them locked in the senate house and prevented the other from entering the Forum with an obstructive mob. With the bill passed, they also made good on their promise to Caesar, putting forward legislation extending Caesar's term in Gaul for five more years.\nPompey threw lavish games in September as part of his dedication of the Theatre of Pompey. News also came of Caesar's expedition beyond the Rhine to Britain; for these, the senate voted him twenty days of thanksgiving. The opposing tribunes attempted to obstruct recruitment for Crassus and Pompey's armies, but were unsuccessful. When Crassus left the city in November, escorted by Pompey, they announced bad omens, attempted to arrest him, and cursed him at the city's gate. Part of the justification against Crassus' campaign was in terms of immorality: \"several in Cato's circle argued... the Parthians had given no justification for war\".\nThe elections for the year, however, went strongly against the allies. Unwilling to repeat their mob tactics due to their unpopularity, Pompey campaigned for one of his clients, Titus Ampius Balbus, but those efforts were in vain. The voters returned Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, denied victory by Pompey and Crassus' violence, and Appius Claudius Pulcher. Also elected was Cato for a praetorship; the next year, he would chair the court on extortion.\nBacklash.\nThe new consul Appius Claudius Pulcher seemed an ally, but as the political winds blew against the alliance, he quickly defected. Early in the year, he cooperated with them in securing the appointment of a Pompeian ally as one of Caesar's tribunes and obstructed Gabinius' prosecution (for the bribes received to induce his invasion of Egypt), but seeing Pompey's support for one Marcus Aemilius Scaurus rather than his brother for the consulship of 53\u00a0BC, he broke with Pompey and launched a prosecution against Scaurus.\nThe alliance's opponents, led by Cato's coterie, also launched a broadside against their supporters in the courts:\nAt least three more supporters of the triumvirate were prosecuted; they too were all acquitted. Cato and his coterie's judicial attacks were unsuccessful \"in large part because the complex network of connections among senators meant that the litigants could not be reduced to stark choices between two political parties or ideologies\".\nThis year also saw the death of Caesar's daughter, and Pompey's wife, Julia, in childbirth. Caesar offered in marriage his grand-niece Octavia, but was rebuffed. Pompey's refusal, however, did not indicate a break between the two allies. At the time, there was \"no demonstrable rupture\"; Pompey and Caesar continued to support each other politically for several years.\nThe elections for 53\u00a0BC were hugely delayed due to political violence and bribery. Domitius and Appius Claudius engaged in bribery pact with two consular candidates. Thus, an anti-triumviral consul, a wavering ally, a supporter of the triumvirate (Gaius Memmius), and an opponent (Gnaeus Domitius Calvinus) banded together. The consuls, concerned that they would be precluded from holding military command due to the lack of a requisite \"lex curiata\", promised to throw their support behind the two candidates in exchange for choice provinces and their securing false testimony from three augurs to swear that the requisite \"lex\" had been passed.\nWhen Memmius exposed the conspiracy, likely to implicate Domitius, all four were indicted for bribery. The senate delayed elections to hold an inquiry, but the specific steps forward became quickly contested and various tribunes vetoed the elections. Coupled with raging street battles in the city between Milo and Clodius' armed gangs, elections were finally held after more than seven months without any magistrates, in July 53\u00a0BC. Dio attributed these delays to tribunician vetoes against elections of \"interreges\" designed to incite appointment of Pompey as dictator. Pompey was not in the city; his return in the summer and his declining of a dictatorship, however, may have stabilised the city sufficiently \u2013 both by his presence and by his starting a rapprochement with Cato's conservative faction \u2013 to allow for elections. By July, the alliance's support for Scaurus, along with Gaius Memmius, had gone nowhere. The \"comitia\" instead returned candidates supported by a coalition of triumviral enemies: Marcus Valerius Messalla Rufus and Gnaeus Domitius Calvinus. As a whole, these various elections showed the weakness of the triumviral coalition: Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus were unable to produce consistently favourable results except when their aims were entirely united; the joint consulship in 55\u00a0BC was brought about by force and, \"thereafter, their [the alliance's] stock with the voters rapidly depreciated\".\nPompey's sole consulship, 52\u00a0BC.\nIn spring of 53\u00a0BC, while Rome dealt with its own political crisis, Crassus launched his invasion of Syria and Caesar was dealing with a military crisis as the Gauls rose up. From the perspective at Rome, news of ambushes in Gaul arrived first: Caesar abandoned his civil functions in Cisalpine Gaul to rescue his legions wintering in the Eburones' territory (near modern Belgium). A few months later, news of the disaster at the Battle of Carrhae arrived, reporting that Crassus and much of his army had been killed by the Parthians.\nStill at this point, Caesar and Pompey were on friendly terms. Caesar praised Pompey, for example, for lending one of Pompey's Spanish legions to help against the Gauls, a private military arrangement which Cato criticised in the senate for usurping senatorial prerogatives on legionary assignments. The consuls immediately prepared to hold elections for 52\u00a0BC, which proved impossible when they were injured by stones thrown by the crowd.\nAs the year 52\u00a0BC started, the consuls stepped down without replacement. For the first 18 days of the year, tribunes continually interposed their vetoes against election of an \"interrex\". Standing for the consulship in this year were Milo (supported by Cato and others), Publius Plautius Hypsaeus (one of Pompey's former lieutenants), and Quintus Caecilius Metellus Pius Scipio. Clodius, still warring with Milo's street gangs, supported Milo's competitors. Some ancient historians \u2013 including Plutarch, Livy, and Valerius Maximus \u2013 believed that this violence was all part of a plot to have Pompey appointed dictator. That Pompey desired a dictatorship is unnecessary to explain his opposition to elections; Pompey may have opposed the elections merely because they would have been elections that Milo would have won. On 18 January, at a chance counter between Clodius and Milo on a road near a suburb outside of Rome, Milo's henchmen killed Clodius after a short brawl between their two entourages. The next day, his body was brought back to Rome, where a mob then stormed the senate house and burnt it down \u2013 along with the Basilica Porcia \u2013 as part of Clodius' funeral pyre.\nAt the resulting senate meeting on the Palatine, the senate elected an \"interrex\". This was in part because two of the men obstructing senatorial action \u2013 Pompey and one of the tribunes, Titus Munatius Plancus, \u2013 were not present. Shortly thereafter, the senate passed a \"senatus consultum ultimum\" which called for the \"interrex\" and Pompey, as proconsul, to raise troops and take them into the city to restore order. The following eleven \"interreges\" were unable to hold elections. However, some fifty-eight days after Clodius' death, with a sufficient force in the city, the twelfth \"interrex\" was able to hold elections. At the direction of the senate on motion of Bibulus and supported by Cato, only Pompey's candidacy was accepted, and upon his election, he became consul without colleague. The purpose of the decree was possibly to forestall a Pompeian dictatorship or as part of a compromise to restore normal government while also precluding Milo's likely election (allowing Milo to be brought to trial for Clodius' murder).\nAlso around this time, Pompey had married the daughter of Quintus Caecilius Metellus Pius Scipio, who also was the widow of Crassus' son; this was part of an attempt to win over more allies. Metellus Pius' family was not part of Cato's coterie (they were personal enemies and Cato's allies had attempted to prosecute him in 60\u00a0BC) and marrying Crassus' son's widow could win over some of the now-dead Crassus' supporters.\nPompey began his consulship by marching soldiers into the city and imposing order by force. After passing legislation, he immediately prosecuted Milo for public violence, a move which Cato and Cicero opposed (for this trial, Cicero wrote Pro Milone). Pompey, however, was able to secure a conviction and forced Milo into exile. Pompey and Cato also bumped heads on the \"Law of the Ten Tribunes\" \u2013 a bill proposed by all ten of the plebeian tribunes in the aftermath of news of Caesar's victory at Alesia \u2013 which granted Caesar the right to stand for the consulship \"in absentia\": Pompey supported it; Cato opposed. Amid bribery scandals, Pompey also secured the passage of a law mooted the previous year, which required a delay of five years been magistracy and dispatch to a province. It was meant to break \"the nexus of corruption between ambition for office and provincial extortion\". Pompey, however, sought and secured exception from his own law, assuming a five year command in Spain immediately.\nCollapse, 52\u201349\u00a0BC.\nThe death of Julia did not mark an immediate collapse in the alliance between Pompey, Crassus, and Caesar. The view that her death made a confrontation inevitable is held by a number of ancient sources, but is no longer uncritically accepted by modern scholars. Nor did his election as sole consul in 52\u00a0BC mark an immediate collapse in their alliance. During Pompey's sole consulship, he married Cornelia Metella, the daughter of Quintus Caecilius Metellus Pius Scipio, but this too was not a break with Caesar (as implied by Velleius Paterclus). The death of Crassus in early 53\u00a0BC, however, did mark the conversion of a balanced three-person alliance into what would turn into a dyadic rivalry. Pompey's marriage in 52\u00a0BC and his other law reaffirming the requirement to declare candidacy for office in person \"did not actually harm Caesar directly\" but indicated his willingness to build alliances with other, formerly closed off, political groupings.\nCato stood for the consulship of 51\u00a0BC. But after running an honest campaign with little bribery and promises to recall Caesar from Gaul, his canvass was rejected by the people. Elected instead were Marcus Claudius Marcellus and Servius Sulpicius Rufus. The former was an enemy of Caesar and raised in 51\u00a0BC the question of stripping Caesar of his command, arguing that because of Caesar's victory at Alesia, his \"provincia\" (here meaning \"task\") in Gaul was completed. His effort was vetoed; Pompey, too, objected, arguing that removing Caesar before the summer of 50\u00a0BC would not respect his dignity.\nAt the elections for the magistrates of 50\u00a0BC, Caesar's ally Gaius Scribonius Curio was elected tribune; Gaius Claudius Marcellus and Lucius Aemilius Paullus were returned as consuls-designate. While Paullus was induced by a massive bribe (Caesar funded his renovation of the \"basilica Aemilia\"), Paullus remained only neutral. By late 51\u00a0BC, the coming showdown became clearer: Caesar would induce tribunes to veto discussion of his replacement in Gaul \u2013 leaving him in command \u2013 while Cato and his conservatives sought to enlist Pompey to defend against any Caesarian threats and deny Caesar any honours. However, Pompey did not immediately come around to breaking with Caesar: he needed Caesar's support to secure a possible command against the Parthians as concerns rose that year over a possible counter-invasion following Crassus' defeat.\nIn the new year, in March 50\u00a0BC, one of the new consuls, Gaius Claudius Marcellus, raised the question of Caesar's command again. His efforts were vetoed by Curio, however, and the consuls responded by putting a hold on all provincial discussions, in an attempt to force Curio to lift it. This veto, perhaps a mistake or possibly made with knowledge that Pompey was hostile to Caesar's standing for election \"in absentia\" with his army \u2013 which would have been seen as intimidating \u2013 started the crisis. Caesar, knowing that Pompey was reconciling with Cato and Bibulus, was unable to trust him to stick to his word, especially if giving up his command would open him to possibly having his candidacy and triumph rejected by the unfriendly consuls. Caesar rejected a senatorial compromise which would have had Caesar stand for the consulship in 50 without giving up his command or armies, likely because he did not trust Pompey and the consuls to uphold their end of the bargain.\nThe proposal of Curio that both men lay down their commands also was rejected, this time by Pompey, who saw it as a personal affront. While the proposal was approved by the senate overwhelmingly, Pompey's refusal and Caesar's militating against his Spanish command sapped trust between the two men. After Pompey's illness in early summer \u2013 which triggered spontaneous prayers for his health that he interpreted as support if he were to engage in civil conflict \u2013 he proposed acceptance, but by this point, Caesar and his partisans were unable to trust Pompey also to hold his end of the bargain and give up his command if Caesar did so first. When two legions were transferred from Caesar's Gallic armies to Italy, on the pretext of use against Parthia (a threat that did not materialise), Caesar's trust in Pompey was shaken again. At the elections, Caesar supported Servius Sulpicius Galba and Lucius Cornelius Lentulus Crus: elected were Gaius Claudius Marcellus (homonymous cousin of the consul of 50\u00a0BC) and Crus, who quickly defected from Caesar's cause.\nAs consul Gaius Claudius Marcellus started military preparations with the clear purpose of opposing Caesar's triumphal return and with Caesar unable to trust Pompey or his loose Catonian allies to hold to his word and vice versa, neither side wanted to make concessions in fear that the other would not reciprocate. Moreover, each side was confident that it held the superior position, expecting the other to give way. By January 49\u00a0BC, this spiralled into a civil war that neither side, Cato's partisans excepted, seemed to have wanted.\nEvaluation.\nThe alliance was clearly successful in winning short-term political advantage for its members in Caesar's consulship of 59\u00a0BC. However, over the following years, it broke down: \"cooperation was shaky and the disenchantment of former supporters proved.. to be debilitating\". Moreover, its very success triggered \"the coalescence of aristocratic groups in opposition\" with greatly lessened success in the later half of the 50s. Overall, the alliance was \"never entirely stable\" and was marked by periods of renewal followed by a return to rivalries between the three members. The goals sought together were broadly opportunistic and self-interested. The alliance, however, was part of the thinking that went into the creation of the Second Triumvirate a few decades later.\nThe formation of the three-way alliance \"has been seen as a momentous milestone in the crippling of republican institutions\" since ancient times. The ancient historian Gaius Asinius Pollio chose to start his history of the civil wars with its formation; other historians, including Ronald Syme in \"Roman Revolution\" (1939), have taken a similar tact, viewing it as \"the end of the free state\". For example, J\u00fcrgen von Ungern-Sternberg in the \"Cambridge Companion to the Roman Republic\" (2014), wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Their friendship (\"amicitia\") could have been a traditional alliance within the framework of what was usual in Roman political life. Yet their agreement that nothing should be done in Rome that was displeasing to any of the three... changed the rules of the game. There had never been a time when three men had conceived of the notion that their private arrangements should regulate what would happen in Rome. For there had never before been three men with the necessary resources and power to impose their vision on the state.\nOthers disagree. Erich Gruen, for example, writes \"the union of political cliques in 59 was an information \"amicitia\"... [it was] no novelty in Roman politics and simply underlined the mobility of grouping that had been characteristic of previous decades\". In this vein, the alliance can be seen as something similar also to \"the kind of political deal the Saturninus and Glaucia were trying to organise in 100\"\u00a0BC. Amy Russell, writing in the \"Encyclopedia of Ancient History\", similarly focuses on how the alliance failed to dominate elections, viewing instead the accusations of \"regnum\" from Cicero and lamentations of tyranny as \"deriv[ing] from their opponents' rhetoric... [who] at the same time... were working to divide them [the allies]\". Similarly, Mary Beard says the alliance \"was not such a complete takeover as those comments [from Horace and Cicero] imply[;] there were all kinds of strains, disagreements, and rivalries between the three men ... the electoral process sometimes got the better of them and someone quite different, not at all to their liking, was voted in\".\nThe alliance's collapse after Crassus' death was because his death put the two remaining men in competition with one another. Coupled with Caesar's military success in Gaul, he was no longer a junior partner. Pompey's search for new allies to counter-balance Caesar led him into conflict.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75054", "revid": "2654606", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75054", "title": "BCCI", "text": ""}
{"id": "75057", "revid": "36246437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75057", "title": "Brutus (cognomen)", "text": ""}
{"id": "75060", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75060", "title": "Karl Gottlob Zumpt", "text": "German classical philologist (1792\u20131849)\nKarl or Carl Gottlob Zumpt (; 20 March 1792\u00a0\u2013 26 June 1849) was a German classical scholar known for his work in the field of Latin philology.\nLife.\nKarl Gottlob Zumpt was born at Berlin on 20 March 1792.\nEducated at Heidelberg and Berlin, he was from 1812 onward, a schoolteacher at Friedrich Werder Gymnasium in Berlin. In 1821 he transferred as a professor to the Joachimsthal Gymnasium, also in Berlin. In 1827 he was appointed professor of classical philology at the University of Berlin.\nHis chief work was his \"Latin Grammar\" (\"Lateinische Grammatik\"\", 1818), which stood as a standard work until superseded by Johan Nicolai Madvig's textbook in 1844 (In Danish: \"\"Latinsk Sprogl\u00e6re til Skolebrug\"). He edited Quintilian's \"Institutio Oratoria\"\" (Volume 5, 1829, a project started by Georg Ludwig Spalding), as well as works by Quintus Curtius Rufus and Cicero:\nOtherwise, he primarily devoted his time and efforts to Roman history, publishing \"Annales veterum regnorum et populorum\" (3rd edition 1862), a work in chronology down to 476 AD, and other antiquarian studies.\nHe was the uncle of August Wilhelm Zumpt.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75061", "revid": "5080785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75061", "title": "August Wilhelm Zumpt", "text": "German classical scholar\nAugust Wilhelm Zumpt (4 December 1815\u00a0\u2013 22 April 1877 in Berlin) was a German classical scholar, known chiefly in connection with Latin epigraphy. He was a nephew of philologist Karl Gottlob Zumpt.\nBorn in K\u00f6nigsberg, Zumpt studied at the University of Berlin (1832\u201336). From 1839 to 1851, he was a professor at Friedrich Werder Gymnasium (Berlin), afterwards working as a professor at Friedrich-Wilhelms-Gymnasium under the direction of Karl Ferdinand Ranke. He travelled extensively during his career; England (1845, 1860), Italy (1851, 1857, 1864), Greece, Egypt, Palestine and Asia Minor (1871\u201372).\nHis papers on epigraphy (collected in \"Commentationes epigraphicae\", 2 vols., 1850, 1854) brought him into conflict with Theodor Mommsen in connexion with the preparation of the \"Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum\", a scheme for which, drawn up by Mommsen, was approved in 1847.\nWorks.\nWilhelm Ihne incorporated materials left by him in the seventh and eighth volumes of his \"R\u00f6mische Geschichte\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75062", "revid": "46026677", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75062", "title": "Battle of Philippi", "text": "Battle of the Roman civil war\nThe Battle of Philippi was the final battle in the Liberators' civil war between the forces of Mark Antony and Octavian (of the Second Triumvirate) and the leaders of Julius Caesar's assassination, Brutus and Cassius, in 42 BC, at Philippi in Macedonia. The Second Triumvirate declared the civil war ostensibly to avenge Julius Caesar's assassination in 44 BC, but the underlying cause was a long-brewing conflict between the Optimates and the Populares.\nThe battle, involving up to 200,000 men in one of the largest of the Roman civil wars, consisted of two engagements in the plain west of the ancient city of Philippi. The first occurred in the first week of October; Brutus faced Octavian, and Antony's forces fought those of Cassius. The Roman armies fought poorly, with low discipline, nonexistent tactical coordination, and amateurish lack of command, with neither side able to exploit opportunities as they developed. At first, Brutus pushed back Octavian and entered his legions' camp. However, to the south, Cassius was defeated by Antony and died by suicide after hearing a false report that Brutus had also failed. Brutus rallied Cassius's remaining troops, and both sides ordered their army to retreat to their camps with their spoils. The battle was essentially a draw but for Cassius's suicide. A second encounter, on 23 October, finished off Brutus's forces after a hard-fought battle. He took his own life in turn, leaving the triumvirate in control of the Roman Republic.\nPrelude.\nAfter the assassination of Caesar, the two main conspirators, Brutus and Cassius, known as the Liberators, and leaders of the Republicans had left Italy. They took control of all the eastern provinces from Greece to Syria and of the allied eastern kingdoms. In Rome the three main Caesarian leaders (Antony, Octavian and Lepidus), who controlled almost all the Roman army in the west, had crushed the opposition of the Senate and established the Second Triumvirate. One of their first tasks was to destroy the Liberators' forces, not only to get full control of the Roman world, but also to avenge Caesar's death.\nThe triumvirs decided that Lepidus would remain in Italy, while the two main partners of the triumvirate, Antony and Octavian, moved to northern Greece with their best troops, a total of 28 legions. They were able to ferry their army across the Adriatic and sent out a scouting force of eight legions, commanded by Norbanus and Saxa, along the Via Egnatia, with the aim of searching for the Liberators' army. Norbanus and Saxa passed the town of Philippi in eastern Macedonia and took a strong defensive position at a narrow mountain pass. Antony was following, while Octavian was delayed at Dyrrachium because of his ill-health (which would accompany him throughout the Philippi campaign). Although Antony and Octavian had been able to cross the sea with their main force, further communications with Italy were made difficult by the arrival of the Republican admiral Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus, with a large fleet of 130 ships.\nThe Liberators did not wish to engage in a decisive battle, but rather to attain a good defensive position and then use their naval superiority to block the triumvirs' communications with their supply base in Italy. They had spent the previous months plundering Greek cities to swell their war-chest. They gathered in Thrace with the Roman legions from the eastern provinces and levies from allies. With their superior forces they were able to outflank Norbanus and Saxa, who had to abandon their defensive position and retreat west of Philippi. This meant that Brutus and Cassius could position their forces to hold the high ground along both sides of the Via Egnatia, about west of the city of Philippi. The southern position was anchored on a supposedly impassable marsh, while on the north on impassable hills. They had time to fortify their position with a rampart and ditch. Brutus positioned his camp to the north while Cassius was on the south of the Via Egnatia. Antony arrived and positioned his army south of the Via Egnatia, while Octavian put his legions north of the road.\nForces.\nAntony and Octavian.\nThe Triumvirs' army present for the battle included nineteen legions. The sources specify the name of only one legion, IV legion, but other legions present included the III, VI, VII, VIII, X Equestris, XII, XXVI, XXVIII, XXIX, and XXX, since their veterans participated in the land settlements after the battle. Appian reports that the triumvirs' legions were almost at full complement. Furthermore, they had a large allied cavalry force of 13,000 horsemen.\nLiberators.\nThe Liberators' army had seventeen legions; eight with Brutus and nine with Cassius. Only two of the legions were at full strength, but the army was reinforced by levies from the eastern allied kingdoms. Appian reports that the army mustered a total of about 80,000 foot-soldiers. Allied cavalry totaled 20,000 horsemen, including 5,000 bowmen mounted in the Eastern fashion. \nThis army included the old Caesarean legions present in the east, probably including XXVII, XXXVI, XXXVII, XXXI and XXXIII legions; so most of these legionaries were Caesarean veterans. However, at least the XXXVI legion consisted of old Pompeian veterans, enrolled in Caesar's army after the Battle of Pharsalus. The loyalty of the soldiers who were supposed to fight against Caesar's heir was a delicate issue for the Liberators. Cassius tried to reinforce the soldiers' loyalty both with strong speeches (\"Let it give no one any concern that he has been one of Caesar's soldiers. We were not his soldiers then, but our country's\") and with a gift of 1,500 denarii for each legionary and 7,500 for each centurion.\nAncient sources do not report the total numbers of men of the two armies, but it seems that they had a similar strength. Adrian Goldsworthy suggests that at full strength the 19 Triumvir legions may have amounted to 95,000 men and the 17 Liberators' legions to 85,000. Most likely each side had only 40,000\u201350,000 legionaries. As the campaign lasted for months, it is unlikely that either side could have sustained the logistics to keep so many men, horses and baggage animals fed if both sides had had 100,000 or so troops.\nFirst battle.\nAntony offered battle several times, but the Liberators were not lured into leaving their defensive position. Antony tried to secretly outflank the Liberators' position through the marshes in the south. With great effort he was able to cut a passage through the marshes, throwing up a causeway over them. This manoeuvre was finally noticed by Cassius, who countered by moving part of his army south into the marshes and constructing a transverse wall in a bid to cut off Antony's outstretched right wing. This brought about a general battle on 3 October 42 BC.\nAntony ordered a charge against Cassius, aiming at the fortifications between Cassius's camp and the marshes. At the same time, Brutus's soldiers, provoked by the triumvirs' army, rushed against Octavian's army, without waiting for the order of attack, which was to be given with the watchword \"Liberty\". This surprise assault had complete success: Octavian's troops were put to flight and pursued up to their camp, which was captured by Brutus's men, led by Marcus Valerius Messalla Corvinus. Three of Octavian's legions had their standards taken, a clear sign of a rout. Octavian was not found in his tent: his couch was pierced and cut to pieces. Most ancient historians say that he had been warned in a dream to beware of that day, as he wrote in his memoirs. Pliny bluntly reports that Octavian went into hiding in the marsh.\nHowever, on the other side of the Via Egnatia, Antony was able to storm Cassius' fortifications, demolishing the palisade and filling up the ditch. Then he easily took Cassius's camp, which was defended by only a few men. It seems that part of Cassius's army had advanced south: when these men tried to come back they were easily repulsed by Antony.\nApparently the battle had ended in a draw. Cassius had lost 8,000 men, while Octavian had about 16,000 casualties. The battlefield was very large and clouds of dust made it impossible to make a clear assessment of the outcome of the battle, so both wings were ignorant of each other's fate. Cassius moved to the top of a hill, but could not see what was happening on Brutus's side. Believing that he had suffered a crushing defeat he ordered his freedman Pindarus to kill him. Brutus mourned over Cassius's body, calling him \"the last of the Romans\". He avoided a public funeral, fearing its negative effects on the army morale.\nOther sources credit the avarice of Brutus' troops as the factor that undid their definitive victory on October3. Premature looting and gathering of treasure by Brutus's advancing forces allowed Octavian's troops to re-form their line. In Octavian's future reign as Emperor, a common battle cry became \"Complete the battle once begun!\"\nSecond battle.\nOn the same day as the first battle, the Republican fleet was able to intercept and destroy the triumvirs' reinforcements of two legions and other troops and supplies led by Gnaeus Domitius Calvinus. The strategic position of Antony and Octavian became perilous, since the already depleted regions of Macedonia and Thessaly were unable to supply their army for long, while Brutus could easily receive supplies from the sea. The triumvirs had to send a legion south to Achaia to collect more supplies. The morale of the troops was boosted by the promise of a further 5,000 denarii for each soldier and 25,000 for each centurion.\nOn the other side, the Liberators' army was left without its best strategic mind. Brutus had less military experience than Cassius and, even worse, he could not command the same respect from his allies and his soldiers, although after the battle he offered another gift of 1,000 denarii for each soldier.\nIn the next three weeks, Antony was able to slowly advance his forces south of Brutus's army, fortifying a hill close to Cassius's former camp, which had been left unguarded by Brutus.\nTo avoid being outflanked, Brutus was compelled to extend his line to the south and then the east, parallel to the Via Egnatia, building several fortified posts. While still holding the high ground he wanted to keep to the original plan of avoiding an open engagement and waiting for his naval superiority to wear out the enemy. The traditional understanding is that Brutus, against his better judgment, subsequently abandoned this strategy because his officers and soldiers were tired of the delaying tactics and demanded he offer another open battle. Brutus and his officers may have feared that their soldiers would desert to the enemy if they appeared to have lost the initiative. Plutarch also reports that Brutus had not received news of Domitius Calvinus' defeat in the Ionian Sea. When some of the eastern allies and mercenaries started deserting, Brutus was forced to attack on the afternoon of October23. As he said, \"I seem to carry on war like Pompey the Great, not so much commanding as commanded.\" However, the reality is that Brutus had no option but to fight, because his entire position was now in danger of being isolated and rendered untenable. If the triumvirs were allowed to continue stretching their lines unimpeded to the east they would ultimately cut off his supply route to Neapolis and pin him against the mountains. If that happened, the tables would be turned; Brutus would either be starved into submission or be forced to retreat by taking his entire army via the hazardous northern trail that had brought him to Philippi.\nThe battle which ensued resulted in close combat between two armies of well-trained veterans. Ranged weapons such as arrows or javelins were largely ignored; instead, the soldiers packed into solid ranks and fought face-to-face with their swords, and the slaughter was terrible. According to Cassius Dio, the two sides had little need for missile weapons, \"for they did not resort to the usual manoeuvres and tactics of battles\" but immediately advanced to close combat, \"seeking to break each other's ranks\". In the account of Plutarch, Brutus had the better of the fight at the western end of his line and pressed hard on the triumvirs' left wing, which gave way and retreated, being harassed by the Republican cavalry, which sought to exploit the advantage when it saw the enemy in disorder. But the eastern flank of Brutus's line had inferior numbers because it had been extended to avoid being outflanked. This meant Brutus's legions had been drawn out too thin in the center, and were so weak here they could not withstand the triumvirs' initial charge. Having broken through, the triumvirs swung to their left to take Brutus in his flank and rear. Appian speaks of the triumvirs' legions having \"pushed back the enemy's line as though they were turning round a very heavy machine.\" Brutus's legions were driven back step-by-step, slowly at first, but as their ranks crumbled under the pressure they began to give ground more rapidly. The second and third reserve lines in the rear failed to keep pace with the retreat and all three lines became entangled. Octavian's soldiers were able to capture the gates of Brutus's camp before the routing army could reach this defensive position. Brutus's army could not reform, which made the triumvirs' victory complete. Brutus was able to retreat into the nearby hills with the equivalent of only four legions. Seeing that surrender and capture were inevitable, Brutus took his own life.\nThe total casualties for the second battle of Philippi were not reported, but the close quarters fighting likely resulted in heavy losses for both sides.\nAftermath.\nPlutarch reports that Antony covered Brutus's body with a purple garment as a sign of respect. Although they had not been close friends, he remembered that Brutus had stipulated, as a condition for his joining the plot to assassinate Caesar, that the life of Antony be spared.\nMany other young Roman aristocrats lost their lives in the battle or died by suicide after the defeat, including the son of great orator Hortensius, and Marcus Porcius Cato, the son of Cato the Younger, and Marcus Livius Drusus Claudianus, the father of Livia, who became Octavian's wife. Some of the nobles who were able to escape negotiated their surrender to Antony and entered his service. Among them were Lucius Calpurnius Bibulus and Marcus Valerius Messalla Corvinus. Apparently, the nobles did not want to deal with the young and merciless Octavian.\nThe remains of the Liberators' army were rounded up, and roughly 14,000 men were enrolled into the triumvirs' army. Old veterans were discharged back to Italy, but some of the veterans remained in the town of Philippi, which became a Roman colony, \"Colonia Victrix Philippensium\".\nAntony remained in the East, while Octavian returned to Italy, with the difficult task of finding enough land on which to settle a large number of veterans. Although Sextus Pompey was controlling Sicily and Domitius Ahenobarbus still commanded the Republican fleet, the Republican resistance had been definitively crushed at Philippi.\nThe Battle of Philippi marked the highest point of Antony's career: at that time he was the most famous Roman general and the senior partner of the Second Triumvirate.\nQuotations.\nPlutarch famously reported that Brutus experienced a vision of a ghost a few months before the battle. One night he saw a huge and shadowy form appearing in front of him; when he asked, \"What and whence art thou?\" it answered \"Thy evil spirit, Brutus: I shall see thee at Philippi.\" He again met the ghost the night before the battle. This episode is one of the most famous in Shakespeare's play \"Julius Caesar\".\nCassius Dio reports that at the last Brutus quoted from a Greek tragedy: \"O wretched Virtue, thou wert but a name, and yet I worshipped thee as real indeed; but now, it seems, thou were but fortune's slave.\"\nAugustus's own version of the Battle of Philippi was: \"I sent into exile the murderers of my father, punishing their crimes with lawful tribunals; and afterwards, when they made war upon the Republic, I twice defeated them in battle.\"\nPopular culture.\nThe battle is depicted in Acts IV and V of Shakespeare's \"Julius Caesar\", in which the two battles are merged into a single day's events.\nA fictionalised account of the battle is depicted in the sixth episode of the second season of the HBO television series \"Rome\". There is but a single battle and both Cassius and Brutus fall in battle instead of being suicides, though Brutus's death is a lone, suicidal attack on the triumvirate's advancing forces, which stab him multiple times, in a similar vein to how he and other senators stabbed Julius Caesar.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75065", "revid": "135518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75065", "title": "Hummus", "text": "Middle Eastern chickpea puree dish\nHummus (, ; , also spelled hommus or houmous), (full name: Hummus Bi Tahini) is a Levantine dip, spread, or savory dish made from cooked, mashed chickpeas blended with tahini, lemon juice, and garlic. The standard garnish includes olive oil, a few whole chickpeas, parsley, and paprika.\nThe earliest mention of hummus was in a 13th century cookbook attributed to the historian Ibn al-Adim from Aleppo in present-day Syria.\nCommonly consumed in Levantine cuisine, it is usually eaten as a dip with pita bread. In the West, it is produced industrially and consumed as a snack or appetizer with crackers or vegetables.\nEtymology and spelling.\nThe word \"hummus\" is 'chickpeas'. The full name of the prepared spread in Arabic is 'chickpeas with tahini'. The colloquial Arabic word is a variant of the Arabic or which may be derived from the Aramaic language ( ), corresponding to the Syriac word for chickpeas: . The word entered the English language around the mid-20th century from the Arabic or via its borrowing for the name of the dish in .\nSpelling of the word in English can be inconsistent, though most major dictionaries from American and British publishers give \"hummus\" as the primary spelling. Some American dictionaries give \"hommos\" as an alternative, while British dictionaries give \"houmous\" or \"hoummos\".\nThe major British supermarkets use \"houmous\".\nOther spellings include \"homous\", \"houmos\", \"houmus\", and similar variants. While \"humus\" (as it is spelled in Turkish) is sometimes found, it is avoided as a heteronym of humus, organic matter in soil.\nOrigin and history.\nAlthough multiple different theories and claims of origins exist in various parts of the Middle East, evidence is insufficient to determine the precise location or time of the invention of hummus. Its basic ingredients\u2014chickpeas, sesame, lemon, and garlic\u2014have been combined and eaten in Egypt and the Levant for centuries. Though regional populations widely ate chickpeas, and often cooked them in stews and other hot dishes, pur\u00e9ed chickpeas eaten cold with tahini do not appear in records before the Abbasid Caliphate in Egypt and the Levant.\nThe earliest mention of Hummus comes from Syria, in a 13th-century cookbook attributed to the Aleppine historian Ibn al-Adim. Other early written recipes for a dish resembling \"\" are recorded in cookbooks written in Cairo in the 14th-century. A cold pur\u00e9e of chickpeas with vinegar and pickled lemons with herbs, spices, and oil, but no tahini or garlic, appears in the \"Treasure Trove of Benefits and Variety at the Table\" (); and a pur\u00e9e of chickpeas and tahini called appears in Muhammad bin Hasan al-Baghdadi's \"The Book of Dishes\": it is based on pur\u00e9ed chickpeas and tahini, and acidulated with vinegar (not lemon), but it also contains many spices, herbs, and nuts, and no garlic. It is also served by rolling it out and letting it sit overnight.\nRegional preparations.\nAs an appetizer and dip, diners scoop hummus with flatbread, such as pita. It is also served as part of a meze or as an accompaniment to falafel, grilled chicken, fish, or eggplant.\nHummus is a common dip in Egypt where it is eaten with pita, and frequently flavored with cumin or other spices.\nIn the Levant, hummus has long been a staple food, often served as a warm dish, with bread for breakfast, lunch or dinner. All of the ingredients in hummus are easily found in gardens, farms and markets, thus adding to the availability and popularity of the dish. Hummus is usually garnished with olive oil, \"nana\" mint leaves, paprika, and parsley.\nHummus is a common part of everyday meals in Israel. It is made from ingredients that, following Kashrut (Jewish dietary laws), can be combined with both meat and dairy meals. Chickpea dishes have long been part of the cuisine of Jews who lived in the Middle East and Northern Africa. The many Mizrahi Jewish immigrants from these countries brought their own unique variations, such as hummus with fried eggplant and boiled eggs prepared by Iraqi Jews. Israeli versions use large amounts of tahini for a creamier texture.\nOne author calls hummus, \"One of the most popular and best-known of all Syrian dishes\" and a \"must on any mezzeh table.\" Syrian and Lebanese in Canada's Arab diaspora prepare and consume hummus along with other dishes like falafel, kibbeh and tabbouleh, even among the third- and fourth-generation offspring of the original immigrants.\nIn Cyprus, hummus is part of the local cuisine in both Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot communities where it is called \"humoi\" (). In the United Kingdom, hummus was popularized by Greek Cypriot caterers, sometimes leading to a perception of it being a Greek food.\nIn Turkey, hummus is considered a meze.\nIn France, in the region of Provence, there is a dish called poichichade that resembles hummus.\nIn the United States and Europe, hummus is commercially available in numerous traditional and non-traditional varieties, such as beet or chocolate.\nNutrition.\nChickpeas, the main ingredient of conventional hummus, have appreciable amounts of dietary fiber, protein, vitamin B6, manganese and other nutrients.\nAs hummus recipes vary, so does nutritional content, depending primarily on the relative proportions of chickpeas, tahini, and water. Hummus provides roughly 170 calories for 100 grams, and is a good to excellent (more than 10% of the Daily Value) source of dietary fiber, vitamin B6, and several dietary minerals.\nPackaged product.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the 1980s, the supermarket Waitrose was the first British supermarket to stock hummus, spelled houmous. Hummus was popularized in the UK by chefs such as Yotam Ottolenghi, Claudia Roden and Anissa Helou. As of 2013, \u00a360 million worth of hummus was sold in the UK each year, and one survey found that 41% of British respondents had hummus in their fridge, twice as many as the rest of Europe. A Waitrose spokesperson said it had become a grocery staple.\nUnited States.\nIn 2006, hummus was present in 12 percent of American households, rising to 17 percent by early 2009. One commentator attributed the growth of hummus to America's embrace of ethnic and exotic foods.\nWhile in 2006\u201308 when some 15 million Americans consumed hummus, and annual national sales were about $5 million, sales growth in 2016 was reflected by an estimated 25% of US households consuming hummus. By 2016, the leading American hummus manufacturer, Sabra Dipping Company, held a 62% market share for hummus sales in the United States, and was forecast to exceed $1 billion in sales in 2017.\nTo meet the rising consumer demand for hummus, American farmers increased their production of chickpeas four-fold since 2009, harvesting more than in 2015, an increase from in 2009. Hummus consumption has been so popular that many tobacco farmers have switched to growing chickpeas to meet demand.\nIn culture.\nHummus is often seen as an unofficial \"national dish\" of Israel, reflecting its huge popularity and significance among the entire Israeli population, which Israel's critics describe as an appropriation of Lebanese, Palestinian or Arab culture. According to Ofra Tene and Dafna Hirsch, the dispute over ownership of hummus exposes nationalism through food and the important role played by the industrialization of hummus made by Israeli private companies in 1958. Although hummus has traditionally been part of the cuisine of the Mizrahi Jews who lived in Arabic-speaking lands, the dish was also popularized among the Jewish immigrants from Europe in the late 19th and early 20th century. Historian Dafna Hirsch describes its adoption in their diet as part of an attempt of blending in the Middle Eastern environment, while sociologist Rafi Grosglick points out the importance of its health aspects to their diet. In recent years, through a process of gourmetization, the Arab identity of hummus became a marker of its authenticity, making famous Arab-Israeli villages such as Abu Gosh and Kafr Yasif. Hence, enthusiasts travel to the more remote Arab and Druze villages in the northern Galilee region for culinary experiences.\nIn October 2008, the Association of Lebanese Industrialists petitioned the Lebanese Ministry of Economy and Trade to request protected status from the European Commission for hummus as a uniquely Lebanese food, similar to the Protected Geographical Status rights held over regional food items by various European Union countries. As of 2009[ [update]], the Lebanese Industrialists Association was still \"collecting documents and proof\" to support its claim.\nThe 2005 short film \"West Bank Story\" features a rivalry between two fictional restaurants, the Israeli \"Kosher King\" and the Palestinian \"Hummus Hut\". A parody of \"West Side Story\", the film won the 2006 Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Film. In 2012, Australian filmmaker Trevor Graham released a documentary, \"Make Hummus Not War\", on the political and gastronomic aspects of hummus.\nLebanon and Israel's chefs have been engaged in a competition over the largest dish of hummus, as validated by the Guinness World Record, as a form of contestation of \"ownership\". The \"title\" has gone back and forth between Israel (2008), Lebanon (2009), Israel (January 2010), and, as of 2021[ [update]], Lebanon (May 2010). The winning dish, cooked by 300 cooks in the village of al-Fanar, near Beirut, weighed approximately , more than double the weight of the Israeli-Arab previous record.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75069", "revid": "1296113482", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75069", "title": "Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus (consul 32 BC)", "text": "Roman general and politician\nGnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus (died 31 BC) was a general and politician of ancient Rome in the 1st century BC.\nLife.\nDuring Caesar's civil war, Ahenobarbus was captured with his father, Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, at Corfinium in 49 BC, and was present at the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 BC, but did not take any further part in the war. He did not however return to Italy until 46 BC, when he was pardoned by Julius Caesar. He probably played no part in Caesar's assassination, although some writers claim that he was one of the conspirators. He followed Brutus into Macedonia after Caesar's death, and was condemned by the \"Lex Pedia\" in 43 BC as one of the murderers.\nIn 42 BC he commanded a fleet of fifty ships in the Ionian Sea, and gained considerable success against the Second Triumvirate, completely defeating Gnaeus Domitius Calvinus on the day of the first battle of Philippi, as the latter attempted to sail out of Brundisium. He was saluted imperator in consequence, and a record of this victory is preserved in the annexed coin, which represents a trophy placed upon the prow of a vessel. The head on the other side of the coin has a beard, in reference to the reputed origin of the Ahenobarbus family.\nAfter the Battle of Philippi in 42 BC, Ahenobarbus conducted the war independently of Sextus Pompey, and with a fleet of seventy ships and two legions plundered the coasts of the Ionian Sea.\nIn 40 BC, through the mediation of Gaius Asinius Pollio, Ahenobarbus became reconciled to Mark Antony, which greatly offended Octavian. In the peace concluded with Sextus Pompeius in 39 BC, Antony provided for the safety of Ahenobarbus, and obtained for him the promise of the consulship for 32 BC. Ahenobarbus accompanied Antony on his ill-fated invasion of Parthia in 36 BC; after one particularly devastating defeat, Antony was too despondent to boost the morale of his troops, so he gave that duty to Ahenobarbus. Antony placed him in command of Bithynia, which he governed until 35 BC or perhaps after. In 35 BC he supported Gaius Furnius, governor of Asia against Pompeius.\nHe became consul, according to agreement, in 32 BC, in which year the open rupture took place between Antony and Octavian. With Gaius Sosius, Ahenobarbus fled from Rome to Antony at Ephesus, where he found Cleopatra with him, and endeavoured, in vain, to obtain her removal from the army. Many of the soldiers, disgusted with the conduct of Antony, offered the command to Ahenobarbus, but he preferred to desert the party altogether, and defected to Octavian shortly before the Battle of Actium in 31 BC. Even though he was suffering from a fever, he took a small boat to Octavian's side. Even though Antony was greatly upset, he still sent him all his gear, his friends and his attendants. He was not, however, present at the battle itself, as he died a few days after joining Octavian. Plutarch suggests that his death was due to \"the shame of his disloyalty and treachery being exposed.\" Suetonius says that he was the best of his family.\nFamily.\nAhenobarbus's father, Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, had been consul in 54 BC. His mother was Porcia, sister of Cato the Younger and half-sister of the two Servilias: Servilia (Caesar's mistress) and Servilia Minor (second wife of Lucullus).\nHis wife was Aemilia Lepida and their son Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus was married to Antonia Major, daughter of Mark Antony by Octavia the Younger. They became parents to a younger Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus, and grandparents of the Roman Emperor Nero. Ahenobarbus may also have been married to a daughter of Lucius Manlius Torquatus.\nCultural depictions.\nThe character of Domitius Enobarbus in the play \"Antony and Cleopatra\" is loosely based on this man. He is Antony's friend who deserts Antony for Caesar (Act III, sc. 13), is stricken with remorse (Act IV, sc. 6), and dies (Act IV, sc. 9).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75070", "revid": "75150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75070", "title": "The Teheran Conference", "text": ""}
{"id": "75071", "revid": "1300395366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75071", "title": "Antonia the Elder", "text": "1st century BC Roman noblewoman\nAntonia the Elder (born August/September 39 BC) was a niece of the first Roman emperor, Augustus, being the eldest daughter of Octavia the Younger and her second husband, the Triumvir Mark Antony. She married Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus and became the paternal grandmother of the emperor Nero.\nBiography.\nAntonia was born in Athens, Greece, and after 36 BC she, her siblings, and her mother were brought to Rome. She was raised by her mother, her uncle, and her aunt Livia Drusilla. According to Cassius Dio, after her father died Augustus allowed her and her younger sister, Antonia Minor, to benefit from their father's estate in Rome. Although little is known of her, Antonia was held in high regard like her sister Antonia Minor, the mother of the emperor Claudius, who was celebrated for her beauty and virtue.\nIssue.\nAround 23 BC Antonia married the consul Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus. Three of their children are known for certain:\nIt is also likely that they had another son named Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (born between 20 and 17 BC), and possibly also a third daughter (born around 23 BC). Syme thinks its possible that the daughter may have lived to marry and produce children, but probably died before the reign of Caligula.\nCultural depictions.\nMany scholars think the Ara Pacis (an altar from the Augustan Era) displays Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus and his elder sister. The woman behind Domitia and Domitius is allegedly their mother Antonia Major and the man next to Antonia Major is allegedly her husband Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, so identified in 1903 by Alfred von Domaszewski. However, the only son of Antonia and Ahenobarbus was born in 1 BC, which is after the Ara Pacis was completed and inaugurated. This means the boy on the frieze cannot be the infamous Gnaeus (father of Nero). Sir Ronald Syme has argued the two children are actually a lost elder son Lucius and another unknown sister. In reality, the family seems to be another family entirely, probably the family of one of Augustus's other three nieces. Gnaeus was born in 1 BC and had two older sisters. No surviving source mentions older siblings who died in childhood, whereas there are other branches of the imperial family that had exactly one son and one daughter between 21 and 15 BC.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75072", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75072", "title": "Bliss Carman", "text": "Canadian poet\nWilliam Bliss Carman (April 15, 1861 \u2013 June 8, 1929) was a Canadian poet who lived most of his life in the United States, where he achieved international fame. He was acclaimed as Canada's poet laureate during his later years.\nIn Canada, Carman is classed as one of the Confederation Poets, a group which also included Charles G.D. Roberts (his cousin), Archibald Lampman, and Duncan Campbell Scott. \"Of the group, Carman had the surest lyric touch and achieved the widest international recognition. But unlike others, he never attempted to secure his income by novel writing, popular journalism, or non-literary employment. He remained a poet, supplementing his art with critical commentaries on literary ideas, philosophy, and aesthetics.\"\nLife.\nWilliam Bliss Carman was born on April 15, 1861, in Fredericton, New Brunswick. \"Bliss\" was his mother's maiden name. He was the great grandson of United Empire Loyalists who fled to Nova Scotia after the American Revolution, settling in New Brunswick (then part of Nova Scotia). His literary roots run deep with an ancestry that includes a mother who was a descendant of Daniel Bliss of Concord, Massachusetts, the great-uncle of Ralph Waldo Emerson. His sister, Jean, married the botanist and historian William Francis Ganong. And on his mother's side he was a first cousin to the siblings Charles (later Sir Charles) G. D. Roberts and Elizabeth Roberts MacDonald.\nEducation and early career.\nCarman was first educated through a private tutor until 1872 due to medical issues stemmed from a severe nose injury he received at the age of four. Afterwards, he attended the Fredericton Collegiate School where he came under the influence of headmaster George Robert Parkin, who gave him a love of classical literature and introduced him to the poetry of Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Algernon Charles Swinburne. He was later educated at the University of New Brunswick (UNB), from which he received a bachelor's degree in 1881. His first published poem was in the \"UNB Monthly\" in 1879. He then spent a year at Oxford and the University of Edinburgh (1882\u20131883), but returned home to receive his master's degree from UNB in 1884.\nAfter the death of his father in January 1885 and his mother in February 1886, Carman enrolled in Harvard University (1886\u20131887). At Harvard he moved in a literary circle that included American poet Richard Hovey, who would become his close friend and his collaborator on the successful \"Vagabondia\" poetry series. Carman and Hovey were members of the \"Visionists\" circle along with Herbert Copeland and F. Holland Day, who would later form the Boston publishing firm Copeland &amp; Day that would launch \"Vagabondia\".\nAfter Harvard Carman briefly returned to Canada, but was back in Boston by February 1890. \"Boston is one of the few places where my critical education and tastes could be of any use to me in earning money,\" he wrote. \"New York and London are about the only other places.\" Unable to find employment in Boston, he moved to New York City and became literary editor of the \"New York Independent\" at the grand sum of $20 a week. There he could help his Canadian friends get published, in the process \"introducing Canadian poets to its readers.\" However, Carman was never a good fit at the semi-religious weekly, and he was summarily dismissed in 1892. \"Brief stints would follow with \"Current Literature\", \"Cosmopolitan\", \"The Chap-Book\", and \"The Atlantic Monthly\", but after 1895 he would be strictly a contributor to the magazines and newspapers, never an editor in any department.\"\nTo make matters worse, Carman's first book of poetry, 1893's \"Low Tide on Grand Pr\u00e9\", was not a success; it was not published in Canada, and distribution in the US was hampered when the publisher went bankrupt.\nLiterary success.\nAt this low point, \"Songs of Vagabondia,\" the first Hovey-Carman collaboration, was published by Copeland &amp; Day in 1894. It was an immediate success. \"No one could have been more surprised at the tremendous popularity of these care-free celebrations (the first of the three collections went through seven rapid editions) than the young authors, Richard Hovey and Bliss Carman.\" \"Songs of Vagabondia\" would ultimately \"go through sixteen printings (ranging from 500 to 1000 copies) over the next thirty years. The three \"Vagabondia\" volumes that followed fell slightly short of that record, but each went through numerous printings. Carman and Hovey quickly found themselves with a cult following, especially among college students, who responded to the poetry's anti-materialistic themes, its celebration of individual freedom, and its glorification of comradeship.\"\nThe success of \"Songs of Vagabondia\" prompted another Boston firm, Stone &amp; Kimball, to reissue \"Low Tide...\" and to hire Carman as the editor of its literary journal, \"The Chapbook\". The next year, though, the editor's job went West (with Stone &amp; Kimball) to Chicago, while Carman opted to remain in Boston.\n\"In Boston in 1895, he worked on a new poetry book, \"Behind the Arras\", which he placed with a prominent Boston publisher (Lamson, Wolffe)... He published two more books of verse with Lamson, Wolffe.\" He also began writing a weekly column for the Boston \"Evening Transcript\", which ran from 1895 to 1900.\nIn 1896 Carman met Mary Perry King, who became the greatest and longest-lasting female influence in his life. Mrs. King became his patron: \"She put pence in his purse, and food in his mouth, when he struck bottom and, what is more, she often put a song on his lips when he despaired, and helped him sell it.\" According to Carman's roommate, Mitchell Kennerley, \"On rare occasions they had intimate relations at 10 E. 16 which they always advised me of by leaving a bunch of violets \u2014 Mary Perry's favorite flower \u2014 on the pillow of my bed.\" If he knew of the latter, Dr. King did not object: \"He even supported her involvement in the career of Bliss Carman to the extent that the situation developed into something close to a \"m\u00e9nage \u00e0 trois\"\" with the Kings.\nThrough Mrs. King's influence Carman became an advocate of 'unitrinianism,' a philosophy which \"drew on the theories of Fran\u00e7ois-Alexandre-Nicolas-Ch\u00e9ri Delsarte to develop a strategy of mind-body-spirit harmonization aimed at undoing the physical, psychological, and spiritual damage caused by urban modernity.\" This shared belief created a bond between Mrs. King and Carman but estranged him somewhat from his former friends.\nIn 1899 Lamson, Wolffe was taken over by the Boston firm of Small, Maynard &amp; Co., who had also acquired the rights to \"Low Tide...\" \"The rights to all Carman's books were now held by one publisher and, in lieu of earnings, Carman took a financial stake in the company. When Small, Maynard failed in 1903, Carman lost all his assets.\"\nDown but not out, Carman signed with another Boston company, L.C. Page, and began to churn out new work. Page published seven books of new Carman poetry between 1902 and 1905. As well, the firm released three books based on Carman's \"Transcript\" columns, and a prose work on unitrinianism, \"The Making of Personality\", that he'd written with Mrs. King. \"Page also helped Carman rescue his 'dream project,' a deluxe edition of his collected poetry to 1903... Page acquired distribution rights with the stipulation that the book be sold privately, by subscription. The project failed; Carman was deeply disappointed and became disenchanted with Page, whose grip on Carman's copyrights would prevent the publication of another collected edition during Carman's lifetime.\"\nCarman also picked up some needed cash in 1904 as editor-in-chief of the 10-volume project, \"The World's Best Poetry\".\nLater years.\nAfter 1908 Carman lived near the Kings' New Canaan, Connecticut, estate, \"Sunshine\", or in the summer in a cabin near their summer home in the Catskills, \"Moonshine.\" Between 1908 and 1920, literary taste began to shift, and his fortunes and health declined.\nBy 1920, Carman was impoverished and recovering from a near-fatal attack of tuberculosis. That year he revisited Canada and \"began the first of a series of successful and relatively lucrative reading tours, discovering 'there is nothing worth talking of in book sales compared with reading.'\" \"'Breathless attention, crowded halls, and a strange, profound enthusiasm such as I never guessed could be,' he reported to a friend. 'And good thrifty money too. Think of it! An entirely new life for me, and I am the most surprised person in Canada.'\" Carman was feted at \"a dinner held by the newly formed Canadian Authors' Association at the Ritz Carlton Hotel in Montreal on 28 October 1921 where he was crowned Canada's Poet Laureate with a wreath of maple leaves.\"\nThe tours of Canada continued, and by 1925 Carman had finally acquired a Canadian publisher. \"McClelland &amp; Stewart (Toronto) issued a collection of selected earlier verses and became his main publisher. They benefited from Carman's popularity and his revered position in Canadian literature, but no one could convince L.C. Page to relinquish its copyrights. An edition of collected poetry was published only after Carman's death, due greatly to the persistence of his literary executor, Lorne Pierce.\"\nDuring the 1920s, Carman was a member of the Halifax literary and social set, The Song Fishermen. In 1927 he edited \"The Oxford Book of American Verse\".\nCarman died of a brain hemorrhage at the age of 68 in New Canaan, and was cremated in New Canaan. \"It took two months, and the influence of New Brunswick's Premier J.B.M. Baxter and Canadian Prime Minister W.L.M. King, for Carman's ashes to be returned to Fredericton.\" \"His ashes were buried in Forest Hill Cemetery, Fredericton, and a national memorial service was held at the Anglican cathedral there.\" Twenty-five years later, on May 13, 1954, a scarlet maple tree was planted at his gravesite, to grant his request in his 1892 poem \"The Grave-Tree\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nLet me have a scarlet maple\nFor the grave-tree at my head,\nWith the quiet sun behind it,\nIn the years when I am dead.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nWriting.\n\"Low Tide on Grand Pr\u00e9\".\nAs a student at Harvard, Carman \"was heavily influenced by Royce, whose spiritualistic idealism, combined with the transcendentalism of Ralph Waldo Emerson, lies centrally in the background of his first major poem, \"Low Tide on Grand Pr\u00e9\" written in the summer and winter of 1886.\" \"Low Tide...\" was published in the Spring, 1887 \"Atlantic Monthly\", giving Carman a literary reputation while still at Harvard. It was also included in the 1889 anthology \"Songs of the Great Dominion.\"\nLiterary critic Desmond Pacey considered \"Low Tide...\" to be \"the most nearly perfect single poem to come out of Canada. It will withstand any amount of critical scrutiny.\"\n\"Low Tide...\" served as the title poem for Carman's first book. \"The poems in this volume have been collected with reference to their similarity of tone,\" Carman wrote in his preface; a nostalgic tone of pervading loss and melancholy. Three outstanding examples are \"The Eavesdropper,\" \"In Apple Time\" and \"Wayfaring.\" However, \"none can equal the artistry of the title poem. What is more, although Carman would publish over thirty other volumes during his lifetime, none of them contains anything that surpasses this poem he wrote when he was barely twenty-five years old.\"\n\"Vagabondia\".\nCarman rose to prominence in the 1890s, a decade the poetry of which anthologist Louis Untermeyer has called marked by \"a cheerless evasion, a humorous unconcern; its most representative craftsmen were, with four exceptions, the writers of light verse.\" The first two of those four exceptions were Richard Hovey and Bliss Carman. For Untermeyer: \"The poetry of this period ... is dead because it detached itself from the world... But ... revolt openly declared itself with the publication of \"Songs from Vagabondia\" (1894), \"More Songs from Vagabondia\" (1896), and \"Last Songs from Vagabondia\" (1900)... It was the heartiness, the gypsy jollity, the rush of high spirits, that conquered. Readers of the \"Vagabondia\" books were swept along by their speed faster than by their philosophy.\"\nEven modernists loved \"Vagabondia\". In the \"October, 1912 issue of the \"London Poetry Review,\" Ezra Pound noted that he had 'greatly enjoyed \"The Songs of Vagabondia\" by Mr. Bliss Carman and the late Richard Hovey.'\"\nCarman's most famous poem from the first volume is arguably \"The Joys of the Open Road.\" \"More Songs...\" contains \"A Vagabond Song,\" once familiar to a generation of Canadians. \"Canadian youngsters who were in grade seven anytime between the mid-1930s and the 1950s were probably exposed to ... 'A Vagabond Song' [which] appeared in \"The Canada Book of Prose and Verse, Book One\", the school reader that was used in nearly every province\" (and was edited by Lorne Pierce).\nIn 1912 Carman would publish \"Echoes from Vagabondia\" as a solo work. (Hovey had died in 1900). More of a remembrance book than part of the set, it has a distinct elegiac tone. It contains the lyric \"The Flute of Spring\".\n\"Behind the Arras\".\nWith \"Behind the Arras\" (1895), Carman continued his practice of \"bringing together poems that were 'in the same key.' Whereas \"Low Tide on Grand Pr\u00e9\" is elegiacal and melancholy, \"Songs from Vagabondia\" is mostly light and jaunty, while \"Behind the Arras\" is philosophical and heavy.\"\n\"Behind the Arras\" the poem is a long meditation that uses the speaker's house and its many rooms as a symbol of life and its choices. The poem does not succeed: \"there are so many asides that the allegory is lost along with any point the poet hoped to make.\"\n\"Ballad of Lost Haven\".\nIn keeping with the \"same key\" idea, Carman's \"Ballad of Lost Haven\" (1897) was a collection of poetry about the sea. Its notable poems include the macabre sea shanty \"The Gravedigger\".\n\"By the Aurelian Wall\".\n\"By the Aurelian Wall\" is Carman's elegy to John Keats. It served as the title poem of his 1898 collection, a book of formal elegies.\nIn the last poem in the book, \"The Grave-Tree,\" Carman writes about his own death.\n\"The Pipes of Pan\".\n\"Pan, the goat-god, traditionally associated with poetry and with the fusion of the earthly and the divine, becomes Carman's organizing symbol in the five volumes issued between 1902 and 1905\" under the above title. Under the influence of Mrs. King, Carman had begun to write in both prose and poetry about the ideas of 'unitrinianism,' \"a strategy of mind-body-spirit harmonization aimed at undoing the physical, psychological, and spiritual damage caused by urban modernity ... therapeutic ideas [which] resulted in the five volumes of verse assembled in \"Pipes of Pan\".\" The \"Dictionary of Canadian Biography (DCB)\" calls the series \"a collection that contains many superb lyrics but, overall, evinces the dangers of a soporific aesthetic.\"\nThe 'superb lyrics' include the much-anthologized \"The Dead Faun\" from Volume I, \"From the Book of Myths\"; \"From the Green Book of the Bards\", the title poem of Volume II; \"Lord of My Heart's Elation\" from the same volume; and many of the erotic poems of Volume III, \"Songs of the Sea Children\" (such as LIX \"I loved you when the tide of prayer\"). As a whole, though, the Pan series shows (perhaps more than any other work) the truth of Northrop Frye's 1954 observation that Carman \"badly needs a skillful and sympathetic selection.\"\n\"Sappho: One Hundred Lyrics\".\nThere were no such problems with Carman's next book. Perhaps because of the underlying concept, \"Sappho: One Hundred Lyrics\" (1904) has a structure and unity that helps make it what has been called Carman's \"finest volume of poetry\".\nSappho was an Ancient Greek poet from the island of Lesbos, who was included in the Greek canon of nine lyric poets. Most of her poetry, which was well-known and greatly admired throughout antiquity, has been lost, but her reputation has endured, supported by the surviving fragments of some of her poems.\nCarman's method, as Charles G.D. Roberts saw it in his Introduction to the book, \"apparently, has been to imagine each lost lyric as discovered, and then to translate it; for the indefinable flavor of the translation is maintained throughout, though accompanied by the fluidity and freedom of purely original work\". It was a daunting task, as Roberts admits: \"It is as if a sculptor of to-day were to set himself, with reverence, and trained craftsmanship, and studious familiarity with the spirit, technique, and atmosphere of his subject, to restore some statues of Polyclitus or Praxiteles of which he had but a broken arm, a foot, a knee, a finger upon which to build.\" Yet, on the whole, Carman succeeded.\n\"Written more or less contemporaneously with the love poems in \"Songs of the Sea Children\", the Sappho reconstructions continue the amorous theme from a feminine point of view. Nevertheless, the feelings ascribed to Sappho are pure Carman in their sensitive and elegiac melancholy.\"\nVirtually all of the lyrics are of high quality; some often-quoted are XXIII (\"I loved thee, Atthis, in the long ago,\"), LIV (\"How soon will all my lovely days be over\"), LXXIV (\"If death be good\"), LXXXII (\"Over the roofs the honey-coloured moon\").\n\"Next to \"Low Tide on Grand Pr\u00e9\", \"Sappho: One Hundred Lyrics\" seems to be the collection that continues to find the most favour among Carman's critics. D.M.R. Bentley, for example, calls it 'undoubtedly one of the most attractive, engaging and satisfying works of any of the Confederation poets.'\" Bentley argued that \"the brief, crisp lyrics of the \"Sappho\" volume almost certainly contributed to the aesthetic and practice of Imagism.\nLater work.\nIn his review of 1954's \"Selected Poems of Bliss Carman\", literary critic Northrop Frye compared Carman and the other Confederation Poets to the Group of Seven: \"Like the later painters, these poets were lyrical in tone and romantic in attitude; like the painters, they sought for the most part uninhabited landscape.\" But Frye added: \"The lyrical response to landscape is by itself, however, a kind of emotional photography, and like other forms of photography is occasional and epigrammatic... Hence the lyric poet, after he has run his gamut of impressions, must die young, develop a more intellectualized attitude, or start repeating himself. Carman's meeting of this challenge was only partly successful.\"\nIt is true that Carman had begun to repeat himself after \"Sappho.\" \"Much of Carman's writing in poetry and prose during the decade preceding World War I is as repetitive as the title of \"Echoes from Vagabondia\" (1912) intimates\" says the \"DCB\". What had made his poetry so remarkable at the beginning \u2013 that every new book was completely new \u2013 was gone.\nHowever, Carman's career was by no means over. He \"published four other collections of new poetry during his lifetime and two more were ready for publication at the time of his death: \"The Rough Rider, and Other Poems\" (1908), \"A Painter's Holiday, and Other Poems\" (1911), \"April Airs\" (1916), \"Far Horizons\" (1925), \"Sanctuary\" (1929), and \"Wild Garden\" (1929). James Cappon's comment on \"Far Horizons\" applies almost equally to the other five volumes: 'There is nothing new in its poetic quality which has the sweet sadness of age rehearsing old tunes with an art which is now very smooth though with less vivacity than it used to have.'\"\nNot only did Carman continue to write, but he continued to write fine poems: poems such as \"The Old Grey Wall\" (\"April Airs\"), the Wilfred Campbell-ish \"Rivers of Canada\" (\"Far Horizons\"), \"The Ghost-yard of the Goldenrod\" and \"The Ships of Saint John\" (\"Later Poems\", 1926), and \"The Winter Scene\" (\"Sanctuary: The \"Sunshine House\" sonnets\"). The best of these have the same nostalgic air of melancholy and loss with which Carman began in \"Low Tide...,\" but now even more poignant as the poet approached his own death.\nRecognition.\nIn 1906 Carman received honorary degrees from UNB and McGill University. He was elected a corresponding Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada in 1925. The Society awarded him its Lorne Pierce Gold Medal in 1928. He was awarded a medal from the American Academy of Arts and Letters in 1929.\nIn 1945, Carman was recognized as a Person of National Historic Significance by the government of Canada.\nCarman is honored by a sculpture erected on the UNB campus in 1947, which portrays him with fellow poets Sir Charles G.D. Roberts and Francis Joseph Sherman.\nBliss Carman Middle School in Fredericton, New Brunswick and Bliss Carman Senior Public School in Toronto, Ontario were named after him.\n\"Bliss Carman Heights\" (an extension of the Skyline Acres subdivision) is a subdivision located in Fredericton, New Brunswick overlooking the Saint John River. It consists of Essex Street, Gloucester Crescent, Reading Street, Ascot Court, and Ascot Drive. An extension of the Bliss Carman Heights subdivision is named \"Poet's Hill\" and consists of Bliss Carman Drive, Poets Lane and Windflower Court (named for one of Carman's poems of the same name).\nIn October 1916, American composer Leo Sowerby was inspired to write his best-known organ piece, \"Comes Autumn Time,\" after reading Carman's poem, \"Autumn,\" in the Literature section of the Sunday Edition of the \"Chicago Tribune\" on October 16 of that year. \"Autumn\" was reprinted from \"The Atlantic\" on page 6 of the Chicago Daily Tribune on October 5, 1916.\nTheodora Thayer's \u201cfine portrait of Bliss Carman is considered one of the memorable achievements in American miniature painting.\u201d\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75073", "revid": "599562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75073", "title": "Britannicus", "text": "Son of Roman emperor Claudius (AD 41\u201355)\nTiberius Claudius Caesar Britannicus (12 February AD 41 \u2013 11 February AD 55), usually called Britannicus, was the son of Roman Emperor Claudius and his third wife, Valeria Messalina. For a time, he was considered his father's heir, but that changed after his mother's downfall in 48, when it was revealed she had engaged in a bigamous marriage without Claudius' knowledge. The next year, his father married Agrippina the Younger, Claudius' fourth and final marriage. Their marriage was followed by the adoption of Agrippina's son, Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, whose name became Nero as a result. His stepbrother would later be married to Britannicus' sister Octavia and soon eclipsed him as Claudius' heir. After his father's death in October 54, Nero became emperor. The sudden death of Britannicus shortly before his fourteenth birthday is reported by all extant sources as being the result of poisoning on Nero's orders; as Claudius' biological son, he represented a threat to Nero's claim to the throne. In Suetonius' The Twelve Caesars, he claims that Nero poisoned Britannicus out of envy of his voice, due to Nero's own obsession with performance and being the best entertainer of all time (as suggested by him wanting the games he hosted to be described as \"the greatest ever undertaken\"). \nName.\nBritannicus' name at birth was Tiberius Claudius Germanicus. The \"agnomen\", his first surname Germanicus, was first awarded to his paternal grandfather, Drusus the Elder, after his death in 9 BC to commemorate his victories over the Germanic tribes. Accordingly, Drusus' sons (Claudius and Germanicus) inherited the name and passed it to their sons as well. Britannicus was given to his father in AD 43 after his conquest of Britain. Claudius never used it himself and gave the name to his son instead, and his full name became Tiberius Claudius Caesar Britannicus. He came to be known by his new name, which seems to have replaced \"Germanicus\" altogether.\nBackground and family.\nBritannicus was born on or about 12 February 41 in Rome, to Emperor Claudius and his third wife, Valeria Messalina. As such, he was a member of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, specifically of the \"gens Claudia\". Britannicus' father had been reigning for less than a month, and his position was boosted greatly by the birth of an heir. To mark the birth, the emperor issued sestertii with the obverse \"Spes Augusta\", the hope of the imperial family.\nBritannicus had four siblings: a half-brother, Claudius Drusus, by Claudius' first wife (Plautia Urgulanilla), though he died before Britannicus was born; a half-sister, Antonia, by Claudius' second wife (Aelia Paetina); a sister by the same mother named Octavia; and an adoptive brother, Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (the future Emperor Nero), who was adopted in AD 49 and renamed Nero Claudius Caesar as a result.\nTwo years later, in 43, Claudius was granted the honorific \"Britannicus\" by the Senate as a reward for his conquest of Britain. The emperor never used the name himself but allowed his son to inherit it and it is the name by which the boy became known to posterity. Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus, a Roman historian, wrote from the late first century that Claudius adored Britannicus; carried him around at public events; and \"would wish him happy auspices, joined by the applauding throng\".\nFather's marriage to Messalina.\nEducation.\nBritannicus was tutored by Sosibius, who was a close associate of Publius Suillius Rufus and a friend of his mother. He was educated alongside Titus Vespasianus, the future emperor. They were brought up together and taught similar subjects by the same tutors.\nIn 47, Sosibius gave Claudius a reminder of the power and wealth, which threatened the emperor's throne. His tutor then, as part of his mother's contrivances, told the emperor of Decimus Valerius Asiaticus's involvement in the murder of Caligula and of his growing popularity in Rome. Sosibius went on, saying Asiaticus meant to rally Roman legions in Germania against the throne. Asiaticus was apprehended immediately and brought to Rome in chains. Sullius successfully pursued charges against other equestrians in the Senate. According to Cassius Dio, Asiaticus was put to death as a favour to Messalina for his property (the Gardens of Lucullus).\nIt was later voted by the Senate for Sosibius to be given a million sesterces for giving Britannicus the benefit of his teachings and Claudius that of his counsel (his involvement in the case against Asiaticus).\nFall of Messalina.\nBritannicus took part in the celebrations of Rome's 800th anniversary in AD 48. It was the sixth-ever \"Ludi Saeculares\" (\"Secular Games\") and sixty-four years since the last one had been held in the summer of 17 BC by Augustus. Britannicus' father was there, as was Lucius Domitius and his mother Agrippina, the last two surviving descendants of Germanicus. Claudius watched the young nobility, including Britannicus and Domitius, enact the Battle of Troy in the circus. Tacitus says that Domitius was greeted with more enthusiasm than Britannicus.\nThe games were seen as the introduction of Agrippina and Domitius to public life, and Britannicus' mother, Messalina, must have been aware of that and been envious of Agrippina. Tacitus writes that Messalina was too busy engaging in an \"insane\" affair to plot the destruction of Agrippina. He says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;She had grown so frantically enamoured of Gaius Silius, the handsomest of the young nobility of Rome, that she drove from his bed Junia Silana, a high-born lady, and had her lover wholly to herself. Silius was not unconscious of his wickedness and his peril; but a refusal would have insured destruction, and he had some hope of escaping exposure; the prize too was great, and so he consoled himself by awaiting the future and enjoying the present. As for her, careless of concealment, she went continually with a numerous retinue to his house, she haunted his steps, showered on him wealth and honours, and, at last, as though empire had passed to another, the slaves, the freedmen, the very furniture of the emperor were to been [\"sic\"] seen in the possession of the paramour.\u2014\u200a\nThe affair continued into the next year. It was then that the affair between Messalina and Silius took a new turn. Silius, who had no children of his own, proposed to marry Messalina if she allowed him to adopt Britannicus. The plan was to overthrow Claudius and rule together as regents of Britannicus. She acquiesced and waited for Claudius to leave Rome before she performed the sacrifice and entered the bigamous marriage. The illegal union was made known to Claudius by Callistus and Narcissus, freedmen in his service. Claudius had Messalina, Silius and others who knew of the affair put to death. Messalina was given a knife to kill herself, but a tribune of the Praetorian Guard had to force it through her neck. Images and statues of Silius and his associates were ordered to be destroyed.\nFather's marriage to Agrippina.\nThe fall of Silius and Messalina opened the way for Agrippina the Younger to become his father's fourth wife. His father claimed to be uninterested in another marriage, but it was not long until he remarried. Unlike his uncle Germanicus, his father had never been adopted into the \"Julii\". Claudius thought that marrying his niece would bring his family closer to that of Augustus, as Agrippina and Domitius were the last living descendants of Germanicus. Therefore, in 49, although a marriage between uncle and niece was incestuous under Roman law, his father remarried. As a daughter of Germanicus and a descendant of Augustus, she was very popular among soldiers and the people. In short, her excellent bloodline and strong political connections made her an attractive candidate for marriage.\nRise of Nero.\nIn 49, during the term of consul-elect Mammius Pollio (March\u2013June), Domitius was betrothed to his sister Octavia and thus became his equal in rank. Tacitus suggests that move had the support of those who feared the vengeance of Britannicus against those who wronged his mother.\nBy the insistence of Pallas, his father was convinced to adopt Domitius as his son. Claudius was convinced to do as Augustus had done in adopting Gaius and Lucius Caesar and as Tiberius had done in adopting Germanicus although he already had a son. In February 50, his father passed a law adopting Domitius into the \"Claudii\" and naming him Nero, and Domitius became \"Nero Claudius Caesar\". Nero and Britannicus then became joint heirs to the emperor, and Agrippina was then given the title of \"Augusta\".\nIn AD 51, his brother Nero assumed the \"toga virilis\" although he was not yet 14. The Senate also decided then that Nero should hold the consulship during his twentieth year (AD 56) and that as consul-elect, that he should enjoy \"imperium proconsulare\" (\"proconsular authority\") beyond the limits of Rome with the title of \"princeps iuventutis\" (\"prince of the youth of Rome\"). The progress of Nero seems to have followed in the footsteps of Gaius and Lucius Caesar. To mark the occasion, a donative was given to the soldiery of Rome, and presents to the people. His stepbrother's status, along with that of Agrippina, is echoed on contemporary coinage.\nIn contrast, Britannicus was progressively isolated. At the games of the circus, Nero appeared in triumphal robes while Britannicus was still dressed as a boy. Tacitus says their clothing at the games affected the expectations of the people: with Nero in a general's clothing and Britannicus in the dress of boyhood. He was not due for the toga until 12 February AD 55. He and his supporters were seen as a potential problem for Nero. Agrippina replaced his tutors with her own nominees and had convinced Claudius to order their executions, including the execution of Sosibius. Not only his tutors but also the two prefects of the Praetorian Guard, Lusius Geta and Rufius Crispinus, were replaced. Tacitus reports that they were thought to be sympathetic to the cause of Britannicus and of his mother. His stepmother had them replaced with Sextus Afranius Burrus, who was a good soldier but knew to whom he owed his allegiance.\nNero's career progressed steadily, and he gave speeches in AD 51 and 52. The speech in 51 thanked the emperor for honours given to him, and that of 52 was a vow for the safe recovery of the emperor from illness. It was in 53 that Nero married Britannicus' sister Octavia, who first had to be legally transferred to another family to obviate charges of incest. By then, it became clear that Nero was the unambiguous designate. His stepbrother became more politically active following his marriage to Octavia. He exempted the people of Ilium from all public burdens by arguing that Rome was descended from Troy through Aeneas (the founder of the Julian line), procured funds for the colony of Bononia (now Bologna, Italy), which had been devastated by fire, and the people of Rhodes had their freedom restored. Meanwhile, Britannicus himself was kept in reserve in case Nero, who was widely seen as the heir, died.\nDeath of Claudius.\nHistorian Suetonius reports that Claudius wished Rome to have a \"real Caesar\", and Britannicus enjoyed support from Claudius' loyal and influential freedman Narcissus. There are possible signs of support for Britannicus seen on coins from Moesia and North Africa that placed Britannicus' head and title on the obverse side. Claudius became aware of his wife's actions and began preparing for the end of her power. His father wished to bestow upon him the toga and to declare Britannicus as his heir. According to Suetonius, when Claudius mentioned his intention to give Britannicus the toga of manhood, he said, \"That the Roman people may at last have a genuine Caesar.\"\nThe actions that Claudius took to preserve his rule in the short term were not easily undone as Britannicus approached manhood. In late 54, Britannicus was within six months of reaching manhood by Roman tradition and had matured early. According to Suetonius, Claudius began to mention divorcing Agrippina and dismissing Nero now that he was no longer needed. Suetonius reports that Claudius now admonished his son to grow up quickly, which implied that everything would be righted when he assumed the toga virilis.\nOn 13 October 54, Claudius died by natural causes or poison. In the accounts of his death by poison, Agrippina, aware of Claudius' intentions of placing Britannicus on the throne, had a well-known poisoner, Locusta, infuse mushrooms with poison that were fed to the emperor.\nThere were those who preferred Britannicus over Nero, such as Claudius' freedman Narcissus. Unfortunately for his cause, Narcissus was away in Campania when the emperor was poisoned, and Britannicus and his sisters, Octavia and Antonia, were kept out of sight in their rooms by Agrippina. Consequently, none could challenge Nero's succession. If one thought that Britannicus' claim should take precedence, the response was that Nero too was the son of Claudius, with Agrippina linking him back to Augustus. It did not help that many were convinced that Britannicus was no longer in the line of succession, a direct effect of the propaganda against him by Agrippina. Nero spoke the eulogy at the emperor's funeral and took sole power. Claudius' new will, which either granted joint rule to Britannicus and Nero or sole rule Britannicus, was suppressed by the new emperor's men in the Senate.\nDownfall and death.\nImmediately after the death of Claudius, Agrippina set upon removing those she had seen as a threat. Marcus Junius Silanus, proconsul of Asia whose brother Lucius had been eliminated by her as well, was poisoned for no other reason than that he had been the great-great-grandson of Augustus. Claudius' freedman Narcissus, Britannicus' champion according to Tacitus, had been driven to suicide after a harsh imprisonment. In Tacitus XIII, that was carried out by Agrippina against the wishes of Nero.\nBefore Nero's consulship in 55, he had forbidden the persecution of a Julius Densus, an equestrian whose partiality for Britannicus had been construed as a crime.\nDuring his consulship, Nero had become more independent from his mother's influence. He began a relationship with a slave girl, and removed Pallas, a favourite of Agrippina, from his post as secretary of the treasury. In response, Agrippina threatened to champion the cause of Britannicus to keep her son in line. In the account of Tacitus, Agrippina says to Nero:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;that Britannicus was now of full age, he who was the true and worthy heir of his father's sovereignty, which a son, by mere admission and adoption, was abusing in outrages on his mother. She shrank not from an utter exposure of the wickedness of that ill-starred house, of her own marriage, to begin with, and of her poisoner's craft. All that the gods and she herself had taken care of was that her stepson was yet alive; with him she would go to the camp, where on one side should be heard the daughter of Germanicus; on the other, the crippled Burrus and the exile Seneca, claiming, forsooth, with disfigured hand, and a pedant's tongue, the government of the world.\u2014\u200a\nTacitus recounts Nero's numerous attempts to undermine Britannicus' image publicly. In one such attempt, during the feast of Saturn (the Saturnalia), he and Nero were playing a game among a group of their friends, and Nero chose Britannicus to sing a song with the expectation that Britannicus would embarrass himself. Britannicus, however, not only avoided humiliation but also generated sympathy amongst the guests by singing a poem telling the tale of how he had been cast aside in favour of Nero. The young emperor immediately began plotting his stepbrother's assassination.\nAccording to Suetonius, Nero moved against Britannicus, employing the same poisoner, Locusta, who had been hired to murder his father, Claudius. The first dose failed, and Nero decided to throw caution to the wind. In the account of Suetonius, he had Locusta brought to his room to mix a faster acting poison before his very eyes, having ruthlessly beaten her for the prior inadequate dose. Locusta claimed this was to keep Nero's assassination under the radar by making the poisoning not as obvious, however it worked only as a laxative. After many tests on kids, there was a mixture that killed an animal instantly. Being pleased, Nero had the concoction brought immediately to the dining room.\nBritannicus was poisoned at a dinner party attended by his sister, Octavia, Agrippina and several other notables. Tacitus' account of the event is that Britannicus was given a hot drink, which was tested by a food taster, and when he asked for it to be cooled, the poison was added to it with the cold water. The substance was instantly effective, and he \"lost alike both voice and breath\". Nero claimed to those present that Britannicus was merely experiencing an epileptic seizure and that he had been affected by the condition since childhood. He died sometime between December 54 and 11 February 55, the day before his 14th birthday, when he was to assume manhood, just four months after his father's death. For her service, the emperor had Locusta rewarded with large estates and even sent her pupils.\nThere is a theory that Britannicus was not poisoned but died of a seizure.\nPost mortem.\nBritannicus was cremated and his ashes placed with those of his father in the Mausoleum of Augustus. Nero held his funeral the very next day in the rain and gave no eulogy, saying it was \"a tradition in the case of untimely deaths not to oppress the public with eulogies and processions.\" Dio states that Nero had the corpse covered in gypsum to cover the effects of the poison on the skin. While he was being carried through the Forum, the rain had uncovered the body, making plain to all who could see that he had been poisoned. The author and historian Beacham considers Dio's account to be \"theatrical\".\nBritannicus was said to have criticised Nero's singing voice, and referred to his adoptive brother by his original name of Lucius Domitius. In favouring Nero, Claudius sealed the fate of his son and perhaps his own. Ominously for Agrippina, Seneca and Burrus did not complain: either they had been bought off or regarded Britannicus' death as inevitable given his relationship with Nero. Instead, they concentrated on growing their influence with the new emperor.\nAccording to Suetonius, Britannicus was good friends with the future Emperor Titus, whose father, Vespasian, had commanded legions in Britain. As part of the Flavians' attempts to link themselves with the Julio-Claudians, Titus claimed that he had been seated with Britannicus on the night he was killed. He even claimed to have tasted the poison, which resulted in a serious and long illness. Titus would go on to erect a gold statue of his childhood friend and issue coins in his memory.\nCultural depictions.\nBritannicus is portrayed in \"Britannicus\" (1669) by French playwright Jean Racine.\nHe was played by Graham Seed in \"I, Claudius\", a 1976 television series by Jack Pulman.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75074", "revid": "48247241", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75074", "title": "Bank of Credit and Commerce International", "text": "Bank involved with crime (1972\u20131991)\nThe Bank of Credit and Commerce International was an international bank founded in 1972 by Agha Hasan Abedi, a Pakistani financier. The bank was registered in Luxembourg with head offices in Karachi and London. A decade after opening, BCCI had over 400 branches in 78 countries and assets in excess of US$20 billion, making it the seventh largest private bank in the world.\nBCCI came under the scrutiny of financial regulators and intelligence agencies in the 1980s, due to concerns that it was poorly regulated. Subsequent investigations revealed that it was involved in massive money laundering and other financial crimes, and had illegally gained controlling interest in a major American bank. BCCI became the focus of a massive regulatory battle in 1991, and, on 5 July of that year, customs and bank regulators in seven countries raided and locked down records of its branch offices during Operation C-Chase.\nInvestigators in the United States and the UK determined that BCCI had been \"set up deliberately to avoid centralized regulatory review, and operated extensively in bank secrecy jurisdictions. Its affairs were extraordinarily complex. Its officers were sophisticated international bankers whose apparent objective was to keep their affairs secret, to commit fraud on a massive scale, and to avoid detection\".\nThe liquidators, Deloitte &amp; Touche, filed a lawsuit against the bank's auditors, Price Waterhouse and Ernst &amp; Young, which was settled for $175 million in 1998. By 2013, Deloitte &amp; Touche claimed to have recovered about 75% of the creditors' lost money.\nBCCI continues to be cited as a lesson to be heeded by leading figures in the world of finance and banking. In March 2023, the United States' Acting Comptroller of the Currency Michael J. Hsu stated that \"there are strong parallels between FTX and the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, better known in bank regulatory circles as BCCI, which failed in 1991 and led to significant changes in how global banks are supervised.\"\nHistory.\nBCCI's founder, Agha Hasan Abedi, established the bank in 1972. Abedi, a prolific banker, had previously set up the United Bank Limited in Pakistan in 1959 sponsored by Saigols. Preceding the nationalization of United Bank Limited in 1974, he sought to create a new supranational banking entity. BCCI was created with capital 25% of which came from Bank of America and the remaining 75% from Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, the ruler of Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates.\nBCCI expanded rapidly in the 1970s, pursuing long-term asset growth over profits, seeking high-net-worth individuals and regular large deposits. The company itself divided into BCCI Holdings with the bank under that splitting into BCCI SA (Luxembourg) and BCCI Overseas (Grand Cayman). BCCI also acquired parallel banks through acquisitions: buying the Banque de Commerce et Placements (BCP) of Geneva in 1976, and creating KIFCO (Kuwait International Finance Company), Credit &amp; Finance Corporation Ltd, and a series of Cayman-based companies held together as ICIC (International Credit and Investment Company Overseas, International Credit and Commerce [Overseas], etc.). Overall, BCCI expanded from 19 branches in five countries in 1973 to 27 branches in 1974 and 108 branches by 1976, with assets growing from $200 million to $1.6 billion. This growth caused extensive underlying capital problems. \"The Guardian\" alleged that BCCI was using cash from deposits to fund operating expenses, rather than making investments. Investigative journalist and author Joseph J. Trento has argued that the bank's transformation was guided by the head of Saudi intelligence with a view to enabling it to finance covert American intelligence operations at a time, in the aftermath of Watergate, when the American intelligence agencies were defending themselves from investigations by domestic authorities. \nIn 1973, the BCCI applied for an offshore banking licence in Singapore that was rejected by the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) on the basis that the bank was too new at just a year old and low in capitalisation. In 1980, they attempted to reapply but were yet again turned down by the MAS on the basis of its weak international regard.\nBCCI entered the African markets in 1979, and Asia in the early 1980s. BCCI was among the first foreign banks awarded a license to operate in the Chinese Shenzhen Special Economic Zone which bore testament to Agha Hasan Abedi's public relations skills, a feat that had yet to be achieved by the likes of Citicorp and JP Morgan. Some of China's largest state banks were depositors in BCCI's Shenzhen branch.\nThere was rigid compartmentalization; the 248 managers and general managers reported directly to Abedi and the CEO Swaleh Naqvi. It was structured in such a way that no single country had overall regulatory supervision over it so as not to hinder potential growth and expansion opportunities. Its two holding companies were based in Luxembourg and the Cayman Islands\u00a0\u2013 two jurisdictions where banking regulation was notoriously weak. It was also not regulated by a country that had a central bank. On several occasions, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, a bureau within the U.S. Department of the Treasury that regulates national banks, told the Federal Reserve in no uncertain terms that BCCI must not be allowed to buy any American bank because it was poorly regulated.\nBy 1980, BCCI was reported to have assets of over $4 billion with over 150 branches in 46 countries. Bank of America was \"bewildered\" by BCCI and reduced its holding in 1980, and the company came to be held by a number of groups, with International Credit and Investment Corp ('ICIC') owning 70%. By 1989, ICIC's shareholding was reduced to 11% with Abu Dhabi groups holding almost 40%. However, large numbers of shares were held by BCCI nominees.\nIn 1982, 15 Middle Eastern investors bought Financial General Bankshares, a large bank holding company headquartered in Washington, D.C. All the investors were BCCI clients, but the Fed received assurances that BCCI would be in no way involved in the management of the company, which was renamed First American Bankshares. To alleviate regulators' concerns, Clark Clifford, an adviser to five presidents, was named First American's chairman. Clifford headed a board composed of himself and several other distinguished American citizens, including former United States Senator Stuart Symington. In truth, BCCI had been involved in the purchase of FGB/First American from the beginning. Abedi had been approached about buying it as early as 1977, but by this time BCCI's reputation in the United States was so poor that it could not hope to buy an American bank on its own (as mentioned above, the OCC was adamantly opposed to BCCI's being allowed to buy its way into the American banking industry). Rather, it used the First American investors as nominees. Moreover, Clifford's law firm was retained as general counsel, and also handled most of BCCI's American legal work. BCCI was also heavily involved in First American personnel matters. The relationship between the two was so close that rumors spread BCCI was the real owner of First American.\nBCCI had an unusual annual auditing system: Price Waterhouse were the accountants for BCCI Overseas, while Ernst &amp; Young audited BCCI and BCCI Holdings (London and Luxembourg). Other companies such as KIFCO and ICIC were audited by neither. In October 1985, the Bank of England and the Monetary Institute of Luxembourg (Luxembourg's bank regulator) ordered BCCI to change to a single accountant, alarmed at reported BCCI losses on the commodities and financial markets. Price Waterhouse became the bank's sole accountant in 1987.\nIn 1990, a Price Waterhouse audit of BCCI revealed an unaccountable loss of hundreds of millions of dollars. The bank approached Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, who made good the loss in exchange for an increased shareholding of 78%. Much of BCCI's documentation was then transferred to Abu Dhabi. The audit also revealed numerous irregularities. Most seriously, BCCI had made a staggering $1.48 billion worth of loans to its own shareholders, who used BCCI stock as collateral.\nThe audit also confirmed what many Americans who watched BCCI long suspected\u00a0\u2013 that BCCI secretly (and illegally) owned First American. When the Fed cleared the group of Arab investors to buy First American, it did so on the condition that they supplement their personal funds with money borrowed from banks with no connection to BCCI. Contrary to that agreement, several stockholders had borrowed heavily from BCCI. Even more seriously, they pledged their First American stock as collateral. When they failed to make interest payments, BCCI took control of the shares. It was later estimated that in this manner, BCCI had ended up with 60% or more of First American's stock.\nDespite these problems, Price Waterhouse signed BCCI's 1989 annual report, largely due to Zayed's firm commitment to propping up the bank. Abedi was succeeded by Swaleh Naqvi as the bank's chief, who, in the aftermath following controversy over BCCI, was replaced by Zafar Iqbal Chaudhry in the late 1980s.\nLending practices.\nBCCI contended that its growth was fueled by the increasingly large number of deposits by oil-rich states that owned stock in the bank as well as by sovereign developing nations. However, this claim failed to mollify the regulators. For example, the Bank of England ordered BCCI to cap its branch network in the United Kingdom at 45 branches.\nThere was particular concern over BCCI's loan portfolio, because of its roots in areas where modern banking was still an alien concept. For instance, a large number of its customers were devout Muslims who are against charging interest on loans\u00a0\u2013 a major pillar of modern banking\u00a0\u2013 because they consider it to be \"riba\", or usury. In many third-world countries, a person's financial standing did not matter as much as his relationship with his banker. One particularly notable example is the Gokal family, a prominent family of shipping magnates. The three Gokal brothers, Abbas, Mustafa and Murtaza, were owners of the Gulf Group. They had a relationship with Abedi dating back to his days at United Bank. Abedi personally handled their loans, with little regard for details such as loan documents or creditworthiness. At one point, BCCI's loans to the Gokal companies were equivalent to US$1.2 billion, three times the bank's capital. The case of Nazmu Virani, the UK based property tycoon who borrowed \u00a3500 million unsecured, was widely reported. Longstanding banking practice dictates that a bank not lend more than 10% of its capital to a single customer.\nMoney laundering.\nIn addition to violations of lending laws, BCCI was also accused of opening accounts or laundering money for figures such as Saddam Hussein, Manuel Noriega, Hussain Muhammad Ershad, and Samuel Doe, and for criminal organizations, such as the Medell\u00edn Cartel and Abu Nidal. Police and intelligence experts nicknamed BCCI the \"Bank of Crooks and Criminals International\" for its penchant for catering to customers who dealt in arms, drugs, and hot money. Both Syed A. Hussain (b. 1960 or 1961) and Amjad Awan, (b. 1946 or 1947) a Pakistani banker that headed the Panamanian branch of BCCI in the early 1980s, assisted Noriega with Noriega's accounts at BCCI.\nWilliam von Raab, a former U.S. Commissioner of Customs, also told the Kerry Committee that the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency held \"several\" accounts at BCCI. According to a 1991 article in \"Time\" magazine, the National Security Council also had accounts at BCCI, which were used for a variety of covert operations, including transfers of money and weapons during the Iran\u2013Contra affair. In 1991, due to Congressional oversight, the CIA admitted that it was aware of BCCI's illegal money laundering activities related to drugs.\nInvestigations begin.\nBCCI's demise began in 1986, when a U.S. Customs undercover operation led by Special Agent Robert Mazur infiltrated the bank's private client division in Tampa, Florida, and uncovered their active role soliciting deposits from drug traffickers and money launderers. This two-year undercover operation concluded in 1988 with a fake wedding that was attended by BCCI officers and drug dealers from around the world, who had established a personal friendship and working relationship with undercover agent Mazur. At the same time he was dealing undercover with BCCI executives, Mazur used his undercover operation to establish a relationship with the hierarchy of the Medell\u00edn Cartel as one of their sources for laundering drug proceeds. Mazur's and others' roles in the sting operation were highlighted in the film \"The Infiltrator\" (2016, adapted from the eponymous autobiography).\nIn 1988, the bank was implicated as the center of a major money laundering scheme. After a six-month trial, BCCI, under immense pressure from U.S. authorities, pleaded guilty in 1990, but only on the grounds of \"respondeat superior\". While federal regulators took no action, Florida regulators forced BCCI to pull out of the state.\nIn 1990, U.S. Senator Orrin Hatch presented an impassioned defense of the bank in a speech on the Senate floor. He and his aide, Michael Pillsbury, were involved in efforts to counter the negative publicity that surrounded the bank, and Hatch solicited the bank to approve a $10 million loan to a close friend, Monzer Hourani.\nSandstorm report.\nIn March 1991, the Bank of England asked Price Waterhouse to carry out an inquiry. On 24 June 1991, using the code name \"Sandstorm\" for BCCI, Price Waterhouse submitted the Sandstorm report showing that BCCI had engaged in \"widespread fraud and manipulation\" that made it difficult, if not impossible, to reconstruct BCCI's financial history.\nThe Sandstorm report, parts of which were leaked to \"The Sunday Times\", included details of how the Abu Nidal terrorist group had manipulated details and through using fake identities had opened accounts at BCCI's Sloane Street branch in London. Britain's internal security service, MI5, had signed up two sources inside the branch to hand over copies of all documents relating to Abu Nidal's accounts. One source was the Syrian-born branch manager, Ghassan Qassem, the second a young British employee.\nThe Abu Nidal link man for the BCCI accounts was a man based in Iraq named Samir Najmeddin or Najmedeen. Throughout the 1980s, BCCI had set up millions of dollars' worth of letters of credit for Najmeddin, largely for arms deals with Iraq. Qassem later swore in an affidavit that Najmeddin was often accompanied by an American, whom Qassem subsequently identified as the financier Marc Rich. Rich was later indicted in the United States for tax evasion and racketeering in an apparently unrelated case and fled the country.\nQassem also told reporters that he had once escorted Abu Nidal, who was allegedly using the name Shakir Farhan, around town to buy a tie, without realizing who he was. This revelation led in 1991 to one of the \"London Evening Standard\"'s best-known front-page headlines: \"I Took Abu Nidal Shopping\".\nForced closure.\nBCCI was awaiting final approval for a restructuring plan in which it would have re-emerged as the \"Oasis Bank\". However, after the Sandstorm report, regulators concluded BCCI was so fraught with problems that it had to be seized. It had already been ordered to shut down its American operations in March for its illegal control of First American.\nOn 5 July 1991, regulators persuaded a court in Luxembourg to order BCCI liquidated on the grounds that it was hopelessly insolvent. According to the court order, BCCI had lost more than its entire capital and reserves the year before. At 1\u00a0pm London time that day (8\u00a0am in New York City), regulators marched into BCCI's offices and shut them down. Around a million depositors were immediately affected by this action.\nOn 7 July 1991, Hong Kong Office of the Commissioner of Banking (predecessor\nof the Hong Kong Monetary Authority) ordered BCCI to shut down its business in Hong Kong on the grounds that BCCI had problem loans and the Sheikh of Abu Dhabi, the major shareholder of BCCI, refused to provide funds to the Hong Kong BCCI. Hong Kong BCCI was liquidated on 17 July 1991.\nA few weeks after the seizure, on 29 July, Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau announced that a Manhattan grand jury had indicted BCCI, Abedi and Naqvi on twelve counts of fraud, money laundering, and larceny. Morgenthau, who had been investigating BCCI for over two years, claimed jurisdiction because millions of dollars laundered by the bank flowed through Manhattan. Also, Morgenthau cited BCCI's secret ownership of First American, which operated a subsidiary in New York City. Morgenthau said that all of BCCI's deposits had been fraudulently collected because the bank misled depositors about its ownership structure and financial condition. He described BCCI as \"the largest bank fraud in world financial history\".\nOn 15 November, BCCI, Abedi and Naqvi were indicted on federal charges that it had illegally bought control of another American bank, Independence Bank of Los Angeles, using Saudi businessman Ghaith Pharaon as the puppet owner.\nJust a month later, BCCI's liquidators (Deloitte, PWC) pleaded guilty to all criminal charges pending against the bank in the United States (both those lodged by the federal government and by Morgenthau), clearing the way for BCCI's formal liquidation that fall. BCCI paid $10 million in fines and forfeited all $550 million of its American assets\u00a0\u2013 at the time, the largest single criminal forfeiture ever obtained by federal prosecutors. The money was used to repay losses to First American and Independence and to make restitution to BCCI's depositors. None of this was enough to rescue both banks, however; Independence was seized later in 1992, while First American was forced into a sale to First Union in 1993.\nMany of the major players in the scandal have never been brought to trial in American or UK courts. Abedi, for example, died in 1995. He was under indictment in the United States and UK for crimes related to BCCI, but Pakistani officials refused to give him up for extradition because they felt the charges were politically motivated. Even without this to consider, he had been in poor health since suffering a stroke in the 1980s. Pharaon remained a fugitive until his death in 2017.\nIn 2002, Denis Robert and Ernest Backes, former number three of financial clearing house Clearstream, discovered that BCCI had continued to maintain its activities after its official closure, with microfiches of Clearstream's illegal unpublished accounts.\nEstimates of financial losses range from $10 billion to $17 billion, though some of it has been recovered by the bank's liquidators, Deloitte &amp; Touche.\nAmerican inquiries and legal actions.\nIn 1991, Robert Mueller declared the government had been investigating BCCI since 1986 resulting in intense media coverage.\nIn 1992, United States Senators John Kerry and Hank Brown became the co-authors of a report on BCCI, which was delivered to the Committee on Foreign Relations. The BCCI scandal was one of a number of disasters that influenced thinking leading to the Public Interest Disclosure Act (PIDA) of 1998. The report found that Clifford and his legal/business partner Robert A. Altman had been closely involved with the bank from 1978, when they were introduced to BCCI by Bert Lance, the former director of the Office of Management and Budget, to 1991. Earlier, Pharaon was revealed to have been the puppet owner of National Bank of Georgia, a bank formerly owned by Lance before being sold back to First American (it had previously been an FGB subsidiary before Lance bought it). Clifford and Altman testified that they had never observed any suspicious activity, and had themselves been deceived about BCCI's control of First American. However, the federal government and Morgenthau contended that the two men knew, or should have known, that BCCI controlled First American. Pharaon also was revealed to be the puppet controlling owner of CenTrust Bank in Miami, Florida.\nMorgenthau and the federal government brought indictments against Clifford and Altman, but did not pursue Clifford due to his age and deteriorating health (he died in 1998). Altman was indicted and tried in New York, though he was ultimately acquitted following a jury verdict of not guilty. Altman later accepted a de-facto lifetime ban from any role in the banking industry to settle a civil suit by the Fed.\nBritish inquiry and litigation.\nThe British government set up an independent inquiry, chaired by Lord Justice Bingham, in 1992. Its House of Commons Paper, \"Inquiry into the Supervision of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International,\" was published in October of that year. Following the report, BCCI liquidators Deloitte Touche filed suit against the Bank of England for \u00a3850m, claiming that the Bank was guilty of misfeasance in public office. The suit lasted 12 years. It ended in November 2005, when Deloitte withdrew its claims after England's High Court ruled that it was \"no longer in the best interests of creditors\" for the litigation to continue. Deloitte eventually paid the Bank of England \u00a373 million for its legal costs. According to news reports at the time, it was the most expensive case in British legal history.\nLitigation elsewhere.\nAlthough major litigation has ended in the case, suits and legal actions relating to the bank were still being brought in 2013, over 20 years after the bank's failure.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75075", "revid": "46263275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75075", "title": "Haloalkane", "text": "Group of chemical compounds derived from alkanes containing one or more halogens\nThe haloalkanes (also known as halogenoalkanes or alkyl halides) are alkanes containing one or more halogen substituents of hydrogen atom. They are a subset of the general class of halocarbons, although the distinction is not often made. Haloalkanes are widely used commercially. They are used as flame retardants, fire extinguishants, refrigerants, propellants, solvents, and pharmaceuticals. Subsequent to the widespread use in commerce, many halocarbons have also been shown to be serious pollutants and toxins. For example, the chlorofluorocarbons have been shown to lead to ozone depletion. Methyl bromide is a controversial fumigant. Only haloalkanes that contain chlorine, bromine, and iodine are a threat to the ozone layer, but fluorinated volatile haloalkanes in theory may have activity as greenhouse gases. Methyl iodide, a naturally occurring substance, however, does not have ozone-depleting properties and the United States Environmental Protection Agency has designated the compound a non-ozone layer depleter. For more information, see Halomethane. Haloalkane or alkyl halides are the compounds which have the general formula \"RX\" where R is an alkyl or substituted alkyl group and X is a halogen (F, Cl, Br, I).\nHaloalkanes have been known for centuries. Chloroethane was produced in the 15th century. The systematic synthesis of such compounds developed in the 19th century in step with the development of organic chemistry and the understanding of the structure of alkanes. Methods were developed for the selective formation of C-halogen bonds. Especially versatile methods included the addition of halogens to alkenes, hydrohalogenation of alkenes, and the conversion of alcohols to alkyl halides. These methods are so reliable and so easily implemented that haloalkanes became cheaply available for use in industrial chemistry because the halide could be further replaced by other functional groups.\nWhile many haloalkanes are human-produced, substantial amounts are biogenic.\nClasses.\nFrom the structural perspective, haloalkanes can be classified according to the connectivity of the carbon atom to which the halogen is attached. In primary (1\u00b0) haloalkanes, the carbon that carries the halogen atom is only attached to one other alkyl group. An example is chloroethane (CH3CH2Cl). In secondary (2\u00b0) haloalkanes, the carbon that carries the halogen atom has two C\u2013C bonds. In tertiary (3\u00b0) haloalkanes, the carbon that carries the halogen atom has three C\u2013C bonds.\nHaloalkanes can also be classified according to the type of halogen on group 17 responding to a specific halogenoalkane. Haloalkanes containing carbon bonded to fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine results in organofluorine, organochlorine, organobromine and organoiodine compounds, respectively. Compounds containing more than one kind of halogen are also possible. Several classes of widely used haloalkanes are classified in this way chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). These abbreviations are particularly common in discussions of the environmental impact of haloalkanes.\nProperties.\nHaloalkanes generally resemble the parent alkanes in being colorless, relatively odorless, and hydrophobic. The melting and boiling points of chloro-, bromo-, and iodoalkanes are higher than the analogous alkanes, scaling with the atomic weight and number of halides. This effect is due to the increased strength of the intermolecular forces\u2014from London dispersion to dipole-dipole interaction because of the increased polarizability. Thus tetraiodomethane (CI4) is a solid whereas tetrachloromethane (CCl4) is a liquid. Many fluoroalkanes, however, go against this trend and have lower melting and boiling points than their nonfluorinated analogues due to the decreased polarizability of fluorine. For example, methane (CH4) has a melting point of \u2212182.5\u00b0C whereas tetrafluoromethane (CF4) has a melting point of \u2212183.6\u00b0C.\nAs they contain fewer C\u2013H bonds, haloalkanes are less flammable than alkanes, and some are used in fire extinguishers. Haloalkanes are better solvents than the corresponding alkanes because of their increased polarity. Haloalkanes containing halogens other than fluorine are more reactive than the parent alkanes\u2014it is this reactivity that is the basis of most controversies. Many are alkylating agents, with primary haloalkanes and those containing heavier halogens being the most active (fluoroalkanes do not act as alkylating agents under normal conditions). The ozone-depleting abilities of the CFCs arises from the photolability of the C\u2013Cl bond.\nNatural occurrence.\nAn estimated 4,100,000,000 kg of chloromethane are produced annually by natural sources. The oceans are estimated to release 1 to 2 million tons of bromomethane annually.\nNomenclature.\nIUPAC.\nThe formal naming of haloalkanes should follow IUPAC nomenclature, which put the halogen as a prefix to the alkane. For example, ethane with bromine becomes bromoethane, methane with four chlorine groups becomes tetrachloromethane. However, many of these compounds have already an established trivial name, which is endorsed by the IUPAC nomenclature, for example chloroform (trichloromethane) and methylene chloride (dichloromethane). But nowadays, IUPAC nomenclature is used. To reduce confusion this article follows the systematic naming scheme throughout.\nProduction.\nHaloalkanes can be produced from virtually all organic precursors. From the perspective of industry, the most important ones are alkanes and alkenes.\nFrom alkanes.\nAlkanes react with halogens by free radical halogenation. In this reaction a hydrogen atom is removed from the alkane, then replaced by a halogen atom by reaction with a diatomic halogen molecule. Free radical halogenation typically produces a mixture of compounds mono- or multihalogenated at various positions.\nFrom alkenes and alkynes.\nIn hydrohalogenation, an alkene reacts with a dry hydrogen halide (HX) electrophile like hydrogen chloride (HCl) or hydrogen bromide (HBr) to form a mono-haloalkane. The double bond of the alkene is replaced by two new bonds, one with the halogen and one with the hydrogen atom of the hydrohalic acid. Markovnikov's rule states that under normal conditions, hydrogen is attached to the unsaturated carbon with the most hydrogen substituents. The rule is violated when neighboring functional groups polarize the multiple bond, or in certain additions of hydrogen bromide (addition in the presence of peroxides and the Wohl-Ziegler reaction) which occur by a free-radical mechanism.\nAlkenes also react with halogens (X2) to form haloalkanes with two neighboring halogen atoms in a halogen addition reaction. Alkynes react similarly, forming the tetrahalo compounds. This is sometimes known as \"decolorizing\" the halogen, since the reagent X2 is colored and the product is usually colorless and odorless.\nFrom alcohols.\nAlcohol can be converted to haloalkanes. Direct reaction with a hydrohalic acid rarely gives a pure product, instead generating ethers. However, some exceptions are known: ionic liquids suppress the formation or promote the cleavage of ethers, hydrochloric acid converts tertiary alcohols to chloroalkanes, and primary and secondary alcohols convert similarly in the presence of a Lewis acid activator, such as zinc chloride. The latter is exploited in the Lucas test.\nIn the laboratory, more active deoxygenating and halogenating agents combine with base to effect the conversion. In the \"Darzens halogenation\", thionyl chloride (SOCl2) with pyridine converts less reactive alcohols to chlorides. Both phosphorus pentachloride (PCl5) and phosphorus trichloride (PCl3) function similarly, and alcohols convert to bromoalkanes under hydrobromic acid or phosphorus tribromide (PBr3). The heavier halogens do not require preformed reagents: A catalytic amount of PBr3 may be used for the transformation using phosphorus and bromine; PBr3 is formed \"in situ\". Iodoalkanes may similarly be prepared using red phosphorus and iodine (equivalent to phosphorus triiodide).\nOne family of named reactions relies on the deoxygenating effect of triphenylphosphine. In the Appel reaction, the reagent is tetrahalomethane and triphenylphosphine; the co-products are haloform and triphenylphosphine oxide. In the Mitsunobu reaction, the reagents are any nucleophile, triphenylphosphine, and a diazodicarboxylate; the coproducts are triphenyl\u00adphosphine oxide and a hydrazodiamide.\nFrom carboxylic acids.\nTwo methods for the synthesis of haloalkanes from carboxylic acids are Hunsdiecker reaction and Kochi reaction.\nBiosynthesis.\nMany chloro- and bromoalkanes are formed naturally. The principal pathways involve the enzymes chloroperoxidase and bromoperoxidase.\nFrom amines by Sandmeyer's Method.\nPrimary aromatic amines yield diazonium ions in a solution of sodium nitrite. Upon heating this solution with copper(I) chloride, the diazonium group is replaced by -Cl. This is a comparatively easy method to make aryl halides as the gaseous product can be separated easily from aryl halide.\nWhen an iodide is to be made, copper chloride is not needed. Addition of potassium iodide with gentle shaking produces the haloalkane.\nReactions.\nHaloalkanes are reactive towards nucleophiles. They are polar molecules: the carbon to which the halogen is attached is slightly electropositive where the halogen is slightly electronegative. This results in an electron deficient (electrophilic) carbon which, inevitably, attracts nucleophiles.\nSubstitution.\nSubstitution reactions involve the replacement of the halogen with another molecule\u2014thus leaving saturated hydrocarbons, as well as the halogenated product. Haloalkanes behave as the R+ synthon, and readily react with nucleophiles.\nHydrolysis, a reaction in which water breaks a bond, is a good example of the nucleophilic nature of haloalkanes. The polar bond attracts a hydroxide ion, OH\u2212 (NaOH(aq) being a common source of this ion). This OH\u2212 is a nucleophile with a clearly negative charge, as it has excess electrons it donates them to the carbon, which results in a covalent bond between the two. Thus C\u2013X is broken by heterolytic fission resulting in a halide ion, X\u2212. As can be seen, the OH is now attached to the alkyl group, creating an alcohol. (Hydrolysis of bromoethane, for example, yields ethanol). Reactions with ammonia give primary amines.\nChloro- and bromoalkanes are readily substituted by iodide in the Finkelstein reaction. The iodoalkanes produced easily undergo further reaction. Sodium iodide is used as a catalyst.\nHaloalkanes react with ionic nucleophiles (e.g. cyanide, thiocyanate, azide); the halogen is replaced by the respective group. This is of great synthetic utility: chloroalkanes are often inexpensively available. For example, after undergoing substitution reactions, cyanoalkanes may be hydrolyzed to carboxylic acids, or reduced to alkanes using lithium aluminium hydride. Azoalkanes may be reduced to primary amines by Staudinger reduction or lithium aluminium hydride. Amines may also be prepared from alkyl halides in amine alkylation, Gabriel synthesis and Delepine reaction, by undergoing nucleophilic substitution with potassium phthalimide or hexamine respectively, followed by hydrolysis.\nIn the presence of a base, haloalkanes alkylate alcohols, amines, and thiols to obtain ethers, \"N\"-substituted amines, and thioethers respectively. They are substituted by Grignard reagent to give magnesium salts and an extended alkyl compound.\nElimination.\nIn dehydrohalogenation reactions, the halogen and an adjacent proton are removed from halocarbons, thus forming an alkene. For example, with bromoethane and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) in ethanol, the hydroxide ion HO\u2212 abstracts a hydrogen atom. A Bromide ion is then lost, resulting in ethene, H2O and NaBr. Thus, haloalkanes can be converted to alkenes. Similarly, dihaloalkanes can be converted to alkynes.\nIn related reactions, 1,2-dibromocompounds are debrominated by zinc dust to give alkenes and geminal dihalides can react with strong bases to give carbenes.\nOther.\nHaloalkanes undergo free-radical reactions with elemental magnesium to give alkyl-magnesium compound: Grignard reagent. Haloalkanes also react with lithium metal to give organolithium compounds. Both Grignard reagents and organolithium compounds behave as the R\u2212 synthon. Alkali metals such as sodium and lithium are able to cause haloalkanes to couple in Wurtz reaction, giving symmetrical alkanes. Haloalkanes, especially iodoalkanes, also undergo oxidative addition reactions to give organometallic compounds.\nApplications.\nChlorinated or fluorinated alkenes undergo polymerization. Important halogenated polymers include polyvinyl chloride (PVC), and polytetrafluoroethene (PTFE, or teflon).\nEnvironmental considerations.\nNature produces massive amounts of chloromethane and bromomethane. Most concern focuses on anthropogenic sources, which are potential toxins, even carcinogens. Similarly, great interest has been shown in remediation of man made halocarbons such as those produced on large scale, such as dry cleaning fluids. Volatile halocarbons degrade photochemically because the carbon-halogen bond can be labile. Some microorganisms dehalogenate halocarbons. While this behavior is intriguing, the rates of remediation are generally very slow.\nSafety.\nAs alkylating agents, haloalkanes are potential carcinogens. The more reactive members of this large class of compounds generally pose greater risk, e.g. carbon tetrachloride.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75076", "revid": "31226230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75076", "title": "Frederick Banting", "text": "Canadian medical scientist and doctor (1891\u20131941)\nSir Frederick Grant Banting (; November 14, 1891\u00a0\u2013 February 21, 1941) was a Canadian pharmacologist, orthopedist, and field surgeon. For his co-discovery of insulin and its therapeutic potential, Banting was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine with John Macleod.\nBanting and his student, Charles Best, isolated insulin at the University of Toronto in the lab of Scottish physiologist John Macleod. When he and Macleod received the 1923 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, Banting shared the honours and award money with Best. That same year, the Government of Canada granted Banting a lifetime annuity to continue his work. He is the youngest Nobel laureate for Physiology/Medicine, at 32.\nEarly life.\nBanting was born on November 14, 1891, in his family's farmhouse in Essa, Ontario, two miles from nearby Alliston. He was the youngest of five children of William Thompson Banting, a farmer in Tecumseh, and Margaret Grant, the daughter of a mill manager. The Bantings were a financially stable family of British and Northern Irish origin. Banting's distant relative, the London-based undertaker William Banting, popularised a weight-loss diet in 1864, and the word \"Banting\" entered the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" as its description. His mother's relatives, the Grants, were of Scottish descent.\nWith his family being located within a secure rural community, Banting was raised in prosperous circumstances. He was often called \"Fred\" or \"Freddie.\" Farm life largely defined most of his boyhood. He felt excluded from his siblings, all multiple years his senior, and recalled that \"my older brothers could not be bothered with me for the most part.\" When he began schooling at the age of seven in Alliston, Banting was a shy, asocial boy who tired of the attendance and was bullied frequently. Early difficulties with spelling ensured poor marks in exams: \"I simply could not spell. Every word seemed to have about three ways of spelling. It was a guess and I invariably guessed wrong.\" He later attributed these experiences as being the product of an inferiority complex.\nDuring his childhood, Banting devoted himself to farmwork, grew close with his mother, and sympathised with animals in the absence of other company. Marion Walwyn, a cousin who first met Banting in 1901, recalled that \"we sat together in the swing in our yard. In an hour he didn't say one word.\" He continued to struggle in school and stubbornly resisted being disciplined there. After one incident, he resolved never to continue his education but was convinced otherwise by his father. Banting's grandfather, John Banting, had urged his own children to be educated; the philosophy had influenced William, who offered to provide a fund to his sons when they turned twenty-one. In contrast to his brothers, who spent the inheritance towards their own farms, Frederick would use it towards matriculation.\nIn his late teenage years, Banting grew into a tall man with engagements in school football and baseball teams. Both his mother and father hoped that he would find a vocation in the Methodist ministry. He passed physics and chemistry during junior matriculation examinations in 1909, but repeated English and was required to undertake French and Latin. The next year, he narrowly passed Latin but failed French and, for a second time, English composition. The principal later remembered his repeated efforts: \"We would not have picked him for one on whom fame should settle. He was a white boy, a right boy.\" \nCollege and service years.\nBanting finally passed examinations in July 1910. He stated on his application to university that he wished to be a teacher, although he also harbored aspirations of becoming a doctor. He toured the Canadian West for the summer, traveling to Winnipeg and Calgary, before enrolling at the University of Toronto, where he entered the General Arts course at Victoria College. Despite hard work, Banting failed his first year, but decided to become a doctor and returned to repeat the year. He petitioned to join the medical program in February 1912 and was accepted. In September, he dropped out of Victoria College to begin medical school at the University of Toronto.\nBanting established himself in medical school by working diligently. His roommate, Sam Graham, remembered him for studying late into the night. Besides being a successful rugby player, however, he was otherwise undistinguished. His grades\u2014now without the burden of language courses\u2014saw a marked improvement, averaging approximately a B, an above-average score. Summers were spent returning to work at the farm. At Toronto's Faculty of Medicine, Banting specialised in surgery.\nAt the onset of World War I, Banting, along with most Canadian men, sought to enlist in the army. He attempted to enter the Canadian Expeditionary Force on August 16, 1914, the day after Canada's declaration of war, and then again in October, but was refused twice due to poor vision. In his third year of medical school Banting successfully joined the Royal Canadian Army Medical Corps in 1915 and was commissioned a private, then promoted to sergeant. He trained at a camp at Niagara Falls for the summer before his fourth year of school. The university accelerated the class by condensing the fifth year of medical school during the summer of 1916. The curriculum placed more emphasis on surgical procedure and trauma; a lecture dedicated to the treatment of diabetes derived itself from Frederick Madison Allen of the Rockefeller Institute, who recommended that diabetics be placed on a starvation diet for minimum metabolization.\nBanting's fourth year was committed to clinical work at Toronto General Hospital. Under the guidance of Clarence L. Starr, the chief surgeon at the Hospital for Sick Children, Banting gained training as an undergraduate house surgeon. By 1915, he had definitively resolved to practice surgery, performing his first operation\u2014the drainage of a soldier's abscess\u2014next winter. On December 9, 1916, Banting graduated with his Bachelor of Medicine (M.B.) and reported for military duty the next day. After being promoted to lieutenant, he sailed from Halifax to Britain on March 26, 1917. Shortly before departing he became engaged to Edith Roach, whom he met in 1911. Starr, an orthopedist who enlisted in 1916, had been impressed by Banting's work as an undergraduate and requested that he join him at the Granville Canadian Special Hospital in Ramsgate, Kent. On May 2, 1917, Banting assumed a position as Starr's assistant.\nFor thirteen months, Banting assisted Starr, a pioneer of nerve suturing, at Granville Hospital. He oversaw 125 patients and refused to levy a fee for extra services: \"it gives me a certain amount of pleasure to be able to help them which repays me in a way that money never could.\" After some study, he gained certification in obstetrics and gynaecology, and was transferred to serve in France, arriving in June 1918. Banting's first encounter with medical service came on August 8 at the Battle of Amiens. Several days were spent tending to and dressing the wounded on the front lines, in effect, as a general practitioner. In the lull between battles, Banting developed his knowledge of anatomy. Eager to see more active combat, he hoped to be deployed to Siberia with the Canadian Siberian Expeditionary Force.\nThe 44th Battalion, 4th Canadian Division, where Banting served, were engaged at the Battle of Cambrai in 1918. He witnessed much of the battle's brutality. When a German entered his aid post, Banting's life was saved by a patient, an amputee sergeant, who shot the soldier at the post's door. Later, Banting was struck by shrapnel from an exploding shell, ultimately ending his frontline duty. He wished to remain in battle to continue treating the wounded but his superior, Major L.C. Palmer, insisted otherwise. For his valour, Palmer would recommend Banting to be decorated. Banting was awarded the Military Cross owing to his \"exceptional bravery while attending the wounded under fire.\"\nBanting returned to Canada after the war and went to Toronto to complete his surgical training. In 1918, he was awarded the license to practise medicine, surgery, and midwifery by the Royal College of Physicians of London. He studied orthopedic medicine and, in 1919\u20131920, was Resident Surgeon at The Hospital for Sick Children. Banting was unable to gain a place on the hospital staff and so he decided to move to London, Ontario, to set up a medical practice. From July 1920 to May 1921, he continued his general practice, while teaching orthopedics and anthropology part-time at the University of Western Ontario in London because his medical practice had not been particularly successful. From 1921 to 1922 he lectured in pharmacology at the University of Toronto. He received his M.D. degree in 1922, and was also awarded a gold medal.\nMedical research.\nIsolation of insulin.\nAn article he read about the pancreas piqued Banting's interest in diabetes. Banting had to give a talk on the pancreas to one of his classes at the University of Western Ontario on November 1, 1920, and he was therefore reading reports that other scientists had written. Research by Naunyn, Minkowski, Opie, Sharpey-Schafer, and others suggested that diabetes resulted from a lack of a protein hormone secreted by the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas. Schafer had named this putative hormone \"insulin\". The hormone was thought to control the metabolism of sugar; its lack led to an increase of sugar in the blood which was then excreted in urine. Attempts to extract insulin from ground-up pancreas cells were unsuccessful, likely because of the destruction of the insulin by the proteolysis enzyme of the pancreas. The challenge was to find a way to extract insulin from the pancreas prior to its destruction.\nMoses Barron published an article in 1920 which described experimental closure of the pancreatic duct by ligature; this further influenced Banting's thinking. The procedure caused deterioration of the cells of the pancreas that secrete trypsin which breaks down insulin, but it left the islets of Langerhans intact. Banting realized that this procedure would destroy the trypsin-secreting cells but not the insulin. Once the trypsin-secreting cells had died, insulin could be extracted from the islets of Langerhans. Banting discussed this approach with John Macleod, professor of physiology at the University of Toronto. Macleod provided experimental facilities and the assistance of one of his students, Charles Best. Banting and Best, with the assistance of biochemist James Collip, began the production of insulin by this means.\nAs the experiments proceeded, the required quantities could no longer be obtained by performing surgery on living dogs. In November 1921, Banting hit upon the idea of obtaining insulin from the fetal pancreas. He removed the pancreases from fetal calves at a William Davies slaughterhouse and found the extracts to be just as potent as those extracted from the dog pancreases. By December 1921, he had also succeeded in extracting insulin from the adult pancreas. Pork and beef would remain the primary commercial sources of insulin until they were replaced by genetically engineered bacteria in the late 20th century. On January 11, 1922, the first ever injection of insulin was given to 14-year-old Canadian Leonard Thompson at Toronto General Hospital. In spring of 1922, Banting established a private practice in Toronto and began to treat diabetic patients. His first American patient was Elizabeth Hughes Gossett, daughter of U.S. Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes.\nBanting and Macleod were jointly awarded the 1923 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Banting split his half of the Prize money with Best, and Macleod split the other half of the Prize money with James Collip.\nAfter insulin.\nBanting was appointed Senior Demonstrator in Medicine at the University of Toronto in 1922. Next year he was elected to the new Banting and Best Chair of Medical Research, endowed by the Legislature of the province of Ontario. He also served as Honorary Consulting Physician to the Toronto General, the Hospital for Sick Children, and the Toronto Western Hospital. At the Banting and Best Institute, he focused his research on silicosis, cancer, and the mechanisms of drowning.\nIn 1938, Banting's interest in aviation medicine resulted in his participation with the Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) in research concerning the physiological problems encountered by pilots operating high-altitude combat aircraft. Banting headed the RCAF's Number 1 Clinical Investigation Unit (CIU), which was housed in a secret facility on the grounds of the former Eglinton Hunt Club in Toronto.\nDuring the Second World War he investigated the problems of aviators, such as \"blackout\" (syncope). He also helped Wilbur Franks with the invention of the G-suit to stop pilots from blacking out when they were subjected to g-forces while turning or diving. Another of Banting's projects during the Second World War involved using and treating mustard gas burns. Banting even tested the gas and antidotes on himself to see if they were effective.\nPublic statements.\nStatements on Hudson's Bay Company.\nDuring his 1927 Arctic trip with A. Y. Jackson, Banting realized that crew or passengers on board the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) paddle wheeler SS \"Distributor\" were responsible for spreading the influenza virus down the Slave River and Mackenzie River, a virus that had over the summer and autumn spread territory-wide, devastating the aboriginal population of the north. Returning from the trip, Banting gave an interview in Montreal with a \"Toronto Star\" reporter under the agreement that his statements on HBC would remain off the record. The conversation was nonetheless published in the \"Toronto Star\" and rapidly reached a wide audience across Europe and Australia. Banting was angry at the leak, having promised the Department of the Interior not to make any statements to the press prior to clearing them.\nThe article noted that Banting had given the journalist C. R. Greenaway repeated instances of how the fox fur trade always favoured the company: \"For over $100,000 of fox skins, he estimated that the Eskimos had not received $5,000 worth of goods.\" He traced this treatment to health, consistent with reports made in previous years by RCMP officers, suggesting that \"the result was a diet of 'flour, biscuits, tea and tobacco,' with the skins that once were used for clothing traded merely for 'cheap whiteman's goods.'\"\nThe fur trade commissioner for the Hudson's Bay Company called Banting's remarks \"false and slanderous\", and a month later, the governor and general manager of HBC met Banting at the King Edward Hotel to demand a retraction. Banting stated that the reporter had betrayed his confidence, but did not retract his statement and reaffirmed that HBC was responsible for the death of indigenous residents by supplying the wrong kind of food and introducing diseases into the Arctic. As A. Y. Jackson notes in his memoir, since neither the governor nor the general manager had been to the Arctic, the meeting ended with them asking Banting's advice on what HBC ought to do: \"He gave them some good advice and later he received a card at Christmas with the Governor's best wishes.\"\nBanting also maintained this position in his report to the Department of the Interior:He noted that \"infant mortality was high because of the undernourishment of the mother before birth\"; that \"white man's food leads to decay of native teeth\"; that \"tuberculosis has commenced. Saw several cases at Godhavn, Etah, Port Burwell, Arctic Bay\"; that \"an epidemic resembling influenza killed a considerable proportion of population at Port Burwell\"; and that \"the gravest danger faces the Eskimo in his transfer from a race-long hunter to a dependent trapper. White flour, sea-biscuits, tea and tobacco do not provide sufficient fuel to warm and nourish him.\" Furthermore, he discouraged the establishment of an Arctic hospital. The \"proposed hospital at Pangnirtung would be a waste of money, as it could be reached by only a few natives.\" Banting's report contrasted starkly with the bland descriptions provided by the ship's physician, F. H. Stringer.\nPersonal life.\nBanting married twice. His first marriage was to Marion Robertson in 1924; they had one child. They divorced in 1932 and Banting married Henrietta Ball in 1937.\nPainting.\nBanting developed an interest in painting beginning around 1921 while he was in London, Ontario. Some of his first pieces were done on the back of the cardboard in which his shirts were packed by the dry-cleaners. He became friends with the Group of Seven artists A. Y. Jackson and Lawren Harris, fellow members of the Arts and Letters Club of Toronto, sharing their love of the rugged Canadian landscape. Writing on Banting, Jackson recalls that \"He did not want to make a business of art and would tell [would-be purchasers] to go buy a Lismer or something else and then he would exchange it for one of his.\" An obituary said, \"A member of the Arts and Letters Club of Toronto, he was one of Canada's most accomplished amateur painters.\"\nIn 1927, he made a sketching trip with Jackson to the St. Lawrence River in Quebec. Later that year, they travelled to RCMP outposts in the Arctic on the Canadian government supply ship \"Beothic\". The sketches, done both in oils on birch panels and in pen and ink, were named after the places he visited: Craig Harbour, Ellesmere Island; Pond Inlet, Baylot Island; Eskimo tents at Etach; others were untitled. A collection of Banting's paintings was acquired by and donated to the Owens Art Gallery at Mount Allison University in 1928. Jackson and Banting also made painting expeditions to Great Slave Lake, Walsh Lake (Northwest Territories), Georgian Bay, French River and the Sudbury District.\nAt the time of his death in 1941, Banting was one of Canada's best-known amateur painters. Dennis Reid, the former director of Collections and Research at the Art Gallery of Ontario, views Banting's works as very much \"part of the Jackson story\".\nDeath.\nIn February 1941, Banting died of wounds and exposure following the crash of a Lockheed L-14 Super Electra/Hudson in which he was a passenger, in Musgrave Harbour, Newfoundland. After departing from Gander, Newfoundland, both of the plane's engines failed. The navigator and co-pilot died instantly, but Banting and the pilot, Captain Joseph Mackey, survived the initial impact. According to Mackey, the sole survivor, Banting died from his injuries the next day. Banting was \"en route\" to England to conduct operational tests on the Franks flying suit developed by his colleague Wilbur Franks. \nBanting and his wife are buried at Mount Pleasant Cemetery in Toronto.\nLegacy.\nIn 1994, Banting was inducted into the Canadian Medical Hall of Fame. In 2004, he was nominated as one of the top 10 \"Greatest Canadians\" by viewers of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. When the final votes were counted, Banting finished fourth behind Tommy Douglas, Terry Fox and Pierre Trudeau.\nNamesakes.\nBanting's namesake, the Banting Research Foundation, was created in 1925 and provides funding to support health and biomedical research in Canada.\nBanting's name is immortalized in the yearly Banting Lectures, given by an expert in diabetes, and by the creation of the Banting and Best Department of Medical Research of the University of Toronto; Sir Frederick G Banting Research Centre located on Sir Frederick Banting Driveway in the Tunney's Pasture complex, Ottawa, ON; Banting Memorial High School in Alliston, ON; Sir Frederick Banting Secondary School in London, ON; Sir Frederick Banting Alternative Program Site in Ottawa, ON; Frederick Banting Elementary School in Montr\u00e9al-Nord QC and \u00c9cole Banting Middle School in Coquitlam, BC.\nThe \"Major Sir Frederick Banting, MC, RCAMC Award for Military Health Research\", sponsored by the True Patriot Love Foundation, is awarded annually by the Surgeon General to the researcher whose work presented at the annual Military and Veterans Health Research Forum is deemed to contribute most to military health. It was first awarded in 2011 in the presence of several Banting descendants.\nThe \"Canadian Forces Major Sir Frederick Banting Term Chair in Military Trauma Research\" at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre was established in 2012. The first Chair holder is Colonel Homer Tien, medical director of Sunnybrook's Tory Regional Trauma Centre and Senior Specialist and Trauma Adviser to the Surgeon General.\nThe Banting Postdoctoral Fellowship Program is administered by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The fellowship provided up to two years of funding at $70,000 per year to researchers in health, natural sciences, engineering, social sciences and humanities.\nProperties.\nBanting House, his former home located in London, Ontario, was declared a National Historic Site of Canada in 1997. The house contains a museum of the history of insulin, as well has Banting's artwork. The Banting Interpretation Centre in Musgrave Harbour, Newfoundland and Labrador is a museum named after him which focuses on the circumstances surrounding the 1941 plane crash which claimed his life. The crater Banting on the Moon is also named after him for his contributions to medicine.\nDuring the voting for \"Greatest Canadians\" in late 2003, controversy rose over the future use of the Banting family farm in New Tecumseth which had been left to the Ontario Historical Society by Banting's late nephew, Edward, in 1998. The dispute centred on the future use of the property and its buildings. In a year-long negotiation, assisted by a provincially appointed facilitator, the Town of New Tecumseth offered $1 million to the Ontario Historical Society (OHS). The town intended to turn the property over to the Sir Frederick Banting Legacy Foundation for preservation of the property and buildings, and the Legacy Foundation planned to erect a Camp for Diabetic Youths. The day after the November 22, 2006, deadline for the OHS to sign the agreement, the OHS announced that it had sold the property for housing development to Solmar Development for more than $2 million.\nThe Town of New Tecumseth announced it would designate the property under the Ontario Heritage Act. This would prevent its commercial development and obligate the owner to maintain it properly. OHS objected. The Ontario Conservation Review Board heard arguments for and against designation in September 2007 and recommended designation of the entire property in October. The Town officially passed the designation by-law on November 12, 2007.\nBanting's artwork has gained attention in the art community; A painting of his called \"St. T\u00eete des Cap\" sold for Can$30,000 including buyer's premium at a Canadian art auction in Toronto.\nPortrayals in film.\nHe and his insulin discovery have also been depicted in various media formats, including comic books, a biography by Michael Bliss, and on television. The National Film Board of Canada produced a short film in 1958, \"The Quest\". The 1988 television movie \"Glory Enough for All\" depicted the search for insulin by Banting and Best, with R. H. Thomson starring as Banting. Banting is also portrayed by Jason Priestley boarding his fatal flight in the 2006 historical drama \"Above and Beyond\".\nAwards and honours.\nPrior to the award of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for 1923\u2014which he shared with Macleod\u2014he received the Reeve Prize of the University of Toronto (1922). In 1923, the Canadian Parliament granted him a Life Annuity of $7,500. Following the Banting's receipt of the Cameron Prize for Therapeutics of the University of Edinburgh in 1927, Banting gave the 1928 Cameron Lecture in Edinburgh. He was a member of numerous medical academies and societies in Canada and abroad, including the British and American Physiological Societies, and the American Pharmacological Society. In 1934, he was knighted as a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE) by King George V and became an active vice-president of the Diabetic Association (now Diabetes UK). In May 1935 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society. In 2004, Banting was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame.\nFlame of Hope.\nA \"Flame of Hope\" was lit by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother in 1989 as a tribute to Dr. Frederick Grant Banting and all the people that have lost their lives to diabetes. The flame will remain lit until there is a cure for diabetes. When a cure is found, the flame will be extinguished by the researchers who discover the cure. The flame is located at Sir Frederick Banting Square in London, Ontario, Canada beside the Banting House National Historic Site of Canada.\nTime capsule.\nA time capsule was buried in the Sir Frederick Banting Square in 1991 to honour the 100th anniversary of Sir Frederick Banting's birth. It was buried by the International Diabetes Federation youth representatives and Governor General of Canada Ray Hnatyshyn. It will be exhumed if a cure for diabetes is found.\nHonorary degrees.\nSir Frederick Banting received honorary degrees from several universities:\nTribute.\nSince 1941, the American Diabetes Association confers Banting Medals for those with long-term contribution to diabetes research and treatment. In 1991, International Diabetes Federation and World Health Organization (WHO) made his birthday the World Diabetes Day. On November 14, 2016, Google celebrated his 125th birthday with a Google Doodle. 2021 marks the centenary of Dr. Banting's co-discovery of insulin at the University of Toronto. Canada Post issued a commemorative stamp.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75078", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75078", "title": "Charles Best (medical scientist)", "text": "Canadian co-discoverer of insulin (1899\u20131978)\nCharles Herbert Best (February 27, 1899 \u2013 March 31, 1978), was an American-Canadian medical scientist and one of the co-discoverers of insulin with Frederick Banting. He served as the chair of the Banting and Best Department of Medical Research at the University of Toronto and was further involved in research concerning choline and heparin. \nEarly life.\nCharles Herbert Best was born in Pembroke, Maine, on February 27, 1899, to Luella (Lulu) Fisher and Herbert Huestis Best, a Canadian-born physician from Nova Scotia. His father, Herbert Best, was a doctor in a small Maine town with a limited economy based mostly on sardine-packing. His mother Lulu was a soprano singer, organist, and pianist. Charles Best grew up in Pembroke before going to Toronto, Ontario, to study medicine in 1915.\nBy the time Best had reached college age and was choosing between such schools as McGill University and the University of Toronto, family connections persuaded him to pursue his studies in Toronto. Family illness had guided Best's research interests\u2014his Aunt Anna dying of diabetes had profound effects on him. It was for this reason, and the fact that his father was a physician, that he chose to study at University of Toronto and train to become a doctor. His university studies were interrupted following his first year by the onset of the First World War. He served as an infantry soldier, reaching the rank of acting Sergeant Major. Following his service, he eventually returned to university in Toronto, but was falling behind in his classes.\nCo-discovery of insulin.\nBest moved in 1915 to Toronto, Ontario, where he started studying towards a bachelor of arts degree at University College, University of Toronto. In 1918, he enlisted in the Canadian Army serving with the 2nd Canadian Tank Battalion. After the war, he completed his degree in physiology and biochemistry.\nAs a 22-year-old medical student at the University of Toronto he worked as an assistant to the surgeon Dr. Frederick Banting and contributed to the discovery of the pancreatic hormone insulin, which led to an effective treatment for diabetes. In the spring of 1921, Banting travelled to Toronto to visit John Macleod, professor of physiology at the University of Toronto, and asked Macleod if he could use his laboratory to isolate pancreatic extracts from dogs. Macleod was initially sceptical, but eventually agreed before leaving on holiday for the summer. Before leaving for Scotland he supplied Banting with ten dogs for experiment and two medical students, Charles Best and Edward Clark Noble, as lab assistants.\nIt was reported that Best and Noble flipped a coin to see who would assist Banting during the first period of four weeks. According to Best, however, this was the product of a journalist\u2019s imagination, or \"newspaper fiction\". Nonetheless, Frederick Banting is known to have mentioned this story when discussing the discovery of insulin.MacLeod was overseeing the work of Banting, who had no experience in physiology, and his assistant Best. In December 1921, when Banting and Best were having difficulties in refining the pancreatic extract and monitoring glucose levels, MacLeod assigned the biochemist James Collip to the team. In January 1922, while Collip was working on insulin purification, Best and Banting administered prematurely their pancreatic extracts to 14-year-old Leonard Thompson, who suffered a severe allergic reaction. Eventually, Collip succeeded in preparing insulin in a more pure, usable form. Banting, Best and Collip shared the patent for insulin, which they sold to the University of Toronto for one dollar.\nIn 1923, the Nobel Prize Committee honoured Banting and John Macleod with the Nobel Prize in Medicine for the discovery of insulin, ignoring Best and Collip. Banting chose to share half of the prize money with Best. The key contribution by Collip was recognised in the Nobel speech of MacLeod, who also gave one-half of his prize money to Collip. However, \"if Banting was hoping that this might offer Best some consolation for not having shared in the prize, he was mistaken. Best\u2019s resentment at having been overlooked began to irritate Banting\", to the point that Banting stated in 1941 \"If I don\u2019t come back and they give my [Professorial] Chair to that son-of-a-bitch Best, I\u2019ll never rest in my grave\", shortly before Banting boarded a plane for the UK which crashed and killed him. After Banting's death, Best \"claimed that the crucial innovation of using alcohol to remove toxic impurities had largely been his own\", even though this had actually been Collip's key contribution. In 1972, an official history of the Nobel Committee declared that omitting Best might have been a mistake. In fact, Best was not considered because he was never nominated. Nomination for a Nobel Prize can only be made by certain individuals, including former recipients of the Prize, and his central role along with Banting was not known to those who had the ability to make nominations. Best was subsequently nominated for the 1950 Nobel Prize in physiology based on his work on choline and heparin.\nProfessor of physiology.\nBest succeeded Macleod as professor of physiology at University of Toronto in 1929. During World War II he was influential in establishing a Canadian program for securing and using dried human blood serum. In his later years, he was an adviser to the Medical Research Committee of the United Nations World Health Organization\nPersonal life.\nBest later claimed that the greatest moment of his life occurred when he met his future wife, Margaret Mahon (1900\u20131988) following his return. Best married Margaret Hooper Mahon in Toronto in 1924 and they had two sons. One son, Henry Best was a well-regarded historian who later became president of Laurentian University in Sudbury, Ontario. Best's other son was Charles Alexander Best, a Canadian politician and geneticist. Best is the grandfather of Susan MacTavish Best.\nBest died on March 31, 1978, in Toronto. He is interred in Mount Pleasant Cemetery, Toronto, not far from Sir Frederick Banting.\nAwards and honours.\nBest was elected a foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1946. He was elected a foreign honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1948. He was elected to both the American Philosophical Society and the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1950. In 1967 he was made a Companion of the Order of Canada in recognition for \"his contribution to medicine, particularly as co-discoverer of insulin.\" He was a commander of the Civil Division of the Order of the British Empire and was made a member of Order of the Companions of Honour in 1971 \"for services to Medical Research\". He was a fellow of the Royal Society of London, the Royal Society of Canada, and was the first Canadian to be elected into the Pontifical Academy of Sciences.\nAs a recipient of the Order of Canada, he was awarded the Canadian version of the Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal in 1977.\nIn 1994 he was inducted into the Canadian Medical Hall of Fame. In 2004, he was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame.\nDr. Charles Best Secondary School in Coquitlam, British Columbia, Dr. Charles Best Public School in Burlington, Ontario, and Charles H. Best Middle School in Toronto, Ontario, are named in his honour. His birthplace in Maine is listed on the United States National Register of Historic Places.\nHonorary degrees.\nDr. Charles Best received 18 honorary degrees from universities around the world including\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75079", "revid": "5681255", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75079", "title": "United States military aircraft designation systems", "text": "Systems used by the United States to assign identifiers to aircraft in service\nMultiple designation systems have been used to specify United States military aircraft. The first system was introduced in 1911 by the United States Navy, but was discontinued six years later; the first system similar to that used today was designed in 1919 when the US Army's Aeronautical Division became the United States Army Air Service. Before this, aircraft were put into service under their manufacturers' designations.\nHistory.\nUnited States Army Air Service system 1919\u20131924.\nDuring this period, type designations used by the United States Army Air Service consisted of a two or three letter abbreviation of the aircraft's purpose. Examples include GA for Ground Attack aircraft, NO for Night Observation aircraft, and NBS for Night Bombardment, Short Distance aircraft.\nArmy aviation system 1924\u20131962.\nFrom 1924 to 1947 the Air Service, United States Army Air Corps, United States Army Air Forces and United States Air Force used a designation system based on mission category, with each model in a category numbered sequentially. In 1947 when the Air Force became a separate service, the designation system was extensively overhauled, with several categories being discontinued and others renamed. For instance, the Lockheed P-80 \"Shooting Star\" (Pursuit) was redesignated as F-80 (Fighter), while the A-26 medium bomber/attack aircraft was redesignated as the B-26, reusing the designation, the Martin B-26 having retired in the meantime.\nUS Navy systems pre-1962.\nBefore 1962, the United States Navy, which also procured aircraft for the United States Marine Corps and United States Coast Guard, used several designation systems. The first was adopted in 1911, but it was replaced by the second in 1914, and aircraft still in inventory were redesignated. Both systems were based primarily on aircraft class rather than mission. In 1917, the 1914 system was dropped, and the Navy reverted to using manufacturer's model designations. In 1922, a new designation system was adopted based on both \"mission\" and \"manufacturer\", and lasted until 1962. \nAirships.\nNavy blimps were initially grouped by class and then used a special designation system until 1954, when this system was unified with the main 1922 system. In contrast with its other aircraft, the Navy's four rigid airships were treated as commissioned warships, and were given hull classification symbols.\nUnited States Army system 1956\u20131962.\nFrom 1956 to 1962 the United States Army used a separate designation system from that of the United States Air Force.\nTri-service aircraft system (Air Force/Army/Navy) 1962\u2013present.\nStarting 18 September 1962, a joint system of \"mission\"-based designations was used, with most of these restarting from 1. Various previously-designated models from the pre-1962 Army-Air Force system (such as the F-111) were not redesignated. \nAll in-use Navy and Marine Corps aircraft from the pre-1962 system were redesignated within the new system. An attempt was made to retain the original Type Sequence numbers for as many aircraft as possible. Thus, the F2H Banshee became the F-2, the F4H Phantom II became the F-4 and the F8U Crusader became the F-8. Army aircraft from the 1956 system were similarly redesignated. \nThe 1962 Tri-Service aircraft designation system is still in use today, though, since 1974, it has been presented and maintained alongside the 1963 Tri-Service rocket and guided missile designation system. DoD Directive 4120.15, first issued in 1971 and most recently updated in 2020 (4120.15E incorporating Change 02 \"Designating and Naming Military Aerospace Vehicles\") is implemented via Air Force Instruction 16-401/Army Regulation 70-50/Naval Air Systems Command Instruction (NAVAIRINST) 13100.16 (3 November 2020) and describes both systems. A list of US military aircraft was kept via 4120.15-L Model Designation of Military Aerospace Vehicles 31 August 2018 until its transition to data.af.mil on 31 August 2018.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75080", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75080", "title": "Lists of military aircraft of the United States", "text": "Lists of military aircraft of the United States cover current and former military aircraft of the United States Armed Forces."}
{"id": "75081", "revid": "1298203035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75081", "title": "Soviet Union military aircraft designation systems", "text": "Pre-revolutionary Imperial Russia (before 1917) did not have a single national unified system but instead relied on those provided by the manufacturers of the aircraft, like Sikorsky Ilya Muromets or Anatra Anasal.\nPre-war Soviet system.\nThe Soviet system used from shortly after the revolution in 1923 and until gradually superseded after 1940, was divided by function, with numbers assigned in order by the government. Duplicate designations were common, as were multiple meanings for individual letters. Designers and manufacturers also had their own internal designations which could be confused for the official government designations. For instance, Tupolev's designs used the designator ANT, for A.N.Tupolev and Yakovlev's designs used AIR, for A.I.Rykov, the communist leader he reported to. Not all designations were taken up, some numbers were assigned to projects that were subsequently cancelled, often at a very early stage of development.\nSoviet system after December 9, 1940.\nThe system after December 9, 1940 (in accordance with order No 704) used letter abbreviations for the \"design office\", \nthen sequential numbers, sometimes with odd numbers for \"fighters\" (e.g. Yak-3, MiG-15, Su-27...) and even numbers for other types (e.g. Il-2, Tu-16, Su-34, Tu-154...). However, this latter rule was not always applied, especially for helicopters.\nContrary to western sources, official Soviet designations did not include constructors' names (e.g. Yakovlev Yak-1), only abbreviations (i.e. Yak-1) however initially full names like Yakovlev-1 were occasionally used. Numerical designations were assigned individually for each developer to aircraft when they entered service. Aircraft also frequently had development designations used within design bureaus, like aircraft 105, or ANT-105 that led to the Tu-22, or T-6 for Su-24, and an industry production name assigned to the facility where production was undertaken.\nThe NATO Air Standardization Coordinating Committee reporting name system (used because designations of new types were often unknown to NATO) was based on an initial letter indicating type of aircraft (B = bomber, C = cargo, F = fighter, H = helicopter, M = miscellaneous or missile,) and 1 syllable if propeller-driven or 2 if jet- or rocket-powered.\nAn (\u0410\u043d): Antonov\nAr (\u0410\u0440): Archangelski\nBI (\u0411\u0418): Berezniak-Isaev\nBe (\u0411\u0435): Beriev\nChe (\u0427\u0435): Chetverikov\nGu (\u0413\u0443): Gudkov\nIl (\u0418\u043b): Ilyushin\nKa (\u041a\u0430): Kamov\nLa (\u041b\u0430): Lavochkin\nLaG (\u041b\u0430\u0413): Lavochkin-Gorbunov\nLaGG (\u041b\u0430\u0413\u0413): Lavochkin-Gorbunov-Gudkov\nLi (\u041b\u0438): Lisunov\nM (\u041c): Myasishchev\nMi (\u041c\u0438): Mil\nMiG (\u041c\u0438\u0413): Mikoyan-Gurevich, until the death of Artem Mikoyan in 1970, then just Mikoyan\nPe (\u041f\u0435): Petlyakov\nPo (\u041f\u043e): Polikarpov\nSu (\u0421\u0443): Sukhoi\nSh (\u0428): Shavrov\nShche (\u0429\u0435): Shcherbakov\nTa (\u0422\u0430): Tairov \nTs (\u0426): Tsybin\nTu (\u0422\u0443): Tupolev (bureau designation was ANT)\nYak (\u042f\u043a): Yakovlev (bureau designation was AIR)\nYer (\u0415\u0440): Yermolayev\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75082", "revid": "42295144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75082", "title": "List of military aircraft of Germany by manufacturer", "text": "This is a list of German military aircraft organised alphabetically by manufacturer.\nDFL.\n(\"Deutsche Forschungsanstalt f\u00fcr Luftfahrt - Research Institute in Braunschweig\") \nVFW-Fokker.\n(\"VFW-Fokker GmbH\") \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75083", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75083", "title": "Michaelis-Menten constant", "text": ""}
{"id": "75084", "revid": "829949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75084", "title": "List of military aircraft of the Soviet Union and the CIS", "text": "This list of the military aircraft of the Soviet Union and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) includes experimental, prototypes, and operational types regardless of era. It also includes both native Soviet designs, Soviet-produced copies of foreign designs, and foreign-produced aircraft that served in the military of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) and its successor states of the CIS. The service time frame begins with the year the aircraft entered military service (not the date of first flight, as reported by some sources). Stated production quantities, which are often very approximate, include all variants of the aircraft type produced for the USSR, unless otherwise noted.\nWikipedia convention is to use the Soviet or Russian names and designations for these aircraft, not the post-World War II NATO reporting names, although these will be used as redirects to guide the reader to the desired article. The reporting names assigned by Western intelligence agencies listed here are provided for ease of reference; they are by no means complete."}
{"id": "75085", "revid": "1295083209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75085", "title": "British military aircraft designation systems", "text": "Aircraft type\nBritish military aircraft designations are used to refer to aircraft types and variants operated by the armed forces of the United Kingdom.\nSince the end of the First World War, aircraft types in British military service have generally been known by a service name (e.g. 'Spitfire'), with individual variants recognised by mark numbers, often in combination with a letter to indicate the role. This is in contrast to identification systems used in countries such as the United States, where an aircraft type is primarily identified by an alphanumeric designation.\nThe British military aircraft designations (e.g. 'Spitfire Mark V' or 'Hercules C3') should not be confused with the military aircraft registration (also known as its \"serial\") used to identify individual aircraft (e.g. XR220), nor with U.S. aircraft designations (e.g. C-5, C-17, MQ-9) or manufacturer's designations (e.g. Sikorsky S-58, Jaguar B, WS-61, AW139, WAH-64), though mark numbers were used to indicate aircraft built for other nations e.g. Hawker Hunter Mk.58 was a Hunter F.6 for the Swiss Air Force.\nNo designation system was introduced during World War I that covered more than the products of a single manufacturer. The Admiralty frequently referred to designs by the serial of the first aircraft of that type to be accepted for service.\nThe military designation system.\nIn this system, which has been used since the end of World War I, each aircraft designation consists of a name, (sometimes) a role prefix, and a mark number.\nA unified official naming system was introduced in February 1918 by the Ministry of Munitions, the scheme would use classes of names related to the role. Fighter aircraft were to be animals, plants or minerals; bomber aircraft were to have geographical names; and 'heavy armoured machines' would be personal names from mythology. The classes were further divided by size of aircraft and land or sea-based, for example a three-seater sea-based fighter would be named after shellfish. Italian towns were to be used for single-seat land-based bombers.\nFollowing the formation of the Royal Air Force (RAF) in April 1918, the Ministry of Munitions introduced a new system as \"Technical Department Instruction 538\". They mainly followed the February 1918 scheme, but certain names already used for engines were excluded, for example birds of prey were used by Rolls-Royce for their aero-engines. The names related to zoology, geography, and mythology were withdrawn in 1927, and the Air Ministry introduced names with the initial letters relating to role, for example C for troop carriers as used by the Handley Page Clive. A further change was made in 1932 and 1939, to use more appropriate names. Fighters were to use \"General words indicating speed, activity or aggressiveness\", and trainer aircraft would be \"words indicating tuition and places of education\".\nBombers were to be named after inland towns in the British Empire, for example the Avro Lancaster and Fairey Battle (after Battle, East Sussex, the site of the Battle of Hastings). With the introduction of helicopters, these were to be named after trees but only the Bristol Sycamore was named in this scheme.\nNames.\nThe name ('type name') of an aircraft type would be agreed between the Air Ministry or Admiralty and the manufacturer or importer when the order was placed. Names generally followed one or a number of patterns:\nThe systems began to change in the immediate post-Second World War period, with the V bombers and types such as the Supermarine Scimitar. The RAF's three post-war jet-engined, swept wing strategic bombers were given names beginning with 'V' \u2013 Vickers Valiant, Avro Vulcan, and Handley Page Victor (the V bombers).\nRole prefixes.\nRole prefixes used at various times comprise:\nMark numbers.\nStarting in the interwar period, variants of each operational type were usually indicated by a mark number, a Roman numeral added to the type name, usually preceded by 'Mark', or its abbreviated form 'Mk.' or 'Mk', e.g.: Fury Mk.I. Mark numbers were allocated sequentially to each new variant, the new mark number signifying a 'major' change such as a new engine-type. Sometimes, an alphabetic suffix was added to the mark number to indicate a minor change, e.g.: Bulldog Mk.IIA. Occasionally, this letter indicated a change in role, e.g.: the Blenheim Mk.I bomber was adapted to the Blenheim Mk.IF long-range fighter. Sometimes a minor but otherwise significant change in an aircraft would necessitate a new mark number, e.g., when the Lancaster I was fitted with Packard-built Merlin engines, which used a different make of carburettor from the Rolls-Royce-built ones, the Lancaster I became a Lancaster III. Otherwise, these two aircraft were identical in appearance and performance, and normally indistinguishable from each other but needed to be identified differently for maintenance.\nDuring the Second World War, as aircraft ordered for one purpose became adapted to a multitude of roles, mark numbers became prefixed with letters to indicate the role of that variant. Aircraft of the same mark that were adapted for different purpose would then be differentiated by the prefix. For instance the Defiant Mk.I was adapted to a night fighter, the Defiant NF Mk.II, some of which were later converted to target tugs as the Defiant TT Mk.II. Where there was a \"Sea-\" variant, this would have its own series of mark numbers, e.g.: the Seafire Mk.I was derived from the Spitfire Mk.V.\nOccasionally, other 'minor' but nonetheless important changes might be denoted by series numbers, preceded by 'Series', 'Srs.', or 'Srs', e.g.: Mosquito B Mk.IV Series I / B Mk.IV Series II \u2013 the different series number denoting the introduction, after a few initial production aircraft, of extended engine nacelles to eliminate buffeting. This design change was made standard on all subsequent production Mosquitoes. The series number denoted a revision during the production run of a particular mark. This again could then have an additional letter-suffix; e.g.: the Halifax Mk.II Series IA.\nExport variants of British military aircraft are usually allocated mark numbers (sometimes without a role prefix) from a higher range of numbers, usually starting at Mark\u00a050. A converse convention was adopted for the Canadian-designed de Havilland Canada DHC-1 Chipmunk, where the sole British service variant was designated Chipmunk T.10.\nUp until the end of 1942, the RAF always used Roman numerals for mark numbers, sometimes separated from its 'mark' abbreviation by a period (full stop). 1943 to 1948 was a transition period, during which new aircraft entering service were given Arabic numerals for mark numbers, but older aircraft retained their Roman numerals. From 1948 onwards, Arabic numerals were used exclusively. Thus, the Spitfire PR Mk.XIX became the PR Mk.19 after 1948. With this change, the \"Sea-\" variants were allocated their own range within one common series for all variants; e.g.: the Hawker Fury Mk.I was followed by the Sea Fury F.10, Sea Fury FB.11 etc.\nMore recently, mark numbers have not always been used sequentially, but instead used to highlight differences in equipment installed. Specific examples include aerial refuelling tankers; the RAF Voyager is either designated as KC2, indicating two Cobham 905E underwing hose and drogue refuelling pods, whereas the KC3 indicates a total of three hose and drogue refuelling units (two underwing, and an additional centreline Cobham 805E Fuselage Refuelling Unit), there was never any 'mark 1' variant of the Voyager.\nFormat of designation.\nThe system has been largely unchanged since 1948, with the addition of more prefixes as new roles have arisen.\nFor example, the first Lockheed Hercules variant in Royal Air Force service was the Hercules C.1 ('Cargo, Mark 1'). A single example was adapted for weather monitoring purposes and became the Hercules W.2. The fuselage-lengthened variant became the Hercules C.3. For aircraft with a long service life, as their function evolves over time, the designation letters and sometimes the mark digit will change to reflect this. The practice of restarting the mark numbers for the naval variant where the name was changed continued; e.g., the naval version of the Hawker Siddely Harrier, the BAe Sea Harrier, marks started again at FRS Mk.1, whilst variants where the name was unchanged for the naval version such as the Lynx have a single set of numbers for both land and naval variants. In the case of the Sea King, which began as a naval aircraft, the RAF kept the name and it also has a single set of numbers.\nThe post-1948 mark numbers are variously presented in full, e.g.: Hercules C Mk.3; or abbreviated, e.g.: Hercules C3 forms; and either with or without a full stop between the prefix and mark number. The use of the 'Mark' or 'Mk.' has gradually been dropped.\nOther designation systems used for UK military aircraft.\nSpecification numbers.\nFrom 1920 to 1949, most aircraft had an associated Air Ministry specification number. Prototype aircraft would be produced under contract, and would be referred to by manufacturer name and specification number. If accepted, they would get a service name. For example, the 'Fairey 6/22' was built to meet the 6th specification issued in the year 1922; it was subsequently accepted as the Fairey Flycatcher. Later, a preceding letter was added to the specification number to identify the type of aircraft; e.g.: specification B.28/35 for a bomber was the 28th\u00a0specification issued in 1935; in this case the specification was specifically written for the Bristol 142M, a modification of Bristol's Type 142 private venture civil aircraft (\"Britain First\") for military use as a bomber, which would enter service as the Bristol Blenheim Mk.I light bomber.\nManufacturers designations.\nFrom about 1910, the largest single designer of aircraft for the British Army's Royal Flying Corps (RFC) was the Royal Aircraft Factory. The Royal Aircraft Factory designated its types according to either the layout of the aircraft or its role; e.g.: Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5, the 'S.E.' prefix representing 'scouting experimental'. In practice, successful Royal Aircraft Factory designs were largely built by other manufacturers, though still known by the Royal Aircraft Factory designations.\nSome examples of manufacturers designations and the corresponding service designations are shown below:\nUS designations.\nFor some aircraft types in the UK armed services which originate from established U.S. military aircraft; e.g., the Boeing C-17 Globemaster III, which is currently known in RAF service as the 'C-17 Globemaster III', have used the original US designation, rather than assigning a UK specific designation.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75087", "revid": "2", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75087", "title": "Berenice (daughter of Herod Agrippa)", "text": "1st century CE member of Herodian Dynasty of Judaea\nBerenice of Cilicia, also known as Julia Berenice and sometimes spelled Bernice (, \"Beren\u00edk\u0113\" or \"Bern\u00edk\u0113\"; 28 \u2013 after 81), was a Jewish client queen of the Roman Empire during the second half of the 1st century. Berenice was a member of the Herodian dynasty that ruled the Roman province of Judaea between 39 BC and 92 AD. She was the daughter of King Herod Agrippa I and Cypros and a sister of King Herod Agrippa II.\nWhat little is known about her life and background comes mostly from the early historian Flavius Josephus, who detailed a history of the Jewish people and wrote an account of the Jewish Rebellion of 67. Suetonius, Tacitus, Dio Cassius, Aurelius Victor, and Juvenal also write about her. She is also mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles (25:13, 23; 26:30). However, it is for her tumultuous love life that she is primarily known since the Renaissance. Her reputation was based on the bias of the Romans against Eastern princesses like Cleopatra, or later Zenobia. After two marriages in which she was widowed in her 40s, she spent much of the remainder of her life at the court of Herod Agrippa II, amidst rumors the two were carrying on an incestuous relationship, though this was neither proved nor disproved. During the First Jewish-Roman War, she began a love affair with the future emperor Titus Flavius Vespasianus. However, her unpopularity among the Romans compelled Titus to dismiss her on his accession as emperor in 79. When he died two years later, she disappeared from the historical record.\nEarly life.\nBerenice was born in 28 to Herod Agrippa and Cypros, as granddaughter to Aristobulus IV and great-granddaughter to Herod the Great. Her elder brother was Agrippa II (b. 27), and her younger sisters were Mariamne (b. 34) and Drusilla (b. 38). According to Josephus, there was also a younger brother called Drusus, who died before his teens. Her family constituted part of what is known as the Herodian Dynasty, who ruled the Judaea Province between 39 BC and 92 AD.\nJosephus records three short-lived marriages in Berenice's life, the first which took place sometime between 41 and 43, when she was between the ages of 13 and 15, to Marcus Julius Alexander, brother of Tiberius Julius Alexander and son of Alexander the Alabarch of Alexandria. On his early death in 44, she was married to her father's brother, Herod of Chalcis, with whom she had two sons, Berenicianus and Hyrcanus. After her husband died in 48, she lived with her brother Agrippa for several years and then married Polemon II of Pontus, king of Cilicia, whom she subsequently deserted. According to Josephus, Berenice requested this marriage to dispel rumors that she and her brother were carrying on an incestuous relationship, with Polemon being persuaded to this union mostly on account of her wealth. However the marriage did not last, and she soon returned to the court of her brother. Josephus was not the only ancient writer to suggest incestuous relations between Berenice and Agrippa. Juvenal, in his sixth satire, outright claims that they were lovers. Whether this was based on truth remains unknown. Berenice indeed spent much of her life at the court of Agrippa and by all accounts shared almost equal power. Popular rumors may also have been fueled by the fact that Agrippa never married.\nBerenice was a\u00a0co-ruler\u00a0of her brother Agrippa II. The Acts of the Apostles records that during this time, Paul the Apostle appeared before their court at Caesarea.\nAn inscription of an honorific statue of Berenice set up in Athens, dated to 61 AD, refers to Berenice as \"basilissa\", a title given by Josephus to Jewish queens who ruled in their own right. Berenice is called \"regina\" (\"queen\") in the Latin inscription discovered at Beyrout, in which her name appears to precede that of her brother Agrippa.\nDuring Jewish-Roman wars.\nEarly phase of the revolt.\nIn 64 emperor Nero appointed Gessius Florus as procurator of the Judaea Province. During his administration, the Jews were systematically discriminated against in favour of the Greek population of the region. Tensions quickly rose to civil unrest when Florus plundered the treasury of the Temple of Jerusalem under the guise of imperial taxes. Following riots, the instigators were arrested and crucified by the Romans. Appalled at the treatment of her countrymen, Berenice travelled to Jerusalem in 66 to personally petition Florus to spare the Jews. Not only did he refuse to comply with her requests, Berenice was nearly killed during skirmishes in the city. Likewise a plea for assistance to the legate of Syria, Cestius Gallus, met with no response.\nTo prevent violence from further escalating, Agrippa assembled the populace and delivered a speech to the crowd in the company of his sister, but the insurgents burned down their palaces. They fled the city to Galilee where they later gave themselves up to the Romans. Meanwhile, Cestius Gallus moved into the region with the Twelfth legion but was unable to restore order and suffered defeat at the battle of Beth-Horon, forcing the Romans to retreat from Jerusalem.\nAffair with Titus.\nVespasian was then appointed by Emperor Nero to put down the rebellion; he landed in Judaea with the Fifth and Tenth legions in 67. He was later joined at Ptolemais by his son Titus, who brought with him the Fifteenth legion. With a strength of 60,000 professional soldiers, the Romans quickly swept across Galilee and by 69 marched on Jerusalem.\nIt was during this time that Berenice met and attempted to seduce Titus, who was eleven years her junior. The Herodians sided with the Flavians during the conflict, and later in 69, the Year of the Four Emperors\u2014when the Roman Empire saw the quick succession of the emperors Galba, Otho and Vitellius\u2014Berenice reportedly used all her wealth and influence to support Vespasian in his campaign to become emperor. When Vespasian was declared emperor on 21 December 69, Titus was left in Judaea to finish putting down the rebellion. The war ended in 70 with the destruction of the Second Temple and the sack of Jerusalem, with hundreds of thousands killed and 97,000 taken captive by the Romans. Triumphant, Titus returned to Rome to assist his father in the government, while Berenice stayed behind in Judaea.\nIn Rome.\nIt took four years until Titus and Berenice reunited, when she and her brother Agrippa II came to Rome in 75. The reasons for this long absence are unclear but have been linked to possible opposition to her presence by Gaius Licinius Mucianus, a political ally of emperor Vespasian who died sometime between 72 and 78. Agrippa II was given the rank of praetor, while Berenice resumed her relationship with Titus, living with him at the palace and reportedly acting in every respect as his wife. The ancient historian Cassius Dio writes that Berenice was at the height of her power during this time, and if it can be any indication as to how influential she was, Quintilian records an anecdote in his \"Institutio Oratoria\" where, to his astonishment, he found himself pleading a case on Berenice's behalf where she presided as the judge. The Roman populace however perceived the Eastern queen as an intrusive outsider, and when the pair was publicly denounced by Cynics in the theatre, Titus caved to the pressure and sent her away.\nUpon the accession of Titus as emperor in 79, she returned to Rome but was quickly dismissed amidst a number of popular measures of Titus to restore his reputation with the populace. It is possible that he intended to send for her at a more convenient time. However, after reigning barely two years as emperor, he suddenly died on 13 September 81. It is not known what happened to Berenice after her final dismissal from Rome. Agrippa II died around 92, and with him, the Herodian Dynasty's rule over Judaea came to an end.\nPortrayal in the arts.\nFrom the 17th century to contemporary times, there has been a long tradition of works of art (novels, dramas, operas, etc.) devoted to or featuring Berenice and especially her affair with Titus. The list includes:\nIn modern history, her aspirations as a potential empress of Rome have led to her being described as a 'miniature Cleopatra'.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75088", "revid": "11692354", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75088", "title": "Maximian", "text": "Roman emperor from 286 to 305\nMaximian (; c.\u2009250\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009July 310), nicknamed Herculius, was Roman emperor from 286 to 305. He was \"Caesar\" from 285 to 286, then \"Augustus\" from 286 to 305. He shared the latter title with his co-emperor and superior, Diocletian, whose political brain complemented Maximian's military brawn. Maximian established his residence at Trier but spent most of his time on campaign. In late 285, he suppressed rebels in Gaul known as the Bagaudae. From 285 to 288, he fought against Germanic tribes along the Rhine frontier. Together with Diocletian, he launched a scorched earth campaign deep into Alamannic territory in 288, refortifying the frontier.\nThe man he appointed to police the Channel shores, Carausius, rebelled in 286, causing the secession of Britain and northwestern Gaul. Maximian failed to oust Carausius, and his invasion fleet was destroyed by storms in 289 or 290. Maximian's subordinate Constantius campaigned against Carausius' successor, Allectus, while Maximian held the Rhine frontier. The rebel leader was ousted in 296, and Maximian moved south to combat piracy near Hispania and Berber incursions in Mauretania. When these campaigns concluded in 298, he departed for Italy, where he lived in comfort until 305. At Diocletian's behest, Maximian abdicated on 1 May 305, gave the Augustan office to Constantius, and retired to southern Italy.\nIn late 306, Maximian took the title of \"Augustus\" again and aided his son, Maxentius, and his rebellion in Italy. In April 307, he attempted to depose his son, but failed and fled to the court of Constantius' successor, Constantine (Maximian's step-grandson and son-in-law), in Trier. At the Council of Carnuntum in November 308, Diocletian and his successor, Galerius, forced Maximian to renounce his imperial claim again. In early 310, Maximian attempted to seize Constantine's title while the emperor was on campaign on the Rhine. Few supported him, and he was captured by Constantine in Marseille. Maximian killed himself in mid-310 on Constantine's orders. During Constantine's war with Maxentius, Maximian's image was purged from all public places. However, after Constantine ousted and killed Maxentius, Maximian's image was rehabilitated, and he was deified.\nEarly life.\nMaximian was born around the year 250 near Sirmium (modern Sremska Mitrovica, Serbia) in the province of Pannonia, into a family of shopkeepers. Beyond that, the ancient sources contain vague allusions to Illyricum as his homeland, to his Pannonian virtues, and to his harsh upbringing along the war-torn Danube frontier. Maximian joined the army, serving with Diocletian under the emperors Aurelian (r. 270\u2013275) and Probus (r. 276\u2013282). He probably participated in the Mesopotamian campaign of Carus in 283 and attended Diocletian's election as emperor on 20 November 284 at Nicomedia. Maximian's swift appointment by Diocletian as Caesar is taken by the writer Stephen Williams and historian Timothy Barnes to mean that the two men were long-term allies, that their respective roles were pre-agreed and that Maximian had probably supported Diocletian during his campaign against Carinus (r. 283\u2013285) but there is no direct evidence for this.\nWith his great energy, firm aggressive character and disinclination to rebel, Maximian was an appealing candidate for imperial office. The fourth-century historian Aurelius Victor described Maximian as \"a colleague trustworthy in friendship, if somewhat boorish, and of great military talents\". Despite his other qualities, Maximian was uneducated and preferred action to thought. The panegyric of 289, after comparing his actions to Scipio Africanus' victories over Hannibal during the Second Punic War, suggested that Maximian had never heard of them. His ambitions were purely military; he left politics to Diocletian. The Christian rhetor Lactantius suggested that Maximian shared Diocletian's basic attitudes but was less puritanical in his tastes, and took advantage of the sensual opportunities his position as emperor offered. Lactantius charged that Maximian defiled senators' daughters and traveled with young virgins to satisfy his unending lust, though Lactantius' credibility is undermined by his general hostility towards pagans.\nMaximian had two children with his Syrian wife, Eutropia: Maxentius and Fausta. There is no direct evidence for their birthdates. Maxentius was probably born around 283 (when Maximian was in Syria), and Fausta around 289 or 290. Maximiana Theodora, the wife of Constantius, is often called Maximian's stepdaughter by ancient sources, leading to claims by Otto Seeck and Ernest Stein that she was born from an earlier marriage between Eutropia and Afranius Hannibalianus. Barnes challenges this view, saying that all \"stepdaughter\" sources derive their information from the partially unreliable work of history \"Kaisergeschichte\", while other, more reliable, sources refer to her as Maximian's natural daughter. Barnes concludes that Theodora was born no later than c. 275 to an unnamed earlier wife of Maximian, possibly one of Hannibalianus' daughters. Julia Hillner agrees with Barnes that the \"stepdaughter sources\" are a result of political propaganda from the later Constantinian dynasty but believes that Barnes explanation fails to explain why Theodora named one of her daughters Eutropia if her mother was an unknown Afrania instead of empress Eutropia. Hillner argues that Afranius Hannibalianus was Eutropia's brother and that Theodora was the daughter of both Maximian and Eutropia. This is in line with John Vanderspoel.\nAppointment as Caesar.\nAt Mediolanum (Milan, Italy) probably in July 285, Diocletian appointed Maximian as his heir-apparent and subordinate, with the title \"Caesar\". The reasons for this decision are complex. With conflict in every province of the Empire, from Gaul to Syria, from Egypt to the lower Danube, Diocletian needed a lieutenant to manage his heavy workload. Historian Stephen Williams suggests that Diocletian considered himself a mediocre general and needed a man like Maximian to do most of his fighting.\nThe general consensus is that Maximian was appointed \"Caesar\" before being proclaimed \"Augustus\" (the official term for \"emperor\"), as stated by the contemporary writer Eusebius. However, some modern scholars have doubted this, as there is virtually no evidence for this. Even brief \"Caesars\" like Volusianus and Numerian, who only held the title for a few months, had coins minted in their names. Historian Richard Burgess argues that Maximian was never \"Caesar\", and that his appointment as \"Augustus\" actually took place on 13 December 285, as opposed to the traditional date of 1 April 286, which has already been put into question by other authors.\nDiocletian was vulnerable in that he had no sons, just a daughter, Valeria, who could never succeed him. He was forced therefore to seek a co-ruler from outside his family and that co-ruler had to be someone he trusted. The historian William Seston has argued that Diocletian, like heirless emperors before him, adopted Maximian as his \"filius Augusti\" (\"Augustan son\") upon his appointment to the office. Some agree, but the historian Frank Kolb has stated that arguments for the adoption are based on misreadings of the papyrological evidence. Maximian did take Diocletian's \"nomen\" (family name) Valerius, however.\nFinally, Diocletian knew that single rule was dangerous and that precedent existed for dual rulership. Despite their military prowess, both sole-emperors Aurelian and Probus had been easily removed from power. In contrast, just a few years earlier, the emperor Carus and his sons had ruled jointly, albeit not for long. Even the first emperor, Augustus (r. 27 BC\u2013AD 14), had shared power with his colleagues and more formal offices of co-emperor had existed from Marcus Aurelius (r. 161\u2013180) on.\nThe dual system evidently worked well. Around 287, after Maximian's appointment as \"Augustus\", the two rulers' relationship was re-defined in religious terms, with Diocletian assuming the title \"Iovius\" and Maximian \"Herculius\". The titles were pregnant with symbolism: Diocletian-Jove had the dominant role of planning and commanding; Maximian-Hercules the heroic role of completing assigned tasks. Yet despite the symbolism, the emperors were not \"gods\" in the Imperial cult (although they may have been hailed as such in Imperial panegyrics). Instead, they were the gods' instruments, imposing the gods' will on earth. Once the rituals were over, Maximian assumed control of the government of the West and was dispatched to Gaul to fight the rebels known as Bagaudae while Diocletian returned to the East.\nEarly campaigns in Gaul and Germany.\nThe Bagaudae of Gaul are obscure figures, appearing fleetingly in the ancient sources, with their 285 uprising being their first appearance. The fourth-century historian Eutropius described them as rural people under the leadership of Amandus and Aelianus, while Aurelius Victor called them bandits. The historian David Potter suggests that they were more than peasants, seeking either Gallic political autonomy or reinstatement of the recently deposed Carus (a native of Gallia Narbonensis, in what would become southern France): in this case, they would be defecting imperial troops, not brigands. Although poorly equipped, led and trained \u2013 and therefore a poor match for Roman legions \u2013 Diocletian certainly considered the Bagaudae sufficient threat to merit an emperor to counter them. Maximian has been implicated in a massacre of Coptic Christian troops from the headquarters unit of a legion raised in Thebes at Aucanus in modern Switzerland in early 285, during the preparations for the campaign against the Bagaudae.\nMaximian traveled to Gaul, engaging the Bagaudae late in mid-285. Details of the campaign are sparse and provide no tactical detail: the historical sources dwell only on Maximian's virtues and victories. The panegyric to Maximian in 289 records that the rebels were defeated with a blend of harshness and leniency. As the campaign was against the Empire's own citizens, and therefore distasteful, it went unrecorded in titles and official triumphs. Indeed, Maximian's panegyrist declares: \"I pass quickly over this episode, for I see in your magnanimity you would rather forget this victory than celebrate it.\" By the end of the year, the revolt had significantly abated, and Maximian moved the bulk of his forces to the Rhine frontier, heralding a period of stability.\nMaximian did not put down the Bagaudae swiftly enough to avoid a Germanic reaction. In late 285, two barbarian armies \u2013 one of Burgundians and Alamanni, the other of Chaibones and Heruli \u2013 forded the Rhine and entered Gaul. The first army was left to die of disease and hunger, while Maximian intercepted and defeated the second. He then established a Rhine headquarters in preparation for future campaigns, either at Moguntiacum (Mainz, Germany), or at Augusta Treverorum (Trier, Germany).\nCarausius.\nAlthough most of Gaul was pacified, regions bordering the English Channel still suffered from Frankish and Saxon piracy. The emperors Probus and Carinus had begun to fortify the Saxon Shore, but much remained to be done. For example, there is no archaeological evidence of naval bases at Dover and Boulogne during 270\u2013285. In response to the pirate problem, Maximian appointed Mausaeus Carausius, a Menapian from Germania Inferior (southern and western Netherlands) to command the Channel and to clear it of raiders. Carausius fared well, and by the end of 285 he was capturing pirate ships in great numbers.\nMaximian soon heard that Carausius was waiting until the pirates had finished plundering before attacking and keeping their booty himself instead of returning it to the population at large or into the imperial treasury. Maximian ordered Carausius' arrest and execution, prompting him to flee to Britain. Carausius' support among the British was strong, and at least two British legions (II Augusta and XX Valeria Victrix) defected to him, as did some or all of a legion near Boulogne (probably XXX Ulpia Victrix).Carausius quickly eliminated the few remaining loyalists in his army and declared himself Augustus.\nMaximian could do little about the revolt. He had no fleet \u2013 he had given it to Carausius \u2013 and was busy quelling the Heruli and the Franks. Meanwhile, Carausius strengthened his position by enlarging his fleet, enlisting Frankish mercenaries, and paying his troops well. By late 286, Britain, much of northwestern Gaul, and the entire Channel coast, was under his control. Carausius declared himself head of an independent British state, an \"Imperium Britanniarum\" and issued coin of a markedly higher purity than that of Maximian and Diocletian, earning the support of British and Gallic merchants. Even Maximian's troops were vulnerable to Carausius' influence and wealth.\nMaximian appointed Augustus.\nSpurred by the crisis with Carausius, on 1 April 286, Maximian took the title of \"Augustus\" (emperor). This gave him the same status as Carausius \u2013 so the clash was between two \"Augusti\", rather than between an \"Augustus\" and a \"Caesar\" \u2013 and, in Imperial propaganda, Maximian was proclaimed Diocletian's brother, his equal in authority and prestige. Diocletian could not have been present at Maximian's appointment, as he was somewhere between Byzantium (Istanbul, Turkey), where he is attested for 22 March 286, and Tiberias, where he is attested from 31 May 286 through 31 August. Otto Seeck suggests that Maximian usurped the title and was only later recognized by Diocletian in hopes of avoiding civil war. This suggestion has not won much support, and the historian William Leadbetter has recently refuted it. Despite the physical distance between the emperors, Diocletian trusted Maximian enough to invest him with imperial powers, and Maximian still respected Diocletian enough to act in accordance with his will.\nIn theory, the Roman Empire was not divided by the dual \"imperium\". Though divisions did take place \u2013 each emperor had his own court, army, and official residences \u2013 these were matters of practicality, not substance. Imperial propaganda from 287 on insists on a singular and indivisible Rome, a \"patrimonium indivisum\". As the panegyrist of 289 declares to Maximian: \"So it is that this great empire is a communal possession for both of you, without any discord, nor would we endure there to be any dispute between you, but plainly you hold the state in equal measure as once those two Heracleidae, the Spartan Kings, had done.\" Legal rulings were given and imperial celebrations took place in both emperors' names, and the same coins were issued in both parts of the empire. Diocletian sometimes issued commands to Maximian's province of Africa; Maximian could presumably have done the same for Diocletian's territory.\nCampaigns against Rhenish tribes.\nCampaigns in 286 and 287.\nMaximian realized that he could not immediately suppress Carausius and campaigned instead against Rhenish tribes. These tribes were probably greater threats to Gallic peace anyway and included many supporters of Carausius. Although Maximian had many enemies along the river, they were more often in dispute with each other than in combat with the Empire. Few clear dates survive for Maximian's campaigns on the Rhine beyond a general range of 285 to 288.\nWhile receiving the consular \"fasces\" on 1 January 287, Maximian was interrupted by news of a barbarian raid. Doffing his toga and donning his armor, he marched against the barbarians and, although they were not entirely dispersed, he celebrated a victory in Gaul later that year.\nMaximian believed the Burgundian and Alemanni tribes of the Moselle-Vosges region to be the greatest threat, so he targeted them first. He campaigned using scorched earth tactics, laying waste to their land and reducing their numbers through famine and disease. After the Burgundians and Alemanni, Maximian moved against the weaker Heruli and Chaibones. He cornered and defeated them in a single battle. He fought in person, riding along the battle line until the Germanic forces broke. Roman forces pursued the fleeing tribal armies and routed them. With his enemies weakened from starvation, Maximian launched a great invasion across the Rhine. He moved deep into Germanic territory, bringing destruction to his enemies' homelands. By the end of 287, he had the advantage and the Rhenish lands were free of Germanic tribesmen. Maximian's panegyrist declared: \"All that I see beyond the Rhine is Roman.\"\nJoint campaign against the Alamanni.\nEarly the next year, as Maximian made preparations for dealing with Carausius, Diocletian returned from the East. The emperors met that year, but neither date nor place is known with certainty. They probably agreed on a joint campaign against the Alamanni and a naval expedition against Carausius.\nLater in the year, Maximian led a surprise invasion of the Agri Decumates \u2013 a region between the upper Rhine and upper Danube deep within Alamanni territory \u2013 while Diocletian invaded Germany via Raetia. Both emperors burned crops and food supplies as they went, destroying the Germans' means of sustenance. They added large swathes of territory to the Empire and allowed Maximian's build-up to proceed without further disturbance. In the aftermath of the war, towns along the Rhine were rebuilt, bridgeheads created on the eastern banks at such places as Mainz and Cologne, and a military frontier was established, comprising forts, roads, and fortified towns. A military highway through Tornacum (Tournai, Belgium), Bavacum (Bavay, France), Atuatuca Tungrorum (Tongeren, Belgium), Mosae Trajectum (Maastricht, Netherlands), and Cologne connected points along the frontier.\nConstantius, Gennobaudes, and resettlement.\nIn early 288, Maximian appointed his praetorian prefect Constantius Chlorus, husband of Maximian's daughter Theodora, to lead a campaign against Carausius' Frankish allies. These Franks controlled the Rhine estuaries, thwarting sea-attacks against Carausius. Constantius moved north through their territory, wreaking havoc, and reaching the North Sea. The Franks sued for peace and in the subsequent settlement Maximian reinstated the deposed Frankish king Gennobaudes. Gennobaudes became Maximian's vassal and, with lesser Frankish chiefs in turn swearing loyalty to Gennobaudes, Roman regional dominance was assured.\nMaximian allowed a settlement of Frisii, Salian Franks, Chamavi and other tribes along a strip of Roman territory, either between the Rhine and Waal rivers from Noviomagus (Nijmegen, Netherlands) to Traiectum, (Utrecht, Netherlands) or near Trier. These tribes were allowed to settle on the condition that they acknowledged Roman dominance. Their presence provided a ready pool of manpower and prevented the settlement of other Frankish tribes, giving Maximian a buffer along the northern Rhine and reducing his need to garrison the region.\nLater campaigns in Britain and Gaul.\nFailed expedition against Carausius.\nBy 289, Maximian was prepared to invade Carausius' Britain, but for some reason the plan failed. Maximian's panegyrist of 289 was optimistic about the campaign's prospects, but the panegyrist of 291 made no mention of it. Constantius' panegyrist suggested that his fleet was lost to a storm, but this might simply have been to diminish the embarrassment of defeat. Diocletian curtailed his Eastern province tour soon after, perhaps on learning of Maximian's failure. Diocletian returned in haste to the West, reaching Emesa by 10 May 290, and Sirmium on the Danube by 1 July 290.\nDiocletian met Maximian in Milan either in late December 290 or January 291. Crowds gathered to witness the event, and the emperors devoted much time to public pageantry. Potter, among others, has surmised that the ceremonies were arranged to demonstrate Diocletian's continuing support for his faltering colleague. The rulers discussed matters of politics and war in secret, and they may have considered the idea of expanding the imperial college to include four rulers (the Tetrarchy). Meanwhile, a deputation from the Roman Senate met with the rulers and renewed its infrequent contact with the imperial office. The emperors would not meet again until 303.\nFollowing Maximian's failure to invade in 289, an uneasy truce with Carausius began. Maximian tolerated Carausius' rule in Britain and on the continent but refused to grant the secessionist state formal legitimacy. For his part, Carausius was content with his territories beyond the Continental coast of Gaul. Diocletian, however, would not tolerate this affront to his rule. Faced with Carausius' secession and further challenges on the Egyptian, Syrian, and Danubian borders, he realized that two emperors were insufficient to manage the Empire. On 1 March 293 at Milan, Maximian appointed Constantius to the office of \"Caesar\". On either the same day or a month later, Diocletian did the same for Galerius, thus establishing the \"Tetrarchy\", or \"rule of four\". Constantius was made to understand that he must succeed where Maximian had failed and defeat Carausius.\nCampaign against Allectus.\nConstantius met expectations quickly and efficiently and by 293 had expelled Carausian forces from northern Gaul. In the same year, Carausius was assassinated and replaced by his treasurer, Allectus. Constantius marched up the coast to the Rhine and Scheldt estuaries where he was victorious over Carausius' Frankish allies, taking the title \"Germanicus maximus\". His sights now set on Britain, Constantius spent the following years building an invasion fleet. Maximian, still in Italy after the appointment of Constantius, was apprised of the invasion plans and, in mid-296, returned to Gaul. There, he held the Rhenish frontiers against Carausius' Frankish allies while Constantius launched his invasion of Britain. Allectus was killed on the North Downs in battle with Constantius' praetorian prefect, Asclepiodotus. Constantius himself had landed near Dubris (Dover) and marched on Londinium (London), whose citizens greeted him as a liberator.\nCampaigns in North Africa.\nWith Constantius' victorious return, Maximian was able to focus on the conflict in Mauretania (Northwest Africa). As Roman authority weakened during the third century, nomadic Berber tribes harassed settlements in the region with increasingly severe consequences. In 289, the governor of Mauretania Caesariensis (roughly modern Algeria) gained a temporary respite by pitting a small army against the Bavares and Quinquegentiani, but the raiders soon returned. In 296, Maximian raised an army, from Praetorian cohorts, Aquileian, Egyptian, and Danubian legionaries, Gallic and German auxiliaries, and Thracian recruits, advancing through Spain later that year. He may have defended the region against raiding Moors before crossing the Strait of Gibraltar into Mauretania Tingitana (roughly modern Morocco) to protect the area from Frankish pirates.\nBy March 297, Maximian had begun a bloody offensive against the Berbers. The campaign was lengthy, and Maximian spent the winter of 297\u2013298 resting in Carthage before returning to the field. Not content to drive them back into their homelands in the Atlas Mountains \u2013 from which they could continue to wage war \u2013 Maximian ventured deep into Berber territory. The terrain was unfavorable, and the Berbers were skilled at guerrilla warfare, but Maximian pressed on. Apparently wishing to inflict as much punishment as possible on the tribes, he devastated previously secure land, killed as many as he could, and drove the remainder back into the Sahara. His campaign was concluded by early 298 and, on 10 March, he made a triumphal entry into Carthage. Inscriptions there record the people's gratitude to Maximian, hailing him \u2013 as Constantius had been on his entry to London \u2013 as \"redditor lucis aeternae\" (\"restorer of the eternal light\"). Maximian returned to Italy in early 299 to celebrate another triumph in Rome.\nAfter his Mauretanian campaign in 299, Maximian returned to the north of Italy, living a life of leisure in palaces in Milan and Aquilea, and leaving warfare to his subordinate Constantius. Maximian was more aggressive in his relationship with the Senate than Constantius, and Lactantius contends that he terrorized senators, to the point of falsely charging and subsequently executing several, including the prefect of Rome in 301\u20132. In contrast, Constantius kept up good relations with the senatorial aristocracy and spent his time in active defense of the empire. He took up arms against the Franks in 300 or 301 and in 302 \u2013 while Maximian was resting in Italy \u2013 continued to campaign against Germanic tribes on the Upper Rhine.\nAccording to Aurelius Victor, he also built a palace near his home town of Sirmium. In addition to the imperial palace in Sirmium another palace has been found at Glac, which may be that of Maximian.\nRetirement.\nDiocletian's \"vicennalia\", the 20-year anniversary of his reign, was celebrated in Rome in 303. Some evidence suggests that it was then that Diocletian exacted a promise from Maximian to retire together, passing their titles as \"Augusti\" to the \"Caesars\" Constantius and Galerius. Presumably Maximian's son Maxentius and Constantius's son Constantine \u2013 children raised in Nicomedia together \u2013 would then become the new \"Caesars\". While Maximian might not have wished to retire, Diocletian was still in control and there was little resistance. Before retirement, Maximian received one final moment of glory by officiating at the Secular Games in 304.\nOn 1 May 305, in separate ceremonies in Milan and Nicomedia, Diocletian and Maximian retired simultaneously. The succession did not go entirely to Maximian's liking: perhaps because of Galerius' influence, Galerius' former army comrade Severus and Galerius' nephew Maximinus (both of whom had long military careers) were appointed \"Caesar\", thus excluding Constantine and Maxentius. Maximian quickly soured to the new tetrarchy, which saw Galerius assume the dominant position Diocletian once held. Although Maximian led the ceremony that proclaimed Severus as \"Caesar\", within two years he was sufficiently dissatisfied to support his son's rebellion against the new regime. Diocletian retired to the expansive palace he had built in his homeland, Dalmatia near Salona on the Adriatic. Maximian retired to villas in Campania, Lucania or Sirmium, where he lived a life of ease and luxury. Although far from the political centers of the Empire, Diocletian and Maximian remained close enough to stay in regular contact.\nMaxentius' rebellion.\nAfter the death of Constantius on 25 July 306, Constantine assumed the title of \"Augustus\". This displeased Galerius, who instead offered Constantine the title of \"Caesar\", which Constantine accepted. The title of \"Augustus\" then went to Severus. Maxentius was jealous of Constantine's power, and on 28 October 306, he persuaded a cohort of imperial guardsmen to declare him \"Augustus\". Uncomfortable with sole leadership, Maxentius sent a set of imperial robes to Maximian and saluted him as \"Augustus for the second time\", offering him theoretic equal rule but less actual power and a lower rank.\nGalerius refused to recognize Maxentius and sent Severus with an army to Rome to depose him. As many of Severus' soldiers had served under Maximian, and had taken Maxentius' bribes, most of the army defected to Maxentius. Severus fled to Ravenna, which Maximian besieged. The city was strongly fortified so Maximian offered terms, which Severus accepted. Maximian then seized Severus and took him under guard to a public villa in southern Rome, where he was kept as a hostage. In late 307, Galerius led a second force against Maxentius but he again failed to take Rome, and retreated north with his army mostly intact.\nWhile Maxentius built up Rome's defenses, Maximian made his way to Gaul to negotiate with Constantine. A deal was struck in which Constantine would marry Maximian's younger daughter Fausta and be elevated to Augustan rank in Maxentius' secessionist regime. In return, Constantine would reaffirm the old family alliance between Maximian and Constantius, and support Maxentius' cause in Italy but would remain neutral in the war with Galerius. The deal was sealed with a double ceremony in Trier in late 307, at which Constantine married Fausta and was declared \"Augustus\" by Maximian.\nMaximian returned to Rome in the winter of 307\u20138 but soon fell out with his son and in early 308 challenged his right to rule before an assembly of Roman soldiers. He spoke of Rome's sickly government, disparaged Maxentius for having weakened it, and ripped the imperial toga from Maxentius' shoulders. He expected the soldiers to recognize him, but they sided with Maxentius; afterward, Maximian was forced to leave Italy in disgrace.\nOn 11 November 308, to resolve the political instability, Galerius called Diocletian (out of retirement) and Maximian to a general council meeting at the military city of Carnuntum on the upper Danube. There, Maximian was forced to abdicate again and Constantine was again demoted to \"Caesar\", with Maximinus the \"Caesar\" in the east. Licinius, a loyal military companion to Galerius, was appointed \"Augustus\" of the West. In early 309 Maximian returned to the court of Constantine in Gaul, the only court that would still accept him. Constantine and Maximinus refused to be placated with the titles of \"Sons of the Augusti\", and they were both reluctantly recognized as emperors, with the result that there were now four \"Augusti\".\nRebellion against Constantine.\nIn 310, Maximian rebelled against Constantine while the Emperor was on campaign against the Franks. Maximian had been sent south to Arles with part of Constantine's army to defend against attacks by Maxentius in southern Gaul. In Arles, Maximian announced that Constantine was dead and took up the imperial purple. Although Maximian offered bribes to all who would support him, most of Constantine's army remained loyal, and Maximian was compelled to leave the city. Constantine soon heard of the rebellion, abandoned his campaign against the Franks, and moved quickly to southern Gaul, where he confronted the fleeing Maximian at Massilia (Marseille). The town was better able to withstand a long siege than Arles, but it made little difference as loyal citizens opened the rear gates to Constantine. Maximian was captured, reproved for his crimes, and stripped of his title for the third and last time. Constantine granted Maximian some clemency but strongly encouraged his suicide. In July 310, Maximian hanged himself.\nDespite the earlier rupture in relations, after Maximian's suicide Maxentius presented himself as his father's devoted son. He minted coins bearing his father's deified image and proclaimed his desire to avenge his death.\nConstantine initially presented the suicide as an unfortunate family tragedy. By 311, however, he was spreading another version. According to this, after Constantine had pardoned him, Maximian planned to murder Constantine in his sleep. Fausta learned of the plot and warned Constantine, who put a eunuch in his own place in bed. Maximian was apprehended when he killed the eunuch and was offered suicide, which he accepted. In addition to the propaganda, Constantine instituted a \"damnatio memoriae\" on Maximian, destroying all inscriptions referring to him and eliminating any public work bearing his image.\nConstantine defeated Maxentius at the Battle of the Milvian Bridge on 28 October 312. Maxentius died, and Italy came under Constantine's rule. Eutropia swore on oath that Maxentius was not Maximian's son, and Maximian's memory was rehabilitated. His apotheosis under Maxentius was declared null and void, and he was re-consecrated as a god, probably in 317. He began appearing on Constantine's coinage as \"divus\", or divine, by 318, together with the deified Constantius and Claudius Gothicus The three were hailed as Constantine's forebears. They were called \"the best of emperors\". Through his daughters Fausta and Theodora, Maximian was grandfather or great-grandfather to every reigning emperor from 337 to 363.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75089", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75089", "title": "Racemic mixture", "text": "Mixture with equal amounts of left- and right-handed chiral isomers\nIn chemistry, a racemic mixture or racemate () is a mixture that has equal amounts (50:50) of left- and right-handed enantiomers of a chiral molecule or salt. Racemic mixtures are rare in nature, but many compounds are produced industrially as racemates.\nHistory.\nThe first known racemic mixture was racemic acid, which Louis Pasteur found to be a mixture of the two enantiomeric isomers of tartaric acid. He manually separated the crystals of a mixture, starting from an aqueous solution of the sodium ammonium salt of racemate tartaric acid. Pasteur benefited from the fact that ammonium tartrate salt gives enantiomeric crystals with distinct crystal forms (at 77\u00a0\u00b0F). Reasoning from the macroscopic scale down to the molecular, he reckoned that the molecules had to have non-superimposable mirror images.\nA sample with only a single enantiomer is an \"enantiomerically pure\" or \"enantiopure\" compound.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"racemic\" derives from Latin , meaning pertaining to a bunch of grapes. Racemic acid, when naturally produced in grapes, is only the right-handed version of the molecule, better known as tartaric acid. In many Germanic languages racemic acid is called \"grape acid\", e.g. German and Swedish . Carl von Linn\u00e9 gave red elderberry the scientific name \"Sambucus racemosa\" as the Swedish name, , means 'grape elder', so called because its berries grow in a grape-like cluster.\nNomenclature.\nA racemic mixture is denoted by the prefix (\u00b1)- or dl- (for sugars the prefix dl- may be used), indicating an equal (1:1) mixture of dextro and levo isomers. Also the prefix rac- (or racem-) or the symbols RS and SR (all in \"italic\" letters) are used.\nIf the ratio is not 1:1 (or is not known), the prefix (+)/(\u2212), d/l- or d/l- (with a slash) is used instead.\nThe usage of d and l is discouraged by IUPAC.\nProperties.\nA racemate is optically inactive (achiral), meaning that such materials do not rotate the polarization of plane-polarized light. Although the two enantiomers rotate plane-polarized light in opposite directions, the rotations cancel each other out because they are present in equal amounts of negative (-) counterclockwise (levorotatory) and positive (+) clockwise (dextrorotatory) enantiomers.\nIn contrast to the two pure enantiomers, which have identical physical properties except for the direction of rotation of plane-polarized light, a racemate sometimes has different properties from either of the pure enantiomers. Different melting points are most common, but different solubilities and boiling points are also possible.\nPharmaceuticals may be available as a racemate or as the pure enantiomer, which might have different potencies. Because biological systems have many chiral asymmetries, pure enantiomers frequently have very different biological effects; examples include glucose and methamphetamine.\nCrystallization.\nThere are four ways to crystallize a racemate; three of which H. W. B. Roozeboom had distinguished by 1899:\nResolution.\nThe separation of a racemate into its components, the individual enantiomers, is called a chiral resolution. Various methods exist for this separation, including crystallization, chromatography, and the use of various reagents.\nSynthesis.\nWithout a chiral influence (for example a chiral catalyst, solvent or starting material), a chemical reaction that makes a chiral product will always yield a racemate. That can make the synthesis of a racemate cheaper and easier than making the pure enantiomer, because it does not require special conditions. This fact also leads to the question of how biological homochirality evolved on what is presumed to be a racemic primordial earth.\nThe reagents of, and the reactions that produce, racemic mixtures are said to be \"not stereospecific\" or \"not stereoselective\", for their indecision in a particular stereoisomerism. A frequent scenario is that of a planar species (such as an sp2 carbon atom or a carbocation intermediate) acting as an electrophile. The nucleophile will have a 50% probability of 'hitting' either of the two sides of the planar grouping, thus producing a racemic mixture:\nRacemic pharmaceuticals.\nSome drug molecules are chiral, and the enantiomers have different effects on biological entities. They can be sold as one enantiomer or as a racemic mixture. Examples include thalidomide, ibuprofen, cetirizine and salbutamol. A well known drug that has different effects depending on its ratio of enantiomers is amphetamine. Adderall is an unequal mixture of both amphetamine enantiomers. A single Adderall dose combines the neutral sulfate salts of dextroamphetamine and amphetamine, with the dextro isomer of amphetamine saccharate and D/L-amphetamine aspartate monohydrate. The original Benzedrine was a racemic mixture, and isolated dextroamphetamine was later introduced to the market as Dexedrine. The prescription analgesic tramadol is also a racemate.\nIn some cases (e.g., ibuprofen and thalidomide), the enantiomers interconvert or racemize \"in vivo\". This means that preparing a pure enantiomer for medication is largely pointless. However, sometimes samples containing pure enantiomers may be made and sold at a higher cost in cases where the use requires specifically one isomer (e.g., for a stereospecific reagent); compare omeprazole and esomeprazole. Moving from a racemic drug to a chiral specific drug may be done for a better safety profile or an improved therapeutic index. This process is called chiral switching and the resulting enantiopure drug is called a chiral switch. As examples, esomeprazole is a chiral switch of (\u00b1)-omeprazole and levocetirizine is a chiral switch of (\u00b1)-cetirizine.\nWhile often only one enantiomer of the drug may be active, there are cases in which the other enantiomer is harmful, like salbutamol and thalidomide. The (R) enantiomer of thalidomide is effective against morning sickness, while the (S) enantiomer is teratogenic, causing birth defects. Since the drug racemizes, the drug cannot be considered safe for use by women of child-bearing age, and its use is tightly controlled when used for treating other illness.\nMethamphetamine is available by prescription under the brand name Desoxyn. The active component of Desoxyn is dextromethamphetamine hydrochloride. This is the right-handed isomer of methamphetamine. The left-handed isomer of methamphetamine, levomethamphetamine, is an OTC drug that is less centrally-acting and more peripherally-acting. Methedrine during the 20th century was a 50:50 racemic mixture of both methamphetamine isomers (levo and dextro).\nWallach's rule.\nWallach's rule (first proposed by Otto Wallach) states that racemic crystals tend to be denser than their chiral counterparts. This rule has been substantiated by crystallographic database analysis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75090", "revid": "50794401", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75090", "title": "Phocomelia", "text": "Medical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nPhocomelia is a congenital disorder that involves malformations of human arms and legs which result in a flipper-like appendage. A prominent cause of phocomelia is the mother being prescribed the use of the drug thalidomide during pregnancy; however, the causes of most cases are to be determined.\nOccurrence in an individual results in various abnormalities to the face, limbs, ears, nose, vessels and many other underdevelopments. Although operations may improve some abnormalities, many are not surgically treatable due to the lack of nerves and other related structures.\nThe term is from Ancient Greek \u03c6\u03ce\u03ba\u03b7 \"ph\u014dk\u0113\", \"seal (animal)\" + \"-o-\" interfix + \u03bc\u03ad\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2 \"melos\", \"limb\" + \u03b9\u03b1 \"-ia\" suffix). Phocomelia is an extremely rare congenital disorder involving malformation of the limbs (dysmelia). \u00c9tienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire coined the term in 1836.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe symptoms of phocomelia syndrome are undeveloped limbs and absent pelvic bones; however, various abnormalities can occur to the limbs and bones. Usually the upper limbs are not fully formed and sections of the \"hands and arms may be missing\". Short arm bones, fused fingers, and missing thumbs will often occur. Sometimes hands or fingers will be present but limp due to having no bones or being loosely attached. Legs and feet are also affected similarly to the arms and hands. Individuals with phocomelia will often lack thigh bones, and the hands or feet may be abnormally small or appear as stumps due to their close \"attachment to the body\".\nAccording to National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD), individuals carrying phocomelia syndrome will generally show symptoms of growth retardation previous to and after birth. The syndrome can also cause severe mental deficiencies in infants. Infants born with phocomelia will normally have a petite head with \"sparse hair\" that may appear \"silvery-blonde\". Hemangioma, the abnormal buildup of blood vessels, will possibly develop around the facial area at birth and the eyes may be set widely apart, a condition known as orbital hypertelorism. The pigment of the eyes will be a bluish white. Phocomelia can also cause: an undeveloped nose with slender nostrils, disfigured ears, irregularly petite jaws (a condition known as micrognathia), and a cleft lip with cleft palate. According to NORD, severe symptoms of phocomelia include:\nThalidomide syndrome symptoms.\nWhen an individual is born with phocomelia due to drugs or pharmaceuticals, it is known as thalidomide syndrome. The symptoms of thalidomide syndrome are defined by absent or shortened limbs, causing flipper hands and feet. According to Anthony J Perri III and Sylvia Hsu they can additionally receive:\nThe infants that were exposed to thalidomide during development phases had a 40% chance of survival. The McCredie\u2013McBride hypothesis explains that the limbs of the infants become malformed as a result of the thalidomide harming the neural tissue\u2014simply because the neural tissue has such a large impact on formation and development of the limbs.\nCauses.\nThalidomide.\nThalidomide was released onto the market in 1958 in West Germany under the name Contergan. Primarily prescribed as a sedative or hypnotic, thalidomide also claimed to cure \"anxiety, insomnia, gastritis, and tension\". Afterwards it was used against nausea and to alleviate morning sickness in pregnant women. Thalidomide became an over-the-counter drug in Germany around 1960, i.e. it could be bought without a prescription. Shortly after the drug was sold, in Germany between 5,000 and 7,000 infants were born with phocomelia. Only 40% of these children survived.\nResearch also proves that although phocomelia did exist through the 1940s and 1950s, cases of severe phocomelia multiplied in the 1960s when thalidomide was released in Germany; the direct cause was traced to thalidomide. The statistic was given that \"50 percent of the mothers with deformed children had taken thalidomide during the first trimester of pregnancy.\" Throughout Europe, Australia, and the United States, 10,000 cases were reported of infants with phocomelia; only 50% of the 10,000 survived. Thalidomide became effectively linked to death or severe disabilities among babies. Those subjected to thalidomide while in the womb experienced limb deficiencies in that the long limbs either were not developed or presented themselves as stumps. Other effects included deformed eyes, hearts, alimentary and urinary tracts, blindness and deafness.\nGenetic inheritance.\nAccording to the National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD), when phocomelia is transmitted (in its familial genetic form) it is seen as an autosomal recessive trait and the mutation is linked to chromosome 8.\nA study of Roberts syndrome, a genetic disorder showing similar symptoms to phocomelia, has shed light on the possible causes. An individual afflicted with Roberts Syndrome will have chromosome copies that do not connect at the centromeres, making them unable to line up accordingly. As a result, the newly made cells contain an excess or reduced number of chromosomes. In both Roberts syndrome and phocomelia the cells cease to develop, or die, preventing proper development of the limbs, eyes, brain, palate, or other structures.\nTreatment.\nProsthesis is a synthetic alternative for missing limbs, teeth, and various other body parts. Advances in materials, pigments and manufacturing methods during the twentieth century have rendered artificial limbs lighter in weight and more realistic-looking. Myoelectric prostheses take all their input from the nervous system and muscles at the site of attachment in the form of electric signals.\nChildren born with phocomelia are recommended to have a prosthetic mitten fitted to get used to the sensation of wearing an aid early on; typically a hook is added around the age of two years until the necessary tissues, bone structures, proprioception and motor coordination have developed to permit use of a myoelectric prosthetic limb.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75091", "revid": "1317357965", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75091", "title": "Alexander Helios", "text": "Son of Egyptian Pharaoh Cleopatra VII\nAlexander Helios (; late 40 BC \u2013 unknown, but possibly between 29 and 25 BC) was a Ptolemaic prince and son of Pharaoh Cleopatra VII of the Ptolemaic dynasty and Roman triumvir Mark Antony. Alexander's fraternal twin sister was Cleopatra Selene II. Cleopatra named her son after Alexander the Great. His second name in Ancient Greek means \"Sun\"; this was the counterpart of his twin sister's second name Selene (\u03a3\u03b5\u03bb\u03ae\u03bd\u03b7), meaning \"Moon\".\nLife.\nAlexander Helios was born and educated in Alexandria. He was the second of Cleopatra's three sons, Caesarion being the oldest. In late 34 BC, at the Donations of Alexandria, Alexander Helios, aged six, was dressed in a Median costume and was given the title king of Kings and the ruler of Armenia, Media, Parthia and any countries yet to be discovered between the Euphrates and Indus Rivers, . although most of this territory stood outside of their control at that time. These areas were, in fact, already ruled by Artaxias II of Armenia (who had been elected King that same year after Antony captured his father Artavasdes II), Artavasdes I of Media Atropatene and Phraates IV of Parthia. In 33 BC, Alexander was engaged to his distant relative Iotapa, a princess of Media Atropatene and daughter of Artavasdes I. However, Mark Antony and Cleopatra were defeated by Octavian at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC. The next year, they committed suicide as Octavian and his army invaded Egypt. Iotapa left Egypt to return to her father and later married her maternal cousin King Mithridates III of Commagene, who was of Armenian and Greek descent.\nWhen Octavian conquered Egypt he spared Alexander but took him, his sister and his brother, Ptolemy Philadelphus, from Egypt to Rome. Octavian celebrated his military triumph in Rome by parading the children in heavy gold chains in the streets behind an effigy of their mother clutching an asp to her arm. It is unclear whether Ptolemy Philadelphus survived the journey to Rome, as Cassius Dio mentions the twins only in his \"History of Rome\". Octavian gave the children to Octavia Minor, his elder sister and a former wife of Mark Antony, to be raised under her guardianship in Rome. They were generously received by Octavia, who educated them with her own children.\nLater life.\nThe fate of Alexander Helios is unknown. Plutarch, Cassius Dio and Suetonius state that Octavian killed Antony's son Marcus Antonius Antyllus and Cleopatra's son with Julius Caesar, Caesarion. The only further mention of Alexander Helios and Ptolemy Philadelphus comes from Cassius Dio, who states that when their sister, Cleopatra Selene II, married King Juba II [25 BC], Octavian (by then named Augustus) spared the lives of Alexander Helios and Ptolemy Philadelphus as a favor to the couple. After Helios arrives in Rome he disappears from historical records.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75094", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75094", "title": "Archibald Hill", "text": "British physiologist (1886\u20131977)\nArchibald Vivian Hill (26 September 1886 \u2013 3 June 1977), better known to friends and colleagues as A. V. Hill, was a British physiologist, one of the founders of the diverse disciplines of biophysics and operations research. He shared the 1922 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his elucidation of the production of heat and mechanical work in muscles.\nBiography.\nBorn in Bristol, the son of Jonathan Hill (1857\u20131924) and Ada Priscilla (n\u00e9e Rumney) (1861\u20131943), he was preceded on the paternal side by five generations of timber merchants at Bristol, carrying on the business which had been founded by James Hill in 1750.\nHe was educated at Blundell's School and graduated from Trinity College, Cambridge as third wrangler in the mathematics tripos before turning to physiology. While still an undergraduate at Trinity College, he derived in 1909 what came to be known as the Langmuir equation.\nThis is closely related to Michaelis\u2013Menten kinetics. In this paper, Hill's first publication, he derived both the equilibrium form of the Langmuir equation, and also the exponential approach to equilibrium. The paper, written under the supervision of John Newport Langley, is a landmark in the history of receptor theory, because the context for the derivation was the binding of nicotine and curare to the \"receptive substance\" at the neuromuscular junction.\nWhile a student he had enrolled in the Officers Training Corps; he was a crack shot. In 1914, at the outbreak of the First World War, Hill became the musketry officer of the Cambridgeshire Regiment.\nAt the end of 1915, while home on leave he was asked by Horace Darwin from the Ministry of Munitions to come for a day to advise them on how to train anti-aircraft gunners. On site, Hill immediately proposed a simple two mirror method to determine airplanes' heights. Transferred to Munitions, he realized that the mirrors could measure where smoke shells burst and if he fitted this data with the equations describing a shell's flight they could provide accurate range tables for anti-aircraft guns. To measure and compute he assembled the Anti-Aircraft Experimental Section, a team of men too old for conscription, Ralph H. Fowler (a wounded officer), and lads too young for service including Douglas Hartree, Arthur Milne and James Crowther. Someone dubbed his motley group \"Hill's Brigands\", which they proudly adopted. Later in the war they also worked on locating enemy planes from their sound. He sped between their working sites on his beloved motorcycle. At the end of the war, Major Hill issued certificates to more than one hundred Brigands. He was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE).\nIn 1923, he succeeded Ernest Starling as professor of physiology at University College London, a few years later becoming a Royal Society Research professor there, where he remained until retirement in 1951. In 1933, he became with William Beveridge and Lord Rutherford a founder member and vice-president of the Academic Assistance Council (which in 1936 became the Society for the Protection of Science and Learning). By the start of the Second World War, the organisation had saved 900 academics (18 of whom went on to win Nobel Prizes) from Nazi persecution. He prominently displayed in his laboratory a toy figure of Adolf Hitler with saluting arm upraised, which he explained was in gratitude for all the scientists Germany had expelled, some of whom were now working with him. Hill believed that \"Laughter is the best detergent for nonsense\".\nIn 1935, he served with Patrick Blackett and Sir Henry Tizard on the committee that gave birth to radar. He was also biological secretary of the Royal Society; William Henry Bragg was president. Both had been frustrated by the delay in putting scientists to work in the previous war. The Royal Society collated a list of scientists and Hill represented the Society at the Ministry of Labour. When the war came Hill led a campaign to liberate refugee scientists who had been interned. He served as an independent Member of Parliament (MP) for Cambridge University from 1940 to 1945. In 1940, he was posted to the British Embassy in Washington to promote war research in the still neutral United States. There he was authorised to swap secrets with U.S. officials and persuaded the British to show the Americans everything they were working on (except for the atomic bomb). The mobilization of Allied scientists was one of the major successes in the war.\nHe visited India between November 1943 and April 1944 to survey scientific and technological research. His suggestions influenced the establishment of the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) in the following decade.\nAfter the war he rebuilt his laboratory at University College and vigorously carried on research. In 1951, his advocacy was rewarded by the establishment of a Biophysics Department under his leadership.\nIn 1952, he became head of the British Association for the Advancement of Science and Secretary General of the International Council of Scientific Unions. He was President of the Marine Biological Association from 1955 to 1960. In 1967, he retired to Cambridge where he gradually lost the use of his legs. He died \"held in the greatest affection by more than a hundred scientific descendants all over the world\".\nCooperativity of protein binding and enzyme kinetics.\nAlthough Hill's work in muscle physiology is probably the most important, and certainly responsible for his Nobel Prize, he is also very well known in biochemistry for the \"Hill equation\", which is used to quantify binding of oxygen to haemoglobin, written here as a kinetic equation:\n formula_1\nHere formula_2 is the rate of reaction at concentration formula_3 of substrate, formula_4 is the rate at saturation, formula_5 is the value of formula_3 that gives formula_7, and the exponent formula_8 is a parameter that expresses the degree of departure from Michaelis\u2013Menten kinetics: \"positive cooperativity\" for formula_9, no cooperativity for formula_10, and \"negative cooperativity\" for formula_11. Note that there is no implication that formula_8 is an integer, and in most experimental cases, apart from the trivial case of formula_10, it is not. Although many authors use formula_14 or formula_15 rather than formula_8 these symbols are misleading if taken to imply that it shows the number of binding sites on the protein. Hill himself avoided any such interpretation.\nThe equation can be rearranged as follows:\n formula_17\nThis shows that when the Hill equation is accurately obeyed a plot of formula_18 gives a straight line of slope formula_8. This is called a \"Hill plot\". In practice the line is usually not straight, and is curved at the extremes.\nMuscle physiology.\nHill made many exacting measurements of the heat released when skeletal muscles contract and relax. A key finding was that heat is produced during contraction, which requires investment of chemical energy, but not during relaxation, which is passive. His earliest measurements used equipment left behind by the Swedish physiologist Magnus Blix, Hill measured a temperature rise of only 0.003\u00a0\u00b0C. After publication he learned that German physiologists had already reported on heat and muscle contraction and he went to Germany to learn more about their work. He continually improved his apparatus to make it more sensitive and to reduce the time lag between the heat released by the preparation and its recording by his thermocouple. \nHill is regarded, along with Hermann Helmholtz, as one of the founders of biophysics.\nHill returned briefly to Cambridge in 1919 before taking the chair in physiology at the Victoria University of Manchester in 1920 in succession to William Stirling. Using himself as the subject \u2014 he ran every morning from 7:15 to 10:30 \u2014 he showed that running a dash relies on energy stores which afterwards are replenished by increased oxygen consumption. Paralleling the work of German Otto Fritz Meyerhof, Hill elucidated the processes whereby mechanical work is produced in muscles. The two shared the 1922 Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine for this work. Hill introduced the concepts of maximal oxygen uptake and oxygen debt in 1922.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1913, he married Margaret Neville Keynes (1885-1974), daughter of the economist John Neville Keynes, and sister of the economist John Maynard Keynes and the surgeon Geoffrey Keynes. They had two sons and two daughters:\nBlue plaque.\nOn 9 September 2015, an English Heritage Blue plaque was erected at Hill's former home, 16 Bishopswood Road, Highgate, where he had lived from 1923 to 1967. Since then the house had been divided into flats and owned by Highgate School, where Hill was a Governor from 1929 to 1960. It has now been sold, redeveloped and renamed as Hurstbourne. In Hill's time, according to his grandson Nicholas Humphrey, regular guests at the house included 18 exiled Nobel laureates, his brother-in-law, the economist John Maynard Keynes, and also friends as diverse and unexpected as Sigmund Freud and Stephen Hawking, he met during the course of his long and extraordinary life. After-dinner conversations in the drawing room would inevitably involve passionate debates about science or politics. \"Every Sunday we would have to attend a tea party at grandpa's house and apart from entertaining some extraordinary guests, he would devise some great games for us, such as frog racing in the garden or looking through the lens of a (dissected) sheep's eye\". Sir Ralph Kohn FRS who proposed the Blue plaque, said: \"The Nobel Prize winner A. V. Hill contributed vastly to our understanding of muscle physiology. His work has resulted in wide-ranging application in sports medicine. As an outstanding Humanitarian and Parliamentarian, he was uncompromising in his condemnation of the Nazi regime for its persecution of scientists and others. A. V. Hill played a crucial role in assisting and rescuing many refugees to continue their work in this country\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75095", "revid": "48934879", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75095", "title": "Asian brown cloud", "text": "Recurrent layer of air pollution covering South Asia\nThe Indian Ocean brown cloud or Asian brown cloud is a layer of air pollution that recurrently covers parts of South Asia, namely the northern Indian Ocean, India, and Pakistan. Viewed from satellite photos, the cloud appears as a giant brown stain hanging in the air over much of the Indian subcontinent and the Indian Ocean every year between October and February, possibly also during earlier and later months. The term was coined in reports from the UNEP Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX). It was found to originate mostly due to farmers burning stubble in northern Indian states such as Punjab, Haryana, and Uttar Pradesh, as well as in the Punjab region of Pakistan. The debilitating air quality in Delhi is also due to the stubble burning in Punjab.\nThe term \"atmospheric brown cloud\" is used for a more generic context not specific to the Asian region.\nCauses.\nThe Asian brown cloud is created by a range of airborne particles and pollutants from combustion (e.g., woodfires, cars, and factories), biomass burning and industrial processes with incomplete burning. The cloud is associated with the winter monsoon (October/November to February/March) during which there is no rain to wash pollutants from the air.\nObservations.\nThis pollution layer was observed during the Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) intensive field observation in 1999 and described in the UNEP impact assessment study published 2002. Scientists in India claimed that the Asian Brown cloud is not something specific to Asia. \nSubsequently, when the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) organized a follow-up international project, the subject of study was renamed \"the Atmospheric Brown Cloud\" with focus on Asia.\nThe cloud was also reported by NASA in 2004 and 2007.\nAlthough aerosol particles are generally associated with a global cooling effect, recent studies have shown that they can actually have a global warming effect in certain regions such as the Himalayas.\nImpacts.\nHealth problems.\nOne major impact is on health. A 2002 study indicated nearly two million people die each year, in Asia alone, from conditions related to the brown cloud.\nRegional weather.\nA second assessment study was published in 2008. It highlighted regional concerns regarding:\nCyclone intensity in Arabian Sea.\nA 2011 study found that pollution is making Arabian Sea cyclones more intense as the atmospheric brown clouds has been producing weakening wind patterns which prevent wind shear patterns that historically have prohibited cyclones in the Arabian Sea from becoming major storms. This phenomenon was found responsible for the formation of stronger storms in 2007 and 2010 that were the first recorded storms to enter the Gulf of Oman.\nGlobal warming and dimming.\nThe 2008 report also addressed the global concern of warming and concluded that the brown clouds have masked 20 to 80 percent of greenhouse gas forcing in the past century. The report suggested that air pollution regulations can have large amplifying effects on global warming.\nAnother major impact is on the polar ice caps. Black carbon (soot) in the Asian Brown Cloud may be reflecting sunlight and dimming Earth below but it is warming other places by absorbing incoming radiation and warming the atmosphere and whatever it touches. Black carbon is three times more effective than carbon dioxide\u2014the most common greenhouse gas\u2014at melting polar ice and snow. Black carbon in snow causes about three times the temperature change as carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. On snow\u2014even at concentrations below five parts per billion\u2013dark carbon triggers melting, and may be responsible for as much as 94 percent of Arctic warming.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75097", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75097", "title": "Caesarion", "text": "Last pharaoh of Ptolemaic Egypt from 44 to 30 BC\nPtolemy XV Caesar (; , ; 47 BC \u2013 late August 30 BC), nicknamed Caesarion (, , \"Little Caesar\"), was the last pharaoh of the Ptolemaic Kingdom of Egypt, reigning with his mother Cleopatra VII from 44 BC to 30 BC. He nominally reigned as sole pharaoh for a few days after his mother's death, although Alexandria had already fallen and Caesarion remained in hiding until his execution by Octavian, who would become the first Roman emperor as \"Augustus\".\nCaesarion was the eldest son of Cleopatra, and was the only known biological son of Julius Caesar, after whom he was named. He was the last sovereign member of the Ptolemaic dynasty, and the last pharaoh of Ancient Egypt, ending more than 3000 years of traditional kingship.\nEarly life.\nPtolemy Caesar was born in Egypt in mid to late 47\u00a0BC. His mother Cleopatra gave him the royal names Theos Philopator Philometor (lit. 'father-loving, mother-loving God') and insisted that he was the son of Roman politician and dictator Julius Caesar. While he was said to have inherited Caesar's looks and manner, Caesar did not officially acknowledge him. All accusations of bastardy against Caesarion were cast from a Roman perspective; their intention was not to portray Caesarion as inappropriate for the throne of Egypt, but rather to deny that he was Julius' heir by Roman law. One of Caesar's supporters, Gaius Oppius, even wrote a pamphlet which attempted to prove that Caesar could not have fathered Caesarion. Nevertheless, Caesar may have allowed Caesarion to use his name. The matter became contentious when Caesar's adopted son, Octavian, came into conflict with Cleopatra.\nCaesarion spent two of his infant years, from 46 to 44\u00a0BC, in Rome, where he and his mother were Caesar's guests at his villa, Horti Caesaris. Cleopatra hoped that her son would eventually succeed his father as the head of the Roman Republic, as well as of Egypt. After Caesar's assassination on 15 March 44\u00a0BC, Cleopatra and Caesarion returned to Egypt. Caesarion was named co-ruler by his mother on 2 September 44\u00a0BC at the age of three, although he was pharaoh in name only, with Cleopatra keeping actual authority. Cleopatra compared her relationship to her son with that of the Egyptian goddess Isis and her divine child Horus.\nThere is no historical record of Caesarion between 44\u00a0BC until the Donations of Antioch in 36\u00a0BC. Two years later he also appears at the Donations of Alexandria. Cleopatra and Antony staged both \"Donations\" to donate lands dominated by Rome and Parthia to Cleopatra's children: Caesarion, the twins Alexander Helios and Cleopatra Selene II, and Ptolemy Philadelphus (the last three were his maternal half-siblings fathered by Mark Antony). Octavian gave public approval to the Donations of Antioch in 36\u00a0BC, which have been described as an Antonian strategy to rule the East making use of Cleopatra's unique royal Seleucid lineage in the regions donated.\nPharaoh.\nIn 34\u00a0BC, Antony granted further eastern lands and titles to Caesarion and his own three children with Cleopatra in the Donations of Alexandria. Caesarion was proclaimed to be a god, a son of [a] god, and \"King of Kings\". This grandiose title was \"unprecedented in the management of Roman client-king relationships\" and could be seen as \"threatening the 'greatness' of the Roman people\". Antony also declared Caesarion to be Caesar's true son and heir. This declaration was a direct threat to Octavian (whose claim to power was based on his status as Julius Caesar's grandnephew and adopted son). These proclamations partly caused the fatal breach in Antony's relations with Octavian, who used Roman resentment over the Donations to gain support for war against Antony and Cleopatra.\nDeath.\nAfter the defeat of Mark Antony and Cleopatra at the Battle of Actium in 31\u00a0BC, Cleopatra seems to have groomed Caesarion to take over as \"sole ruler without his mother\". She may have intended to go into exile, perhaps with Antony, who may have hoped that he would be allowed to retire as Lepidus had. Caesarion reappears in the historical record in 30\u00a0BC, when Octavian invaded Egypt and searched for him. Cleopatra may have sent Caesarion, 17\u00a0years old at the time, to the Red Sea port of Berenice for safety, possibly as part of plans for an escape to India. Plutarch does say that Caesarion was sent to India, but also that he was lured back by false promises of the kingdom of Egypt: Caesarion, who was said to be Cleopatra's son by Julius Caesar, was sent by his mother, with much treasure, into India, by way of Ethiopia. There Rhodon, another tutor like Theodorus, persuaded him to go back, on the ground that [Octavian] Caesar invited him to take the kingdom.\nOctavian captured the city of Alexandria on 1 August 30\u00a0BC, the date that marks the official annexation of Egypt to the Roman Republic. Around this time Mark Antony and Cleopatra died, traditionally said to be by suicide.\nThough Octavian may have temporarily considered permitting Caesarion to succeed his mother and rule Egypt (though now a smaller and weaker kingdom), he is supposed to have had Caesarion executed in Alexandria in late August, possibly on 29 August 30 BC (the beginning of the Egyptian new year). According to Plutarch, he followed the advice of his companion Arius Didymus, who said \"Too many Caesars is not good\" (a pun on a line in Homer). Surviving information on the death of Caesarion is scarce. Octavian then assumed absolute control of Egypt. The year 30\u00a0BC was considered the first year of the new ruler's reign according to the traditional chronological system of Egypt.\nDepictions.\nFew images of Caesarion survive. He is thought to be depicted in a partial statue found in the harbour of Alexandria in 1997 and is also portrayed twice in relief, as an adult pharaoh, with his mother on the Temple of Hathor at Dendera. His infant image appears on some bronze coins of Cleopatra.\nEgyptian names.\nIn addition to his Greek name and nicknames, Caesarion also had a full set of royal names in the Egyptian language:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75098", "revid": "7034620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75098", "title": "Bovinae", "text": "Subfamily of mammals\nBovines (subfamily Bovinae) comprise a diverse group of 10 genera of medium to large-sized ungulates, including cattle, bison, African buffalo, water buffalos, and the four-horned and spiral-horned antelopes. The members of this group of bovids are classified into loose tribes rather than formal subgroups, as the evolutionary relationships within the groups are still uncertain. General characteristics include cloven hooves and usually at least one of the sexes of a species having true horns. The largest extant bovine is the gaur.\nIn many countries, bovine milk and meat is used as food by humans. Cattle are kept as livestock almost everywhere except in parts of India and Nepal, where they are considered sacred by most Hindus. Bovines are used as draft animals and as riding animals. Small breeds of domestic bovine, such as the Miniature Zebu, are kept as pets. Bovine leather is durable and flexible and is used to produce a wide range of goods including clothing and bags.\nEtymology.\nBovine is derived from Latin \"bos\", \"ox\", through Late Latin \"bovinus\". Bos comes from the Indo-European root \"*gwous\", meaning ox.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75101", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75101", "title": "Cahiers du Cinema", "text": ""}
{"id": "75103", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75103", "title": "Seminole County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nSeminole County (, ) is a county located in the central portion of the U.S. state of Florida. As of the 2020 census, the population was 470,856, making it the 13th-most populated county in Florida. Its county seat and largest city is Sanford. Seminole County is part of the Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, Florida Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nOn July 21, 1821, two counties formed Florida: Escambia to the west and St. Johns to the east. In 1824, the area to the south of St. Johns County was designated Mosquito County, with its seat at Enterprise. The county's name was changed to Orange County in 1845 when Florida became a state, and over the next 70 years several other counties were created. Seminole County was one of the last to split.\nSeminole County was created on April 25, 1913, out of the northern portion of Orange County by the Florida Legislature. It was named for the Seminole people who historically lived throughout the area. The name \"Seminole\" is thought to be derived from the Spanish word \"cimarron,\" meaning \"wild\" or \"runaway\".\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has an area of , of which is land and (10.4%) is water. It is Florida's fourth-smallest county by land area and third-smallest by total area.\nSeminole County's location between Volusia County and Orange County has made it one of Florida's fastest-growing counties. The Greater Orlando Metropolitan District which includes Seminole, Osceola, and the surrounding counties of Lake and Orange counties, together with neighboring Volusia and Brevard counties create a viable, progressive, and diverse setting for economic growth and residential development.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 470,856 people, 178,094 households, and 120,049 families residing in the county.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 365,196 people, 139,572 households, and 97,281 families residing in the county. The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that the population of the county has grown to 394,878 by 2003. Current 2012 estimates put the population at more than 430,838. The population density was . There were 147,079 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 82.4% White, 9.5% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 2.5% Asian, &lt;0.1% Pacific Islander, 3.1% from other races, and 2.2% from two or more races. 11.2% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 139,572 households, out of which 33.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.3% were married couples living together, 11.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.3% were non-families. 22.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.59 and the average family size was 3.07. The Department of Education states that in 2003, school enrollment was approximately 72,630. As of 2006, the Seminole County School District was the 52nd largest in the nation. As of 2020, the Seminole County School District was the 12th largest school district in Florida and 60th nationally with more than 67,000 students and 10,000 employees.\nPopulation was distributed with 25.4% under the age of 18, 8.4% from 18 to 24, 32.0% from 25 to 44, 23.6% from 45 to 64, and 10.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.90 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $49,326, and the median income for a family was $56,895. Males had a median income of $40,001 versus $28,217 for females. The per capita income for the county was $24,591. About 5.1% of families and 7.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.6% of those under age 18 and 6.6% of those age 65 or over. As of March 2009, according to Workforce Central Florida, the unemployment rate for Seminole County is 9.2 percent.\nReligion.\nThe following reflects the latest year available for religious statistics, which was 2000.\nGovernment and politics.\nSeminole County is part of the strongly Republican belt of central and southwest Florida that was the first portion of the state to politically distance itself from the \"Solid South\", until Joe Biden carried the county in 2020; the last Democratic Party candidate to win the county in a presidential election had been Harry Truman in 1948, and the last Democrat to win a majority of votes in the county being Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1944. As of \u00a031, 2024[ [update]], Republicans outnumbered Democrats 122,489 to 113,260, in registered voters.\nThe government operates under a County Charter adopted in 1989 and amended in November 1994. Policymaking and the legislative authority are vested in the Board of County Commissioners, a five-member board elected to four-year terms in partisan, countywide elections and from single member districts. The board adopts the county budget, levies property taxes and other fees, and hires the county manager and county attorney. In addition to the board, five constitutional officers are elected to partisan, four-year terms in accordance with the constitution of the State of Florida.\nThe constitutional officers, clerk of the circuit and county courts, sheriff, tax collector, property appraiser, and supervisor of elections, maintain separate accounting records and budgets. The board funds a portion or, in certain instances, all of the operating budgets of the county's constitutional officers.\nThe county provides a full range of services: the construction and maintenance of the county's infrastructure, public safety, recreation, health and human services, and development and protection of the physical and economic environment.\nIn addition to the county government described above, there are other political entities which are controlled by the county, but have their own appointed boards; the Seminole County Expressway Authority, the Seminole County Port Authority, the Fred R. Wilson Memorial Law Library and the US 17-92 Community Redevelopment Agency.\nCounty elected officials.\nRepublicans control all of Seminole County's partisan elected offices. In 2020, despite Joe Biden narrowly winning Seminole County in the presidential election, Republican candidates for county office won by wide margins over their Democratic opponents.\nSecondary officials.\nSeminole Soil and Water Conservation District.\nThe Seminole Soil and Water Conservation District serves as an administrative role to conserve the environment within the county.\nThe following officers are elected as indicated:\nLaw enforcement.\nThe Seminole County Sheriff's Office is the law enforcement agency for unincorporated areas of Seminole County. As of 2022[ [update]] the current sheriff is Dennis M. Lemma, who took office in 2017.\nThe Seminole County Sheriff's Office is currently accredited by eight independent bodies:\nLibraries.\nThe library system was founded in 1978 by the Seminole County Board of County Commissioners. It contains 500,000 volumes and has a circulation of 2.5 million books annually. There are five branches, located in the cities of Casselberry, Sanford, Lake Mary, Oviedo, and Longwood.\nAn online catalog is available including access to e-books and audio books. Library cards are restricted to county residents, property owners, students (enrolled in a county public school), or employed by the county government.\nEducation.\nSeminole County Public Schools operates public schools.\nTransportation.\nSurface roads.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75104", "revid": "7291611", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75104", "title": "Sumter County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nSumter County is a county located in the central portion of the U.S. state of Florida. As of the 2020 census, the population was 129,752, and was estimated to be 154,693 in 2024. Its county seat is Bushnell, and the largest city is Wildwood. The Villages is located in Sumter County.\nIt has the oldest median age (68.1 years) of any US county in the 2022 estimate.\nSumter County coincides with The Villages, FL Metropolitan Statistical Area, which is included in the Orlando\u2013Lakeland\u2013Deltona, FL Combined Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nSumter County was created on January 8, 1853. It was named for General Thomas Sumter, a general in the American Revolutionary War. The county in the past, and to this day by some, is nicknamed \"Hog County\" most likely because it is home to a large population of wild hogs. Hog hunting is still a favorite pastime of locals in the more rural portions of the county.\nAlthough long extremely rural, Sumter County has sustained an exceptionally large increase in population, almost solely due to the expansion of The Villages retirement complex, a significant portion of which is in the county. This has dramatically changed the demographics of the county and has brought in significant income.\nSumter County was affected by the massive Florida tornado outbreak of February 2, 2007, and a state of emergency was declared.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (3.91%) is water. It is the 51st largest county in Florida by total area.\nThe Wildwood-The Villages, Florida Metropolitan statistical area (MSA) consists of Sumter County. The principal cities of the MSA are Wildwood and The Villages. The MSA was first defined in or before 2003 as The Villages, Florida Micropolitan statistical area (\u03bcSA) with The Villages as the principal city. The area was designated an MSA in or before 2013. In 2023, Wildwood was added as a principal city and the name of the MSA.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the third quarter of 2024, the median home value in Sumter County was $403,970.\nAs of the 2023 American Community Survey, there are 66,941 estimated households in Sumter County with an average of 1.93 persons per household. The county has a median household income of $73,297. Approximately 9.7% of the county's population lives at or below the poverty line. Sumter County has an estimated 25.0% employment rate, with 35.1% of the population holding a bachelor's degree or higher and 93.2% holding a high school diploma.\nThe median age in the county was 68.2 years.\nSumter County, Florida \u2013 racial and ethnic composition&lt;br&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 129,752 people, 62,907 households, and 41,080 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 75,304 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 86.36% White, 6.62% African American, 0.30% Native American, 0.97% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 1.47% from some other races and 4.25% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 5.84% of the population.\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 53,345 people, 20,779 households, and 15,043 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 25,195 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 82.60% White, 13.78% Black or African American, 0.51% Native American, 0.41% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 1.16% from other races, and 1.49% from two or more races. 6.29% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 20,779 households, out of which 18.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.90% were married couples living together, 8.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.60% were non-families. 23.50% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.80% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.27 and the average family size was 2.62.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 16.10% under the age of 18, 5.90% from 18 to 24, 23.30% from 25 to 44, 27.30% from 45 to 64, and 27.40% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 49 years. For every 100 females, there were 113.10 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 113.90 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $32,073, and the median income for a family was $36,999. Males had a median income of $27,346 versus $21,145 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,830. About 9.60% of families and 13.70% of the population were below the poverty line, including 26.00% of those under age 18 and 7.70% of those age 65 or over.\nLaw enforcement.\nThe Sumter County Sheriff's Office is accredited by the Commission for Florida Law Enforcement Accreditation, Inc. and recognized by the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies. It primarily patrols the unincorporated areas of Sumter County.\nFederal Correctional Complex, Coleman of the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) is located in the county.\nIt includes:\nTransportation.\nRailroads.\nCSX operates one rail line within the county. Amtrak formerly provided passenger rail service to Wildwood, but the stop was terminated in late 2004. Other lines have existed in the past, most notably one from Coleman southeast towards Auburndale in Polk County, part of which includes the General James A. Van Fleet State Trail in Mabel. Amtrak ran along this line until 1988. Another line ran from Croom in Hernando County to Center Hill. Today, part of it is a Forest Road in Withlacoochee State Forest north of the Sumter Rest Area on I-75. A fourth one was part of the Orange Belt Railway, which ran from Trilby in Pasco County to Sylvan Lake in Seminole County. This runs along the south side of State Road 50 east of Tarrytown.\nScenic Sumter Heritage Byway.\nThe Sumter County Chamber of Commerce, the cities of Webster and Bushnell, the Sumter County government, businesses, community leaders, veterans\u2019 groups, and individuals worked to have 62 miles of road in Sumter County designated by the state of Florida as a Florida Scenic Byway. On September 1, 2010, the Scenic Sumter Heritage Byway was designated a candidate for the Florida Scenic Highway Program. The Scenic Sumter Heritage Byway became the 24th highway to be designated a Florida Scenic Highway by the Florida Department of Transportation in June 2013. Points of interest along the route include the Dade Battlefield State Historic Site, the Sumter County Farmer's Market, Lake Panasoffkee, the Florida National Cemetery. On January 25, 2014, community leaders, supporters of the byway, and Assistant Secretary of the Florida Department of Transportation Brian Blanchard cut the ribbon to the highway at the Dade Battlefield State Historic Site in Bushnell.\nPublic Transportation.\nSumter County operates Sumter County Transit, which operates three fixed-route services, as well as paratransit service.\nEducation.\nSumter District Schools operates district public and private schools in Sumter County.\nThe Villages Charter Schools is a K-12 charter school in unincorporated northern Sumter County in The Villages CDP. Children are eligible to attend the charter school if one or both of their parents work for The Villages.\nAmong other schools in the county is South Sumter Middle School, a junior high school for students in grades 6\u20138, and Lake-Sumter State College has a campus in Sumterville that serves the community.\nLibraries.\nSumter County has five branches serving its community as well as a Lake-Sumter State College campus library that is open to the public.\nThe Sumter County Library Services began servicing the Wahoo, Center Hill, Linden, Croom-A-Coochee areas through the county's Library on Wheels program in 2008.\nCommunities.\nOther unincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75107", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75107", "title": "Suwannee County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nSuwannee County is a county located in the north central portion of the state of Florida. As of the 2020 census, the population was 43,474, up from 41,551 in 2010. Its county seat is Live Oak. Suwannee County was a dry county until August 2011, when the sale of alcoholic beverages became legal in the county.\nHistory.\nSuwannee County was created in 1858, as railways were constructed through the area connecting it to Jacksonville, Tallahassee, and points north. It was named after the Suwannee River, which forms the county's northern, western, and much of its southern border. The word \"Suwannee\" may either be a corruption of the Spanish \"San Juan\" (\"Saint John\") or from the Creek (Muscogee) \"sawani\" (\"echo river\").\nDuring the American Civil War, Company K of the 3rd Florida Infantry Regiment was composed almost entirely of men from Suwannee County. In 1884, Florida's volunteer militia was reorganized and the Suwanee Rifles were established. The Rifles were among the twelve companies from Florida that were activated for service during the Spanish\u2013American War.\nThe rural areas supported numerous lumber and turpentine camps. In the 1930s, anthropologist Zora Neale Hurston did research in North Florida timber camps.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.5%) is water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 43,474 people, 15,149 households, and 10,655 families residing in the county.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 34,844 people, 13,460 households, and 9,691 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 15,679 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 84.53% White, 12.11% Black or African American, 0.39% Native American, 0.51% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 1.12% from other races, and 1.29% from two or more races. 4.89% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 13,460 households, out of which 29.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.50% were married couples living together, 11.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.00% were non-families. 23.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.54 and the average family size was 2.96.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.00% under the age of 18, 8.50% from 18 to 24, 25.10% from 25 to 44, 25.40% from 45 to 64, and 16.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 95.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.90 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $29,963, and the median income for a family was $34,032. Males had a median income of $26,256 versus $21,136 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,678. About 14.80% of families and 18.50% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.90% of those under age 18 and 12.40% of those age 65 or over.\nIn March 2016, the county's unemployment rate was 4.8%.\nLibraries.\nSuwannee County is served by the https://, which contains eight branches and also serves Hamilton and Madison counties.\nSuwannee River Regional Library was first formed by a contractual agreement between Suwannee and Lafayette counties, making it the first regional library in Florida. In 1957, the local Library Board learned that they might get a grant for a new library if they joined with another county. The Suwannee Board convinced the Mayo Woman's Club in Lafayette County to have their county join with Suwannee County and organize the first library region in Florida. With the formation of the duo-county, Suwannee-Lafayette Library Region, it immediately received $28,224 in funds. A small library was established at Mayo in Lafayette County in October 1957. The library started as a 3,100 book collection but soon grew to some 10,000 titles, some loaned from the State Library. A bookmobile was also added and put on the road.\nAfter being successful with its new library, the Suwannee River Regional Library System was approached by a number of nearby counties interested in the project, and in 1959 Columbia, Gilchrist, Hamilton, Madison and Taylor counties qualified for membership and became a part of the system. Greenville, Jasper, Lake City, Madison, and Perry had small libraries operated by a Woman's Club that were also absorbed into the organization. By 1960, the library system now had 23,500 books in its collection, 3,000 of which were a gift from the Miami Public Library. On August 2 of that year, Dixie County became the last one to be invited to join in. Later, the Cross City library observed its official opening December 1, 1960. In May 1990 Madison County expanded by establishing a small satellite branch library in the Town of Lee. The Suwannee County library in Live Oak is the headquarters of the organization, as it has been since the establishment of the Suwannee River Regional Library System.\nTransportation.\nAirports.\nSuwannee County is accessed by air from Suwannee County Airport, located two miles west of Live Oak. It is a publicly operated airport run by the county government that has a paved runway in excess of 4,000 feet, major aircraft maintenance, training, car rental, as well as selling 100LL aviation fuel from the FBO. There are also many private airparks scattered throughout the county.\nRailroads.\nSuwannee County has one surviving railroad line. The primary one is a Florida Gulf &amp; Atlantic Railroad line formerly owned by CSX, Seaboard System Railroad, Seaboard Coast Line Industries and Seaboard Air Line Railroad that served Amtrak's \"Sunset Limited\" until it was truncated to New Orleans in 2005 by Hurricane Katrina. Union Depot and Atlantic Coast Line Freight Station was Suwannee County's premiere railroad station on the corner of US 129 &amp; SR 136 in Live Oak, and served both the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad and Seaboard Air Line Railroad but has not been in use since 1971, with the termination of the Louisville and Nashville and Seaboard Coast Line's \"Gulf Wind\" (New Orleans - Jacksonville). The Seaboard Air Line operated two passenger trains a day in each direction until 1966 or 1967. Various abandoned lines also exist within the county, one of which was converted into the Suwannee River Greenway Trail, along the southeastern part of the county.\nCommunities.\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nUntil 1964, Suwannee County, as part of the Solid South, voted with the Democratic presidential candidate every time. Since then, the only Democratic candidate to carry the county was southerner Jimmy Carter, although he carried it both times in 1976 and 1980 despite losing the state and nationally in the latter.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75108", "revid": "12978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75108", "title": "Branford", "text": "Branford may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75109", "revid": "32860082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75109", "title": "Jean-Baptiste Biot", "text": "French physicist (1774\u20131862)\nJean-Baptiste Biot (; ; 21 April 1774 \u2013 3 February 1862) was a French physicist, astronomer, and mathematician who co-discovered the Biot\u2013Savart law of magnetostatics with F\u00e9lix Savart, established the reality of meteorites, made an early balloon flight, and studied the polarization of light.\nThe biot (a CGS unit of electrical current), the mineral biotite, and Cape Biot in eastern Greenland were named in his honour.\nBiography.\nJean-Baptiste Biot was born in Paris on 21 April 1774 the son of Joseph Biot, a treasury official.\nHe was educated at Lyceum Louis-le-Grand and \u00c9cole Polytechnique in 1794. Biot served in the artillery before he was appointed professor of mathematics at Beauvais in 1797. He later went on to become a professor of physics at the Coll\u00e8ge de France around 1800, and three years later was elected as a member of the French Academy of Sciences. In July 1804, Biot joined Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac for the first scientific hot-air balloon ride to measure how the Earth's magnetic field varies with elevation (NNDB 2009, Reese 2004, O'Connor and Robertson 1997). They reached a height of 4000 metres (13,100 feet) (NNDB 2009, Reese 2004). Later, in Sept. 1804, a solo flight took Gay-Lussac up to 7010 metres (23,000\u00a0ft) (quite dangerous without supplementary oxygen (Reese 2004)).\nBiot was also a member of the Legion of Honour; he was elected chevalier in 1814 and commander in 1849. In 1815, he was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society of London, in 1816 a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, and 1822 a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In addition, Biot received the Rumford Medal in 1840, awarded by the Royal Society in the field of thermal or optical properties of matter. (O\u2019Connor and Robertson 1997). In 1850 Jean-Baptiste Biot published in the \"Journal des savants\" a 7-page memoir from his recollections of the period of the late 1790s and early 1800s concerning his encounters with Laplace.\nJean-Baptiste Biot had a single son, \u00c9douard Constant Biot, an engineer and Sinologist, born in 1803. Edouard died in 1850 and his father made extraordinary efforts to ready for publication the second half of Edouard's last book, a reference translation of the Chinese classic \"Tcheou-li\". It had been left in manuscript, unfinished. To publish it in correct form, Jean-Baptiste Biot wrote, he had to consult Stanislas Julien, the famous Sinologist, but also, especially for the translation of the most difficult part, the Kaogongji, he himself visited many workshops and questioned artisans and craftsmen about their methods and vocabulary in order to verify his son's work. Biot's translation remains to this day the only translation into a Western language of this book.\nHe died in Paris on 3 February 1862.\nWork.\nElectromagnetism.\nJean-Baptiste Biot made many contributions to the scientific community in his lifetime \u2013 most notably in optics, magnetism, and astronomy. In 1804, he used lines of equal magnetic field intensity in an article authored together with the Prussian naturalist Alexander von Humboldt. The Biot\u2013Savart law in magnetism is named after Biot and his colleague F\u00e9lix Savart for their work in 1820. In their experiment they showed a connection between electricity and magnetism by \"starting with a long vertical wire and a magnetic needle some horizontal distance apart [and showing] that running a current through the wire caused the needle to move\" (Parsley).\nMeteorites.\nIn 1803 Biot was sent by the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise to report back on 3000 meteorites that fell on L'Aigle, in Normandy, France (see L'Aigle (meteorite)). He found that the meteorites, called \"stones\" at the time, were from outer space. With his report, Biot helped support the German physicist Ernst Chladni's argument, published in 1794, that meteorites were debris from space.\nPrior to Biot's thorough investigation of the meteorites that fell near l'Aigle, France in 1803, very few truly believed that rocks found on Earth could have extraterrestrial origins. There were anecdotal tales of unusual rocks found on the ground after fireballs had been seen in the sky, but such stories were often dismissed as fantasy. Serious debate concerning the unusual rocks began in 1794 when Ernst Chladni published a book claiming that such rocks had an extraterrestrial origin (Westrum). Only after Biot was able to analyse the rocks at l'Aigle was it commonly accepted that the fireballs seen in the sky were meteors falling through the atmosphere. Since Biot's time, analysis of meteorites has resulted in accurate measurements of the chemical composition of the Solar System. The composition and position of meteors in the Solar System have also given astronomers clues as to how the Solar System formed.\nPolarized light.\nIn 1812, Biot turned his attention to the study of optics, particularly the polarization of light. Prior to the 19th century, light was believed to consist of discrete packets called corpuscles. During the early 19th century, many scientists began to disregard the corpuscular theory in favor of the wave theory of light. Biot began his work on polarization to show that the results he was obtaining could appear only if light were made of corpuscles.\nIn 1815 he demonstrated that \"polarized light, when passing through an organic substance, could be rotated clockwise or counterclockwise, dependent upon the optical axis of the material.\" His work in chromatic polarization and rotary polarization greatly advanced the field of optics, although it was later shown that his findings could also be obtained using the wave theory of light. The transverse-wave explanation by Augustin-Jean Fresnel is much simpler and is consistent with the equations of James Clerk Maxwell. \nBiot's work on the polarization of light has led to many breakthroughs in the field of optics. Liquid crystal displays (LCDs), such as television and computer screens, use light that is polarized by a filter as it enters the liquid crystal, to allow the liquid crystal to modulate the intensity of the transmitted light. This happens as the liquid crystal's polarisation varies in response to an electric control signal applied across it. Polarizing filters are used extensively in photography to cut out unwanted reflections or to enhance reflection.\nCream of Tartar.\nPotassium bitartrate was first discovered inside a wine container in Iran. The modern application of the substance began in 1768, and in 1832, Jean Baptiste Biot discovered the physical properties of cream of tartar. The item gained most of its popularity when the French began using it frequently in their cooking.\nArc measurement.\nIn August 1806, he was commissioned by the Bureau des Longitudes, together with Fran\u00e7ois Arago, to continue the measurement of a meridian arc in France and Spain begun by Delambre and M\u00e9chain (the meridian arc of Delambre and M\u00e9chain).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75110", "revid": "50822880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75110", "title": "Biot\u2013Savart law", "text": "Law of classical electromagnetism\nIn physics, specifically electromagnetism, the Biot\u2013Savart law ( or ) is an equation describing the magnetic field generated by a constant electric current. It relates the magnetic field to the magnitude, direction, length, and proximity of the electric current. \nThe Biot\u2013Savart law is fundamental to magnetostatics. It is valid in the magnetostatic approximation and consistent with both Amp\u00e8re's circuital law and Gauss's law for magnetism. When magnetostatics does not apply, the Biot\u2013Savart law should be replaced by Jefimenko's equations. The law is named after Jean-Baptiste Biot and F\u00e9lix Savart, who discovered this relationship in 1820.\nEquation.\nIn the following equations, it is assumed that the medium is not magnetic (e.g., vacuum). This allows for straightforward derivation of magnetic field B, while the fundamental vector here is H.\nElectric currents (along a closed curve/wire).\nThe Biot\u2013Savart lawSec 5-2-1 is used for computing the resultant magnetic flux density B at position r in 3D-space generated by a filamentary current \"I\" (for example due to a wire). A steady (or stationary) current is a continual flow of charges which does not change with time and the charge neither accumulates nor depletes at any point. The law is a physical example of a line integral, being evaluated over the path \"C\" in which the electric currents flow (e.g. the wire). The equation in SI units teslas (T) is\nformula_1\n(where \"\u03b4\" is the Dirac delta function), using the fact that the divergence of J is zero (due to the assumption of magnetostatics), and performing an integration by parts, the result turns out to be\nformula_2\ni.e. Amp\u00e8re's circuital law. (Due to the assumption of magnetostatics, formula_3, so there is no extra in Amp\u00e8re's law.)\nIn a \"non\"-magnetostatic situation, the Biot\u2013Savart law ceases to be true (it is superseded by Jefimenko's equations), while Gauss's law for magnetism and the Maxwell\u2013Amp\u00e8re law are still true.\nTheoretical background.\nInitially, the Biot\u2013Savart law was discovered experimentally, then this law was derived in different ways theoretically. In The Feynman Lectures on Physics, at first, the similarity of expressions for the electric potential outside the static distribution of charges and the magnetic vector potential outside the system of continuously distributed currents is emphasized, and then the magnetic field is calculated through the curl from the vector potential. Another approach involves a general solution of the inhomogeneous wave equation for the vector potential in the case of constant currents. The magnetic field can also be calculated as a consequence of the Lorentz transformations for the electromagnetic force acting from one charged particle on another particle. Two other ways of deriving the Biot\u2013Savart law include: 1) Lorentz transformation of the electromagnetic tensor components from a moving frame of reference, where there is only an electric field of some distribution of charges, into a stationary frame of reference, in which these charges move. 2) the use of the method of retarded potentials."}
{"id": "75111", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75111", "title": "Taylor County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nTaylor County is a county located in the Big Bend region in the northern part of the U.S. state of Florida. As of the 2020 census, the population was 21,796. Its county seat is Perry. The county hosts the annual Florida Forest Festival and has been long known as the \"Tree Capital of the South\" since a 1965 designation from then-Governor W. Haydon Burns.\nHistory.\nTaylor County was created on December 23, 1856, from Madison County on the same day as Lafayette County was also split off from Madison County. It was named for Zachary Taylor, twelfth president of the United States, who served from 1849 to 1850. Taylor won most counties in northern Florida during the election of 1848 and was largely responsible for the ultimate U.S. victory in the Second Seminole War.\nDuring the American Civil War, Taylor County was home to William Strickland and his band of deserters and Unionists called \"The Royal Rangers\" or the \"Independent Rangers\". In 1864, a Confederate colonel tasked with hunting down deserters, broke into Strickland's home and found a membership list of 35 men who \"bear true allegiance to the United States of America.\" Despite their names being identified and homes burned to the ground, few members of the Rangers surrendered.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (15.3%) is water.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 21,796 people, 7,405 households, and 5,197 families residing in the county.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 19,256 people, 7,176 households, and 5,130 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 9,646 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 77.84% White, 19.04% Black or African American, 0.98% Native American, 0.44% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.32% from other races, and 1.38% from two or more races. 1.53% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 7,176 households, out of which 31.60% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.50% were married couples living together, 14.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.50% were non-families. 24.20% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.51 and the average family size was 2.95.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 24.60% under the age of 18, 8.20% from 18 to 24, 28.30% from 25 to 44, 24.80% from 45 to 64, and 14.10% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 104.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 104.80 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $30,032, and the median income for a family was $35,061. Males had a median income of $27,967 versus $19,054 for females. The per capita income for the county was $15,281. About 14.50% of families and 18.00% of the population were below the poverty line, including 22.20% of those under age 18 and 17.90% of those age 65 or over.\nIn March 2016, the county's unemployment rate was 5.6%.\nEducation.\nStudents are served by the Taylor County School System. For the 2006 - 2007 school year the Florida Department of Education gave the District a \"B\" grade with three of its schools earning an \"A\" and one school earning a \"B\" grade.\nTaylor County High School also has an Army JROTC unit which has been an Honor Unit with Distinction for 27 consecutive years.\nLibrary.\nThe Taylor County Public Library is part of the Three Rivers Library System, which also serves Gilchrist, Lafayette, and Dixie counties.\nCommunities.\nOther unincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nTaylor County was a Democratic-leaning county until 1964, when Republican Barry Goldwater carried it. Democrats only carried the county three times since then, with the last being in 1996.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75112", "revid": "488581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75112", "title": "Union County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nUnion County is a county located in the north central portion of the U.S. state of Florida, the smallest in the state by area. As of the 2020 census, the population was 16,147. The county seat is Lake Butler.\nHistory.\nUnion County was created on October 1, 1921, from part of Bradford County. It was named to honor the concept of unity. Union County is the location of Union Correctional Institution and the Reception and Medical Center (RMC). Union CI is a maximum security prison and is home to part of Florida's Death Row. The death chamber is located at nearby Florida State Prison (FSP) in Bradford County. Florida State Prison also houses some death-row inmates.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has an area of , of which is land and (2.5%) is water. It is the smallest county by area in Florida.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 16,147 people, 4,008 households, and 2,873 families residing in the county.\nAt the 2000 census, there were 13,442 people, 3,367 households and 2,606 families residing in the county. The population density was 56 per square mile (22/km2). There were 3,736 housing units at an average density of 16 per square\u00a0mile (6/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 73.62% White, 22.84% Black or African American, 0.66% Native American, 0.31% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.04% from other races, and 1.50% from two or more races. 3.55% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nOf the 3,367 households, 41.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.70% were married couples living together, 15.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.60% were non-families. 19.50% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.76 and the average family size was 3.13.\nThe age distribution was 21.80% under the age of 18, 8.70% from 18 to 24, 39.80% from 25 to 44, 22.20% from 45 to 64, and 7.50% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 183.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 215.20 males. This extremely skewed gender distribution is the result of the county's male prison population.\nThe median household income was $34,563, and the median family income was $37,516. Males had a median income of $28,571 versus $22,083 for females. The county's per capita income was $12,333. About 10.50% of families and 14.00% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.60% of those under age 18 and 16.20% of those age 65 or over.\nThe county suffers a death rate of about 1600 per 100,000 residents, the highest in the nation.\nGovernment and infrastructure.\nThe Florida Department of Corrections (FDOC) operates Region II Correctional Facility Office in an unincorporated area in Union County. FDOC also maintains the Union Correctional Institution in an unincorporated area in the county. Union Correctional Institution houses one of two death rows for men in Florida. About a third of the county's population is imprisoned, compared to a statewide figure of one-half percent.\nThe Union Juvenile Residential Facility of the Florida Department of Juvenile Justice is in an unincorporated area in Union County.\nEducation.\nUnion County School District serves the county.\nLibraries.\nIn 1986, local county volunteers ran a make shift library in the local Community Center which consisted of donated books and other items. Soon the County was able to fund their own public library from tax money. An old bank building was renovated and used for the new public library. In 1990, the library was open to the public. In 1996, the Union County Public Library became a part of the New River Public Library Cooperative to enhance and support library services for patrons throughout the county.\nThe Union County Public Library serves the county. The branch is at 250 SE 5th Avenue, Lake Butler, Florida 32054. Its director is Mary C. Brown. The branch is open Monday, Wednesday\u2013Friday 9 am\u20136 pm, Tuesday 9 am\u20138 pm, and Saturday 9 am\u20133 pm.\nTransportation.\nRailroads.\nUnion County has had three railroad lines in the past, all of which are abandoned. The primary one is the former Georgia Southern and Florida Railway, which ran along SR 100 from Columbia County through Bradford County. The other line is the Jacksonville and Southwestern Railroad which ran along SR 121 from Columbia County into Baker County. The J&amp;SW also had a junction to the Bradford Farms Railroad, a spur north of Florida State Road 16 leading to what is today the Wildwood Subdivision in Lawtey in Bradford County.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75113", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75113", "title": "Volusia County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nVolusia County (, ) is a county located in the east-central part of the U.S. state of Florida between the St. Johns River and the Atlantic Ocean. As of the 2020 census, the county was home to 553,543 people, an increase of 11.9% from the 2010 census. It was founded on December 29, 1854, from a portion of Orange County, and was named for the community of Volusia, located in northwestern Volusia County. The original county seat was Enterprise. Since 1887, the county seat has been DeLand. Volusia County is part of the Deltona\u2013Daytona Beach\u2013Ormond Beach metropolitan statistical area, as well as part of the larger Orlando\u2013Deltona\u2013Daytona Beach Combined statistical area.\nEtymology.\nThe origins of the word \"Volusia\" are unclear, though several theories exist:\nHistory.\nVolusia County was named after its largest community, Volusia, when the Florida Legislature created it by dividing Orange County on December 29, 1854. At the time, Volusia County had about 600 residents.\nThe land area of present-day Volusia County was long inhabited by the indigenous Timucua and Mayaca peoples. Neither historic group exists today as distinct ethnic tribes, having been decimated by disease and war in the decades after contact with European traders and settlers. The large shell middens at Tomoka State Park and other evidence of their historic habitation can still be seen in various areas of Volusia County.\nDuring the British occupation of Florida, a colony known as New Smyrna was started in southeast Volusia County by Andrew Turnbull. This colony was connected to St. Augustine, the capital of East Florida, via the Kings Road. After the failure of the colony the settlers, many of whom were ethnic Menorcan and Greek, traveled the to move to St. Augustine.\nThe Seminole Indians, descendants of the Creek tribe of Alabama and Georgia who resisted forced relocation to Indian Territory, also camped in various parts of Volusia County. During the Second Seminole War (1836\u20131842), the Seminole burned a large sugar plantation in what is today the city of Daytona Beach.\nOn the east shore of the St. Johns River in Volusia, in present-day DeBary, General Winfield Scott established a fort/depot in 1836 named Fort Florida.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which are land and (23.1%) are covered by water.\nVolusia County is bordered on the west by the St. Johns River and Lake Monroe, and by the Atlantic Ocean to the east. Roughly the size of Rhode Island, Volusia is situated northeast of Orlando, north of the Kennedy Space Center, and south of Jacksonville.\nRegions.\nThe Volusia County government divides the county into three regions. This parallels the three calling regions used by BellSouth, the regional phone company:\nParks and gardens.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRivers and waterways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 553,543 people, 220,386 households, and 136,510 families residing in the county.\nAs of the 2000 census, 443,343 people, 184,723 households, and 120,069 families were residing in the county. The population density was . The 211,938 housing units averaged 192 per square\u00a0mile (74/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 86.11% White, 9.29% African American, 0.31% Native American, 1.00% Asian, 1.86% from other races, and 1.43% from two or more races. About 6.57% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race; ancestry was 13.7% German, 11.5% Irish, 11.2% English, 10.7% American, and 8.7% Italian ancestry.\nOf the 184,723 households, 24.10% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.40% were married couples living together, 10.90% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.00% were not families. About 27.90% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.32, and the average family size was 2.82.\nIn the county, the age distribution was 20.30% under 18, 8.20% from 18 to 24, 25.30% from 25 to 44, 24.20% from 45 to 64, and 22.10% at 65 or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.50 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.80 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $35,219, and for a family was $41,767. Males had a median income of $30,573 versus $22,471 for females. The per capita income for the county was $19,664. About 7.90% of families and 11.60% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.30% of those under age 18 and 7.10% of those age 65 or over.\n2016.\nAs of 2016, an estimated 205,310 households were in Volusia County. The total population was 510,806. About 86.8% spoke English as their only language, so 13.2% could speak a language other than English. The largest ancestry groups in the county were English-American at 15.7%, German-American at 12.3%, Irish-American at 11.0% and Italian-American at 7.0%.\nPolitics.\nVoter registration.\nAccording to the secretary of state's office, Republicans are a plurality of registered voters in Volusia County.\nUntil 1952, Volusia County was reliably Democratic, with Republicans only winning it once in 1928. From 1952 to 1988, Democrats only carried the county twice, in 1964 and 1976. Democrats then gained ground again by winning the county five times in a row. Since 2010, it has trended more Republican, and in 2024 Donald Trump carried the county with the highest percentage for any candidate from either party since Reagan's 1984 landslide.\nLaw and government.\nUnder Volusia County's council-manager form of government, voters elect a county council, which consists of seven members who serve four-year terms. Five are elected by district; the county chairman and at-large representative are elected county-wide.\nThe county council establishes ordinances and policies for the county. It also reviews and approves the county budget annually. The county council appoints a county manager, who carries out the will of the council and handles day-to-day business.\nElected officials.\nMembers of the Volusia County Council:\nConstitutional officers, elected county-wide:\nOfficers of the 7th Judicial Circuit, which includes Volusia County, elected circuit-wide:\nJustice.\nThe county's courts operate from facilities in both DeLand and Daytona Beach. There, they preside over a variety of cases, including felonies, misdemeanors, traffic, and domestic cases in their dockets. An elected prosecutor tries cases for the public. Defendants may find representation through the office of the elected public defender.\nThe power of electing the county's sheriff lies with the county's residents. The county sheriff is directly responsible to the courts, but also to the state for the enforcement of state laws. The county sheriff's deputies provide law enforcement to the unincorporated areas of Volusia County, and assist the various municipal police departments, such as the Daytona Beach Police Department.\nMany volunteers work alongside the paid professionals. Included are Citizen Observer Program (COP), who are volunteers working under the direction of the county sheriff and play a part in the county's policing operations.\nThe Volusia County Correctional Center and the Volusia County Branch Jail are both located on U.S. Highway 92, also known as International Speedway Boulevard, which is roughly equidistant between DeLand and Daytona Beach. The county's jail imprisons inmates awaiting trial, convicted offenders who have yet to be sentenced, or those who have been sentenced for a term of a year or less. Longer sentences may be served in the Florida state prison system or alternatively in the federal prison system according to the dictates of the offense.\nLibraries.\nThe county centrally controls 14 libraries, with DeLand and Daytona Beach-City Island being the largest two. Each library branch is administered by geographic region.\nCollections included 869,491 books, 83,943 videos, 58,784 audio materials, 2,051 magazines and newspapers, over 100,000 government documents, and 51 licensed databases. Personal computers for public use are hooked up on broadband in all libraries. An estimated 230,000 Volusia County residents have library cards. One library card is valid at all locations, and materials are lent between locations through a daily courier service and outside the libraries by interlibrary loan. Library cards are free for all Volusia County residents.\nDepending on size, the branches have different operating hours; six are open every day of the week (Ormond Beach, Daytona Beach-City Island, Port Orange, New Smyrna Beach, DeLand, and Deltona), three are open six days a week (Edgewater, Hope Place, and DeBary), and five are open five days a week (Daytona Beach-Keech Street, Oak Hill, Pierson, Lake Helen, and Orange City).\nThe Volusia County Library System was officially started in 1961. Prior to 1961, there were small libraries throughout Volusia County that were maintained by different organizations prevalent in the county. In 1949, Charlotte Smith started an effort to organize the public library system within Volusia County. In 1960, 10 libraries existed in Volusia County, however they were not connected together in a centralized library system. In September 1960, state officials met with librarians and county officials to discuss how the Library Services Act could be applied to Volusia County. A committee was formed to study the conditions of the libraries within the county and determine if organizing the libraries in the county into a centralized system was an appropriate move. After a year the committee found that a countywide library system would be the best course of action for the county. With the development of the Volusia County Library System, a library board was appointed by the governor and the board hired Bradley Simon to be the first director of the Volusia County Library System. During this time, bookmobiles were purchased and sent to rural areas in Volusia County to provide residents there with library services. By 1962, nine public libraries and the bookmobiles were part of the Volusia County Library System, and within the next four years Holly Hill, Ormond Beach, and Orange City joined the system. As new funds were made available, new construction of library facilities occurred, with many of the libraries in the Volusia County Library System being granted new buildings. In 1976 the Deltona Library opened and became the only library that the county fully owned. In 1977 the Dickerson Community Center Library opened and served the black community of Daytona Beach, and is now the John H. Dickerson Heritage Library. Expansion in the 1980s included the construction of buildings for the Port Orange Regional Library in 1984, the Lake Helen Public Library and the Edgewater Public Library in 1988, and the DeLand Regional Library in 1989.\nEconomy.\nThe overall gross metro product (GMP) for Volusia County economy increased from $12.98 billion in 2005 to $13.69 billion in 2006; a $709.9 million increase. The GMP is an annual measurement of the total economic output and sales of goods and services provided within the metropolitan statistical area that comprises all of Volusia County and its 16 cities. A GMP of $13.69 billion represents a significant circulation of new capital resources in an economy populated by just over 500,000 residents.\nLocal consumer confidence and a continued immigration of an estimated 28,800 new residents, new capital investments for new construction exceeding $1.11 billion, and the steady growth of professional and health-care services continued to drive much of the county's economic viability.\nVolusia County's manufacturing sector maintained a steady and stable position within the local economy contrary to the declining trends being experienced elsewhere within Florida. The overall number of manufacturers present within the county increased to over 430 in 2006 and accounted for a large portion of the county's GMP. Manufacturing maintains one of the highest of all average wage levels within the county and generates a higher rate of circulation of economic impact than any other business sector that comprises the local economy.\nVolusia County's manufacturing sector generated an average annual wage of $37,632 in 2006, well above the county's average annual wage of $32,200 for all workers.\nTransportation.\nPublic transportation.\nVolusia County Public Transit System (VOTRAN) is the local bus service. The buses offer service throughout the county, Monday through Saturday, from 7\u00a0am to 7\u00a0pm, and is handicapped-accessible. Limited service is offered in East Volusia in the evenings and on Sundays. The cost is $1.25 per trip, $3.00 for a one-day bus pass, or $40 for a 31-day pass (valid for all VOTRAN routes).\nPassenger train service to Volusia County is provided by Amtrak on the \"Silver Meteor\" and \"Silver Star\" routes.\nService between Volusia County and Orlando is provided by SunRail, a commuter rail line running from Volusia to Orange County. The initial phase of the project commenced in 2014 and extends service to as far north as DeBary. A planned expansion was to include the DeLand Amtrak station in 2015, but didn't actually reach the station until August 2024.\nEducation.\nPublic primary and secondary education is handled by Volusia County Schools.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRoman Catholic Diocese of Orlando operates area Catholic schools. One of the larger private schools is Father Lopez Catholic High School, the sole Catholic high school in the county.\nColleges and universities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVocational.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMedia.\nTelevision.\nPublic broadcasting station WDSC-TV is located in Daytona Beach and broadcasts to 10 counties in Central Florida. Television station WESH is allocated to Daytona Beach - Orlando, and its transmission tower is located midway between those two. Otherwise, Volusia County is served by the major TV broadcasting stations in Orlando and Orange County.\nRadio.\nAM.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFM.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther unincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75114", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75114", "title": "Timothy Eaton", "text": "Northern Irish-Canadian businessman (1834\u20131907)\nTimothy Eaton (March 1834 \u2013 31 January 1907) was a Northern Irish-Canadian businessman who founded the Eaton's department store, one of the most important retail businesses in Canada's history.\nEarly life and family.\nHe was born in Ballymena, County Antrim, Ireland (now Northern Ireland). His parents were Scottish Protestants, John Eaton and Margaret Craig. As a 20-year-old Irish apprentice shopkeeper, Timothy Eaton sailed from Ireland to settle with other family members in southern Ontario, Canada. On 28 May 1862, Eaton married Margaret Wilson Beattie. They had five sons and three daughters. Among the sons were John Craig Eaton and Edward Young Eaton. One of the daughters, Josephine Smyth Eaton, survived the sinking of RMS \"Lusitania\" off the Irish coast in 1915. His granddaughter, Iris Burnside, was lost in that sinking.\nT. Eaton Co. Limited.\nIn 1854, he worked for a short time in a haberdashery store in Glen Williams, Ontario. His sister married William Reid; they owned a farm in Georgetown, Ontario, a short distance from Glen Williams. In 1865, with the help of his brothers, Robert and James, Timothy Eaton set up a bakery business in the town of Kirkton, Ontario, which went under after only a few months. Undaunted, he opened a dry goods store in St. Marys, Ontario.\nIn 1869, Eaton purchased an existing dry-goods and haberdashery business at 178 Yonge Street in Toronto. In promoting his new business, Eaton embraced two retail practices that were ground-breaking at the time: first, all goods had one price (no haggling) with no credit given, and second, all purchases came with a money-back guarantee (a practice expressed in what would become the long-standing store slogan of \"Goods Satisfactory or Money Refunded\").\nStarting in 1884, Eaton introduced Canada to the wonders of the mail-order catalogue, reaching thousands of small towns and rural communities with an array of products previously unattainable. In these tiny communities, the arrival of Eaton's catalogue was a major event. More than clothing, furniture, or the latest in kitchen gadgetry, the catalogue offered such practical items as milking machines, in addition to just about every other contraption or new invention desirable. And, when rendered obsolete by the new season's catalogue, it served another important use in the outdoor privy of most every rural home.\nEaton spawned a colossal retail empire that his offspring would expand coast to coast, reaching its high point during World War II, when the T. Eaton Co. Limited employed more than 70,000 people. Although Eaton did not invent the department store, nor was he the first retailer in the world to implement a money-back guarantee, the chain he founded popularized both concepts and revolutionized retailing in Canada.\nDeath and legacy.\nEaton died of pneumonia on 31 January 1907, and is buried in Mount Pleasant Cemetery in Toronto. He was succeeded by his son, John Craig Eaton.\nIn 1919, two life-sized statues of Timothy Eaton were donated by the Eaton's employees to the Toronto and Winnipeg stores in celebration of the 50th anniversary of the company. For years, it was tradition for customers in both Toronto and Winnipeg to rub the toe of the statue for good luck. The Toronto statue is now housed by the Royal Ontario Museum, and the Winnipeg statue sits in the city's arena, Canada Life Centre (formerly MTS Centre and Bell MTS Place), in almost exactly the same spot where it stood in the now demolished Eaton's store (albeit one storey higher). Museum-goers in Toronto and hockey fans in Winnipeg continue to rub Timothy Eaton's toe for luck.\nHis grandson was flying ace Henry John Burden. In 1985, his great-great-granddaughter, Nancy Eaton, was murdered by a childhood friend, who was found not guilty by reason of insanity.\nTimothy Eaton Memorial Church, in Toronto, was erected in 1914.\nThe town of Eatonia, Saskatchewan was named after Timothy Eaton.\nThe ground of Ballymena RFC, originally the sports grounds of the Mid-Antrim Sports Association, is called Eaton Park.\nA school in the Scarborough district of Toronto, Timothy Eaton Business and Technical Institute, was named after him. It opened in 1971 for classes and closed its doors permanently in 2009.\nIn popular culture.\nBrian Rhodes portrays Eaton in \"Invention Convention\" (July 31, 2012), episode 9 of season 5 of the Canadian television period drama Murdoch Mysteries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "75116", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75116", "title": "Wakulla County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nWakulla County is a county located in the Big Bend region in the northern portion of the U.S. state of Florida. As of the 2020 census, the population was 33,764. Its county seat is Crawfordville. Wakulla County is part of the Tallahassee, Florida Metropolitan Statistical Area. Wakulla County has a near-absence of any municipal population, with two small municipalities holding about 3% of the population. The county seat, Crawfordville, is one of only two unincorporated county seats among Florida's 67 counties.\nHistory.\nFirst Spanish period.\nIn 1528, P\u00e1nfilo de Narv\u00e1ez found his way to what would be Wakulla County from the future Pinellas County, Florida, camping at the confluence of the Wakulla and St. Marks rivers. Narv\u00e1ez determined this was a very suitable spot for a fort. In 1539, Hernando de Soto's expedition passed through \"La Florida\" with a similar route.\nThe Fort San Marcos de Apalache began with a wooden fort in the late 1600s. The vicinity around the fort was not settled until 1733. Spanish colonial officials began constructing a stone fort, which was unfinished in the mid-1760s when Great Britain took over.\nBritish period.\nThe British divided Florida into East Florida, which included present-day Wakulla County, and West Florida. The boundary was the Apalachicola River; at that time, West Florida extended all the way to the Mississippi River. Twenty years later when the Spanish returned, they kept the East and West divisions, with the administrative capitals remaining at St. Augustine and Pensacola, respectively.\nSecond Spanish period.\nThe area to become Wakulla County was an active place in the early 19th century. A former British officer named William Augustus Bowles attempted to unify and lead 400 Creek Indians against the Spanish outpost of San Marcos, capturing it. This provoked Spain, and a Spanish flotilla arrived some five weeks later to restore control.\nIn 1818, General Andrew Jackson invaded the area, capturing Fort San Marcos. Two captive British citizens, Robert Ambrister and Alexander Arbuthnot, were tried, found guilty of inciting Indian raids, and executed under Jackson's authority \u2013 causing a diplomatic nightmare between the U.S. and Britain. The U.S. Army garrison of 200 infantry and artillery men occupied the fort for the better part of a year (1818\u20131819).\nIn 1821, Florida was ceded to the United States and Fort St. Marks, as the Americans called it, was again garrisoned by U.S. troops.\nFlorida's territorial period.\nIn 1824, the fort was abandoned and turned over to the Territory of Florida.\nBy 1839, the fort was returned to the Federal government and a merchant marine hospital was built. The hospital provided care for seamen and area yellow fever victims.\nAntebellum Wakulla.\nWakulla County was created from Leon County in 1843. It may (although this is disputed) be named for the Timucuan Indian word for \"spring of water\" or \"mysterious water\". This is in reference to Wakulla County's greatest natural attraction, Wakulla Springs, which is one of the world's largest freshwater springs, both in terms of depth and water flow. In 1974, the water flow was measured at per day\u2014the greatest recorded flow ever for a single spring.\nIn an 1856 book, adventurer Charles Lanman wrote of the springs:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An adequate idea of this mammoth spring could never be given by pen or pencil; but when once seen, on a bright calm day, it must ever after be a thing to dream about and love. It is the fountain-head of a river... and is of sufficient volume to float a steamboat, if such an affair had yet dared to penetrate this solemn wilderness... It wells up in the very heart of a dense cypress swamp, is nearly round in shape, measures some four hundred feet in diameter, and is in depth about one hundred and fifty feet, having at its bottom an immense horizontal chasm, with a dark portal, from one side of which looms up a limestone cliff, the summit of which is itself nearly fifty feet beneath the spectator, who gazes upon it from the sides of a tiny boat. The water is so astonishlingly clear that even a pin can be seen on the bottom in the deepest places, and of course every animate and inanimate object which it contains is fully exposed to view. The apparent color of the water from the shore is greenish, but as you look perpendicularly into it, it is colorless as air, and the sensation of floating upon it is that of being suspended in a balloon; and the water is so refractive, that when the sun shines brilliantly every object you see is enveloped in the most fascinating prismatic hues.\nAnother possible origin for the name Wakulla, not as widely accepted, is that it means \"mist\" or \"misting\", perhaps in reference to the Wakulla Volcano, a 19th-century phenomenon in which a column of smoke could be seen emerging from the swamp for miles.\nThe town of Port Leon was once a thriving cotton-shipping hub, with a railroad from Tallahassee that carried over 50,000 tons of cotton a year to be put on ships, usually for shipment direct to Europe. Port Leon was the sixth-largest town in Florida, with 1,500 residents. However, a hurricane and the accompanying storm surge wiped out the entire town. New Port (today known as Newport, Florida) was built two miles (3\u00a0km) upstream but never quite achieved the prosperity of Port Leon.\nCivil War.\nDuring the Civil War, Wakulla County was blockaded from 1861 to 1865 by a Union Navy squadron at the mouth of the St. Marks River. Confederates took the old Spanish fort known as San Marcos de Apalache, or Fort St. Marks, and renamed it Fort Ward.\nThe Battle of Natural Bridge eventually stopped the Union force that intended to take Fort Ward and nearby Tallahassee, the only Confederate state capital other than Austin, Texas which had not been captured. The Union was not able to land all of its forces, but they still outnumbered the Confederates, who chose to make their stand at a place where the St. Marks River goes underground: the \"Natural Bridge\" referred to. However, the Confederate Army had over a day to prepare its defenses, and the Union Army retreated. Most of the dead were African-American Union soldiers.\n20th century and beyond.\nIn Gloria Jahoda's book \"The Other Florida\", she writes movingly of the extreme poverty of Wakulla County from the early 1900s to 1966 when Wakulla still had no doctor and no dentist, few stores, and a county newspaper produced just once a month on a mimeograph machine.\nToday, Wakulla has several doctors and dentists, several supermarkets and big-box retailers, a golf resort, and a thriving seafood business.\nEtymology.\nThe name Wakulla is corrupted from Guacara. Guacara is a Spanish phonetic spelling of an original Indian name, and Wakulla is a Muskhogean pronunciation of Guacara. The Spanish \"Gua\" is the equivalent of the Creek \"wa\", and as the Creek alphabet does not exhibit an \"R\" sound, the second element \"cara\" would have been pronounced \"kala\" by the Creeks. The Creek voiceless \"L\" is always substituted for the Spanish \"R\". Thus the word Guacara was pronounced Wakala by the Seminoles who are Muskhogean in their origin and language.\nBecause Wakulla was probably a Timucuan word, it is unlikely that its meaning will ever be known. It may contain the word kala, which signified a \"spring of water\" in some Indian dialects.. It may refer to the Whip-poor-will, known as waxkula in Creek.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (17.6%) is water.\nWakulla County was added to the Tallahassee, Florida Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) in 1973. The county was removed from the Tallahassee MSA in 1983. It was re-added to the MSA (for the second time) in 2003.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 33,764 people, 11,382 households, and 8,362 families residing in the county.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 22,863 people, 8,450 households, and 6,236 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 9,820 housing units at an average density of 16 per square\u00a0mile (6/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 86.10% White, 11.51% Black or African American, 0.59% Native American, 0.25% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.29% from other races, and 1.23% from two or more races. 1.94% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 8,450 households, out of which 35.60% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.10% were married couples living together, 12.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.20% were non-families. 22.00% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.57 and the average family size was 2.99. In the county, the population was spread out, with 25.60% under the age of 18, 7.60% from 18 to 24, 31.70% from 25 to 44, 24.70% from 45 to 64, and 10.30% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 107.30 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 106.80 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $37,149, and the median income for a family was $42,222. Males had a median income of $29,845 versus $24,330 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,678. About 9.30% of families and 11.30% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.40% of those under age 18 and 15.10% of those age 65 or over.\nTransportation.\nRoads.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRailroads.\nNo railroads currently operate within Wakulla County, but it was formerly served by two different railroads.\nThe Georgia, Florida and Alabama Railroad, completed in 1893, passed through Sopchoppy on its route between Tallahassee and Carrabelle until its abandonment in 1948. South of Sopchoppy, the line followed H.T. Smith Road. The railroad bridge crossing the Ochlocknee River at MacIntyre still exists as pilings blocking all but a portion of the river on the south side.\nThe Tallahassee Railroad, the first railroad in Florida, was completed in 1836 and was abandoned by its successor, the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad, in 1983. of that right-of-way became the Tallahassee-St. Marks Historic Railroad State Trail in 1988.\nAirports.\nThe Wakulla County Airport (2J0), located south of Panacea, is a small public-use airport with a single , north\u2013south turf runway. This airfield was originally constructed during World War II, as an emergency landing strip for Army Air Corps aircraft which trained and patrolled along the Gulf Coast, most of which belonged to the 3rd Army Air Corps out of Dale Mabry Field Army Air Base in Tallahassee. After the war, the air strip was turned over to the county for civilian uses.\nSeaports.\nSt. Marks is a small commercial seaport. Panacea and Ochlockonee Bay also support small fishing fleets.\nEducation.\nWakulla County is served by the Wakulla school district with the following schools:\nThe former Sopchoppy Elementary School now serves as the Sopchoppy Education Center, a Pre-K, adult, and second chance school.\nThe former Shadeville High School served African-American students from 1931 to 1967.\nLibrary.\nThe Wakulla County Public Library is the main library of Wakulla County and is a part of the Wilderness Coast Public Libraries.\nCommunities.\nOther unincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75118", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75118", "title": "Walton County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nWalton County is a county located on the Emerald Coast in the northwestern part of the U.S. state of Florida, with its southern border on the Gulf of Mexico. As of the 2020 census, the population was 75,305. Its county seat is DeFuniak Springs. The county is home to the highest natural point in Florida: Britton Hill, at . Walton County is included in the Crestview\u2013Fort Walton Beach\u2013Destin Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nWalton County was organized by European Americans in 1824. It was named for Colonel George Walton Jr., secretary of the Florida Territory from 1821 to 1826. Walton, the son of George Walton, a signer of the Declaration of Independence, was born August 15, 1786, in Augusta, Georgia, and died March 20, 1859, in Petersburg, Virginia.\nBetween 1763 and 1783 the territory that has since become Walton County was part of the colony of British West Florida. During this time British settlers permanently settled in the area, becoming the first English-speaking people to permanently reside in what is now Walton County. During this period Scottish settlers migrated from the backcountry of the Carolinas and settled in the Defuniak Springs area while English settlers, most of whom were either farmers or fishermen, settled in the southern portion of the county by the sea, settling throughout the area that has since become Santa Rosa Beach, Sandestin, Miramar Beach, Point Washington, Seaside and Topsail Hill Preserve State Park and Point Washington State Forest.\nWhile the Scottish settlers had come from a recently established Scottish-majority settlement in North Carolina, the English settlers came largely from the English regions of Norfolk, Dorset and the western half of Sussex. Both the Scots village in the northern portion of the county and the English community along the coast were largely self-contained and had economies that were entirely operational without external trade, as all products in use were made within the two respective communities, and the only external trade was between the Scots in Defuniak Springs and the English farmers/fishermen by the coast. Neither community exported the goods they produced for profit, nor did they have any imported goods at all as both communities relied on self-produced subsistence agriculture. The original settlements were in the Euchee (Yuchi) Valley, near the landing on the Choctawhatchee River that was maintained by a mixed-race Yuchi named Sam Story, whose mother was Yuchi and father was an early Scots trader in the area. The white settlers founded one of the first Presbyterian churches in Northwest Florida. It is still an operating parish and has a historical cemetery.\nWhen the Spanish regained control of Florida in 1783, roughly two-thirds of the British settlers in Pensacola left the colony to find permanent habitation elsewhere, including in the Bahamas and Bermuda, however none of the English or Scottish settlers in what has since become Walton County left with them. The Spanish came to regard the English and Scottish settlers in what has since become Walton County as \"stubborn\" and \"ungovernable\" as the Spanish were unable to make them obey Spanish law. They unanimously refused to convert to Catholicism, despite the fact that Spanish law said they were only allowed to remain in Florida if they did so and the Spanish were unable to compel them to pay taxes to the local Spanish government. As settlers from the newly created United States of America began migrating into north Florida the English and Scottish settlers in what has since become Walton County became gradually absorbed into this community, which would subsequently become the majority population in North Florida.\nIn 1860, there were roughly 573 military aged men in Walton County. Of that population, 62, or 11%, went to serve in the Union unit, the 1st Florida Cavalry Regiment that was mustered in on October 29, 1863. The first Confederate monument in Florida, located at the Walton County Courthouse, records the names of 94 soldiers who died fighting for the Confederacy.\nIn 1995, three planned communities designed by Andr\u00e9s Duany and Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk of the Duany Plater-Zyberk &amp; Company were founded. The communities, named Alys Beach, Seaside, and Rosemary Beach are examples of a style of urban planning known as New Urbanism. The final plan for Seaside was complete around 1985.\nSeaside was used as the main filming location of the 1998 film \"The Truman Show\".\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (16.3%) is water.\nThe county is 12th largest in area in the state, stretching from the Alabama state line to the Emerald Coast.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 75,305 people, 28,635 households, and 20,034 families residing in the county.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 40,601 people, 16,548 households, and 11,120 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 29,083 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 88.41% White, 6.98% Black or African American, 1.28% Native American, 0.45% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.75% from other races, and 2.09% from two or more races. 2.17% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 16,548 households, out of which 26.40% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.00% were married couples living together, 10.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.80% were non-families. 27.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 2.83.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 21.70% under the age of 18, 7.10% from 18 to 24, 28.50% from 25 to 44, 26.90% from 45 to 64, and 15.80% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 105.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 105.00 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $32,407, and the median income for a family was $37,663. Males had a median income of $26,799 versus $21,208 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,198. About 11.60% of families and 14.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.00% of those under age 18 and 10.90% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nPolitics.\nWalton County is a stronghold of the Republican Party. It has supported the Republican candidate in each presidential election since 1980, usually by overwhelming margins.\nLibraries.\nWalton County has four branches, including the historic DeFuniak Springs Library.\nSchools.\nThe county is served by the Walton County School District.\nCommunities.\nOther unincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75119", "revid": "1036689920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75119", "title": "Quotations", "text": ""}
{"id": "75120", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75120", "title": "Wausau", "text": "Wausau may refer to:\nOther uses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "75121", "revid": "47220715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75121", "title": "Vernon", "text": "Vernon may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75122", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75122", "title": "Washington County, Florida", "text": "County in Florida, United States\nWashington County is a county located in the northwestern part of the U.S. state of Florida, in the Panhandle. As of the 2020 census, the population was 25,318. Its county seat is Chipley. Washington County is included in the Panama City\u2014Panama City Beach, Florida Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nWashington County was created in 1825, and was nearly twice the size of the State of Delaware, stretching all the way to the Gulf of Mexico. After a century of boundary shifts, the county, with over of rolling hills covered in thick, stately pines and mixed hardwood forests, now covers a large portion of the central Florida Panhandle.\nOver a span of more than 150 years, Washington County has seen Native American, Spanish and English cultural influences. The county's historical lore is rich with stories of the exploits of Andrew Jackson. There are numerous Native American mounds and evidence of strong settlements still being discovered.\nNamed after George Washington, the first US president, the area was first settled by those seeking both economic and political freedom in this frontier land of vast timber and mineral resources. Inland waterway transportation brought about heavy river settlements. The arrival of railroads in the late 1800s boosted economic, social and political developments.\nVernon, the geographical center of the county, is named for George Washington's Virginia home, Mt. Vernon. The pioneer town was also the site of a major Indian settlement.\nThe county courthouse was located in Vernon during the early part of this century, until a railroad town in northeastern Washington County, Chipley, became the new and present county seat in 1927.\nWashington County was once a dry county, meaning that the sale of alcoholic beverages was banned in the county. In January 2022, this restriction was removed following a voter referendum in which about two-thirds of voters supported the removal.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (5.4%) is water.\nThe county became part of the Panama City metropolitan area in 2023.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 25,318 people, 9,037 households, and 5,945 families residing in the county.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 20,973 people, 7,931 households, and 5,646 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 9,503 housing units at an average density of 16 per square\u00a0mile (6/km2). The racial makeup of the county was 81.72% White, 13.69% Black or African American, 1.54% Native American, 0.36% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.58% from other races, and 2.05% from two or more races. 2.30% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 7,931 households, out of which 30.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.20% were married couples living together, 11.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.80% were non-families. 25.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 2.93.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 23.40% under the age of 18, 7.70% from 18 to 24, 28.50% from 25 to 44, 24.70% from 45 to 64, and 15.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 105.80 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 105.90 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $27,922, and the median income for a family was $33,057. Males had a median income of $26,597 versus $20,198 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,980. About 15.40% of families and 19.20% of the population were below the poverty line, including 26.90% of those under age 18 and 19.40% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nThe Washington County School District includes:\nIt is the sole school district in the county.\nWashington Public Library System.\nWashington County Public Library system has four branches:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nhttps://www.wjhg.com/2022/01/22/washington-county-dry-no-more/"}
{"id": "75123", "revid": "6817", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75123", "title": "Functional MRI", "text": ""}
{"id": "75124", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75124", "title": "Casey Stengel", "text": "American baseball player and manager (1890\u20131975)\nCharles Dillon \"Casey\" Stengel (; July 30, 1890 \u2013 September 29, 1975) was an American professional baseball player and manager in Major League Baseball (MLB). A right fielder, he played 14 seasons in the major leagues. Subsequently, he managed for 25 seasons, most notably for the New York Yankees during the 1950s and later for the expansion New York Mets. Nicknamed \"the Ol' Perfessor\", he was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1966.\nStengel was born in Kansas City, Missouri, in 1890. In 1910, he began a professional baseball career that would span over half a century. After almost three seasons in the minor leagues, Stengel reached the major leagues late in 1912, as an outfielder, for the Brooklyn Dodgers. His six seasons there saw some success, among them playing for Brooklyn's 1916 National League championship team. During this time he also developed a reputation as a clown. After repeated clashes over pay with the Dodgers owner, Charlie Ebbets, Stengel was traded to the Pittsburgh Pirates in 1918; however, he enlisted in the Navy that summer, for the remainder of World War I. After returning to baseball, he continued his pay disputes, resulting in trades to the Philadelphia Phillies (in 1919) and to the New York Giants (in 1921). There, he learned much about baseball from the manager, John McGraw, and had a number of highlights in his career, including hitting an inside-the-park home run in Game 1 of the 1923 World Series to defeat the Yankees. His major league playing career ended with the Boston Braves in 1925, after which he began a career as a manager.\nThe first twenty years of Stengel's second career brought mostly poor finishes, especially during his MLB managerial stints with the Dodgers (1934\u20131936) and Braves (1938\u20131943). He thereafter enjoyed some success on the minor league level, and Yankee general manager George Weiss hired him as manager in October 1948. Stengel's Yankees won the World Series five consecutive years (1949\u20131953), the only time that has been achieved. Although the team won ten pennants in his twelve seasons and won seven World Series, his final two years brought less success, with a third-place finish in 1959 and a loss in the 1960 World Series. By then aged 70, he was dismissed by the Yankees shortly after their defeat.\nStengel had become well known for his humorous and sometimes disjointed way of speech during his time with the Yankees, and these skills of showmanship served the expansion Mets well when they hired him in late 1961. He promoted the team tirelessly, as well as managing it to a 40\u2013120 win\u2013loss record, the most losses of any 20th century MLB team. The team finished last all four years he managed it, but was boosted by considerable support from fans. Stengel retired in 1965, and became a fixture at baseball events for the rest of his life. Although Stengel is sometimes described as one of the great managers in major league history, others have contrasted his success during the Yankee years with his lack of success at other times, and concluded he was a good manager only when given good players. Stengel is remembered as one of the great characters in baseball history.\nEarly life.\nCharles Dillon Stengel was born on July 30, 1890, in Kansas City, Missouri. His ancestry included German and Irish; his parents\u2014Louis Stengel and Jennie (Jordan) Stengel\u2014were from the Quad Cities area of Illinois and Iowa, and had moved to Kansas City soon after their 1886 wedding so Louis could take an insurance job. \"Charlie\" was the youngest of three children, and the second son. Charlie Stengel played sandlot baseball as a child, and also played baseball, football and basketball at Kansas City's Central High School. His basketball team won the city championship, while the baseball team won the state championship.\nAs a teenager, Stengel played on a number of semipro baseball teams. He played on the traveling team called the Kansas City Red Sox during the summers of 1908 and 1909, going as far west as Wyoming and earning a dollar a day. He was offered a contract by the minor league Kansas City Blues for $135 a month, more money than his father was making. Since young Stengel was underage, his father had to agree, which he did. Louis Stengel recalled, \"So I put down my paper and signed. You could never change that boy's mind anyway\".\nPlaying career.\nMinor leagues.\nBefore reporting to spring training for the Blues in early 1910 at Excelsior Springs, Missouri, Stengel was approached by his neighbor, Kid Nichols, a former star pitcher, who advised him to listen to his manager and to the older players, and if he was minded to reject their advice, at least think it over for a month or so first. Stengel failed to make the ball club, which was part of the American Association, considered one of the top minor leagues. Kansas City optioned Stengel to the Kankakee Kays of the Class D Northern Association, a lower-level minor league, to gain experience as an outfielder. He had a .251 batting average with Kankakee when the league folded in July. He found a place with the Shelbyville Grays, who moved mid-season and became the Maysville Rivermen, of the Class D Blue Grass League, batting .221. He returned to the Blues for the final week of the season, with his combined batting average for 1910 at .237.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI want to thank my parents for letting me play baseball, and I'm thankful I had baseball knuckles and couldn't become a dentist.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel\nUncertain of whether he would be successful as a baseball player, Stengel attended Western Dental College in the 1910\u20131911 offseason. He would later tell stories of his woes as a left-handed would-be dentist using right-handed equipment. The Blues sold Stengel to the Aurora Blues of the Class C Wisconsin\u2013Illinois League. He led the league with a .352 batting average. Brooklyn Dodgers scout Larry Sutton took a trip from Chicago to nearby Aurora, noticed Stengel, and the Dodgers purchased his contract on September 1, 1911. Brooklyn outfielder Zach Wheat later claimed credit for tipping off Sutton that Stengel was worth signing. Stengel finished the season with Aurora and returned to dental school for the offseason.\nThe Dodgers assigned Stengel to the Montgomery Rebels of the Class A Southern Association for the 1912 season. Playing for manager Kid Elberfeld, Stengel batted .290 and led the league in outfield assists. He also developed a reputation as an eccentric player. Scout Mike Kahoe referred to Stengel as a \"dandy ballplayer, but it's all from the neck down\". After reporting to Brooklyn in September and getting a taste of the big leagues, he spent a third offseason at dental school in 1912\u20131913. He did not graduate, though whenever his baseball career hit a bad patch in the years to follow, his wife Edna would urge him to get his degree.\nBrooklyn years (1912\u20131917).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThey brought me up to the Brooklyn Dodgers, which at that time was in Brooklyn.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel\nIn later years, Casey Stengel told stories of his coming to Brooklyn to play for the Dodgers; most focused on his na\u00efvet\u00e9 and were, at least, exaggerated. Wheat was from the Kansas City area and watched over Stengel, getting the young player a locker next to his and working with him on outfield technique. Stengel made his MLB debut at Brooklyn's Washington Park on September 17, 1912, as the starting center fielder, and went 4\u20134 with a walk, two stolen bases and two tie-breaking runs batted in, leading seventh-place Brooklyn to a 7\u20133 win over the Pirates. Stengel continued to play well, finishing the season with a .316 batting average, though hitting .351 when right-handers started against Brooklyn and only .250 when left-handers started.\nAfter holding out for better pay, Stengel signed with the Dodgers for 1913. He won the starting center fielder job. The Dodgers had a new ballpark, Ebbets Field, and Stengel became the first person to hit a home run there, first an inside-the-park home run against the New York Yankees in an exhibition game to open the stadium, and then in the regular season. During the 1913 season, Stengel acquired the nickname \"Casey\"; there are varying stories of how this came to be, though his home town of Kansas City likely played a prominent role\u2014sportswriter Fred Lieb stated that the ballplayer had \"Charles Stengel\u2014K.C.\" stenciled on his bags. Although he missed 25 games with injuries, he hit .272 with seven official home runs in his first full season as a major leaguer. Prior to 1914 spring training, Stengel coached baseball at the University of Mississippi. Though the position was unpaid, he was designated an assistant professor for the time he was there, something that may have been the source of Stengel's nickname, \"The Ol' Perfessor\".\nThe Dodgers were an improving team in Stengel's first years with them, and he was greatly influenced by the manager who joined the team in 1914, Wilbert Robinson. Stengel also avoided a holdout in 1914; Dodgers owner Charlie Ebbets was anxious to put his players under contract lest they jump to the new Federal League, and nearly doubled Stengel's salary to $4,000 per year. During spring training, the Dodgers faced the minor league Baltimore Orioles and their rookie, Babe Ruth, who pitched. Ruth hit a triple over Stengel's head but gave up two doubles to him, and Stengel chased down a long Ruth fly ball to right in the Dodgers' loss. Both Brooklyn and Stengel started the season slowly, but both recovered with a hot streak that left the Dodgers only 4 games under .500, their best record since 1903, and Stengel finished with a .316 batting average, fifth best in the league. His on-base percentage led the league at .404, though this was not yet an official statistic. With the Federal League still active, Stengel was rewarded with a two-year contract at $6,000 per year.\nStengel reported to spring training ill and thin; he was unable to work out for much of the time the Dodgers spent in Florida. Although the team stated that he had typhoid fever, still common in 1915, Lieb wrote after Stengel's death in 1975 that the ballplayer had gonorrhea. Stengel may have been involved in a well-known incident during spring training when Robinson agreed to catch a baseball dropped from an airplane piloted by Ruth Law\u2014except that it proved not to be a baseball, but a small grapefruit, much to the manager's shock, as he assumed the liquid on him was blood. Law stated that she dropped the grapefruit as she had forgotten the baseball, but Stengel retold the story, imitating Robinson, many times in his later years, with himself as grapefruit dropper, and is often given the credit for the stunt. Stengel's batting average dipped as low as the .150s for part of the season; though he eventually recovered to .237, this was still the worst full season percentage of his major league career.\nSoon after the 1916 season started, it became clear that the Dodgers were one of the better teams in the league. Robinson managed to squeeze one more year of productivity out of some older veterans such as Chief Meyers, who said of Stengel, \"It was Casey who kept us on our toes. He was the life of the party and just kept all us old-timers pepped up all season.\" Stengel, mostly playing right field, hit .279 with eight home runs, one less than the team leader in that category, Wheat. Stengel's home run off Philadelphia Phillies pitcher Grover Cleveland Alexander, who won 33 games that year, in the second game of a doubleheader on September 30, provided the margin of victory as the Dodgers went into first place to stay, qualifying for their first World Series, against the Boston Red Sox. Despite getting two hits in a Game 1 loss at Boston, Stengel was benched for Game 2 because the Red Sox were pitching a left-hander, Babe Ruth, and Stengel hit better against right-handers. Stengel, back in the lineup for Game 3, got a hit in Brooklyn's only victory of the series. He was benched again in Game 4 against left-hander Dutch Leonard, though he was inserted as a pinch runner, and got another hit in the Game 5 loss, finishing 4 for 11, .364, the best Dodger batting average of the Series.\nDespite the successful season, Ebbets was determined to cut his players' salaries, including Stengel, whom he considered overpaid. By then, the Federal League was defunct, and the reserve clause prevented players from jumping to other major league clubs. The owner sent Stengel a contract for $4,600, and when that was rejected, cut it by another $400. A holdout ensued, together with a war of words waged in the press. With little leverage, Stengel became willing to sign for the original contract, and did on March 27, 1917, but missed most of spring training. Stengel's batting average dropped from .279 to .257 as the defending league champion Dodgers finished seventh in the eight-team league, but he led the team in games, hits, doubles, triples, home runs and runs batted in. After the season, Ebbets sent Stengel a contract for $4,100, and the outfielder eventually signed for that amount, but on January 9, 1918, Ebbets traded him along with George Cutshaw to the Pittsburgh Pirates for Burleigh Grimes, Al Mamaux and Chuck Ward.\nPittsburgh and Philadelphia (1918\u20131921).\nThe Pirates had been the only National League team to do worse than the Dodgers in 1917, finishing last. Stengel met with the Pirates owner Barney Dreyfuss to seek a salary increase, but found Dreyfuss reluctant to deal until Stengel proved himself as a Pirate. On June 3, 1918, Stengel was ejected for arguing with the umpire, and was fined by the league office for taking off his shirt on the field. The U.S. had been fighting in World War I for a year, and Stengel enlisted in the Navy. His wartime service was playing for and managing the Brooklyn Navy Yard's baseball team, driving in the only run to beat Army, 1\u20130, before 5,000 spectators at the Polo Grounds. He also occasionally helped paint a ship\u2014he later stated he had guarded the Gowanus Canal, and not a single submarine got into it.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI had many years that I was not so successful as a ball player, as it is a game of skill.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel, testifying before a Senate subcommittee, 1958.\nThe Armistice renewed the conflict between Stengel and Dreyfuss, and the outfielder held out again to begin the 1919 season. Both wanted to see Stengel traded, but no deal was immediately made. By then, Stengel's position as regular right fielder had been taken by Billy Southworth, and he had difficulty breaking back into the lineup. Stengel played better than he had before he enlisted, and by the time Dreyfuss traded him to the Philadelphia Phillies for Possum Whitted on August 9, he was batting .293 with four home runs. But before being traded, Stengel pulled one of his most famous stunts, on May 25 at Ebbets Field, as a member of the visiting Pirates. It was not unusual at Ebbets Field for right fielders of either team, rather than go to the dugout after three were out, to go to the Dodgers' bullpen, in foul territory down the right field line, if they were not likely to bat in the upcoming inning. Stengel did so to visit old friends, and discovered that pitcher Leon Cadore had captured a sparrow. Stengel took it, and quietly placed it under his cap when called to bat in the sixth inning. He received mixed boos and cheers from the Brooklyn crowd as a former Dodger, took a deep bow at the plate, and doffed his cap, whereupon the bird flew away to great laughter from the crowd.\nThe trade to the Phillies ended Stengel's major league season for 1919, as he refused to report unless he got a raise, and when one was not forthcoming, returned to Kansas City to raise a barnstorming team. In the offseason, he came to terms with William Baker, the owner of the Phillies, and hit .292 in 1920 with nine home runs. However, racked by injuries and no longer young for a ballplayer, he did not play much in the early part of the 1921 season. On June 30, 1921, the Phillies traded Stengel, Red Causey and Johnny Rawlings to the New York Giants for Lee King, Goldie Rapp and Lance Richbourg. The Giants were one of the dominant teams in the National League, and Stengel, who had feared being sent to the minor leagues, quietly placed a long-distance call once informed to ensure he was not the victim of a practical joke.\nNew York Giants and Boston Braves (1921\u20131925).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI learned more from McGraw than anybody.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel\nWhen Stengel reported to the Giants on July 1, 1921, they were managed, as they had been for almost 20 years, by John McGraw. Stengel biographer Robert W. Creamer said of McGraw, \"his Giants were the most feared, the most respected, the most admired team in baseball\". Stengel biographer Marty Appel noted, \"McGraw and Stengel. Teacher and student. Casey was about to learn a lot about managing\". Stengel had time to learn, playing in only 18 games for the Giants in 1921, mostly as a pinch hitter, and watched from his place on the bench as McGraw led the Giants from a 7&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 game deficit on August 24 to the National League pennant. Although he was on the 25-player postseason roster, Stengel did not appear in the 1921 World Series against the Yankees, as McGraw used only 13 players (4 of them pitchers) in beating the Yankees, five games to three. The only contribution Stengel made to the box score was being ejected from Game 5 for arguing.\nMcGraw brought several outfielders into spring training with the Giants. When Stengel was not included with the starters when the manager split the squad, some sportswriters assumed he would not be with the team when the regular season began. Stengel, at McGraw's request, acted as a coach to the young players on the \"B\" squad, and worked hard, getting key hits in spring training games, and making the Giants as a reserve outfielder. McGraw and Stengel sometimes stayed up all night, discussing baseball strategy. With two Giant outfielders injured by June, Stengel was put in center field, and hit .368 in 84 games, as McGraw platooned him against right-handers. If Stengel had enough plate appearances to qualify for the league batting championship, he would have finished second to Rogers Hornsby of the St. Louis Cardinals, who hit .401. The Giants played the Yankees again in the 1922 World Series; Stengel went 1\u20134 in Game 1, nursing an injured right leg muscle, which he aggravated running out an infield single in his first at bat in Game 2. Stengel was obviously limping when he was advanced to second base on another single, and McGraw sent in a pinch runner. He did not use Stengel again in the Series, which the Giants won, four games to zero, with one tie. After the Series, Stengel and other major leaguers went on a barnstorming tour of Japan and the Far East.\nThe year 1923 started much the same as the year before, with Stengel detailed to the \"B\" squad as player and coach in spring training, making the team as a reserve, and then inserted as center fielder when righties pitched. Similar also were Stengel's hot batting streaks, helping the Giants as they contended for their third straight pennant. Stengel was ejected several times for brawling or arguing with the umpire, and the league suspended him for ten games in one incident. McGraw continued to use him as a means of exerting some control over the younger players. During that summer, Stengel fell in love with Edna Lawson, a Californian who was running part of her father's building contracting business; they were married the following year. Near the end of the season, he sustained a mild foot injury, causing McGraw to rest him for a week, but he played the final two games of the regular season to finish at .339 as the Giants and Yankees each won their leagues.\nUntil 1923, the Yankees had been tenants of the Giants at the Polo Grounds, but had opened Yankee Stadium that year, and this was the site for Game 1 of the 1923 World Series on October 10. Casey Stengel's at bat in the ninth inning with the score tied 4\u20134 was \"the stuff of legend\", as Appel put it in his history of the Yankees. Before the largest crowd he had ever played before, Stengel lined a changeup from Joe Bush for a hit that went between the outfielders deep to left center. Hobbled by his injury and even more as a sponge inside his shoe flew out as he rounded second base, Stengel slowly circled the bases, and evaded the tag from catcher Wally Schang for an inside-the-park home run, providing the winning margin. Thus, the first World Series home run in old Yankee Stadium's history did not go to Babe Ruth, \"that honor, with great irony, would fall to the aging reserve outfielder Casey Stengel\".\nAfter the Yankees won Game 2 at the Polo Grounds, the Series returned to Yankee Stadium for Game 3. Stengel won it, 1\u20130, on a home run into the right field bleachers. As the Yankee fans booed Stengel, he thumbed his nose at the crowd and blew a kiss toward the Yankee players, outraging the team's principal owner, Jacob Ruppert, who demanded that Baseball Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis fine or suspend Stengel. Judge Landis declined, saying \"a man who wins two games with home runs may feel a little playful, especially if he's a Stengel\". The Yankees won the next three games to take the Series; Stengel batted .417 in the six games, completing his World Series career as a player with a .393 batting average.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n It's lucky I didn't hit three home runs in three games, or McGraw would have traded me to the Three-I League.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel on being traded by the Giants to the Boston Braves\nOn November 13, 1923, twenty-nine days after the World Series ended, Stengel was traded to the perennial second-division-dwelling Boston Braves with Dave Bancroft and Bill Cunningham for Joe Oeschger and Billy Southworth. Stengel had enjoyed his time in New York and was initially unhappy at the trade, especially since he had become close to McGraw. He soon cooled down, and later praised McGraw as \"the greatest manager I ever played for\". Despite nagging pains in his legs, Stengel played in 134 games during the 1924 season, the most since his days with the Dodgers, and hit .280 with a team-leading 13 stolen bases, but the Braves finished last. After the season, Stengel joined a baseball tour of Europe organized by McGraw and Charles Comiskey, with Edna Stengel accompanying the team. Casey Stengel met King George V and the Duke of York, later to become King George VI; Edna sipped tea with Queen Mary, an experience that strained her nerves. That winter, the Stengels moved into a house built by Edna's father in Glendale, California, where they would live the rest of their lives. The marriage produced no children.\nEarly managerial career (1925\u20131948).\nMinor leagues (1925\u20131931).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNever let a losing pitcher drive the bus\u2014especially a left-hander. A guy who has just blown a tough one shouldn't be allowed behind the wheel.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel\nStengel started 1925 on the active roster of the Braves, but was used as a pinch hitter and started only once, in right field against the Pirates on May 14, a game in which he got his only MLB hit of 1925, the final one of his major league career, a single. His average sank to .077. Braves owner Emil Fuchs purchased the Worcester Panthers of the Eastern League, and hired Stengel as player-manager and team president. Appel noted that in joining the Panthers, Stengel was \"starting out on a managing career that would eventually take him to Cooperstown\". With fans enjoying Stengel's on-field antics and his World Series heroics still recent, he was the Eastern League's biggest attendance draw. Between run-ins with the umpires, Stengel hit .302 in 100 games as the Panthers finished third.\nThe Panthers were not a box office success, and Fuchs planned to move the team to Providence, Rhode Island for the 1926 season, with Stengel to remain in his roles. McGraw, with whom Stengel had remained close, wanted him to take over as manager of the Giants' top affiliate, the Toledo Mud Hens of the American Association, at an increase in salary. Stengel was still under contract to the Braves, and Mud Hens president Joseph O'Brien was unwilling to send them money or players in order to get him. When Stengel asked Fuchs what to do if a higher-level club wanted to draft him, Fuchs half-heartedly suggested releasing himself as a player, which would automatically terminate his Braves contract. Stengel took up Fuchs on his suggestion, releasing himself as a player, then firing himself as manager and resigning as president, clearing the way for him to move to the Mud Hens. Fuchs was outraged, and went to Judge Landis, who advised him to let the matter go.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPeople talk about all the money I've made. But they never talk about all the money I've lost.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel\nStengel's six years in Toledo would be as long as he would spend anywhere as manager, except his time with the Yankees of the 1950s. McGraw sent talented players down to Toledo, and the Mud Hens threatened for the pennant in Stengel's first year before falling back to third. In 1927, the team won its first pennant and defeated the Buffalo Bisons, five games to one, in the Little World Series. Stengel missed part of the 1927 campaign, as he was suspended by the league for inciting the fans to attack the umpire after a close play during the first game of the Labor Day doubleheader. Stengel continued as an occasional player as late as 1931 in addition to his managerial role, hitting a game-winning home run (the last of his professional career) in 1927 for the Mud Hens. Since minor league clubs suffer large turnovers in their rosters, the team's success did not carry over to 1928, when it finished sixth, and then eighth in the eight-team league in 1929. The team recovered for third in 1930, but by then both Stengel and the team (in which he had invested) were having financial problems due to the start of the Great Depression. The team finished last again in 1931, and, after Landis was convinced no money had been skimmed off to benefit Stengel and other insiders, the team went into receivership, and Stengel was fired.\nBrooklyn and Boston (1932\u20131943).\nStengel had approached the new manager of the Dodgers, Max Carey, an old teammate from his time with the Pirates, seeking a job, and was hired as first base coach. Stengel thus ended an exile of seven years from the major leagues: Appel suggested that Stengel's reputation as a clown inhibited owners from hiring him although he was known as knowledgeable and able to manage the press. Sportswriter Dan Daniel described Stengel's hiring as \"the return of an ancient Flatbush landmark\", which might satisfy old Dodger fans upset at Robinson's dismissal at the end of 1931. Brooklyn finished third and then sixth with Stengel in the first base coaching box. Among the players was catcher Al Lopez; the two became close friends and would be managing rivals in the 1950s American League.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe first thing I want to say is that the Dodgers are still in the National League. Tell that to Bill Terry.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel, on being hired as Dodger manager, February 24, 1934\nDuring the winter following the 1933 season, the manager of the world champion Giants, Bill Terry was interviewed by the press about the other teams in the National League. When asked about the Dodgers, Terry responded, \"Brooklyn? Gee, I haven't heard a peep out of there. Is Brooklyn still in the league?\" This angered Brooklyn's management, and they expected Carey to make a full-throated response. When he remained silent, he was fired. One sportswriter regarded the hiring of Stengel as too logical a thing to happen in Brooklyn, but on February 24, 1934, Stengel faced the press for the first time as the manager of a major league team. McGraw, Stengel's mentor, was too ill to issue a statement on seeing him become a major league manager; he died the following day.\nStengel, hired only days before spring training, had a limited opportunity to shape his new ballclub. The Dodgers quickly settled into sixth place, where they would end the season. Stengel, in later years, enjoyed discussing one 1934 game in Philadelphia's Baker Bowl: with Dodger pitcher Boom-Boom Beck ineffective, Stengel went out to the mound to take out the angry pitcher, who, instead of giving Stengel the baseball, threw it into right field, where it hit the metal wall with a loud noise. The right fielder, Hack Wilson, lost in thought, heard the boom, assumed the ball had been hit by a batter, and ran to retrieve it and throw it to the infield, to be met by general laughter. Stengel got the last laughs on the Giants as well. The Giants, six games ahead of the Cardinals on Labor Day, squandered that lead, and with two games remaining in the season, were tied with St. Louis. The final two games were against Brooklyn at the Polo Grounds, games played in front of raucous crowds, who well remembered Terry's comments. Brooklyn won both games, while the Cardinals won their two games against the Cincinnati Reds, and won the pennant. Richard Bak, in his biography of Stengel, noted that the victories over the Terry-led Giants represented personal vindication for the Dodger manager.\nThe Dodgers finished fifth in 1935 and seventh in 1936. Dodger management felt Stengel had not done enough with the talent he had been given, and he was fired during the 1936 World Series between the Yankees and Giants. Stengel was paid for one year left on his contract, and he was not involved in baseball during the 1937 season. Stengel had invested in oil properties, as advised by one of his players, Randy Moore, a Texan; the investment helped make the Stengels well-to-do, and they put the profits in California real estate. Stengel considered going in the oil business full-time, but Braves president Bob Quinn offered him the Boston managerial job in late 1937, and he accepted.\nStengel was both manager and an investor in the Braves. In his six years there, 1938 to 1943, his team never finished in the top half of the league standings, and the Boston club finished seventh four straight years between 1939 and 1942, saved from last place by the fact that the Phillies were even worse. The entry of the United States in World War II meant that many top players went into the service, but for the Braves, the changeover made little difference in the standings. Among the young players to join the Braves was pitcher Warren Spahn, who was sent down to the minor leagues by the manager for having \"no heart\". Spahn, who would go on to a Hall of Fame career, much of it with the Braves, would play again for Stengel on the woeful New York Mets in 1965, and joke that he was the only person to play for Stengel both before and after he was a genius.\nA few days before the opening of the 1943 season, Stengel was hit by a vehicle while crossing Commonwealth Avenue in Boston, and he severely fractured a leg. He missed the first two months of the season, receiving many well-wishers, and reading get-well cards jokingly misaddressed to the hospital's psychiatric ward. For the rest of his life, Stengel walked with a limp. At the end of the season, Braves management, tired of minimal progress, fired Stengel, and he received no immediate job offers. Stengel testified about this part of his career before a Senate subcommittee fifteen years later, \"I became a major league manager in several cities and was discharged. We call it discharged because there is no question I had to leave\".\nReturn to the minors (1944\u20131948).\nStengel thought the 1943 season would be his last in baseball; Edna urged him to look after the family business interests full-time, and Casey, who had always been an athlete, was reluctant to show himself at a baseball stadium with the imperfectly healed injury. But early in the 1944 season, the minor-league Milwaukee Brewers had a managing vacancy to fill, as the Chicago Cubs had hired away the Brewer manager, Charlie Grimm, who had played with Stengel on the 1919 Pirates. Grimm told the Cubs he was obliged to see the Brewers had a competent replacement, and urged the Brewers to hire Stengel. The team owner, Bill Veeck, stationed as a Marine on Guadalcanal, thought ill of Stengel as a manager, and was very reluctant in his consent when reached by cable. Stengel was adept at fostering good relations with reporters, and the very talented team continued to win; by the end of May, Veeck had withdrawn his objections. The team won the American Association pennant, but lost in the playoffs to Louisville. Veeck, having returned to the United States, offered to rehire Stengel for 1945, but Stengel preferred another offer he received. This was from George Weiss of the New York Yankees, to manage the team Stengel had begun with, the Kansas City Blues, by then a Yankee farm club. Kansas City had finished last in the American Association as Milwaukee won the pennant, making it something of a comedown for Stengel, who hoped to return to the major leagues. Nevertheless, it was in his old home town, allowing him to see friends and relations, and he took the job. The Blues finished seventh in the eight-team league in 1945.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEvery manager wants to throw himself off a bridge sooner or later, and it's very nice for an old man to know he doesn't have to walk fifty miles to find one.\n \u2014 Casey Stengel on the proximity of the Bay Bridge to the Oaks' stadium\nAlthough there was no major league managing vacancy Stengel could aspire to, the Oakland Oaks of the Pacific Coast League had fired their manager, and approached Stengel. The baseball played in the PCL was close to major league level, and the league featured many aging big leaguers finishing their careers. Also attractive to Stengel was that the league had three teams in Southern California, allowing him to spend more time at his home in Glendale. To that time, the club had won only one pennant, and was something of a weak sister to its crossbay rivals, the San Francisco Seals, but owner Brick Laws believed Stengel could mold the players into a winning team.\nThe Oaks finished second in the league behind the Seals in 1946, winning the first round of the playoffs against Los Angeles before losing to San Francisco in the finals. They finished fourth in 1947, beating San Francisco in the first round before losing to Los Angeles. Stengel managed the Oaks for a third year in 1948, with the roster heavy with former major leaguers. Among the younger players on the team was 20-year-old shortstop Billy Martin. Stengel was impressed by Martin's fielding, baseball acuity, and, when there were brawls on the field, fighting ability. The Oaks clinched the pennant on September 26, and defeated Los Angeles and the Seattle Rainiers to win the Governors' Cup. \"The Sporting News\" named Stengel the Minor League Manager of the Year.\nGlory days: Yankee dynasty (1949\u20131960).\nHiring and 1949 season.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSo what if he doesn't talk to me? I'll get by and so will he. DiMaggio doesn't get paid to talk to me and I don't either.\n \u2014 Casey Stengel on his relationship with Joe DiMaggio.\nStengel had been talked about as a possible Yankee manager in the early 1940s, but longtime team boss Ed Barrow (who retired in 1945) refused to consider it. Yankee manager Joe McCarthy retired during the 1946 season, and after the interim appointment of catcher Bill Dickey as player-manager, Bucky Harris was given the job in 1947. Stengel's name was mentioned for the job before Harris got it; he was backed by Weiss, but Larry MacPhail, then in charge of the franchise, was opposed. Harris and the Yankees won the World Series that year, but finished third in 1948, though they were not eliminated until the penultimate day. Harris was fired, allegedly because he would not give Weiss his home telephone number. MacPhail could no longer block Stengel's hiring, as he had sold his interest in the Yankees after the 1947 season. Weiss, who became general manager after MacPhail's departure, urged his partners in the Yankees to allow the appointment of Stengel, who aided his own cause by winning the championship with Oakland during the time the Yankee job stood open. Del Webb, who owned part of the Yankees, had initial concerns but went along. Yankee scouts on the West Coast recommended Stengel, and Webb's support helped bring around co-owner Dan Topping.\nStengel was introduced as Yankee manager on October 12, 1948, the 25th anniversary of his second World Series home run to beat the Yankees. Joe DiMaggio attended the press conference as a sign of team support. Stengel faced obstacles to being accepted\u2014Harris had been popular with the press and public, and the businesslike Yankee corporate culture and successful tradition were thought to be ill matched with a manager who had the reputation of a clown and who had never had a major league team finish in the top half of the standings. Stengel's MLB involvement had been in the National League, and there were several American League parks in which he had neither managed nor played.\nStengel tried to keep a low profile during the 1949 Yankee spring training at St. Petersburg, Florida, but there was considerable media attention as Stengel shuttled rookies from one position on the field to another, and endlessly shuffled his lineup. He had the advantage of diminished expectations, as DiMaggio, the Yankee superstar, was injured with a bone spur in his heel, and few picked New York to win the pennant. There were other injuries once the season began, and Stengel, who had initially planned a conservative, stable lineup in his first American League season, was forced to improvise. Although platooning, playing right-handed batters against left-handed pitchers and the reverse, against whom they are on average more able to hit, had been known for some years, Stengel popularized it, and his use gave the practice its name, coined by a sportswriter and borrowed from football. For example, in the early part of the 1949 season, Stengel might play Bobby Brown at third base and Cliff Mapes and Gene Woodling in the outfield against right-handers. Against left-handers, Stengel might play Billy Johnson at third with Johnny Lindell and Hank Bauer in the outfield.\nAfter the team blew leads and lost both ends of a doubleheader in Philadelphia on May 15, Stengel called a team meeting in which he criticized the players responsible for the two losses, but also predicted greatness for them, and told the team it was going to win. The team then won 13 of its next 14 games. Yankee sportscaster Curt Gowdy, who was present, later stated, \"that speech in Philadelphia was the turning point of the season\".\nDiMaggio returned from injury on June 28 after missing 65 games. He hit four home runs in three games to help sweep Boston and extend the Yankees' league lead. Despite DiMaggio's return, the lineup remained plagued with injuries. After consulting with Stengel, Weiss obtained Johnny Mize from the Giants, but he was soon sidelined with a separated shoulder. Twelve games behind on the Fourth of July, the Red Sox steadily gained ground on the Yankees, and tied them by sweeping a two-game set at Fenway September 24 and 25, the first time the Yankees had not been in sole possession of first place since the third game of the season. The Red Sox took the lead the following day with a comeback win in a makeup game, as Stengel lost his temper at the umpire for the first time in Yankee uniform; although he was not ejected, he was fined by the league.\nThe season came down to a two-game set with the Red Sox at Yankee Stadium, with the home team one game behind and needing to win both. Stengel, during the 1949 season, had shown himself more apt than his peers to bring in a relief pitcher, and when during the first game, starter Allie Reynolds gave up the first two runs in the third inning, the manager brought in Joe Page. Though Page walked in two more runs, he shut out the Red Sox the rest of the way as the Yankees came back to win, 5\u20134. This set up a winner-take-all game for the league title. The Yankees took a 5\u20130 lead before Boston scored three in the ninth, but Vic Raschi was able to prevent further damage, giving the Yankees the pennant, Stengel's first as a major league manager.\nIn the 1949 World Series, Stengel's first as a participant since 1923, the Yankees faced the Brooklyn Dodgers, who were assembling the team that would challenge the Yankees through much of his time in New York. The teams split the first two games, at Yankee Stadium. Before Game 3 at Ebbets Field, Stengel was called upon to introduce his surviving teammates from the 1916 pennant-winning Brooklyn club, which he did emotionally. The Yankees won Game 3, and during Game 4, a Yankee victory, Stengel left the dugout to shout to catcher Yogi Berra to throw the ball to second base, which Berra did to catch Pee Wee Reese trying to take an extra base. For this breach of baseball's rules, Stengel was reprimanded after the game by Commissioner Happy Chandler. The Yankees won Game 5 as well to take the Series, and during the celebration after the game, Del Webb said of Stengel to the press, \"I knew he would win, whether we got some more players for him or not\".\nRepeating success (1950\u20131953).\nDuring the 1949 season, Stengel had been more subdued than he usually was, but being the manager of the defending world champions and the Major League Manager of the Year relieved his inhibitions, and he was thereafter his talkative self. He also was more forceful in running the team, not always to the liking of veteran players such as DiMaggio and Phil Rizzuto. As part of his incessant shuffling of the lineup, Stengel had DiMaggio play first base, a position to which he was unaccustomed and refused to play after the first game. Stengel considered DiMaggio's decline in play as he neared the end of his stellar career more important than his resentment. In August, with the slugger in the middle of a batting slump, Stengel benched him, stating he needed a rest. DiMaggio returned after six games, and hit .370 for the rest of the season, winning the slugging percentage title. Other young players on the 1950 team were Billy Martin and Whitey Ford. The ascendence of these rookies meant more of the Yankees accepted Stengel's techniques, and diminished the number of those from the McCarthy era who resented their new manager. The Detroit Tigers were the Yankees' main competition, leading for much of the summer, but the Yankees passed them in the middle of September to win the pennant by three games. In the 1950 World Series, the Yankees played the Phillies, another of Stengel's old teams. The Yankees won in four games.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe's just a green pea out there. But he'll be back soon, and you'll see something.\n \u2014 Casey Stengel on sending Mickey Mantle to the minor leagues, 1951.\nBefore spring training in 1950, the Yankees had pioneered the idea of an instructional school for rookies and other young players. This was the brainchild of Stengel and Weiss. Complaints from other teams that the Yankees were violating time limits on spring training and were using their money for competitive advantage led to modifications, but the concept survived and was eventually broadly adopted. Among those invited to the 1951 early camp was 19-year-old Mickey Mantle, whose speed and talent awed Stengel, and who had spent the previous year in the minor leagues. Stengel moved Mantle from shortstop to the outfield, reasoning that Rizzuto, the shortstop, was likely to play several more years. Both Mantle and the Yankees started the 1951 season slowly, and on July 14, Mantle was sent to Kansas City to regain his confidence at the plate. He was soon recalled to the Yankees; although he hit only .267 for the season, this was four points better than DiMaggio, in his final season. Much of the burden of winning a third consecutive pennant fell on Berra, who put together an MVP season. The White Sox and then the Indians led the league for much of the summer, but the Yankees, never far behind, put together a torrid final month of the season to win the pennant by five games.\nThe Yankee opponent in the 1951 World Series was the Giants, with Game 1 played the day after they won the National League pennant in the Miracle of Coogan's Bluff. On an emotional high, the Giants beat the Yankees in Game 1 at Yankee Stadium. Game 2 was a Yankee victory, but Mantle suffered a knee injury and was out for the Series, the start of knee problems that would darken Mantle's career. The Giants won Game 3, but DiMaggio stepped to the fore, with six hits in the following three games, including a home run to crown his career. The Yankees won Games 4 and 5, and staked Raschi to a 4\u20131 lead in Game 6 before Stengel had Johnny Sain pitch in relief. When Sain loaded the bases with none out in the ninth, Stengel brought in Bob Kuzava, a left-hander, to pitch against the Giants, even though right-handers Monte Irvin and Bobby Thomson were due to bat. The Giants scored twice, but Kuzava hung on. The Yankees and Stengel had their third straight World Series championship.\nDiMaggio's retirement after the 1951 season gave Stengel greater control over the players, as the relationship between superstar and manager had sometimes been fraught. Stengel moved Mantle from right to center field in DiMaggio's place. The Yankees were not the favorites to win the pennant again in 1952, with DiMaggio retired, Mantle still recovering from his injury and several Yankees in military service, deployed in the Korean War. Sportswriters favored the Indians. Younger players, some of whom Stengel had developed, came to the fore, with Martin the regular second baseman for the first time. Mantle proved slow to develop, but hit well towards the end of the season to finish at .311. The Yankee season was also slow to get on track; the team had a record of 18\u201317 on May 30, but they improved thereafter. Stengel prepared nearly 100 different lineup cards for the 1952 season. The race was still tight in early September, and on September 5, Stengel lectured the team for excessive levity on the train after the Yankees lost two of three to Philadelphia. Embarrassed by the episode, which made its way into print, the Yankees responded by winning 15 of their next 19, clinching the pennant on September 27.\nThe 1952 World Series was against the Brooklyn Dodgers, who by then had their stars of the 1950s such as Jackie Robinson, Gil Hodges and Duke Snider, with the team later nicknamed \"The Boys of Summer\". The teams split the first four games. With his pitching staff tired, Stengel gave the start to late-season acquisition Ewell Blackwell, who surrendered four runs in five innings, and the Yankees lost the game in 11 innings to the Dodgers behind Carl Erskine's complete game. Needing to win two in a row at Ebbets Field, Stengel pitched Raschi in Game 6, who won it with a save from Reynolds. With no tomorrow in Game 7, Stengel sent four pitchers to the mound. Mantle hit a home run to break a 2\u20132 tie, Martin preserved the lead by making a difficult catch off a Robinson popup, and Kuzava again secured the final outs for a Series victory, as the Yankees won 4\u20132 for their fourth straight World Series victory, matching the record set in 1936\u20131939, also by the Yankees.\nThe sportswriters had picked other teams to win the pennant in Stengel's first four years as Yankee manager; in 1953 they picked the Yankees, and this time they were proven correct. An 18-game winning streak in June placed them well in front, and they coasted to their fifth consecutive league championship, the first time a team had won five straight pennants. The Yankees played the Dodgers again in the World Series, which was less dramatic than the previous year's, as the Yankees won in six games, with Mantle, Martin, Berra and Gil McDougald\u2014players developed under Stengel\u2014taking the fore. The Yankees and Stengel won the World Series for the fifth consecutive year, the only team to accomplish that feat. Stengel, having taken the managerial record for consecutive pennants from McGraw (1921\u20131924) and McCarthy (1936\u20131939) and for consecutive titles from the latter, would say, \"You know, John McGraw was a great man in New York and he won a lot of pennants. But Stengel is in town now, and he's won a lot of pennants too\".\nMiddle years (1954\u20131958).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf the Yankees don't win the pennant, the owners should discharge me.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel before the 1954 season\nThe Yankees started the defense of their title in 1954 with an opening day loss to the Washington Senators in the presence of President Dwight D. Eisenhower. Even though the Yankees won 103 games, the most regular season victories they would have under Stengel, they lost by eight games to the Indians, managed by Stengel's old friend Al Lopez. In spite of the defeat, Stengel was given a new two-year contract at $75,000 per year.\nBy the mid-1950s, Stengel was becoming a national figure, familiar from television broadcasts of the Yankees on NBC's \"Game of the Week\", and from managing in most World Series and All-Star Games during his tenure. National magazines such as \"Look\" and \"Sports Illustrated\" did feature stories about Stengel, and his turn of phrase became known as \"Stengelese\" or \"Stengelisms\". The magazines not only told stories about the manager's one-liners and jokes, but recounted the pranks from his playing days, such as the grapefruit dropped from the plane and the sparrow under the cap. According to Richard Bak in his biography of Stengel, \"people across the country grew enamored of the grandfatherly fellow whose funny looks and fractured speech were so at odds with the Yankees' bloodless corporate image\".\nThe Yankees won the pennant again in 1955, breaking open a close pennant race in September to take the American League. They played the Dodgers again in the World Series, which the Dodgers won in seven games. The Dodgers won Game 7, 2\u20130, behind the pitching of Johnny Podres and Stengel, after losing his first World Series as a manager, blamed himself for not instructing his hitters to bat more aggressively against Podres. Billy Martin stated, \"It's a shame for a great manager like that to have to lose\".\nThere was not much of a pennant race in the American League in 1956, with the Yankees leading from the second week of the season onwards. With little suspense as to the team's standing, much attention turned to Mantle's batting, as he made a serious run at Babe Ruth's record at the time of 60 home runs in a season, finishing with 52, and won the Triple Crown. On August 25, Old-Timers' Day, Stengel and Weiss met with the little-used Rizzuto, the last of the \"McCarthy Yankees\" and released him from the team so they could acquire Enos Slaughter. Never a Stengel fan, the process left Rizzuto bitter.\nThe World Series opponent that year was again the Dodgers, who won the first two games at Ebbets Field. Stengel lectured the team before Game 3 at Yankee Stadium and the team responded with a victory then and in Game 4. For Game 5, Stengel pitched Don Larsen, who had been knocked out of Game 2, and who responded with a perfect game, the only one in major league postseason history. The Dodgers won Game 6 as the Series returned to Ebbets Field. Many expected Whitey Ford to start Game 7, but Stengel chose Johnny Kucks, an 18-game winner that season who had been used twice in relief in the Series. Kucks threw a three-hit shutout as the Yankees won the championship, 9\u20130, Stengel's sixth as their manager.\nNew York got off to a slow start in the 1957 season, and by early June was six games out. By then, the team was making headlines off the field. Some of the Yankees were known for partying late into the night, something Stengel turned a blind eye to as long as the team performed well. The May 16 brawl at the Copacabana nightclub in New York involved Martin, Berra, Mantle, Ford, Hank Bauer and other Yankees, resulted in the arrest of Bauer (the charge of assault was later dropped) and exhausted Yankee management's patience with Martin. Stengel was close to Martin, who took great pride in being a Yankee, and Topping and Weiss did not involve the manager in the trade talks that ensued. On June 15, Martin was traded to the Kansas City Athletics. Martin wrote in his autobiography that Stengel could not look him in the eye as the manager told him of the trade. The two, once close friends, rarely spoke in the years to come.\nThe Yankees recovered from their slow start, winning the American League pennant by eight games. They faced the Milwaukee Braves in the 1957 World Series. The Braves (Stengel had managed them when they played in Boston) defeated the Yankees in seven games, with Lew Burdette, who had been a Yankee until traded in 1950, beating New York three times. Stengel stated in an interview, \"We're going to have Burditis on our minds next year\".\nWhat was seen as a failure to keep discipline on the team hurt Stengel's standing with the Yankee owners, Topping, Weiss and Webb, as did the defeat in the 1957 Series. Stengel was by then aged 67 and had several times fallen asleep in the dugout, and players complained that he was growing more irritable with the years. Former Yankee catcher Ralph Houk, who had been successful as a minor league manager and was Stengel's first base coach, was seen by ownership as the next manager of the Yankees. Stengel's contract, his fifth two-year deal, was up after the 1958 season. As ownership debated whether to renew it, the Yankees led by as many as 17 games, and won the pennant by 10. The Braves were the opponent in the 1958 World Series. The Braves won three of the first four games, but the Yankees, backed by the pitching of Bob Turley (who got two wins and a save in the final three games) stormed back to win the Series. Firing Stengel under such circumstances was not possible, and ownership gave him another two-year contract, to expire after the 1960 season.\nFinal years and firing (1959\u20131960).\nThe Yankees finished 79\u201375 in 1959, in third place, their worst record since 1925, as the White Sox, managed by Lopez, won the pennant. There was considerable criticism of Stengel, who was viewed as too old and out of touch with the players. After the 1959 season, Weiss made a trade with Kansas City to bring Roger Maris to the Yankees. Stengel was delighted with the acquisition and batted Maris third in the lineup, just in front of Mantle, and the new Yankee responded with an MVP season in 1960. Stengel had health issues during the season, spending ten days in the hospital in late May and early June, with the illness variously reported as a bladder infection, a virus or influenza. The Yankees were challenged by the Baltimore Orioles for most of the year but won the pennant by eight games, Stengel's tenth as manager, tying the major league record held by McGraw.\nThe Yankees played the Pittsburgh Pirates, again a team Stengel had played for, in the 1960 World Series. Stengel picked Art Ditmar, who had won the most games, 15, for the Yankees, as the Game 1 starter rather than the established star, Whitey Ford. The Pirates knocked Ditmar out of the box in the first inning, and won Game 1. Ditmar was also knocked out of Game 5; Ford won Games 3 and 6 of the seven-game series with shutouts, but could not pitch Game 7, as he might have if Stengel had used him in Games 1 and 5. The Pirates defeated the Yankees in Game 7, 10\u20139, on a ninth-inning home run by Bill Mazeroski.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI'll never make the mistake of being seventy again.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel, on being fired by the New York Yankees, 1960.\nShortly after the Yankees returned to New York, Stengel was informed by the team owners that he would not be given a new contract. His request, that the termination be announced at a press conference, was granted and on October 18, 1960, Topping and Stengel appeared before the microphones. After Topping evaded questions from the press about whether Stengel had been fired, Stengel took the microphone, and when asked if he had been fired, stated, \"Quit, fired, whatever you please, I don't care\". Topping stated that Stengel was being terminated because of his age, 70, and alleged that this would have happened even had the Yankees won the World Series.\nThe Amazins': Casey and the Mets (1962\u20131965).\nHiring and 1962 season.\nTwo days after dismissing Stengel, the Yankees announced the hiring of Houk as his replacement\u2014part of the reason for Stengel's firing was so that New York would not lose Houk to another team. Stengel returned to Glendale, and spent the 1961 season out of baseball for the first time since 1937. He turned down several job offers to manage, from the Tigers, San Francisco Giants and the expansion Los Angeles Angels. He spent the summer of 1961 as vice president of the Glendale Valley National Bank, which was owned by members of Edna Stengel's family.\nAs part of baseball's expansion in the early 1960s, a franchise was awarded to New York, to play in the National League beginning in 1962, and to be known as the New York Mets. It was hoped that the new team would be supported by the many former Giant and Dodger fans left without a team when the franchises moved to California after the 1957 season. There were rumors through the 1961 season that Stengel would be the manager, but he initially showed no interest in managing a team that, given the rules for the expansion draft, was unlikely to be competitive. George Weiss had been forced out as Yankee general manager and hired by the Mets. He wanted Stengel as manager, and after talks with the Mets principal owners, Joan Whitney Payson and M. Donald Grant, Stengel was introduced as Mets manager at a press conference on October 2, 1961. Leonard Koppett of \"The New York Times\" suggested that Stengel took the job to give something back to the game that had been his life for half a century.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLook at that guy. He can't hit, he can't run, and he can't throw. Of course, that's why they gave him to us.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel on a player obtained by the Mets in the expansion draft.\nWeiss was convinced his scouting staff would make the Mets a respectable team in five to six years, but in the interim New York would most likely do poorly. He hoped to overcome the challenge of attracting supporters to a losing team in the \"City of Winners\" by drafting well-known players who would draw fans to the Polo Grounds, where the Mets would initially play. Thus, the Mets selected a number of over-the-hill National Leaguers, some of whom had played for the Dodgers or Giants, including Gil Hodges, Roger Craig, Don Zimmer and Frank Thomas. Selected before them all was journeyman catcher Hobie Landrith; as Stengel explained, \"You have to have a catcher or you'll have a lot of passed balls\".\nThe return of Casey Stengel to spring training received considerable publicity, and when the Mets played the Yankees in an exhibition game, Stengel played his best pitchers while the Yankees treated it as a meaningless game, and the Mets won, 4\u20133. The team won nearly as many games as it lost in spring training, but Stengel warned, \"I ain't fooled. They play different when the other side is trying too\". The Mets lost their first nine games of the regular season; in the meantime the Pirates were 10\u20130, meaning the Mets were already 9&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 games out of first place. Some light appeared in May, when the Mets won 11 of 18 games to reach eighth place in the ten-team league. They then lost 17 in a row, returning to last place, where they would spend the remainder of the season.\nAccording to sportswriter Joseph Durso\non days when [Stengel's] amazing Mets were, for some reason, amazing, he simply sat back and let the writers swarm over the heroes of the diamond. On days when the Mets were less than amazing\u2014and there were many more days like that\u2014he stepped into the vacuum and diverted the writers' attention, and typewriters, to his own flamboyance\u00a0... the perfect link with the public was formed, and it grew stronger as the team grew zanier.\nThe Mets appealed to the younger generation of fans and became an alternative to the stuffy Yankees. As the losing continued, a particular fan favorite was \"Marvelous\" Marv Throneberry, who was a \"lightning-rod for disaster\" in the 1962 season, striking out to kill rallies, or dropping pop flies and routine throws to first base. During one game, Throneberry hit a massive shot to right, winding up on third base, only to be called out for missing first. Stengel came from the dugout to argue, only to be told that Throneberry had missed second base as well.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCan't anyone play this here game?\n\u2014 Casey Stengel, on his 1962 Mets.\nStengel tried incessantly to promote the Mets, talking to reporters or anyone else who would listen. He often used the word \"amazin'\" (as he put it) and soon this became the \"Amazin' Mets\", a nickname that stuck. Stengel urged the fans, \"Come out and see my amazin' Mets. I been in this game a hundred years but I see new ways to lose I never knew existed before\". Stengel was successful in selling the team to some extent, as the Mets drew 900,000 fans, half again as many as the Giants had prior to their departure, though the games against the Giants and Dodgers accounted for half of the total. The team was less successful on the field, finishing with a record of 40\u2013120, the most losses of any 20th century major league team. They finished 60&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 games behind the pennant-winning Giants, and 18 games behind ninth-place Chicago.\nLater seasons and retirement (1963\u20131965).\nThe 1963 season unfolded for the Mets much like the previous year's, though they lost only eight games to begin the season, rather than nine, but they still finished 51\u2013111, in last place. One highlight, though it did not count in the standings, was the Mayor's Trophy Game on June 20 at Yankee Stadium. Stengel played to win; the Yankees under Houk possibly less so, and the Mets beat the Yankees, 6\u20132.\nIn 1964, the Mets moved into the new Shea Stadium; Stengel commented that \"the park is lovelier than my team\". The Mets finished 53\u2013109, again in last place. By this time, the fans were starting to be impatient with the losing, and a number of people, including sportscaster Howard Cosell and former Dodger Jackie Robinson, criticized Stengel as ineffective and prone to fall asleep on the bench. Stengel was given a contract for 1965, though Creamer suggested that Weiss, Grant and Payson would have preferred that the 74-year-old Stengel retire.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n And we have this fine young catcher named Goossen, who is only twenty years old, who in ten years, he has a chance to be thirty.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel\nThe early part of the 1965 season saw similar futility. On July 25, the Mets had a party at Toots Shor's for the invitees to the following day's Old-Timers' Game. Sometime during that evening, Stengel fell off a barstool and broke his hip. The circumstances of his fall are not known with certainty, as he did not realize he had been severely injured until the following day. Stengel spent his 75th birthday in the hospital. Recognizing that considerable rehabilitation would be required, he retired as manager of the Mets on August 30, replaced by Wes Westrum, one of his coaches. The Mets would again finish in last place.\nLater years and death.\nThe Mets retired Stengel's uniform number, 37, on September 2, 1965, after which he returned to his home in California. He was kept on the team payroll as a vice president, but for all intents and purposes he was out of baseball. His life settled into a routine of attending the World Series (especially when in California), the All-Star Game, Mets spring training, and the baseball writers' dinner in New York. The writers, who elect members of baseball's Hall of Fame, considered it unjust that Stengel should have to wait the usual five years after retirement for election, and waived that rule. On March 8, 1966, at a surprise ceremony at the Mets spring training site in St. Petersburg, Stengel was told of his election; he was inducted in July along with Ted Williams. Thereafter, he added the annual Hall of Fame induction ceremony to his schedule. In 1969, the \"Amazin' Mets\" justified their nickname by unexpectedly winning the World Series over the favored Orioles. Stengel attended the Series, threw out the first ball for Game 3 at Shea, and visited the clubhouse after the Mets triumphed in Game 5 to win the Series. The Mets presented him with a championship ring.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMost people my age are dead at the present time.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel, in his final years\nStengel also participated in Old-Timers' Day at a number of ballparks, including, regularly, Shea Stadium. In 1970, the Yankees invited him to Old-Timers' Day, at which his number, 37, was to be retired. By this time, the Yankee ownership had changed, and the people responsible for his dismissal were no longer with the team. He accepted and attended, and Stengel became the fifth Yankee to have his number retired. He thereafter became a regular at the Yankees' Old-Timers' Day.\nBy 1971, Edna Stengel was showing signs of Alzheimer's disease, and in 1973, following a stroke, she was moved into a nursing home. Casey Stengel continued to live in his Glendale home with the help of his housekeeper June Bowdin. Stengel himself showed signs of senility in his last years, and during the final year of his life, these increased. In his last year, Stengel cut back on his travel schedule, and was too ill to attend the Yankees' Old-Timers Day game in August 1975, at which it was announced that Billy Martin would be the new team manager. A diagnosis of cancer of the lymph glands had been made, and Stengel realized he was dying. In mid-September, he was admitted to Glendale Memorial Hospital, but the cancer was inoperable. He died there on September 29, 1975. Stengel was interred in the Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery in Glendale.\nThe tributes to Stengel upon his death were many. Maury Allen wrote, \"He is gone and I am supposed to cry, but I laugh. Every time I saw the man, every time I heard his voice, every time his name was mentioned, the creases in my mouth would give way and a smile would come to my face\". Richie Ashburn, a member of the 1962 Mets, stated, \"Don't shed any tears for Casey. He wouldn't want you to\u00a0... He was the happiest man I've ever seen\". Jim Murray of the \"Los Angeles Times \" wrote, \"God is certainly getting an earful tonight\".\nEdna Stengel died in 1978, and was interred next to her husband. In addition to the marker at their graves in Forest Lawn Cemetery, there is a plaque nearby in tribute to Casey Stengel, which besides biographical information contains a bit of Stengelese: \"There comes a time in every man's life, and I've had plenty of them\".\nAwards and honors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nYou could look it up.\nCasey Stengel, on many a story\nAs part of professional baseball's centennial celebrations in 1969, Stengel was voted its \"Greatest Living Manager\". He had his uniform number, 37, retired by both the Yankees and the Mets. He is the first man in MLB history to have had his number retired by more than one team based solely upon his managerial accomplishments, and was joined in that feat in 2011 by the late Sparky Anderson, who had called Stengel \"the greatest man\" in the history of baseball. The Yankees dedicated a plaque in Yankee Stadium's Monument Park in Stengel's memory on July 30, 1976, reading: \"Brightened baseball for over 50 years; with spirit of eternal youth; Yankee manager 1949\u20131960 winning 10 pennants and 7 world championships including a record 5 consecutive, 1949\u20131953\". He was inducted into the New York Mets Hall of Fame in 1981.\nStengel is the only man to have worn the uniform (as player or manager) of all four Major League Baseball teams in New York City in the 20th century: the Dodgers, Giants, Yankees and Mets. He is the only person to have played or managed for the home team in five New York City major league venues: Washington Park, Ebbets Field, the Polo Grounds, Shea Stadium and the original Yankee Stadium. In 2009, in an awards segment on the MLB Network titled \"The Prime 9\", he was named \"The Greatest Character of The Game\", beating out Yogi Berra.\nManagerial techniques.\nStengel re-invigorated platooning in baseball. Most of Stengel's playing days were after offensive platooning, choosing left-handed batters against a right-handed pitcher and the converse, was used successfully by the World Series champion 1914 Boston \"Miracle\" Braves. This set off widespread use of platooning: Stengel himself was several times during his playing career platooned against right-handers, but the practice fell into disuse around 1930. Stengel reintroduced it to the Yankees, and its prominent use amid the team's success caused it to be imitated by other teams. Bill James deemed Stengel and Earl Weaver the most successful platoon managers.\nThis strategic selection also applied to the pitchers, as Stengel leveraged his staff, starting his best pitchers against the best opponents. Although Stengel is best known for doing this with the Yankees, he also did it in his days managing Brooklyn and Boston, and to a very limited extent with the Mets. Rather than have a regular pitching rotation to maximize the number of starts a pitcher will have, Stengel often rested pitchers longer to take advantage of situational advantages which he perceived. For example, Stengel started Eddie Lopat against Cleveland whenever possible, because he regularly beat them. Stengel's 1954 Yankees had the highest sabermetrics measurement of Leverage Points Average of any 20th century baseball team. Leveraging became unpopular after choices of starting pitchers based on it backfired on Lopez in the 1959 World Series and on Stengel in the following year's\u2014he waited until Game 3 to start Whitey Ford because he felt Ford would be more effective at Yankee Stadium rather than at the small Forbes Field. Ford pitched two shutouts, including Game 6 at Forbes Field, but could not pitch in the Yankees' Game 7 loss. Stengel's philosophy took another blow in 1961 when Houk used Ford in a regular rotation and the pitcher went 25\u20134 and won the Cy Young Award\u2014he had never won 20 games under Stengel. Today, teams prefer, for the most part, a regular rotation.\nJames noted that Stengel was not only the most successful manager of the 1950s, he was the most dominant manager of any single decade in baseball history. Stengel used his entire squad as Yankee manager, in contrast to other teams when he began his tenure, on which substitutes tended to get little playing time. Stengel's use of platooning meant more players saw more use, and he was generally more prone to put in a pinch hitter or replace his pitcher than other managers. Although only once in Stengel's time (1954) did the Yankees lead the league in number of pinch hitters, Stengel was known for using them in odd situations, once pinch-hitting for Moose Skowron in the first inning after a change of pitcher. Additionally, according to James, Stengel \"rotated lineups with mad abandon, using perhaps 70 to 100 different lineups in a 154 game season\". Although Stengel was not the first Yankee manager to use a regular relief pitcher\u2014Harris had seen success with Joe Page in 1947\u2014his adoption of the concept did much to promote it.\nStengel often rotated infielders between positions, with the Yankees having no real regular second baseman or shortstop between 1954 and 1958. Despite this, the Yankees had a strong defensive infield throughout. Stengel gave great attention to the double play, both defensively and in planning his lineup, and the Yankees responded by being first in the league in double plays as a defense six times in his twelve-year tenure, and the batters hit into the fewest double plays as a team eight times in that era. Having had few players he could rely upon while managing Brooklyn and Boston, Stengel treated his Yankee roster with little sentimentality, trading players quickly when their performance seemed to decline, regardless of past accomplishments. Assured of quality replacements secured by the Yankee front office, the technique worked well, but was not a success with the Mets, where no quality replacements were available, and the technique caused confusion and apathy among the players.\nAppraisal.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe secret of managing is to keep the five guys who hate you away from the guys who are undecided.\n\u2014 Casey Stengel\nMarty Appel wrote of Stengel, \"He was not a man for all seasons; he was a man for baseball seasons\". Stengel remains the only manager to lead his club to victory in five consecutive World Series. How much credit he is due for that accomplishment is controversial, due to the talent on the Yankee teams he managed\u2014\"Total Baseball\" deemed that the Yankees won only six games more than expected during the Stengel years, given the number of runs scored and allowed. According to Bak, \"the argument\u2014even among some Yankees\u2014was that the team was so good \"anybody\" could manage it to a title\". Rizzuto stated, \"You or I could have managed and gone away for the summer and still won those pennants\". Appel noted, \"There was no doubt, by taking on the Mets job, he hurt his reputation as a manager. Once again, it was clear that with good players he was a good manager, and with bad players, not. Still, his Yankee years had put him so high on the list of games won, championships won, etc., that he will always be included in conversations about the greatest managers\".\nBill Veeck said of Stengel in 1966, soon after the manager's retirement, \"He was never necessarily the greatest of managers, but any time he had a ball club that had a chance to win, he'd win\". Stengel's American League rival, Al Lopez, once said of him \"I swear I don't understand some of the things he does when he manages\". Though platooning survives, Stengel's intuitive approach to managing is no longer current in baseball, replaced by the use of statistics, and the advent of instant replay makes obsolete Stengel's tendency to charge from the dugout to confront an umpire over a disputed call.\nStengel has been praised for his role in successfully launching the Mets. Appel deemed the Mets' beginnings unique, as later expansion teams have been given better players to begin with, \"few expansion teams in any sport have tried the formula\u2014a quotable, fan-popular man who would charm the press and deflect attention away from ineptness on the field\". Arthur Daley of \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"he gave the Mets the momentum they needed when they needed it most. He was the booster that got them off the ground and on their journey. The smoke screen he generated to accompany the blast-off obscured the flaws and gave the Mets an acceptance and a following they could not have obtained without him\". James wrote, \"Stengel became such a giant character that you really can't talk about him in the past. He became an enduring part of the game\". Commissioner William Eckert said of Stengel, \"he's probably done more for baseball than anyone\".\nA child of the Jim Crow era, and from a border state (Missouri) with southern characteristics, Stengel has sometimes been accused of being a racist, for example by Roy Campanella Jr., who stated that Stengel made racist remarks from the dugout during the World Series towards his father Roy Campanella, Jackie Robinson and other black stars of the Dodgers. Bak noted, though, that Stengel was a \"vicious and inventive\" bench jockey, hazing the other team with whatever might throw off their performance. Stengel had poor relations with Robinson; each disliked the other and was a vocal critic. One widely quoted Stengel comment was about catcher Elston Howard, who became the first black Yankee in 1955, eight years after Robinson had broken the color barrier, \"they finally get me a nigger, I get the only one who can't run\". Howard, though, denied that Stengel had shouted racial epithets at the Dodgers, and said \"I never felt any prejudice around Casey\". Al Jackson, a black pitcher with the Mets under Stengel, concurred, \"He never treated me with anything but respect\". According to Bill Bishop in his account of Stengel, \"Casey did use language that would certainly be considered offensive today, but was quite common vernacular in the fifties. He was effusive in his praise of black players like Satchel Paige, Larry Doby and Howard\". Conscious of changing times, Stengel was more careful in his choice of words while with the Mets.\nStengel was sometimes considered thoughtless or even cruel towards his players. Examples of this include his playing Joe DiMaggio at first base, and sometimes batting Phil Rizzuto ninth, behind the pitcher, as well as his dismissal of the shortshop on Old-Timers' Day in 1956. In spite of their falling out over the 1957 trade, Billy Martin, by then manager of the Yankees, wore a black armband in remembrance of Stengel during the 1976 season, the sole Yankee to do so. According to Creamer, \"It doesn't seem to be stretching the point too far to say that Ned Hanlon begat John McGraw who begat Casey Stengel who begat Billy Martin\".\nSportswriter Leonard Koppett wrote of Stengel in \"The New York Times\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He didn't always succeed, but he didn't always fail, either. That is why his deepest feelings in all his years as manager of the Yankees and Mets have been involved in \"leaving something behind\". With the Yankees, already successful, it was a desire to \"rebuild\", with the Mets, it was a desire to build from nothing.\nReferences.\nNumbers for the James books and for Jaffe indicate Kindle locations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75125", "revid": "14423028", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75125", "title": "History of the Brooklyn Dodgers", "text": ""}
{"id": "75126", "revid": "2043601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75126", "title": "Boston Braves (disambiguation)", "text": "The Boston Braves were a Major League Baseball team, now known as the Atlanta Braves.\nBoston Braves may also refer to the following teams in other sports:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75127", "revid": "26350496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75127", "title": "Monoplane", "text": "Fixed-wing aircraft with a single main wing plane\nA monoplane is a fixed-wing aircraft configuration with a single mainplane, in contrast to a biplane or other types of multiplanes, which have multiple planes.\nA monoplane has inherently the highest efficiency and lowest drag of any wing configuration and is the simplest to build. However, during the early years of flight, these advantages were offset by its greater weight and lower manoeuvrability, making it relatively rare until the 1930s. Since then, the monoplane has been the most common form for a fixed-wing aircraft.\nCharacteristics.\nSupport and weight.\nThe inherent efficiency of the monoplane is best achieved in the cantilever wing, which carries all structural forces internally. However, to fly at practical speeds the wing must be made thin, which requires a heavy structure to make it strong and stiff enough.\nExternal bracing can be used to improve structural efficiency, reducing weight and cost. For a wing of a given size, the weight reduction allows it to fly slower and with a lower-powered and more economical engine. For this reason, all monoplane wings in the pioneer era were braced and most were up until the early 1930s. However, the exposed struts or wires create additional drag, lowering aerodynamic efficiency and reducing the maximum speed.\nHigh-speed and long-range designs tend to be pure cantilevers, while low-speed short-range types are often given bracing.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Wing position.\nBesides the general variations in wing configuration such as tail position and use of bracing, the main distinction between types of monoplane is where the wing is mounted vertically on the fuselage.\nLow.\nA low wing is one which is located on or near the bottom of the fuselage.\nPlacing the wing low allows good visibility upwards and frees the central fuselage from the wing spar carry-through. By reducing pendulum stability, it makes the aircraft more maneuverable, as on the Spitfire; but aircraft that value stability over maneuverability may then need some dihedral.\nA feature of the low-wing position is its significant ground effect, giving the plane a tendency to float farther before landing. Conversely, this ground effect permits shorter takeoffs.\nMid.\nA mid wing is mounted midway up the fuselage. The carry-through spar structure can reduce the useful fuselage volume near its centre of gravity, where space is often in most demand.\nThe Mid-wing form is the most common one for large aircraft, and nearly the only one used for passenger-carrying large aircraft.\nShoulder.\nA shoulder wing (a category between high-wing and mid-wing) is a configuration whereby the wing is mounted near the top of the fuselage but not on the very top. Shoulder-wings and high-wings share some characteristics, namely: they support a pendulous fuselage which requires no wing dihedral for stability; and, by comparison with a low-wing, a shoulder-wing's limited ground effect reduces float on landing. Compared to a low-wing, shoulder-wing and high-wing configurations give increased propeller clearance on multi-engined aircraft.\nOn a large aircraft, there is little practical difference between a shoulder wing and a high wing; but on a light aircraft, the configuration is significant because it offers superior visibility to the pilot. On light aircraft, shoulder-wings tend to be mounted further aft than a high wing, and so may need to be swept forward to maintain correct center of gravity. Examples of light aircraft with shoulder wings include the ARV Super2, the B\u00f6lkow Junior, Saab Safari and the Barber Snark.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;High.\nA high wing has its upper surface on or above the top of the fuselage. It shares many advantages and disadvantages with the shoulder wing, but on a light aircraft, the high wing has poorer upwards visibility. On light aircraft such as the Cessna 152, the wing is usually located above the cabin, so that the wing spar passes over the occupants' heads, leaving the wing in the ideal fore-aft position.\nAn advantage of the high-wing configuration is that the fuselage is closer to the ground which eases cargo loading, especially for aircraft with a rear-fuselage cargo door. Military cargo aircraft are predominantly high-wing designs with a rear cargo door.\nParasol.\nA parasol wing is not directly attached to the fuselage but held above it, supported by either cabane struts or a pylon. Additional bracing may be provided by struts or wires extending from the fuselage sides.\nThe first parasol monoplanes were adaptations of shoulder wing monoplanes, since raising a shoulder mounted wing above the fuselage greatly improved visibility downwards, which was useful for reconnaissance roles, as with the widely used Morane-Saulnier L.\nThe parasol wing allows for an efficient design with good pilot visibility, and was adopted for some fighters such as the Fokker D.VIII and Morane-Saulnier AI in the later part of the First World War.\nA parasol wing also provides a high mounting point for engines and during the interwar period was popular on flying boats, which need to lift the propellers clear of spray. Examples include the Martin M-130, Dornier Do 18 and the Consolidated PBY Catalina.\nCompared to a biplane, a parasol wing has less bracing and lower drag. It remains a popular configuration for amphibians and small homebuilt and ultralight aircraft.\nHistory.\nAlthough the first successful aircraft were biplanes, the first attempts at heavier-than-air flying machines were monoplanes, and many pioneers continued to develop monoplane designs. For example, the first aeroplane to be put into production was the 1907 Santos-Dumont Demoiselle, while the Bl\u00e9riot XI flew across the English Channel in 1909. Throughout 1909\u20131910, Hubert Latham set multiple altitude records in his Antoinette IV monoplane, eventually reaching .\nThe equivalent German language term is \"Eindecker\", as in the mid-wing Fokker Eindecker fighter of 1915 which for a time dominated the skies in what became known as the \"Fokker scourge\". The German military Idflieg aircraft designation system prior to 1918 prefixed monoplane type designations with an \"E\", until the approval of the Fokker D.VIII fighter from its former \"E.V\" designation. However, the success of the Fokker was short-lived, and World War I was dominated by biplanes. Towards the end of the war, the parasol monoplane became popular and successful designs were produced into the 1920s.\nNonetheless, relatively few monoplane types were built between 1914 and the late 1920s, compared with the number of biplanes. The reasons for this were primarily practical. With the low engine powers and airspeeds available, the wings of a monoplane needed to be large in order to create enough lift while a biplane could have two smaller wings and so be made smaller and lighter.\nTowards the end of the First World War, the inherent high drag of the biplane was beginning to restrict performance. Engines were not yet powerful enough to make the heavy cantilever-wing monoplane viable, and the braced parasol wing became popular on fighter aircraft, although few arrived in time to see combat. It remained popular throughout the 1920s.\nOn flying boats with a shallow hull, a parasol wing allows the engines to be mounted above the spray from the water when taking off and landing. This arrangement was popular on flying boats during the 1930s; a late example being the Consolidated PBY Catalina. It died out when taller hulls became the norm during World War II, allowing a high wing to be attached directly to the hull.\nAs ever-increasing engine powers made the weight of all-metal construction and the cantilever wing more practical\u2014first pioneered together by the revolutionary German Junkers J 1 factory demonstrator in 1915\u201316\u2014they became common during the post\u2013World War I period, the day of the braced wing passed, and by the 1930s, the cantilever monoplane was fast becoming the standard configuration for a fixed-wing aircraft. Advanced monoplane fighter-aircraft designs were mass-produced for military services around the world in both the Soviet Union and the United States in the early\u2013mid 1930s, with the Polikarpov I-16 and the Boeing P-26 Peashooter respectively.\nMost military aircraft of WWII were monoplanes, as have been virtually all aircraft since, except for a few specialist types.\nJet and rocket engines have even more power and all modern high-speed aircraft, especially supersonic types, have been monoplanes.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75128", "revid": "44220290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75128", "title": "Norfolk Tides", "text": "Minor League Baseball team\nMinor league baseball team&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox/mobileviewfix.css\"/&gt;\nThe Norfolk Tides are a Minor League Baseball team of the International League and the Triple-A affiliate of the Baltimore Orioles. They are located in Norfolk, Virginia, and are named in nautical reference to the city's location on the Chesapeake Bay. The team plays their home games at Harbor Park, which opened in 1993. The Tides previously played at High Rock Park in 1961 and 1962, Frank D. Lawrence Stadium from 1961 to 1969, and at Met Park from its opening in 1970 until the end of the 1992 season.\nOriginally known as the Portsmouth-Norfolk Tides, the team began play in 1961 as members of the Class A South Atlantic League. In 1963, they joined the Class A Carolina League and became known as the Tidewater Tides, taking their geographic identifier from the Tidewater region. The Tides were replaced by a Triple-A International League team in 1969. The Triple-A Tides carried on the history of the Class A team that preceded them. The club rebranded as the Norfolk Tides in 1993. In conjunction with Major League Baseball's reorganization of Minor League Baseball in 2021, the Tides were placed in the Triple-A East, which was renamed the International League in 2022.\nThe team has won seven league championships in its history. They won the Carolina League championship in 1965 as the Class A affiliate of the Chicago White Sox. During their 38-year Triple-A affiliation with the New York Mets from 1969 to 2006, they won the Governors' Cup, the championship of the International League, on five occasions (1972, 1975, 1982, 1983, and 1985) and won the Triple-A World Series in 1983. As an affiliate of the Baltimore Orioles, they won another International League championship and the Triple-A championship in 2023.\nHistory.\nBefore the Tides.\nBoth Norfolk and Portsmouth, Virginia, first hosted professional baseball teams in the late 19th century. Among the clubs to hail from these neighboring cities were the Norfolk Tars, which played on and off from 1906 to 1955 primarily in the Virginia League and Piedmont League; the Portsmouth Truckers, which played at intervals from 1895 to 1935 mostly in the Virginia League; the Portsmouth Cubs of the Piedmont League from 1936 to 1952; and the Portsmouth Merrimacs also of the Piedmont League from 1953 to 1955. The Tars folded in July 1955 due to low attendance and steep financial losses. Fiscal problems also caused the Merrimacs to cease operations after the 1955 campaign.\nSouth Atlantic League (1961\u20131962).\nSix years after the loss of the Tars and Merrimacs, the Portsmouth-Norfolk Tides were established as members of the Class A South Atlantic League. They played some home games at Frank D. Lawrence Stadium in Portsmouth and some at High Rock Park in Norfolk. The Tides had a limited affiliation with Major League Baseball's Kansas City Athletics. Their inaugural season opener was a 7\u20134 victory in Portsmouth over the Charlotte Hornets with 3,158\u00a0people in attendance on April 17, 1961. In 1962, they became an affiliate of the St. Louis Cardinals. The Tides dropped out of the Sally League after losing their working agreement with St. Louis and following what Tides general manager Marshall Fox called \"unfair treatment\" by the league.\nCarolina League (1963\u20131968).\nThe Carolina League, a Class A circuit, accepted the Tides as members for 1963. At this point, the team became known as the Tidewater Tides, taking their geographic identifier from the Tidewater region, and began playing their home games exclusively at Lawrence Stadium in Portsmouth. They were not affiliated with any Major League Baseball team in their first Carolina League season.\nThe Tides became the Class A affiliate of the Chicago White Sox in 1964. Under manager Allen Jones, they qualified for the playoffs that year for the first time in team history and defeated the Kinston Eagles in the semifinals to advance to the championship round where they lost to the Winston-Salem Red Sox. Outfielder Ed Stroud won the league's Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award. Jones led the team back to the postseason in 1965. After defeating the Peninsula Grays in the semifinals, the Tides won the Carolina League championship by sweeping the Durham Bulls, 2\u20130.\nTidewater became an affiliate of the Philadelphia Phillies in 1966. They made the postseason in 1967 and 1968, but they were defeated in the finals by Durham in 1967 and eliminated in the quarterfinals by the Raleigh-Durham Mets in 1968.\nInternational League.\nNew York Mets (1969\u20132006).\nIn 1969, the New York Mets moved their Triple-A International League (IL) affiliate, the Jacksonville Suns, from Jacksonville, Florida, to Portsmouth as the Tidewater Tides. The team was operated by Tidewater Professional Sports and owned by the Mets. The Triple-A Tides carried on the history of the Class A team that preceded them.\nInternational League Manager of the Year Clyde McCullough led the team to a league-best 76\u201359 record in their first Triple-A season, but they were eliminated in the semifinals of the Governors' Cup playoffs to determine the IL championship. The 1969 season was the team's last at Lawrence Stadium. They moved into the new Met Park, located in Norfolk, in 1970. After another semifinal exit that year, the Tides reached the finals in 1971 but lost the championship to the Rochester Red Wings in the full five-game series. Hank Bauer, manager of the 1972 club, led the Tides to win their first Governors' Cup with a 3\u20132 series defeat of the Louisville Colonels in the finals. Following this win, Tidewater competed in the Kodak World Baseball Classic, a five-team round-robin tournament that included the champions of the American Association (the Evansville Triplets) and Pacific Coast League (the Albuquerque Dukes), the Caribbean All-Stars, and the hosting Hawaii Islanders. The Tides went 3\u20132 but were eliminated. Bauer was selected as the 1972 IL Manager of the Year. The club returned to the playoffs in 1973 but could not advance past the semifinals.\nTidewater finished atop the league standings in 1974 with an 86\u201355 record under manager Joe Frazier. After sweeping the Charleston Charlies, 3\u20130, in the semis, they won the IL championship over the Syracuse Chiefs, 3\u20131. Afterwards, they met the Evansville Triplets, champions of the American Association, in the Junior World Series, which the Tides lost, 4\u20131. The Tides swept the 1975 International League year-end awards with outfielder Mike Vail as the IL MVP and Rookie of the Year, Craig Swan as the Most Valuable Pitcher, and Frazier as Manager of the Year.\nThey next appeared in the postseason in 1977, 1979, and 1981, but they were unable to move on past the semifinals. During this stretch, Juan Berenguer won the 1978 Most Valuable Pitcher Award, and outfielder Mookie Wilson won the 1979 Rookie of the Year Award. Tidewater won back-to-back Governors' Cups in 1982 and 1983. Jack Aker's 1982 club swept the Columbus Clippers, 3\u20130, in the semifinals and did the same against Rochester in the finals. Under Davey Johnson in 1983, the Tides dispatched Columbus in the semis, and then won a second consecutive IL title over the Richmond Braves. That postseason, the Tides, the American Association champion Denver Bears, and Pacific Coast League champion Portland Beavers contested the Triple-A World Series, a round-robin tournament to crown an overall champion of the classification. Tidewater won the series, 3\u20131. Walt Terrell was the IL's Most Valuable Pitcher for 1973.\nIn 1985, Bob Schaefer led the team to its sixth and final Governors' Cup championship with a semifinal victory over the Maine Guides and a finals win over Columbus. Though the Tides would remain members of the International League for the next 35\u00a0years, they were unable to win another league crown. They lost in the semifinals in 1986 and suffered defeats in the finals of both 1987 and 1988. John Mitchell was selected as the IL Most Valuable Pitcher for 1986. First baseman Randy Milligan won both the 1987 MVP and Rookie of the Year Awards. Third basemen Tom O'Malley (1989) and Jeff Manto (1994) later won IL MVP Awards.\nThe club went through a season of change from 1992 to 1993. First, in December 1992, the Mets sold the franchise to a group led by Tampa businessman Ken Young. The Triple-A affiliation between the teams remained intact. In 1993, the Tides left Met Park and moved into the new US$16-million Harbor Park. As they moved into the new facility, the team also replaced the \"Tidewater\" in its name with that of Norfolk. Also in 1993, the Tides introduced their mascot, Rip Tide. The franchise was awarded the 1993 John H. Johnson President's Award, recognizing them as the \"complete baseball franchise\u2014based on franchise stability, contributions to league stability, contributions to baseball in the community, and promotion of the baseball industry.\"\nThe 1995 Tides led the league with their 86\u201356 record but were eliminated in the Governors' Cup finals by the Ottawa Lynx. They did, however, win all four IL year-end awards: MVP (third baseman/outfielder Butch Huskey, Most Valuable Pitcher and Rookie of the Year (Jason Isringhausen, and Manager of the Year (Toby Harrah). Norfolk made three more playoff appearances as a Mets affiliate, exiting in the semifinal rounds of 1996, 2001, and 2005. Mike Fyhrie won the 1996 Most Valuable Pitcher Award, and first baseman Roberto Petagine was the 1997 IL MVP. The 38-year Triple-A affiliation with New York ended after the 2006 season when the Mets elected to affiliate with the New Orleans Zephyrs for 2007.\nBaltimore Orioles (2007\u20132020).\nNorfolk became the Triple-A affiliate of the Baltimore Orioles in 2007. The Orioles preferred the quality of the facilities at Harbor Park as well as the more favorable weather and proximity of Norfolk compared to their previous location in Ottawa. Maryland Baseball Holding, the Tides' ownership group led by Ken Young, also owned two other Orioles-affiliated teams at the time: the Bowie Baysox and Frederick Keys.\nFrom 2007 to 2014, the Tides regularly finished with losing records and only finished at or above .500 in 2009, 2012, and 2013. The 2015 team, led by IL Manager of the Year Ron Johnson qualified for the Governors' Cup playoffs as winners of the Southern Division title but lost in the semifinals to Columbus in five games. The Tides added a second mascot, a green sea creature named Triton, in 2016. Norfolk continued to post losing seasons from 2016 to 2019. In 2019, first baseman Ryan Mountcastle was selected as the IL MVP. The start of the 2020 season was initially postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic before being cancelled altogether.\nTriple-A East / International League.\nBaltimore Orioles (2021\u2013present).\nFollowing the 2020 season, Major League Baseball assumed control of Minor League Baseball in a move to increase player salaries, modernize facility standards, and reduce travel. The Tides were organized into the Triple-A East and maintained their affiliation with the Baltimore Orioles. Norfolk ended the season in sixth place in the Southeastern Division with a 48\u201372 record. No playoffs were held to determine a league champion; instead, the team with the best regular-season record was declared the winner. However, 10\u00a0games that had been postponed from the start of the season were reinserted into the schedule as a postseason tournament called the Triple-A Final Stretch in which all 30 Triple-A clubs competed for the highest winning percentage. Norfolk finished the tournament tied for 20th place with a 4\u20136 record. In 2022, the Triple-A East became known as the International League, the name historically used by the regional circuit prior to the 2021 reorganization. Shortstop Gunnar Henderson won the 2022 International League Top MLB Prospect Award.\nOn April 8, 2023, the Tides set the franchise record as an Orioles affiliate for the most runs scored in a game in a 21\u20132 victory over the Gwinnett Stripers. In addition, Norfolk tied the franchise record for runs scored in an inning after 11 crossed the plate in the 6th inning. The Tides won the first-half of the 2023 season, clinching a berth in the championship playoffs at the conclusion of the season. In the best-of-three series, the Tides defeated the Durham Bulls to win the International League championship. They won the Triple-A National Championship Game versus the Oklahoma City Dodgers, champions of the Pacific Coast League, 7\u20136. Buck Britton won the 2023 IL Manager of the Year Award.\nThe franchise was purchased by Diamond Baseball Holdings on October 17, 2023. In 2024, third baseman Coby Mayo won the IL Top MLB Prospect Award. In 2025, Dylan Beavers was selected as the IL MVP.\nRadio and television.\nAll Tides home and road games are broadcast on ESPN 94.1 WVSP-FM. Live audio broadcasts are also available online through the station's website as well as on the team's website and the MiLB First Pitch app. Games can be viewed through the MiLB.TV subscription feature of the official website of Minor League Baseball, with audio provided by a radio simulcast.\nAs of 2021, Pete Michaud is the play-by-play announcer. Several former Tides broadcasters have gone on to work in Major League Baseball or other major league sports, including: Ford C. Frick Award winner Marty Brennaman (1970\u20131973), Pete Van Wieren (1974\u20131975), Larry Matson (1976), Bob Rathbun (1980\u20131985, 1990), Charlie Slowes (1986, 1991\u20131992), Ken Levine (1989\u20131990), and Bob Socci (2006\u20132011).\nAwards.\nThe franchise has been awarded these honors by Minor League Baseball.\nOne player won a league award in recognition for their performance with Tidewater in the Carolina League.\nSeventeen players, six managers, and two executives have won league awards in recognition for their performance with Tidewater/Norfolk in the International League.\nManagers.\nNorfolk has had 33 managers since their inaugural 1961 season.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75129", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75129", "title": "Madison Square Garden", "text": "Multi-purpose indoor arena in New York City, U.S.\nMadison Square Garden, colloquially known as the Garden or by its initials MSG, is a multi-purpose indoor arena in New York City. It is located in Midtown Manhattan between Seventh and Eighth avenues from 31st to 33rd streets above Pennsylvania Station. It is the fourth venue to bear the name \u201cMadison Square Garden\u201d; the first two, opened in 1879 and 1890, were located on Madison Square, on East 26th Street and Madison Avenue, with the third Madison Square Garden (1925) farther uptown at Eighth Avenue and 50th Street.\nThe Garden hosts professional ice hockey, professional basketball, boxing, mixed martial arts, concerts, ice shows, circuses, professional wrestling and other forms of sports and entertainment. It is close to other midtown Manhattan landmarks, including the Empire State Building, Koreatown and Macy's at Herald Square. It is home to the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League (NHL), the New York Knicks of the National Basketball Association (NBA) and was home to the New York Liberty of the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) from 1997 to 2017.\nOriginally called Madison Square Garden Center, the Garden opened on February 11, 1968, on the site of the old Pennsylvania Station. It is the oldest major sporting facility in the New York metropolitan area. It is the oldest arena in the NBA and the second-oldest in the NHL, after Seattle's Climate Pledge Arena. As of 2016, MSG is also the second-busiest music arena in the world in terms of ticket sales. Including its two major renovations in 1991 and 2013, the Garden's total construction cost was approximately US$, and it has been ranked as one of the ten most expensive arena venues ever built. It is part of the Pennsylvania Plaza office and retail complex, named for the railway station. Several other operating entities related to the Garden share its name.\nHistory.\nPrevious Gardens.\nMadison Square is formed by the intersection of 5th Avenue and Broadway at 23rd Street in Manhattan. It was named after James Madison, the fourth president of the United States.\nTwo venues called Madison Square Garden were located just northeast of the square, the original Garden from 1879 to 1890, and the second Garden from 1890 to 1925. The first, leased to P. T. Barnum, was demolished in 1890 because of a leaky roof and dangerous balconies that had collapsed, resulting in deaths. The second was designed by noted architect Stanford White. The new building was built by a syndicate that included J. P. Morgan, Andrew Carnegie, P. T. Barnum, Darius Mills, James Stillman and W. W. Astor. White gave them a Beaux-Arts structure with a Moorish feel, including a minaret-like tower modeled after Giralda, the bell tower of the Cathedral of Seville, soaring 32 stories, the city's second-tallest building at the time and dominating Madison Square Park. It was by , and the main hall, which was the largest in the world, measured by with permanent seating for 8,000 people and floor space for thousands more. It had a 1,200-seat theater, a concert hall with a capacity of 1,500, the largest restaurant in the city, and a roof garden cabaret. The building cost $3\u00a0million. Madison Square Garden\u00a0II was unsuccessful like the first Garden, and the New York Life Insurance Company, which held the mortgage on it, decided to tear it down in 1925 to make way for a new headquarters building, which would become the landmark Cass Gilbert-designed New York Life Building.\nA third Madison Square Garden opened in a new location, on Eighth Avenue between 49th and 50th streets, from 1925 to 1968. Groundbreaking on the third Madison Square Garden took place on January 9, 1925. Designed by the noted theater architect Thomas W. Lamb, it was built at the cost of $4.75\u00a0million in 249 days by boxing promoter Tex Rickard; the arena was dubbed \"The House That Tex Built\". The arena was by , with seating on three levels, and a maximum capacity of 18,496 spectators for boxing.\nDemolition commenced in 1968 after the opening of the current Garden, and was completed in early 1969. The site is now the location of One Worldwide Plaza.\nCurrent Garden.\nIn February 1959, former automobile manufacturer Graham-Paige purchased a 40% interest in the Madison Square Garden for $4\u00a0million and later gained control. In November 1960, Graham-Paige president Irving Mitchell Felt purchased from the Pennsylvania Railroad the rights to build at Penn Station. To build the new facility, the above-ground portions of the original Pennsylvania Station were torn down.\nThe new structure was one of the first of its kind to be built above the platforms of an active railroad station. It was an engineering feat constructed by Robert E. McKee of El Paso, Texas with the contribution of Arq. Leonel Viera's design for the Cilindro Municipal. Public outcry over the demolition of the Pennsylvania Station structure\u2014an outstanding example of Beaux-Arts architecture\u2014led to the creation of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission. The venue opened on February 11, 1968. Comparing the new and the old Penn Station, Yale architectural historian Vincent Scully wrote, \"One entered the city like a god; one scuttles in now like a rat.\"\nIn 1972, Felt proposed moving the Knicks and Rangers to a then incomplete venue in the New Jersey Meadowlands, the Meadowlands Sports Complex. The Garden was also the home arena for the NY Raiders/NY Golden Blades of the World Hockey Association. The Meadowlands would eventually host its own NBA and NHL teams, the New Jersey Nets and the New Jersey Devils, respectively. The New York Giants and Jets of the National Football League (NFL) also relocated there. In 1977, the arena was sold to Gulf and Western Industries. Felt's efforts fueled controversy between the Garden and New York City over real estate taxes. The disagreement again flared in 1980 when the Garden again challenged its tax bill. The arena has enjoyed tax-free status since the 1980s, under the condition that all Knicks and Rangers home games must be hosted at MSG, lest it lose this exemption. As such, when the Rangers have played neutral-site games\u2014even those in New York City, such as the 2018 NHL Winter Classic, they have always been designated as the visiting team. The tax agreement includes an act of God clause, which allowed Knicks and Rangers home games to be played elsewhere during the 2020 NBA Bubble and 2020 Stanley Cup playoffs, respectively, because of the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn 1984, the four streets immediately surrounding the Garden were designated as Joe Louis Plaza, in honor of boxer Joe Louis, who had made eight successful title defenses in the previous Madison Square Garden.\n1991 renovation.\nIn April 1986, Gulf and Western announced that they would build a new Madison Square Garden a few blocks away on the site of present-day Hudson Yards. The plan would cost an estimated $150 million and included the demolition of the 1964 building to replace it with a new office tower development. After years of planning, Gulf and Western decided against building a new arena in favor of a renovation after estimated costs doubled during the process.\nGarden owners spent $200 million in 1991 to renovate facilities and add 89 suites in place of hundreds of upper-tier seats. The project was designed by Ellerbe Becket. The renovation was criticized for perceived corporatization. Additionally, the renovation made bathrooms larger, expanded menus, added a new ventilation system, replaced all of the seats with new cushioned teal and violet seats, and refurbished both home teams' locker rooms.\nIn 2000, current MSG owner James Dolan was quoted as saying that a new arena was being considered as the current building was starting to show its age.\nIn 2004\u20132005, Cablevision battled with the City of New York over the proposed West Side arena, which was canceled. Cablevision then announced plans to raze the Garden, replace it with high-rise commercial buildings, and build a new Garden one block away at the site of the James Farley Post Office. Meanwhile, a new project to renovate and modernize the Garden completed phase one in time for the Rangers and Knicks' 2011\u201312 seasons, though the vice president of the Garden says he remains committed to the installation of an extension of Penn Station at the Farley Post Office site. While the Knicks and Rangers were not displaced, the New York Liberty played at the Prudential Center in Newark, New Jersey, during the renovation.\nMadison Square Garden is the last of the NBA and NHL arenas not to be named after a corporate sponsor.\n2011\u20132013 renovation.\nMadison Square Garden's $1\u00a0billion second renovation took place mainly over three off-seasons. It was set to begin after the 2009\u201310 hockey/basketball seasons, but was delayed until after the 2010\u201311 seasons. Renovation was done in phases, with the majority of the work done in the summer months to minimize disruptions to the NHL and NBA seasons. While the Rangers and Knicks were not displaced, the Liberty played their home games through the 2013 season at Prudential Center in Newark, New Jersey, during the renovation.\nNew features include a larger entrance with interactive kiosks, retail, climate-controlled space, and broadcast studio; larger concourses; new lighting and LED video systems with HDTV; new seating; two new pedestrian walkways suspended from the ceiling to allow fans to look directly down onto the games being played below; more dining options; and improved dressing rooms, locker rooms, green rooms, upgraded roof, and production offices. The lower bowl concourse, called the Madison Concourse, remains on the sixth floor. The upper bowl concourse was relocated to the eighth floor and it is known as the Garden Concourse. The seventh floor houses the new Madison Suites and the Madison Club. The upper bowl was built on top of these suites. The rebuilt concourses are wider than their predecessors, and include large windows that offer views of the city streets around the Garden.\nConstruction of the lower bowl (Phase 1) was completed in 2011. An extended off-season for the Garden permitted some advance work to begin on the new upper bowl, which was completed in 2012. This advance work included the West Balcony on the tenth floor, taking the place of sky-boxes, and new end-ice 300 level seating. The construction of the upper bowl along with the Madison Suites and the Madison Club (Phase 2) were completed for the 2012\u201313 NHL and NBA seasons. Phase 3, which involved the construction of the new lobby known as Chase Square, the Chase Bridges on the 10th floor, and the new scoreboard, was completed for the 2013\u201314 NHL and NBA seasons.\nPenn Station renovation controversy.\nMadison Square Garden is seen as an obstacle in the renovation and future expansion of Penn Station, which expanded in 2021 with the opening of Moynihan Train Hall at the James Farley Post Office, and some have proposed moving MSG to other sites in western Manhattan. On February 15, 2013, Manhattan Community Board 5 voted 36\u20130 against granting a renewal to MSG's operating permit in perpetuity and proposed a 10-year limit instead in order to build a new Penn Station where the arena is currently standing. Manhattan borough president Scott Stringer said, \"Moving the arena is an important first step to improving Penn Station.\" The Madison Square Garden Company responded by saying that \"[i]t is incongruous to think that M.S.G. would be considering moving.\"\nIn May 2013, four architecture firms\u00a0\u2013 SHoP Architects, SOM, H3 Hardy Collaboration Architecture, and Diller Scofidio + Renfro\u00a0\u2013 submitted proposals for a new Penn Station. SHoP Architects recommended moving Madison Square Garden to the Morgan Postal Facility a few blocks southwest, as well as removing 2 Penn Plaza and redeveloping other towers, and an extension of the High Line to Penn Station. Meanwhile, SOM proposed moving Madison Square Garden to the area just south of the James Farley Post Office, and redeveloping the area above Penn Station as a mixed-use development with commercial, residential, and recreational space. H3 Hardy Collaboration Architecture wanted to move the arena to a new pier west of Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, four blocks west of the current station and arena. Then, according to H3's plan, four skyscrapers would be built, one at each of the four corners of the new Penn Station superblock, with a roof garden on top of the station; the Farley Post Office would become an education center. Finally, Diller Scofidio + Renfro proposed a mixed-use development on the site, with spas, theaters, a cascading park, a pool, and restaurants; Madison Square Garden would be moved two blocks west, next to the post office. DS+F also proposed high-tech features in the station, such as train arrival and departure boards on the floor, and apps that would inform waiting passengers of ways to occupy their time until they board their trains. Madison Square Garden rejected the notion that it would be relocated, and called the plans \"pie-in-the-sky\".\nIn June 2013, the New York City Council Committee on Land Use voted unanimously to give the Garden a ten-year permit, at the end of which period the owners would either have to relocate or go back through the permission process. On July 24, the City Council voted to give the Garden a 10-year operating permit by a vote of 47\u20131. \"This is the first step in finding a new home for Madison Square Garden and building a new Penn Station that is as great as New York and suitable for the 21st century,\" said City Council speaker Christine Quinn. \"This is an opportunity to reimagine and redevelop Penn Station as a world-class transportation destination.\"\nIn October 2014, the Morgan facility was selected as the ideal area for Madison Square Garden to be moved, following the 2014 MAS Summit in New York City. More plans for the station were discussed. Then, in January 2016, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo announced a redevelopment plan for Penn Station that would involve the removal of The Theater at Madison Square Garden, but would otherwise leave the arena intact.\nIn June 2023, nearing the end of the Garden's ten-year permit granted by the city, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, along with Amtrak and NJ Transit, filed a report stating that MSG is no longer compatible with Penn Station, with the report saying, \"MSG's existing configuration and property boundaries impose severe constraints on the station that impede the safe and efficient movement of passengers and restrict efforts to implement improvements, particularly at the street and platform levels.\" On September 14, 2023, the New York City Council voted 48\u20130 to renew the operating permit for Madison Square Garden for five years, the shortest ever granted by the city to the Garden.\nEvents.\nRegular events.\nSports.\nMadison Square Garden hosts approximately 320 events a year. It is the home to the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League, and the New York Knicks of the National Basketball Association. Before 2020, the New York Rangers, New York Knicks, and the Madison Square Garden arena itself were all owned by the Madison Square Garden Company. The MSG Company split into two entities in 2020, with the Garden arena and other non-sports assets spun off into Madison Square Garden Entertainment and the Rangers and Knicks remaining with the original company, renamed Madison Square Garden Sports. Both entities remain under the voting control of James Dolan and his family. The arena is also host to the Big East men's basketball tournament and was home to the finals of the National Invitation Tournament from the beginning of its existence up until 2022. It also hosts select home games for the St. John's Red Storm, representing St. John's University in men's college basketball, and almost any other kind of indoor activity that draws large audiences, such as the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show and the 2004 Republican National Convention.\nThe Garden was home of the NBA draft and NIT Season Tip-Off, as well as the former New York City home of the Ringling Brothers and Barnum and Bailey Circus and Disney on Ice; all four events are now held at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn. It served the New York Cosmos for half of their home games during the 1983\u201384 NASL Indoor season.\nMany of boxing's biggest fights were held at Madison Square Garden, including the Roberto Dur\u00e1n\u2013Ken Buchanan affair, the first Muhammad Ali \u2013 Joe Frazier bout and the US debut of Anthony Joshua that ended in a huge upset when he was beaten by Andy Ruiz. Before promoters such as Don King and Bob Arum moved boxing to Las Vegas, Nevada, Madison Square Garden was a popular location for boxing. The original ring, which was brought from the second and third generation of the Garden, was officially retired on September 19, 2007, and donated to the International Boxing Hall of Fame after 82 years of service. A ring replaced it beginning on October 6 of that same year. The UFC has hosted many events at Madison Square Garden in recent years and has put on some of the highest grossing PPV events in history.\nProfessional wrestling.\nMadison Square Garden has hosted many notable WWE (formerly WWF and WWWF) events, and it's affectionally known as WWE's \"home office\". The Garden has hosted three WrestleMania events, including the first edition of the annual marquee event for WWE, as well as the 10th and 20th editions. Madison Square Garden is also one of two venues (the other being Allstate Arena) to host WrestleMania three times.\nIt also hosted the Royal Rumble in 2000 and 2008; SummerSlam in 1988, 1991 and 1998; as well as Survivor Series in 1996, 2002 and 2011. Multiple episodes of WWE's weekly shows, \"Raw\" and \"SmackDown\" have been broadcast from the Arena as well.\nNew Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW) and Ring of Honor (ROH) hosted their G1 Supercard supershow at the venue on April 6, 2019. A year later it was announced that New Japan Pro-Wrestling would return to Madison Square Garden alone on August 22, 2020, for NJPW Wrestle Dynasty. In May 2020, NJPW announced that the Wrestle Dynasty show would be postponed to 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nConcerts.\nMadison Square Garden hosts more high-profile concert events than any other venue in New York City. It has been the venue for Michael Jackson's Bad World Tour in 1988, George Harrison's The Concert for Bangladesh, The Concert for New York City following the September 11 attacks, John Lennon's final concert appearance during an Elton John concert on Thanksgiving Night in 1974 before his murder in 1980, and Elvis Presley, who gave four sold-out performances in 1972, his first and last ever in New York City. Parliament-Funkadelic headlined numerous sold-out shows in 1977 and 1978. Kiss, who were formed in the arena's city and three of whose members were city-born, did six shows during their second half of the 1970s main attraction peak or \"heyday\": four sold out winter shows at the arena in 1977 (February 18 and December 14\u201316), and another two shows only this time in summer for a decade-ender in 1979 (July 24\u201325). They played their final two shows at the venue on the December 1 and 2, 2023, the 50th anniversary year of their formation.\nBilly Joel, another city-born and fellow 1970's pop star, played his first Garden show on December 14, 1978, with that month's follow ups on the 15th, 16th and 18th. Joel would eventually dominate the record for most concerts performed at Madison Square Garden.\nLed Zeppelin's three-night stand in July 1973 was recorded and released as both a film and album titled \"The Song Remains The Same\". The Police played their final show of their reunion tour at the Garden in 2008.\nIn the summer of 2017, Phish held a 13-night series of concerts called \"The Bakers' Dozen\", during which the band played 237 unique songs, repeating none during the entire run. The Garden commemorated \"The Bakers' Dozen\" by adding a Phish-themed banner to the rafters. With their first MSG show taking place on December 30, 1994, Phish has regularly played annual multi-night runs, typically around New Year's Eve. As of January 2025, Phish has performed 87 times at MSG.\nElton John once held the all-time record for the greatest number of appearances at the Garden with 64 shows. In a 2009 press release, John was quoted as saying \"Madison Square Garden is my favorite venue in the whole world. I chose to have my 60th birthday concert there, because of all the incredible memories I've had playing the venue.\" A DVD recording was released as \"Elton 60\u2014Live at Madison Square Garden\".\nThe current record-holder for most appearances is Billy Joel, who as of July 2024 had played the Garden 150 times. That figure includes a \"residency\" of monthly concerts that he started in 2014 and played nearly continuously for a decade. Joel has stated that the site \"has the best acoustics, the best audiences, the best reputation, and the best history of great artists who have played there. It is the iconic, holy temple of rock and roll for most touring acts.\" Joel would set his first record for most consecutive performances by a music artist at Madison Square Garden in 2006 after performing 12 consecutive concerts at the arena from January to April of that year. In December 2013, Joel would also be named as Madison Square Garden's first ever music \"franchise\" with this honor also making it so he would join the New York Knicks, New York Rangers and New York Liberty in being recognized as an original Madison Square Garden franchise.\nThe Grateful Dead performed in the venue 53 times from 1979 to 1994, with the first show being held on January 7, 1979, and the last being on October 19, 1994; their longest run was in September 1991.\nThe Who have headlined at the venue 32 times, including a four-night stand in 1974, a five-night stand in 1979, a six-night stand in 1996, and four-night stands in 2000 and 2002. They also performed at The Concert for New York City in 2001.\nOn March 10, 2020, a 50th-anniversary celebration of The Allman Brothers Band titled 'The Brothers' took place, featuring the five surviving members of the final Allman Brothers lineup and Chuck Leavell. Dickey Betts was invited to participate but his health precluded him from traveling. This was the final concert at the venue before the COVID-19 pandemic forced its closure. Live shows returned to The Garden when the Foo Fighters headlined a show there on June 20, 2021. The show was for a vaccinated audience only and was the first 100 percent capacity concert in a New York arena since the start of the pandemic.\nOther events.\nIt hosted the 1976 Democratic National Convention and 1980 Democratic National Convention with Carter, the 1992 Democratic National Convention with Clinton, and the 2004 Republican National Convention with Bush, and hosted the NFL draft for many years (later held at Garden-leased Radio City Music Hall, now shared between cities of NFL franchises). The \"Jeopardy!\" Teen Tournament and several installments of \"Celebrity Jeopardy!\" were filmed at MSG in 1999, as well as several episodes of \"Wheel of Fortune\" in 1999 and 2013.\nThe New York City Police Academy, Baruch College/CUNY, and Yeshiva University also hold their annual graduation ceremonies at Madison Square Garden. It hosted the Grammy Awards in 1972, 1997, 2003, and 2018 (which are normally held in Los Angeles) as well as the Latin Grammy Awards of 2006.\nThe group and Best in Show competitions of the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show have been held at MSG every February since 1877. Its original run at MSG through 2020 was the arena's longest continuous tenancy. In 2021, the event moved to Tarrytown, and later the USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The show returned to MSG in 2025 for the first time since 2020.\nNotable firsts and significant events.\nMadison Square Garden was the location of a 1939 Nazi rally sponsored by the German American Bund. According to the World War Two Museum in New Orleans, Louisiana, the rally falsely presented itself as a \"Pro-American Rally\". According to NPR, the rally had more than 20,000 people in attendance. The rally featured a 30-foot banner of former American president George Washington, featured next to two American flag banners and two banners featuring the Nazi Swastika.\nThe Garden hosted the Stanley Cup Final and NBA Finals simultaneously on two occasions: in 1972 and 1994.\nMSG has hosted the following All-Star Games:\nMike Krzyzewski recorded two notable milestones at the arena. In 2011, he surpassed Bob Knight as the coach with the most wins in NCAA Division I men's basketball history when Duke defeated Michigan State. Four years later, a Duke victory over St. John's gave Coach K his 1,000th career win.\nStephen Curry broke the NBA's all-time three-point scoring record at Madison Square Garden, on December 14, 2021. The Warriors defeated the Knicks 105\u201396 with Curry recording his 2,977th career three-pointer by the end of the game, eclipsing Ray Allen's 2,973 career total.\nOn October 27, 2024, then presidential candidate Donald Trump hosted a campaign rally at Madison Square Garden. The event was particularly notable for remarks by comedian Tony Hinchcliffe, who spoke prior to Trump and made jokes widely considered offensive toward Puerto Ricans, which became a significant talking point going into the presidential election.\nRecognition given by Madison Square Garden.\nMadison Square Garden Gold Ticket Award.\nIn 1977, Madison Square Garden announced Gold Ticket Awards would be given to performers who had brought in more than 100,000 unit ticket sales to the venue. Since the arena's seating capacity is about 20,000, this would require a minimum of five sold-out shows. Performers who were eligible for the award at the time of its inauguration included Chicago, John Denver, Peter Frampton, the Rolling Stones, the Jackson 5, Elton John, Led Zeppelin, Sly Stone, Jethro Tull, the Who, and Yes. Graeme Edge, who received his award in 1981 as a member of the Moody Blues, said he found his gold ticket to be an interesting piece of memorabilia because he could use it to attend any event at the Garden. Many other performers received Gold Ticket Awards between 1977 and 1994.\nMadison Square Garden Platinum Ticket Award.\nMadison Square Garden also gave Platinum Ticket Awards to performers who sold over 250,000 tickets to their shows throughout the years. Winners of the Platinum Ticket Awards include: the Rolling Stones (1981), Elton John (1982), Yes (1984), Billy Joel (1984), the Grateful Dead (1987), and Madonna (2004).\nMadison Square Garden Hall of Fame.\nThe Madison Square Garden Hall of Fame honors those who have demonstrated excellence in their fields at the Garden. Most of the inductees have been sports figures, however, some performers have been inducted as well. Elton John was reported to be the first non-sports figure inducted into the MSG Hall of Fame in 1977 for \"record attendance of 140,000\" in June of that year. For their accomplishment of \"13 sell-out concerts\" at the venue, the Rolling Stones were inducted into the MSG Hall of Fame in 1984, along with nine sports figures icons, bringing the hall's membership to 107.\nMadison Square Garden Walk of Fame.\nThe walkway leading to the arena of Madison Square Garden was designated as the \"Walk of Fame\" in 1992. It was established \"to recognize athletes, artists, announcers and coaches for their extraordinary achievements and memorable performances at the venue.\" Each inductee is commemorated with a plaque that lists the performance category in which his or her contributions have been made.\nTwenty-five athletes were inducted into the MSG Walk of Fame at its inaugural ceremony in 1992, a black-tie dinner to raise money to fight multiple sclerosis. \nElton John was the first entertainer to be inducted into the MSG Walk of Fame in 1992. \nBilly Joel was inducted at a date after Elton John, \nand the Rolling Stones were inducted in 1998. In 2015, the Grateful Dead were inducted into the MSG Walk of Fame along with at least three sports-related figures.\nCapacity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Theater at Madison Square Garden.\nThe Theater at Madison Square Garden seats between 2,000 and 5,600 for concerts and can also be used for meetings, stage shows, and graduation ceremonies. It was the home of the NFL draft until 2005, when it moved to the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center after MSG management opposed a new arena for the New York Jets. It also hosted the NBA draft from 2001 to 2010. The theater also occasionally hosts boxing matches.\nThe fall 1999 \"Jeopardy!\" Teen Tournament as well as \"Celebrity Jeopardy!\" competitions were held at the theater. \"Wheel of Fortune\" taped at the theater twice in 1999 and 2013. In 2004, it was the venue of the \"\" finale. No seat is more than from the 30' \u00d7 64' stage. The theater has a relatively low ceiling at stage level and all of its seating except for boxes on the two side walls is on one level slanted back from the stage. There is an lobby at the theater.\nAccessibility and transportation.\nMadison Square Garden sits directly atop a major transportation hub, New York Penn Station, which is served by Long Island Rail Road and NJ Transit commuter rail, as well as Amtrak. The Garden is also accessible via the New York City Subway at the 34th Street\u2013Penn Station ( A , \u200b C , and \u200b E trains) and the 34th Street\u2013Penn Station ( 1 , \u200b 2 , and \u200b 3 trains) stations.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nclass=\"wikitable succession-box mw-collapsible autocollapse\" style=\"margin: 0 auto 0 auto; font-size:95%;clear:both;\"\nEvents and tenants"}
{"id": "75132", "revid": "23838081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75132", "title": "American Association", "text": "American Association may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75133", "revid": "7279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75133", "title": "US Department of the Interior", "text": ""}
{"id": "75141", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75141", "title": "List of Montreal Canadiens captains", "text": ""}
{"id": "75143", "revid": "50948131", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75143", "title": "Jeremiah", "text": "Biblical prophet\nJeremiah (c.\u2009650 \u2013 c.\u2009570 BC), also called Jeremias, was one of the major prophets of the Hebrew Bible. According to Jewish tradition, Jeremiah authored the book that bears his name, the Books of Kings, and the Book of Lamentations, with the assistance and under the editorship of Baruch ben Neriah, his scribe and disciple.\nAccording to the narrative of the Book of Jeremiah, the prophet emerged as a significant figure in the Kingdom of Judah in the late 7th and early 6th centuries BC. Born into a priestly lineage, Jeremiah reluctantly accepted his call to prophethood, embarking on a tumultuous ministry more than five decades long. His life was marked by opposition, imprisonment, and personal struggles, according to Jeremiah 32 and 37. Central to Jeremiah's message were prophecies of impending divine judgment, forewarning of the nation's idolatry, social injustices, and moral decay. According to the Bible, he prophesied the siege of Jerusalem and Babylonian captivity as consequences for disobedience. Jeremiah's teachings encompassed lamentations, oracles, and symbolic acts, emphasising the urgency of repentance and the restoration of a covenant relationship with God.\nJeremiah is an essential figure in both Judaism and Christianity. His words are read in synagogues as part of the haftara and he is quoted in the New Testament. Islam also regards Jeremiah as a prophet and his narrative is recounted in Islamic tradition.\nBiblical narratives.\nLineage and early life.\nJeremiah was known as a prophet from the thirteenth year of Josiah, king of Judah (626\u00a0BC), until after the fall of Jerusalem and the destruction of Solomon's Temple in 587\u00a0BC. This period spanned the reigns of five kings of Judah: Josiah, Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah. The prophetess Huldah was a relative and contemporary of Jeremiah, while the prophet Zephaniah was his mentor.\nJeremiah was the son of Hilkiah, a priest from the land of Benjamin in the village of Anathoth. The difficulties he encountered, as described in the books of Jeremiah and Lamentations, have prompted scholars to refer to him as \"the weeping prophet\".\nJeremiah was called to prophecy c.\u2009626\u00a0BC by God to proclaim Jerusalem's coming destruction by invaders from the north. This was because Israel had forsaken God by worshiping the idols of Baal and burning their children as offerings to Baal. The nation had deviated so far from God's laws that they had broken the covenant, causing God to withdraw his blessings. Jeremiah was guided by God to proclaim that the nation of Judah would suffer famine, foreign conquest, plunder, and captivity in a land of strangers.\nAccording to , Yahweh called Jeremiah to prophesy in about 626\u00a0BC, about five years before Josiah's famous reforms. However, they were insufficient to save Judah and Jerusalem from destruction, because of the sins of Manasseh, Josiah's grandfather, and Judah's return to the idolatry of foreign gods after Josiah's death. Jeremiah was said to have been appointed to reveal the sins of the people and the punishment to come.\nJeremiah resisted the call by complaining that he was only a child and did not know how to speak, but the Lord placed the word in Jeremiah's mouth, commanding \"Get yourself ready!\" The qualities of a prophet listed in Jeremiah 1 include not being afraid, standing up to speak, speaking as told, and going where sent. Since Jeremiah is described as emerging well trained and fully literate from his earliest preaching, his relationship with the Shaphan family has been used to suggest that he may have trained at the scribal school in Jerusalem over which Shaphan presided.\nIn his early years of being a prophet, Jeremiah was primarily a preaching prophet, preaching throughout Israel. He condemned idolatry, the greed of priests, and false prophets. Many years later, God instructed Jeremiah to write down these early oracles and his other messages. Charles Cutler Torrey argues that the prophet accuses priests and scribes of altering the actual Scriptures with \"scribal additions\" to accommodate the worship of other deities.\nPersecution.\nJeremiah's prophecies prompted plots against him. Unhappy with Jeremiah's message, possibly from concern that it would shut down the Anathoth sanctuary, his priestly kin and the men of Anathoth plotted to kill him. However, the Lord revealed the conspiracy to Jeremiah, protected his life, and declared disaster for the people of Anathoth. When Jeremiah complains to the Lord about this persecution, he is told that the attacks on him will become worse.\nA priest, Pashur the son of Immer, a temple official in Jerusalem, had Jeremiah beaten and put in the stocks at the Upper Gate of Benjamin for a day. After this, Jeremiah laments the travails and mockery that speaking God's word have caused him. He recounts how, if he tries to shut God's word inside, it burns in his heart and he is unable to hold it in.\nConflict with false prophets.\nWhile Jeremiah was prophesying the coming destruction, he denounced a number of other prophets who were prophesying peace.\nAccording to the book of Jeremiah, during the reign of King Zedekiah, the Lord instructed Jeremiah to make a yoke with the message that the nation would be subject to the king of Babylon. The false prophet Hananiah took the yoke off Jeremiah's neck and broke it, prophesying that within two years the Lord would break the yoke of the king of Babylon, but Jeremiah prophesied in return: \"You have broken the yoke of wood, but you have made instead a yoke of iron.\"\nRelationship with the Northern Kingdom (Samaria).\nJeremiah was sympathetic to, as well as descended from, the northern Kingdom of Israel. Many of his first reported oracles are about, and addressed to, the Israelites at Samaria. He resembles the northern prophet Hosea in his use of language and examples of God's relationship to Israel. Hosea seems to have been the first prophet to describe the desired relationship as an example of ancient Israelite marriage, where a man might be polygamous, while a woman was only permitted one husband. Jeremiah often repeats Hosea's marital imagery.\nBabylon.\nThe biblical narrative portrays Jeremiah as being subject to additional persecutions. After Jeremiah prophesied that Jerusalem would be handed over to the Babylonian army, the king's officials, including Pashur the priest, tried to convince King Zedekiah that Jeremiah should be put to death for disheartening the soldiers and the people. Zedekiah allowed them, and they cast Jeremiah into a cistern, where he sank down into the mud. The intent seemed to be to kill Jeremiah by starvation, while allowing the officials to claim to be innocent of his blood. Ebed-Melech, an Ethiopian, rescued Jeremiah by pulling him out of the cistern, but Jeremiah remained imprisoned until Jerusalem fell to the Babylonian army in 587\u00a0BC.\nThe Babylonians released Jeremiah, and showed him great kindness, allowing him to choose the place of his residence, according to a Babylonian edict. Jeremiah accordingly went to Mizpah in Benjamin with Gedaliah, who had been made governor of Judea.\nEgypt.\nJohanan succeeded Gedaliah, who had been assassinated by an Israelite prince in the pay of Ammon \"for working with the Babylonians.\" Refusing to listen to Jeremiah's counsel, Johanan fled to Egypt, taking with him Jeremiah and Baruch, Jeremiah's faithful scribe and servant, and the king's daughters. There, the prophet probably spent the remainder of his life, still seeking to turn the people back to God. There is no authentic record of his death. The Elephantine papyrus reflects that the Yahweh's wife or consort is still acknowledged in worship and liturgy at the site as late as 419 BC, and several scholars have noted that this feature of the cultural landscape in the place of his exile is likely to have left him disconsolate or perturbed during the final years of his life.\nHistoricity.\nThe consensus is that there was a historical prophet named Jeremiah and that portions of the book probably were written by Jeremiah or his scribe Baruch. Views range from the belief that the narratives and poetic sections in Jeremiah are contemporary with his life (W. L. Holladay), to the view that the work of the original prophet is beyond identification or recovery (R. P. Carroll).\nAccording to Rainer Albertz, first there were early collections of oracles, including material in ch. 2\u20136, 8\u201310, 13, 21\u201323, etc. Then there was an early Deuteronomistic redaction which Albertz dates to around 550 BC, with the original ending to the book at 25:13. There was a second redaction around 545\u2013540 BC which added much more material, up to about ch. 45. Then there was a third redaction around 525\u2013520 BC, expanding the book up to the ending at 51:64. Then there were further post-exilic redactions adding ch. 52 and editing content throughout the book.\nAlthough Jeremiah was often thought of traditionally as the author of the Book of Lamentations, it may also be a collection of individual and communal laments by others composed at various times throughout the Babylonian captivity--interpretations on this question continue to swing both ways.\nArchaeology.\nNebo-Sarsekim tablet.\nIn July 2007, Assyrologist Michael Jursa translated a cuneiform tablet dated to 595\u00a0BC, as describing a Nabusharrussu-ukin as \"the chief eunuch\" of Nebuchadnezzar II of Babylon. Jursa hypothesized that this reference might be to the same individual as the Nebo-Sarsekim mentioned in .\nSeals.\nA 7th-century BC seal of Jehucal, son of Shelemiah and another of Gedaliah, son of Pashhur (mentioned together in ; Jehucal also mentioned in ) were found during excavation by Eilat Mazar in the city of David, Jerusalem, in 2005 and 2008, respectively.\nTel Arad ostraca.\nPottery shards at Tel Arad were unearthed in the 1970s that mention Pashhur, and this reference may be to the same individual mentioned in .\nReligious views.\nHe was first added to Bede's Martyrology.\nJudaism.\nIn Jewish rabbinic literature, especially the aggadah, Jeremiah and Moses are always mentioned together, An ancient midrash, in connection with presented their life and works in parallel, in which \"a prophet like Moses\" is promised, states Jeremiah's time as prophet was similar with Moses, which is 40 years. Moses also prophesied that his own tribe, Tribe of Levi, will rebel against Judah, while Jeremiah's tribe would in turn rebel against Jeremiah himself. In the year of the prophesied event, Moses also said that he himself will be exiled into watery areas, while Jeremiah will be jailed in a pit. Then Moses will be saved by a slave of Pharaoh's daughter, while subsequently Jeremiah will be rescued by a slave named Ebed-melech; After such, the Deuteronomy closed the chapter with Moses reprimanded the people in discourses; so did Jeremiah. The prophet Ezekiel was a son of Jeremiah according to rabbinic literature. In https://, Jeremiah is credited with hiding the Ark, incense altar, and tabernacle on the mountain of Moses.\nChristianity.\nChristian worship services regularly include readings from the Book of Jeremiah. The author of the Gospel of Matthew is especially mindful of how the events in the life, death and resurrection of Jesus fulfill Jeremianic prophecies. There are about forty direct quotations of the book in the New Testament, most appearing in Revelation 18 in connection with the destruction of Babylon. The Epistle to the Hebrews also picks up the fulfilment of the prophetic expectation of the new covenant.\nIn Christianity, there are several feast days which commemorate Jeremiah:\nIslam.\nJeremiah (; 650 BC \u2013 570 BC) is regarded as a prophet in Islam. In Arabic, Jeremiah's name is usually vocalised \"Irmiy\u0101\", \"Armiy\u0101\" or \"\u016armiy\u0101\". However, since the name of Jeremiah is not explicitly mentioned in the Quran and Hadith, belief in Jeremiah was considered not part of the Five Pillars of Islam by the academic community of Islam, who regarded Jeremiah instead as historical supplementary material, since his name was only found in the tafsir and other non-canonical Islamic literature. Nevertheless, since his status as prophet was generally undisputed in Islam, Muslims apply \"PBUH\" or \"Peace Belong Upon Him\" as an honorific for Jeremiah.\nThe narratives of Jeremiah in Islamic belief closely correspond with the account given in the Hebrew Bible, and are found in the Ibn Kathir work of al-Bidaya wa l-Nihaya &amp; \"Qisas Al-Anbiya\" (History of prophets), Al-Tabari work of \"History of the Prophets and Kings\", and Ibn Asakir work of \"History of Damascus\".\nIslamic literature narrated a detailed account of the Siege of Jerusalem (587 BC), which parallels the account given in the Book of Jeremiah.\nInterpretation of Quran and Hadith.\nThe oldest Islamic narration about Jeremiah was found in the tradition from Ibn Abbas, which identified Jeremiah as Khidr. However, This Hadith tradition was considered inauthentic and not generally accepted by Ibn Kathir in his work, al-Bidaya wa l-Nihaya.\nAccording to al-Qurtubi, the interpretation of the 11th verse Quran chapter Al-Anbiya has mentioned the unnamed figure in the verse as Jeremiah, which musing in the similar narrative with the biblical version of Nebuchadnezzar's invasion of Jerusalem. However, al-Qurtubi also further added in his interpretation that during the meeting of Jeremiah with Nebuchadnezzar, Jeremiah revealed to him about the prophesied advent of Muhammad in the land of Hejaz.\nIbn Kathir tafsir narrate that the Parable of the Hamlet in Ruins, which from the 259th verse of Al-Baqara chapter focused about Jeremiah, when he was commanded by God to reconstruct the devastated Jerusalem after Nebuchadnezzar's invasion.\nIn Quran Sura (chapter) 17 (Al-Isra), Ayah (verse) 4\u20137, that is about the two corruptions of children of Israel on the earth, some hadith and tafsir cite that one of these corruptions is the imprisonment and persecution of Jeremiah. Separately, Ibn Kathir interpretation of the 11th verse of al-Isra also discussed about Jeremiah.\nOther traditions.\nIbn Asakir has mentioned in his work titled \"Tarikh Dimashq\" (History of Damascus), that Jeremiah was a son of Hilkiah, who hailed from the tribe of Levy which descended from Jacob. According to one tradition which recorded by Ibn Kathir, Wahb has narrated that the timeline of Jeremiah as prophet was between the era of David and the era of Zechariah.\nWahb ibn Munabbih, who gave Isra\u02bciliyyat account about Jeremiah which turned \"upon the main points of the Old Testament story of Jeremiah: his call to be a prophet, his mission to the king of Judah, his mission to the people and his reluctance, the announcement of a foreign tyrant who is to rule over Judah.\"\nAccording to some Jewish narratives and Ibn Kathir, Zoroaster was once a disciple of Jeremiah. However, the two of them came into conflict which ended with Jeremiah disowning Zoroaster. Jeremiah then cast a curse upon Zoroaster, causing him to suffer leprosy. Zoroaster later moved to a place in modern-day Azerbaijan, ruled by Bashtaasib, governor of Nebuchadnezzar, and spread his teaching of Zoroastrianism there. Bashtaasib then followed his teaching, forced the inhabitants of Persia to convert to Zoroastrianism and killed those who refused. Ibn Kathir quoted the original narrative which was borrowed from Tabari's record of the \"History of Jerusalem\". He also mentioned that Zoroastrian was synonymous with Majus.\nReligious ritual.\nJeremiah is listed amongst the prophets in the work of salawat Dalail al-Khayrat, an Islamic prayer collection made by Muhammad al-Jazuli from Shadhili order of Sufi.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nIn the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, Jeremiah is regarded as one of the prophets along with David, Solomon, Isaiah, Ezekiel, and others.\nCultural influence.\nJeremiah inspired the French noun \"j\u00e9r\u00e9miade\", and subsequently the English \"jeremiad\", meaning \"a lamentation; mournful complaint,\" or further, \"a cautionary or angry harangue.\"\nJeremiah has periodically been a popular first name in the United States, beginning with the early Puritan settlers, who often took the names of biblical prophets and apostles. Jeremiah was substituted for the Irish \"Diarmuid/Diarmaid\" (also anglicised as Dermot), with which it has no etymological connection, when Gaelic names were frowned upon in official records. The name Jeremy also derives from Jeremiah.\nSohrab Sepehri, an Iranian poet and painter, has mentioned Jeremiah in his work as \"The weeping prophet\".\nNotes and references.\nExplanatory footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75144", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75144", "title": "Singin in the Rain", "text": ""}
{"id": "75147", "revid": "11692354", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75147", "title": "Decius", "text": "Roman emperor from 249 to 251\nGaius Messius Quintus Trajanus Decius (c. 201\u00a0\u2013 June 251), known as Trajan Decius or simply Decius (), was Roman emperor from 249 to 251.\nA distinguished politician during the reign of Philip the Arab, Decius was proclaimed emperor by his troops after putting down a rebellion in Moesia. In 249, he defeated and killed Philip near Verona and was recognized as emperor by the Senate afterwards. During his reign, he attempted to strengthen the Roman state and its religion, leading to the Decian persecution, where a number of prominent Christians (including Pope Fabian) were put to death. In the last year of his reign, Decius co-ruled with his son Herennius Etruscus, until they were both killed by the Goths in the Battle of Abritus.\nEarly life and rise to power.\nTrajanus Decius was born Gaius Messius Quintus Decius Valerinus at Budalia, Illyricum, near Sirmium in Pannonia Inferior. He was of Oscan descent from the Decia gens. Decius was one of the first among a long succession of Roman emperors (Illyrian emperors) to originate from the Danube provinces, often referred to as Illyricum. Unlike some of his immediate imperial predecessors such as Philip the Arab or Maximinus Thrax who did not have extensive administrative experience before assuming the throne, Decius was a distinguished senator who had served as suffect consul in 232, had been governor of Moesia and Germania Inferior soon afterwards, served as governor of Hispania Tarraconensis between 235 and 238, and was urban prefect of Rome during the early reign of Emperor Philip the Arab.\nAround 245, Philip entrusted Decius with an important command on the Danube. By the end of 248 or 249, Decius was sent to quell the revolt of Pacatian and his troops in Moesia and Pannonia; some modern historians see this rebellion as a reflection of emerging Balkan separatism. After the collapse of the revolt, Decius let the troops proclaim him emperor. Philip advanced against him and was killed at Verona, Italy, in September 249. The Senate then recognized Decius as emperor, giving him the attribute \"Traianus\" in reference to Emperor Trajan. According to the Byzantine historian Zosimus, Decius was clothed in purple and forced to undertake the [burdens of] government, despite his reluctance and unwillingness.\nPolitical and monumental initiatives.\nDecius' political program was focused on the restoration of the strength of the State, both militarily opposing the external threats, and restoring the public piety with a program of renovation of the state religion.\nEither as a concession to the Senate, or perhaps with the idea of improving public morality, Decius endeavoured to revive the separate office and authority of the censor. He left the choice of candidate to the Senate, who unanimously selected Valerian (the future emperor). Seeing the office as difficult and potentially dangerous, Valerian declined it. The invasion of the Goths and Decius's death put an end to the abortive attempt.\nDecius sponsored several building projects in Rome, including the Baths of Decius (\"Thermae Decianae\") on the Aventine Hill. Completed in 252, the building survived through to the 16th century. He also repaired the Colosseum, which had been damaged by lightning strikes.\nPersecution of Christians.\nIn late 249, Decius issued an imperial edict on sacrifices:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All the inhabitants of the empire were required to sacrifice before the magistrates of their community \"for the safety of the empire\" by a certain day (the date would vary from place to place and the order may have been that the sacrifice had to be completed within a specified period after a community received the edict). When they sacrificed they would obtain a certificate (libellus) recording the fact that they had complied with the order. That is, the certificate would testify the sacrificant's loyalty to the ancestral gods and to the consumption of sacrificial food and drink as well as the names of the officials who were overseeing the sacrifice.\nAccording to D. S. Potter, Decius did not try to impose the superiority of the Roman pantheon over any other gods. It is very probable that the edict was an attempt to legitimize his position and to respond to a general unease provoked by the passing of the Roman millennium. While Decius himself may have intended the edict as a way to reaffirm his conservative vision of the Pax Romana and to reassure Rome's citizens that the empire was still secure, it nevertheless sparked a \"terrible crisis of authority as various Christian bishops and their flocks reacted to it in different ways.\" Measures were first taken demanding that the bishops and officers of the church make a sacrifice for the emperor. The sacrifice was \"on behalf of\" (Latin \"pro\") the emperor, not \"to\" the emperor, since a living emperor was not considered divine. Certificates were issued to those who satisfied the commissioners during the persecution of Christians under Decius. Forty-six such certificates have been published, all dating from 250, four of them from Oxyrhynchus. Anyone, including Christian followers, who refused to offer a sacrifice for the emperor and the Empire's well-being by a specified date risked torture and execution. A number of prominent Christians did, in fact, refuse to make a sacrifice and were killed in the process, including Pope Fabian himself in 250, and \"anti-Christian feeling[s] led to killings at Carthage and Alexandria.\" However, towards the end of the second year of Decius' reign, \"the ferocity of the [anti-Christian] persecution had eased off, and the earlier tradition of tolerance had begun to reassert itself.\" Christians bore the brunt of the persecution and never forgot the reign of Decius, whom they remembered as \"that fierce tyrant\". In June 251 Decius died alongside his co-emperor Herennius Etruscus in the Battle Abrittus against the Goths; their successors Trebonianus Gallus and Hostilian rescinded Decius' decree, ending the persecution after approximately eighteen months.\nAt this time, there was a second outbreak of the Antonine Plague, which at its height from 251 to 266, took the lives of 5,000 daily in Rome. This outbreak is referred to as the \"Plague of Cyprian\" (Cyprian was the bishop of Carthage, where both the plague and the persecution of Christians were especially severe). Cyprian's biographer Pontius gave a vivid picture of the demoralizing effects of the plague and Cyprian moralized the event in his essay \"De mortalitate\". In Carthage, the \"Decian persecution\", unleashed at the onset of the plague, sought out Christian scapegoats. Decius' edicts were renewed under Valerian in 253 and repealed under his son, Gallienus, in 260\u2013261.\nCampaigns against the Goths and death.\nThe barbarian incursions into the Empire were becoming more daring and frequent whereas the Empire was facing a serious economic crisis in Decius' time. During his brief reign, Decius engaged in important operations against the Goths, who crossed the Danube to raid districts of Moesia and Thrace. This is the first considerable occasion that the Goths\u00a0\u2013 who would later come to play such an important role\u00a0\u2013 appear in the historical record. The Goths under King Cniva were surprised by the emperor while besieging Nicopolis on the Danube; the Goths fled through the difficult terrain of the Balkans, but then doubled back and surprised the Romans near Bero\u00eb (modern Stara Zagora), sacking their camp and dispersing the Roman troops (Battle of Beroe). The Goths then moved to attack Philippopolis (modern Plovdiv), which fell into their hands. The governor of Thrace, Titus Julius Priscus, declared himself emperor under Gothic protection in opposition to Decius but Priscus' challenge was rendered moot when he was killed soon afterwards. Then the invaders began returning to their homeland, laden with booty and captives, among them many of senatorial rank. \nIn the meantime, Decius had returned with his re-organized army, accompanied by his son Herennius Etruscus and the general Trebonianus Gallus, intending to defeat the invaders and recover the booty. The final engagement, the battle of Abritus, in which the Goths fought with the courage of despair, under the command of Cniva, took place during the second week of June 251 on swampy ground in the Ludogorie (region in northeastern Bulgaria which merges with Dobruja plateau and the Danube Plain to the north) near the small settlement of Abritus or \"Forum Terebronii\" (modern Razgrad). Jordanes records that Decius' son Herennius Etruscus was killed by an arrow early in the battle, and to cheer his men Decius exclaimed, \"Let no one mourn; the death of one soldier is not a great loss to the republic.\" Nevertheless, Decius' army was entangled in the swamp and annihilated in this battle, while he himself was killed on the field of battle. As the historian Aurelius Victor relates:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Decii (i.e., \"Decius\" and his son), while pursuing the barbarians across the Danube, died through treachery at Abritus after reigning two years. ... Very many report that the son had fallen in battle while pressing an attack too boldly; that the father however, has strenuously asserted that the loss of one soldier seemed to him too little to matter. And so he resumed the war and died in a similar manner while fighting vigorously.\nOne literary tradition claims that Decius was betrayed by his successor, Trebonianus Gallus, who was involved in a secret alliance with the Goths, but this cannot be substantiated and was most likely a later invention since Gallus felt compelled to adopt Decius' younger son, Gaius Valens Hostilianus, as joint emperor even though the latter was too young to rule in his own right. It is also unlikely that the shattered Roman legions would proclaim as emperor a traitor who was responsible for the loss of so many soldiers from their ranks. Decius was the first Roman emperor to die in battle against a foreign enemy.\nLegacy.\nThe Decian persecution was the first organized persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire and served as the basis for the Diocletianic Persecution, the last major persecution of Christians in the Empire.\nThe later telling of the Seven Sleepers, about seven Christian youths from Ephesus who fled the Decian persecution by hiding in a cave (walled up by Decius) and sleeping for almost 300 years, emerged. The Quranic account, captured in Al-Kahf (\"The Cave\") surah (chapter), has led to the Persian saying of \"ahd-e daqy\u0101nus\" (\"age of Decius\") or \"daqy\u0101nus\" referring to ancient times or a person with outdated views. When something is old and outdated, people say, \"this belongs to the age of Decius.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75149", "revid": "7663319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75149", "title": "Lubusz Voivodeship", "text": "Lubusz Voivodeship ( ) is a voivodeship (province) in western Poland with a population of 972,140. Its regional capitals are Gorz\u00f3w Wielkopolski and Zielona G\u00f3ra. The region is characterized by a landscape of forests, lakes, and rivers, and is bordered by Germany to the west.\nThe functions of regional capital are shared between two cities\u00a0\u2013 Gorz\u00f3w Wielkopolski and Zielona G\u00f3ra. Gorz\u00f3w serves as the seat of the centrally-appointed voivode (\"wojewoda\"), or governor, and Zielona G\u00f3ra is the seat of the elected regional assembly (\"sejmik\") and the executive elected by that assembly, headed by a marshal (\"marsza\u0142ek\"). In addition, the voivodeship includes a third city (Nowa S\u00f3l) and a number of towns.\nLubusz Voivodeship borders West Pomeranian Voivodeship to the north, Greater Poland Voivodeship to the east, Lower Silesian Voivodeship to the south, and Germany (Brandenburg and Saxony) to the west.\nIt was created on January 1, 1999, out of the former Gorz\u00f3w Voivodeship and Zielona G\u00f3ra Voivodeship, pursuant to the Polish local government reforms adopted in 1998. The province's name recalls the historic Lubusz Land (\"Lebus\" or \"Lubus\"), although parts of the voivodeship belong to the historic regions of Lower Silesia, Greater Poland, and Lusatia.\nHistory.\nThe first leaders of the Polans, Mieszko I and especially Boles\u0142aw I the Brave added a number of surrounding territories to the newly established core Polish state, and Lubusz Land came under Polish rule. Part of the historic province was located on the western bank of the Oder River, where the main settlement Lubusz, later known as the German town of Lebus, was located. The entire territory of the present Lubusz Voivodeship was part of Poland by 1002. The oldest towns in the region, dating back over 1,000 years, include Trzciel, Skwierzyna, I\u0142owa, Szprotawa, Jasie\u0144, Krosno Odrza\u0144skie, Mi\u0119dzyrzecz and \u017bary, with most other towns also founded in the Middle Ages, including the current regional capitals of Zielona G\u00f3ra and Gorz\u00f3w Wielkopolski. The youngest towns are \u0141\u0119knica, Czerwie\u0144sk, Nowa S\u00f3l, Szlichtyngowa and Zb\u0105szynek, all either first mentioned or established in the later periods.\nFollowing the fragmentation of Poland into smaller provincial duchies, various portions of the present Lubusz Voivodeship were part of various duchies, initially the duchies of Greater Poland and Silesia, and later also Legnica, G\u0142og\u00f3w, Lubusz and \u017baga\u0144, ruled by various lines of the Piast dynasty. Over time, portions of the present Lubusz Voivodeship were lost by Poland. In 1250 the Lubusz Land was acquired by the Ascanian margraves of Brandenburg. In 1319\u20131326 it was contested by various Polish and German rulers, before falling back to Brandenburg. After Brandenburg passed to the Bohemian Crown in 1373, Poland made a peaceful attempt to regain the northern portion of the area. In 1402, the Bohemian rulers reached an agreement with Poland in Krak\u00f3w. Poland was to buy and re-incorporate the northern outskirts of the present Lubusz Voivodeship, but eventually the Bohemian rulers sold the area to the Teutonic Order, who in turn sold it back to Brandenburg in 1454 to raise funds for war against Poland. The southern part of the current voivodeship remained part of the duchies of \u017baga\u0144 and G\u0142og\u00f3w, ruled by the houses of Piast and Jagiellon, with the \u017baga\u0144 duchy eventually passing to houses of foreign background, including Czech, Saxon and French, whereas other areas were gradually incorporated directly into the Kingdom of Bohemia. In 1635, most of the south-western part of the present Lubusz Voivodeship passed from Bohemia to Saxony, and from 1697 formed part of Poland-Saxony. In the 18th century, Wschowa was an important royal city of Poland, as it often hosted Polish kings and several sessions of the Polish Senate, hence being dubbed the \"unofficial capital of Poland\". King Augustus III of Poland also often stopped in Brody.\nIn 1701, the Kingdom of Prussia was established, which included Brandenburg-held Lubusz Land, and various areas were eventually gradually annexed by Prussia in the following centuries, starting with the south-eastern part of the current voivodeship in 1742, followed by eastern portions (western outskirts of Greater Poland) in 1793 (briefly regained by Poles in 1807\u20131815 as part of the short-lived Duchy of Warsaw), and the south-western part in 1815. Within Prussia and Germany the territory was divided between the provinces of Neumark/Brandenburg, South Prussia/Posen, and Silesia/Lower Silesia.\nDuring World War II, the Oflag II-C, Stalag III-C, Stalag VIII-C and Stalag Luft III major German prisoner-of-war camps for Polish, French, British, Belgian, Canadian, Serbian, Italian, American, Australian, New Zealander, Soviet, Norwegian, Czech, Slovak, South African, Dutch, Greek, Yugoslav, Senegalese, Algerian and Moroccan POWs were operated in the territory. The latter was the site of the \"Great Escape\" in 1944. There are museums at the site of the camps in Dobiegniew and \u017baga\u0144, and a memorial to the victims of the Stalag Luft III murders in \u017baga\u0144. Particularly infamous camps in the region were the Oderblick labor education camp in \u015awiecko and the Sonnenburg concentration camp in S\u0142o\u0144sk, in which Polish, Belgian, French, Bulgarian, Dutch, Yugoslav, Russian, Italian, Ukrainian, Luxembourgish, Danish, Norwegian, Czech, Slovak and other prisoners were held, and many died. There were also eleven subcamps of the Gross-Rosen concentration camp and a subcamp of the Sachsenhausen concentration camp, in which mostly Jewish and Polish, but also French, Russian, Czech, Italian, Greek, Yugoslav, Dutch, Romanian, Hungarian, Lithuanian and German prisoners were held. Obrzyce was the place of \"Aktion T4\" murders of mentally ill and disabled people. The region was the site of fierce fighting during the war in 1945. During the liberation of the Stalag III-C camp, Soviet troops killed some American POWs mistaking them for enemy troops. On 18 March 1945, the Germans shot down an American bomber near Bucze.\nUnder the terms laid down by Joseph Stalin in the Potsdam Agreement, the borders of Poland and Germany were redrawn and the area of the Lubusz Voivodeship fell within the new borders of Poland.\nIn 1998, the government of Jerzy Buzek decided to introduce an administrative reform, with its principles including the restoration of counties and a steep reduction in the number of voivodeships. A general consensus existed among scholars that the local administration exercised through the 49 existing voivodeships established in 1975 was inefficient, anachronistic, impractical, detrimental to maintaining regional identity, and untenable. However, the reform draft accepted by the government surprised the public and caused widespread outcry, as its authors foresaw creation of only 12 large voivodships, thus going much further than the widely expected reconstitution of the 17 voivodeships existing prior to the 1975 reform. As a consequence, the original draft made no provision for a separate Lubusz voivodeship \u2013 Gorz\u00f3w was to become along with Kostrzyn, Strzelce Kraje\u0144skie and Drezdenko a part of West Pomeranian Voivodeship, Zielona G\u00f3ra was to be included along with Krosno, Nowa S\u00f3l, \u017baga\u0144, Gubin and \u017bary in the Lower Silesian Voivodeship, while a narrow horizontal strip encompassing Mi\u0119dzyrzecz, Sul\u0119cin, \u015awiebodzin, S\u0142ubice and Sulech\u00f3w was to be assigned to the Greater Poland Voivodeship as a bizarre sort-of corridor to the German border. However, mass protests broke out as a result in the cities such as Bydgoszcz, Koszalin, Opole or Kielce. Many of the people opposing the draft reform initially demanded retaining as many as 25 voivodeships (including the 2 ones seated in Gorz\u00f3w and Zielona G\u00f3ra), a number nevertheless widely regarded as a demand intentionally excessive to serve as an initial negotiating bargain, actually aiming to restore the 17 voivodeships existing prior to 1975 as an ultimate compromise. As Poland was at the time governed under political cohabitation, the opposition party constituting the political background of the President decided to capitalize on the popular discontent which erupted against the government on an unanticipated scale; the most obvious mean readily available for the opposition was a presidential veto, which in fact ensued. In order to salvage the reform from being killed altogether, the government was, in the face of lacking the supermajority required to overturn the veto at the time, forced to reconsider the original shape of the reform and to reconcile it with the reservations of the President and his political background, with the result of a compromise adjustment increasing the number of voivodeships to 16, with Lubusz Voivodeship included among the four additional ones created according to the agreement.\nThe path leading to such and outcome was far from smooth. The government made an effort to highlight and exploit the decades-long animosity between the approximately same-size two principal cities, spreading scare against its inevitable re-ignition and explosion in any of these two cities after designating the other one as the voivodeship capital, and hoping to use the engineered scare as the main argument in the ongoing discussions against creating the Lubusz voivodeship, The animosity, existing indeed between the cities, has been historically rooted in a widespread perception among Gorz\u00f3w inhabitants that the 1950 decision to designate Zielona G\u00f3ra as the voivodeship capital instead of their larger and more populous city, was taken by the anticlerical communist government due to a hidden motivation of punishing Gorz\u00f3w for becoming the see of the newly established Roman Catholic apostolic administration governing the majority of the Recovered Territories, with the ensuing discrimination of the city by the voivodeship authorities in the years 1950\u20131975 in terms of establishing any new public cultural and educational institutions, other public investments or public funds allocations, in vivid contrast to the unjust favoring of their own seat, the city of Zielona G\u00f3ra; a sentiment reinforced further by the surprise relocation of the see of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Gorz\u00f3w to Zielona G\u00f3ra in 1992, renamed as a result the Roman Catholic Diocese of Zielona G\u00f3ra-Gorz\u00f3w, and finally and perhaps most importantly, by the historical, perpetual and almost sacred rivalry between the motorcycle speedway clubs located in both cities. The objective of the local elites in Zielona G\u00f3ra was in turn to become a single capital centre, reverting to the situation before 1975, while any prospect of sharing the governing institutions was for a long time treated with their hostility. In spite of that, the looming threat of a \"everybody lose\" scenario set to materialize in case of a possible implementation of the original reform draft, paved the way for neutralizing this argument through forcing both rival sides into the breakthrough reconciliation accord known as the Parady\u017c Agreement, brokered by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Zielona G\u00f3ra-Gorz\u00f3w and formalized in a document signed during a highly publicized local summit in the Go\u015bcikowo-Parady\u017c Abbey on 13 March 1998. This compromise agreement, was negotiated and concluded between the delegations of both rival cities, composed of the respectively aligned most powerful local and national scene politicians and business people, with its most important provision being the unusual arrangement to divide and distribute the governing institutions of the voivodeship more or less equally between the two cities. On the basis of this broadly supported agreement, an effective public pressure endorsed jointly by the two centers was successfully exerted on the central government which ultimately acquiesced to the demand of establishing Lubusz Voivodeship. \nNevertheless, creating any new type of public institution at voivodeship level in Poland continues to ignite almost automatically a fierce battle in the Lubusz Voivodeship regarding the seat of the institution. There have also been numerous attempts to relocate some of the existing public institutions under various pretexts from one city to another, in some cases successful, as well as of merging a pair of equal institutions of a type existing in both cities, in order to make one of them a branch of the other, with obscure or no justification in most cases for such merger. Nevertheless, a general local majority consensus prevails that the compromise, although unsatisfactory for any of the two cities, spared both of them the fate of a number of cities which lost in 1999 entirely the status of a voivodeship capital and all voivodeship-level institutions, along with the associated attractiveness and prestige of the city as a place to live, crucial for its growth, with the ensuing profoundly detrimental phenomena.\nGeography.\nThe Lubusz Voivodeship is a land of forests and lakes; forests cover 48% of the area. The river Oder, flowing through the voivodeship, is one of the few large European rivers retaining broadleaved and riparian forests. Areas with the highest natural values are protected as national parks (Drawa National Park and Warta Mouth National Park), landscape parks and wildlife reserves. The 19th century Muskau Park, located on both sides of the Polish\u2013German border, has entered the UNESCO World Heritage List. The voivodeship abounds in lakes, especially in its central and northern parts; around those lakes numerous bathing resorts, holiday centres and farms offering tourist services have been established.\nCuisine.\nThe voivodeship, especially its northern part, is a notable for production of honey, with several varieties listed as traditional foods by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of Poland, and the Saint Michael's Honey Fair held annually in Gorz\u00f3w Wielkopolski.\nThe southern part of the voivodeship with Zielona G\u00f3ra is one of the leading winemaking regions of Poland, and other traditional beverages from the voivodeship are beer, mead, nalewki and vodka.\nVarious types of traditional Polish kie\u0142basa, also designated as traditional foods by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of Poland, are produced in the Nowa S\u00f3l, Wschowa, Zielona G\u00f3ra, \u017baga\u0144 and \u017bary counties in the southern part of the Lubusz Voivodeship, whereas Siedlisko, Nowa S\u00f3l County produces a variety of traditional cheeses and quarks.\nCities and towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;The voivodeship contains 3 cities and 40 towns. These are listed below in descending order of population (as of 2021):\nAdministrative division.\nLubusz Voivodeship is divided into 14 counties (powiats): 2 city counties and 12 land counties. These are further divided into 82 gminas.\nThe counties are listed in the following table (ordering within categories is by decreasing population).\nEconomy.\nThe gross domestic product (GDP) of the province was 10.8 billion euros in 2018, accounting for 2.2% of Polish economic output. The GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was 17,600 euros or 58% of the EU27 average in the same year. The GDP per employee was 67% of the EU average.\nTransport.\nThe sole airport in the voivodeship is the Zielona G\u00f3ra Airport. The A2, A18 and S3 highways pass through the province.\nProtected areas.\nProtected areas in Lubusz Voivodeship include two national parks and eight landscape parks. These are listed below.\nSights and tourism.\nThere are seven Historic Monuments of Poland and one World Heritage Site in the voivodeship:\nFurthermore, there are several preserved old towns with historic town halls and market squares (i.e. Zielona G\u00f3ra, Wschowa, \u015awiebodzin and Bytom Odrza\u0144ski). Of the historic town halls, the one in Kargowa was the site of an armed defense against the annexation by Prussia in the Second Partition of Poland in 1793. Several towns contain entirely or partly preserved medieval town walls with towers and gates, i.e. Ko\u017cuch\u00f3w, Strzelce Kraje\u0144skie, Gorz\u00f3w Wielkopolski, Wschowa. There are multiple castles, including Piast Royal and Ducal castles in Krosno Odrza\u0144skie, Ko\u017cuch\u00f3w, Mi\u0119dzyrzecz and \u017baga\u0144. There are also numerous palaces, including at Brody, D\u0105br\u00f3wka Wielkopolska, Glisno, J\u0119drzychowice, Kalsk, Mierz\u0119cin, Trzebiech\u00f3w, \u017bary. The village of \u0141ag\u00f3w, which hosted the Knights Templar and the Sovereign Military Order of Malta in the past, contains the Castle of the Order of St. John, and several other medieval structures. Kostrzyn nad Odr\u0105 and its surroundings contain fortifications of the Kostrzyn Fortress with Fort Sarbinowo, which housed a German strict regime prisoner-of-war camp for Allied officers during World War I, considered the only German WWI POW camp from which no one managed to escape.\nMajor museums dedicated to the history of the region are located in Gorz\u00f3w Wielkopolski and Zielona G\u00f3ra. There are museums dedicated to Allied prisoners of war at the former German POW camps in Dobiegniew and \u017baga\u0144. In \u017baga\u0144, there is a memorial to the victims of the Stalag Luft III murders of Allied POWs, perpetrated by Nazi Germany in World War II. There are multiple other memorials to victims of Nazi Germany in the region. In Bucze there is a memorial to American airmen shot down by the Germans in 1945. The garrison town of \u017baga\u0144 hosts Poland's oldest monument of Wojtek, the soldier bear of the Polish II Corps.\n\"Kuna\", the world's oldest in service river icebreaker, is docked in the river port of Gorz\u00f3w Wielkopolski and is open to the public as a museum ship.\nOne of the world's tallest Christ statues, the Christ the King Statue is located in \u015awiebodzin, whereas S\u0142ubice hosts the Wikipedia Monument.\nSports.\nMotorcycle speedway enjoys a large following in the province with the Stal Gorz\u00f3w Wielkopolski and Falubaz Zielona G\u00f3ra clubs being among the most accomplished in the sport in the country. The teams contest the Lubusz Voivodeship Derby, one of the fiercest speedway rivalries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75150", "revid": "22388063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75150", "title": "Seneca the Younger", "text": "Roman Stoic philosopher, statesman and dramatist (c. 4 BC\u2013AD 65)\nLucius Annaeus Seneca the Younger ( ; AD 65), usually known mononymously as Seneca, was a Stoic philosopher of Ancient Rome, a statesman, a dramatist, and in one work, a satirist, from the post-Augustan age of Latin literature.\nSeneca was born in Colonia Patricia Corduba in Hispania, and was trained in rhetoric and philosophy in Rome. His father was Seneca the Elder, his elder brother was Lucius Junius Gallio Annaeanus, and his nephew was the poet Lucan. In AD 41, Seneca was exiled to the island of Corsica under emperor Claudius, but was allowed to return in 49 to become a tutor to Nero. When Nero became emperor in 54, Seneca became his advisor and, together with the praetorian prefect Sextus Afranius Burrus, provided competent government for the first five years of Nero's reign. Seneca's influence over Nero declined with time, and in 65 Seneca was executed by forced suicide for alleged complicity in the Pisonian conspiracy to assassinate Nero, of which he may have been innocent, although there is still no consensus agreement. His stoic and calm suicide has become the subject of numerous paintings.\nAs a writer, Seneca is known for his philosophical works, and for his plays, which are all tragedies. His prose works include 12 essays and 124 letters dealing with moral issues. These writings constitute one of the most important bodies of primary material for ancient Stoicism. As a tragedian, he is best known for plays such as his \"Medea\", \"Thyestes\", and \"Phaedra\". Seneca had an immense influence on later generations\u2014during the Renaissance he was \"a sage admired and venerated as an oracle of moral, even of Christian edification; a master of literary style and a model [for] dramatic art.\"\nLife.\nEarly life, family and adulthood.\nSeneca was born in C\u00f3rdoba in the Roman province of Baetica in Hispania. His branch of the Annaea gens consisted of Italic colonists, of Umbrian or Paelignian origins. His father was Lucius Annaeus Seneca the Elder, a Spanish-born Roman knight who had gained fame as a writer and teacher of rhetoric in Rome. It is conjectured, based on a single inscription, that Seneca's mother, Helvia, was from a prominent Baetician family. Seneca was the second of three brothers; the others were Lucius Annaeus Novatus (later known as Junius Gallio), and Annaeus Mela, the father of the poet Lucan. Miriam Griffin says in her biography of Seneca that \"the evidence for Seneca's life before his exile in 41 is so slight, and the potential interest of these years, for social history, as well as for biography, is so great that few writers on Seneca have resisted the temptation to eke out knowledge with imagination.\" Griffin also infers from the ancient sources that Seneca was born in either 8, 4, or 1 BC. She thinks he was born between 4 and 1 BC and was resident in Rome by AD 5.\nSeneca is said to have been taken to Rome in the \"arms\" of his aunt (his mother's stepsister) at a young age, probably when he was about five years old. His father resided for much of his life in the city. Seneca was taught the usual subjects of literature, grammar, and rhetoric, as part of the standard education of high-born Romans. While still young he received philosophical training from Attalus the Stoic, and from Sotion and Papirius Fabianus, both of whom belonged to the short-lived School of the Sextii, which combined Stoicism with Pythagoreanism. Sotion persuaded Seneca when he was a young man (in his early twenties) to become a vegetarian, which he practiced for around a year before his father urged him to desist because the practice was associated with \"some foreign rites\". Seneca often had breathing difficulties throughout his life, probably asthma, and at some point in his mid-twenties (c.\u2009AD 20) he appears to have been struck down with tuberculosis. He was sent to Egypt to live with his aunt (the same aunt who had brought him to Rome), whose husband Gaius Galerius had become Prefect of Egypt. She nursed him through a period of ill health that lasted up to ten years. In 31 AD he returned to Rome with his aunt, his uncle dying en route in a shipwreck. His aunt's influence helped Seneca be elected quaestor (probably after AD 37), which also earned him the right to sit in the Roman Senate.\nPolitics and exile.\nSeneca's early career as a senator seems to have been successful and he was praised for his oratory. In his writings Seneca has nothing good to say about Caligula and frequently depicts him as a monster. Cassius Dio relates a story that Caligula was so offended by Seneca's oratorical success in the Senate that he ordered him to commit suicide. Seneca survived only because he was seriously ill and Caligula was told that he would soon die anyway. Seneca explains his own survival as due to his patience and his devotion to his friends: \"I wanted to avoid the impression that all I could do for loyalty was die.\"\nIn AD 41, Claudius became emperor, and Seneca was accused by the new empress Messalina of adultery with Julia Livilla, sister to Caligula and Agrippina. The affair has been doubted by some historians, since Messalina had clear political motives for getting rid of Julia Livilla and her supporters. The Senate pronounced a death sentence on Seneca, which Claudius commuted to exile, and Seneca spent the next eight years on the island of Corsica. Two of Seneca's earliest surviving works date from the period of his exile\u2014both consolations. In his \"Consolation to Helvia\", his mother, Seneca comforts her as a bereaved mother for losing her son to exile. Seneca incidentally mentions the death of his only son, a few weeks before his exile. Later in life Seneca was married to a woman younger than himself, Pompeia Paulina. It has been thought that the infant son may have been from an earlier marriage, but the evidence is \"tenuous\". Seneca's other work of this period, his \"Consolation to Polybius\", one of Claudius' freedmen, focused on consoling Polybius on the death of his brother. It is noted for its flattery of Claudius, and Seneca expresses his hope that the emperor will recall him from exile. In 49 AD Agrippina married her uncle Claudius, and through her influence Seneca was recalled to Rome. Agrippina gained the praetorship for Seneca and appointed him tutor to her son, the future emperor Nero.\nImperial advisor.\nFrom AD 54 to 62, Seneca acted as Nero's advisor, together with the praetorian prefect Sextus Afranius Burrus. Early in Nero's reign, his mother Agrippina exercised his authority to make decisions. Seneca and Burrus opposed this authoritarian matriarchy which had become the cause of irresponsibility of the emperor. One by-product of his new position was that Seneca was appointed suffect consul in 56. Seneca's influence was said to have been especially strong in the first year. Seneca composed Nero's accession speeches in which he promised to restore proper legal procedure and authority to the Senate. He also composed the eulogy for Claudius that Nero delivered at the funeral. Seneca's satirical skit \"Apocolocyntosis\", which lampoons the deification of Claudius and praises Nero, dates from the earliest period of Nero's reign. In AD 55, Seneca wrote \"On Clemency\" following Nero's murder of Britannicus, perhaps to assure the citizenry that the murder was the end, not the beginning of bloodshed. \"On Clemency\" is a work which, although it flatters Nero, was intended to show the correct (Stoic) path of virtue for a ruler. Tacitus and Dio suggest that Nero's early rule, during which he listened to Seneca and Burrus, was quite competent. However, the ancient sources suggest that, over time, Seneca and Burrus lost their influence over the emperor. In 59 they had reluctantly agreed to Agrippina's murder, and afterward Tacitus reports that Seneca had to write a letter justifying the murder to the Senate.\nIn AD 58 the senator Publius Suillius Rufus made a series of public attacks on Seneca. These attacks, reported by Tacitus and Cassius Dio, included charges that, in a mere four years of service to Nero, Seneca had acquired a vast personal fortune of three hundred million sestertii by charging high interest on loans throughout Italy and the provinces. Suillius' attacks included claims of sexual corruption, with a suggestion that Seneca had slept with Agrippina. Tacitus, though, reports that Suillius was highly prejudiced: he had been a favorite of Claudius, and had been an embezzler and informant. In response, Seneca brought a series of prosecutions for corruption against Suillius: half of his estate was confiscated and he was sent into exile. However, the attacks reflect a criticism of Seneca that was made at the time and continued through later ages. Seneca was undoubtedly extremely rich: he had properties at Baiae and Nomentum, an Alban villa, and Egyptian estates. Cassius Dio even reports that the Boudica uprising in Britannia was caused by Seneca forcing large loans on the indigenous British aristocracy in the aftermath of Claudius's conquest of Britain, and then calling them in suddenly and aggressively. Seneca was sensitive to such accusations: his \"De Vita Beata\" (\"On the Happy Life\") dates from around this time and includes a defense of wealth along Stoic lines, arguing that properly gaining and spending wealth is appropriate behavior for a philosopher.\nRetirement.\nAfter Burrus's death in 62, Seneca's influence declined rapidly; as Tacitus puts it (Ann. 14.52.1), \"mors Burri infregit Senecae potentiam\" (\"the death of Burrus broke Seneca's power\"). Tacitus reports that Seneca tried to retire twice, in 62 and AD 64, but Nero refused him on both occasions. Nevertheless, Seneca was increasingly absent from the court. He adopted a quiet lifestyle on his country estates, concentrating on his studies and seldom visiting Rome. It was during these final few years that he composed two of his greatest works: \"Naturales quaestiones\"\u2014an encyclopedia of the natural world; and his \"Letters to Lucilius\"\u2014which document his philosophical thoughts.\nDeath.\nIn AD 65, Seneca was caught up in the aftermath of the Pisonian conspiracy, a plot to kill Nero. Although it is unlikely that Seneca was part of the conspiracy, Nero ordered him to kill himself. Seneca followed tradition by severing several veins in order to bleed to death, and his wife Pompeia Paulina attempted to share his fate. Cassius Dio, who wished to emphasize the relentlessness of Nero, focused on how Seneca had attended to his last-minute letters, and how his death was hastened by soldiers. A generation after the Julio-Claudian emperors, Tacitus wrote an account of the suicide, which, in view of his republican sympathies, is perhaps somewhat romanticized. According to this account, Nero ordered Seneca's wife saved. Her wounds were bound up and she made no further attempt to kill herself. As for Seneca himself, his age and diet were blamed for slow loss of blood and extended pain rather than a quick death. He also took poison, which was not fatal. \nAfter dictating his last words to a scribe, and with a circle of friends attending him in his home, he immersed himself in a warm bath, which he expected would speed blood flow and ease his pain. Tacitus wrote, \"He was then carried into a bath, with the steam of which he was suffocated, and he was burnt without any of the usual funeral rites. So he had directed in a codicil of his will, even when in the height of his wealth and power he was thinking of life's close.\" This may give the impression of a favorable portrait of Seneca, but Tacitus's treatment of him is at best ambivalent. Tacitus tells us that he left his family an \"imago suae vitae\" (\"Annales\" 15.62), \"an image of his life\", he is possibly being ambiguous: in Roman culture, the \"imago\" was a kind of mask that commemorated the great ancestors of noble families, but at the same time, it may also suggest duplicity, superficiality, and pretense.\nPhilosophy.\nAs \"a major philosophical figure of the Roman Imperial Period\", Seneca's lasting contribution to philosophy has been to the school of Stoicism. His writing is highly accessible and was the subject of attention from the Renaissance onwards by writers such as Michel de Montaigne.\nSeneca wrote a number of books on Stoicism, mostly on ethics, with one work (\"Naturales Quaestiones\") on the physical world. Seneca built on the writings of many of the earlier Stoics: he often mentions Zeno, Cleanthes, and Chrysippus; and frequently cites Posidonius, with whom Seneca shared an interest in natural phenomena. He frequently quotes Epicurus, especially in his \"Letters\". His interest in Epicurus is mainly limited to using him as a source of ethical maxims. Likewise Seneca shows some interest in Platonist metaphysics, but never with any clear commitment. His moral essays are based on Stoic doctrines. Stoicism was a popular philosophy in this period, and many upper-class Romans found in it a guiding ethical framework for political involvement. It was once popular to regard Seneca as being very eclectic in his Stoicism, but modern scholarship views him as a fairly orthodox Stoic, albeit a free-minded one.\nHis works discuss both ethical theory and practical advice, and Seneca stresses that both parts are distinct but interdependent. His \"Letters to Lucilius\" showcase Seneca's search for ethical perfection. Seneca regards philosophy as a balm for the wounds of life. The destructive passions, especially anger and grief, must be uprooted, or moderated according to reason. He discusses the relative merits of the contemplative life and the active life, and he considers it important to confront one's own mortality and be able to face death. One must be willing to practice poverty and use wealth properly, and he writes about favours, clemency, the importance of friendship, and the need to benefit others. The universe is governed for the best by a rational providence, and this must be reconciled with acceptance of adversity.\nDrama.\nTen plays are attributed to Seneca, of which most likely eight were written by him. The plays stand in stark contrast to his philosophical works. With their intense emotions, and grim overall tone, the plays seem to represent the antithesis of Seneca's Stoic beliefs. Up to the 16th century it was normal to distinguish between Seneca the moral philosopher and Seneca the dramatist as two separate people. Scholars have tried to spot certain Stoic themes: it is the uncontrolled passions that generate madness, ruination, and self-destruction. This has a cosmic as well as an ethical aspect, and fate is a powerful, albeit rather oppressive, force.\nMany scholars have thought, following the ideas of the 19th-century German scholar Friedrich Leo, that Seneca's tragedies were written for recitation only. Other scholars think that they were written for performance and that it is possible that actual performance took place in Seneca's lifetime. Ultimately, this issue cannot be resolved on the basis of our existing knowledge. The tragedies of Seneca have been successfully staged in modern times.\nThe dating of the tragedies is highly problematic in the absence of any ancient references. A parody of a lament from \"Hercules Furens\" appears in the \"Apocolocyntosis\", which implies a date before AD 54 for that play. A relative chronology has been proposed on metrical grounds. The plays are not all based on the Greek pattern; they have a five-act form and differ in many respects from extant Attic drama, and while the influence of Euripides on some of these works is considerable, so is the influence of Virgil and Ovid.\nSeneca's plays were widely read in medieval and Renaissance European universities and strongly influenced tragic drama in that time, such as Elizabethan England (William Shakespeare and other playwrights), France (Corneille and Racine), and the Netherlands (Joost van den Vondel). English translations of Seneca's tragedies appeared in print in the mid-16th century, with all ten published collectively in 1581. He is regarded as the source and inspiration for what is known as \"Revenge Tragedy\", starting with Thomas Kyd's \"The Spanish Tragedy\" and continuing well into the Jacobean era. \"Thyestes\" is considered Seneca's masterpiece, and has been described by scholar Dana Gioia as \"one of the most influential plays ever written\". \"Medea\" is also highly regarded, and was praised along with \"Phaedra\" by T. S. Eliot.\nWorks.\nWorks attributed to Seneca include 12 philosophical essays, 124 letters dealing with moral issues, nine tragedies, and a satire, the attribution of which is disputed. His authorship of \"Hercules on Oeta\" has also been questioned.\nSeneca's tragedies.\n\"Fabulae crepidatae\" (tragedies with Greek subjects):\n\"Fabula praetexta\" (tragedy in Roman setting):\nEssays and letters.\nEssays.\n\"Traditionally given in the following order:\"\nLegacy.\nAs a proto-Christian saint.\nSeneca's writings were well known in the later Roman period, and Quintilian, writing thirty years after Seneca's death, remarked on the popularity of his works amongst the youth. While he found much to admire, Quintillian criticized Seneca for what he regarded as a degenerate literary style\u2014a criticism echoed by Aulus Gellius in the middle of the 2nd century.\nThe early Christian Church was very favourably disposed towards Seneca and his writings, and the church leader Tertullian possessively referred to him as \"our Seneca\". By the 4th century an apocryphal correspondence with Paul the Apostle had been created linking Seneca into the Christian tradition. The letters are mentioned by Jerome who also included Seneca among a list of Christian writers, and Seneca is similarly mentioned by Augustine. In the 6th century Martin of Braga synthesized Seneca's thought into a couple of treatises that became popular in their own right. Otherwise, Seneca was mainly known through a large number of quotes and extracts in the \"florilegia\", which were popular throughout the medieval period. When his writings were read in the later Middle Ages, it was mostly his \"Letters to Lucilius\"\u2014the longer essays and plays being relatively unknown.\nMedieval writers and works continued to link him to Christianity because of his alleged association with Paul. The \"Golden Legend\", a 13th-century hagiographical account of famous saints that was widely read, included an account of Seneca's death scene, and erroneously presented Nero as a witness to Seneca's suicide. Dante placed Seneca (alongside Cicero) among the \"great spirits\" in the First Circle of Hell, or Limbo. Boccaccio, who in 1370 came across the works of Tacitus whilst browsing the library at Montecassino, wrote an account of Seneca's suicide hinting that it was a kind of disguised baptism, or a \"de facto\" baptism in spirit. Some, such as Albertino Mussato and Giovanni Colonna, went even further and concluded that Seneca must have been a Christian convert.\nDisputed quotations.\nVarious other antique and medieval texts purport to be by Seneca, e.g., \"De remediis fortuitorum\", but with unconfirmed authorship, they have sometimes been referred-to as \"Pseudo-Seneca\". At least some of these seem to preserve and adapt genuine Senecan content, for example, Saint Martin of Braga's (d. c. 580) \"Formula vitae honestae\", or \"De differentiis quatuor virtutum vitae honestae\" (\"Rules for an Honest Life\", or \"On the Four Cardinal Virtues\"). Early manuscripts preserve Martin's preface, where he makes it clear that this was his adaptation, but in later copies this was omitted, and the work was later thought fully Seneca's work.\nAn improving reputation.\nSeneca remains one of the few popular Roman philosophers from the period. He appears not only in Dante, but also in Chaucer and to a large degree in Petrarch, who adopted his style in his own essays and who quotes him more than any other authority except Virgil. In the Renaissance, printed editions and translations of his works became common, including an edition by Erasmus and a commentary by John Calvin. John of Salisbury, Erasmus and others celebrated his works. French essayist Montaigne, who gave a spirited defense of Seneca and Plutarch in his \"Essays\", was himself considered by Pasquier a \"French Seneca\". Similarly, Thomas Fuller praised Joseph Hall as \"our English Seneca\". Many who considered his ideas not particularly original still argued that he was important in making the Greek philosophers presentable and intelligible. His suicide has also been a popular subject in art, from Jacques-Louis David's 1773 painting \"The Death of Seneca\" to the 1951 film \"Quo Vadis\".\nEven with the admiration of an earlier group of intellectual stalwarts, Seneca has never been without his detractors. In his own time, he was accused of hypocrisy or, at least, a less than \"Stoic\" lifestyle. While banished to Corsica, he wrote a plea for restoration rather incompatible with his advocacy of a simple life and the acceptance of fate. In his \"Apocolocyntosis\" he ridiculed the behaviors and policies of Claudius, and flattered Nero\u2014such as proclaiming that Nero would live longer and be wiser than the legendary Nestor. The claims of Publius Suillius Rufus that Seneca acquired some \"three hundred million \"sesterces\"\" through Nero's favor are highly partisan, but they reflect the reality that Seneca was both powerful and wealthy. Robin Campbell, a translator of Seneca's letters, writes that the \"stock criticism of Seneca right down the centuries [has been]...the apparent contrast between his philosophical teachings and his practice.\"\nIn 1562 Gerolamo Cardano wrote an \"apology\" praising Nero in his \"Encomium Neronis\", printed in Basel. This was likely intended as a mock \"encomium\", inverting the portrayal of Nero and Seneca that appears in Tacitus. In this work Cardano portrayed Seneca as a crook of the worst kind, an empty rhetorician who was only thinking to grab money and power, after having poisoned the mind of the young emperor. Cardano stated that Seneca well deserved death.\nAmong the historians who have sought to reappraise Seneca is the scholar Anna Lydia Motto, who in 1966 argued that the negative image has been based almost entirely on Suillius's account, while many others who might have lauded him have been lost.\nWe are therefore left with no contemporary record of Seneca's life, save for the desperate opinion of Publius Suillius. Think of the barren image we should have of Socrates, had the works of Plato and Xenophon not come down to us and were we wholly dependent upon Aristophanes' description of this Athenian philosopher. To be sure, we should have a highly distorted, misconstrued view. Such is the view left to us of Seneca, if we were to rely upon Suillius alone. \nMore recent work is changing the dominant perception of Seneca as a mere conduit for pre-existing ideas, showing originality in Seneca's contribution to the history of ideas. Examination of Seneca's life and thought in relation to contemporary education and to the psychology of emotions is revealing the relevance of his thought. For example, Martha Nussbaum in her discussion of desire and emotion includes Seneca among the Stoics who offered important insights and perspectives on emotions and their role in our lives. Specifically devoting a chapter to his treatment of anger and its management, she shows Seneca's appreciation of the damaging role of uncontrolled anger, and its pathological connections. Nussbaum later extended her examination to Seneca's contribution to political philosophy showing considerable subtlety and richness in his thoughts about politics, education, and notions of global citizenship\u2014and finding a basis for reform-minded education in Seneca's ideas she used to propose a mode of modern education that avoids both narrow traditionalism and total rejection of tradition. Elsewhere Seneca has been noted as the first great Western thinker on the complex nature and role of gratitude in human relationships.\nIn the late 19th century, Spanish thinker \u00c1ngel Ganivet re-appropriated and reshaped Seneca as a \"Spaniard in essence\" coming to embody the Spanish Volksgeist, making this idea central to his \"Idearium espa\u00f1ol\".\nIn popular culture.\nNotable fictional portrayals.\nSeneca is a character in Monteverdi's 1642 opera \"L'incoronazione di Poppea\" (\"The Coronation of Poppea\"), which is based on the pseudo-Senecan play, \"Octavia\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75151", "revid": "34975998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75151", "title": "Jeremiah (comics)", "text": "Belgian comic book series by Hermann Huppen\nJeremiah (also known as \"The Survivors\" in some English translations) is a Belgian science fiction comic book series by Hermann Huppen. \"Jeremiah\" was created in 1979 for the German magazine \"Zack\", and had a premiere in Sarajevo based \"Strip art\" magazine, since the editor of this magazine, Ervin Rustemagic, was also Hermann's manager. It has also been serialized in the French-language \"M\u00e9tal Hurlant\" and \"Spirou\" magazine, as well as the Serbian magazines \"Stripoteka\" and \"Politikin Zabavnik\". Currently, there are 40 volumes and one \"Special Edition\" in French and Dutch.\nPlot.\nRacial wars have torn the U.S. apart, resulting in a post-apocalyptic world. Many small pockets of civilization still exist; from isolated super high-tech fortresses, hidden research labs, or racial groups in walled-in cities \u2014 all fighting each other among the more regular population which in many ways resembles the \"old west\".\nJeremiah and his friend Kurdy travel the country, taking odd jobs and getting mixed up in various affairs. Jeremiah, being the more noble of the two, often sticks his neck out to help others, while Kurdy is a more wily, opportunistic scoundrel.\nDespite its setting, \"Jeremiah\"'s underlying motif is of hope and the survival of mankind. The storylines carry little from album to album, meaning they can be read individually.\nReception.\n\"Jeremiah\" has been translated into 26 languages, and has a large fan base in Europe. Tome #25, \"Et si un jour la Terre\", was nominated for the 2005 Angoul\u00eame International Comics Festival Prize Awarded by the Audience.\nVarious attempts to introduce the series to the American market have had middling results, mostly due to the different tastes of the American and European comic book public. The current holder of the English language copyrights is Strip Art Features (SAF). After failing to reach American audiences in the 1980s and 1990s with such publishers as Fantagraphics, Catalan Communications, and Malibu Comics; \"Jeremiah\" (and SAF) found success with Dark Horse beginning in the 2000s. In March 2012, Dark Horse Comics began another English language reprint series in collaboration with SAF; three volumes of the \"Jeremiah Omnibus\", collecting tomes 1 to 3, 4 to 6, and 7 to 9 respectively, have been released as of October 2017. In May 2019, SAF released digital editions of volumes 1 to 6, and later of volumes 7 to 9 in July 2020.\nList of titles.\nFollowing are the \"Jeremiah\" comic albums as named in French, with publication dates.\nTelevision series.\nAn American television series, \"Jeremiah\", was produced from 2002\u20132004. Developed by \"Babylon 5\" creator J. Michael Straczynski and executive produced by Straczynski and Sam Egan, the series is loosely based on the \"Jeremiah\" comics series. Aside from the names of the two main characters, the general personality of the protagonist, and the post-apocalyptic setting, there are no similarities between the comics and the series.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75152", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75152", "title": "Jeremiah (TV series)", "text": "2002 action drama television series\nJeremiah is a post-apocalyptic action drama television series starring Luke Perry and Malcolm-Jamal Warner that ran on the Showtime network from March 3, 2002 to September 24, 2004. Loosely based on the Belgian comic series \"Jeremiah\" by Hermann Huppen, the series takes place in a future wherein the adult population has been wiped out by a deadly virus.\nThe series ended production in 2003, after the management of Showtime decided they were no longer interested in producing science fiction programming. Had the series continued, it would have run under a different showrunner than J. Michael Straczynski, who decided to leave following the completion of the production of the second season due to creative differences between himself and MGM Television.\nEpisodes for the final half of the second season did not begin airing in the United States until September 3, 2004.\nPlot.\nIn an alternate 2021, the eponymous Jeremiah is a loner who has spent 15 years searching the United States for a place called \"Valhalla Sector\". His father, a viral researcher, named Valhalla Sector as a possible refuge shortly before disappearing into the chaos of \"The Big Death\", a 2006 plague that killed nearly everyone over the age of thirteen. A stop in the Colorado trading town of Clarefield results in Jeremiah teaming up with another lone traveller named Kurdy, before being imprisoned by the town's warlord with a man named Simon. Simon wants to recruit Jeremiah for a vague and mysterious organization. With Kurdy's help, Jeremiah and Simon escape, but Simon is fatally wounded in the process.\nFollowing the instructions given to them by the dying Simon, Jeremiah and Kurdy take Simon's truck back to \"Thunder Mountain\", the remains of the Cheyenne Mountain Complex, where they discover a well-organized and well-equipped group led by the former child prodigy Markus Alexander. He chooses to employ Jeremiah and Kurdy as a recon team to replace Simon and his partner, sending the two men back outside to gather information in preparation for the time when the organization will need to start rebuilding the world.\nOver the course of the first season, the group encounters threats originating from Valhalla Sector, which they discover to be a sealed and heavily armed bunker complex in Pennsylvania (the ruins of Raven Rock Mountain Complex), used to house the remainder of the US government and military leadership during The Big Death. The survivors there plan to rebuild the world in an authoritarian mold using military might and weaponizing The Big Death virus itself to wipe out non-compliant populations. The second half of Season 1 primarily deals with the efforts of Jeremiah and Thunder Mountain to stop Valhalla Sector.\nAfter the final defeat of Valhalla Sector in the opening episodes of Season 2, a new threat emerges in the form of a crusading army from the East, led by a mysterious prophetic figure known as Daniel. Season 2 deals with the impending conflict between the unifying survivor communities under Thunder Mountain, and the advancing Army of Daniel.\nAlthough a third season was considered, series creator J. Michael Straczynski made it clear that if the show ran a further season he would have nothing to do with it. The show concluded with the end of the second season resolving most plot threads.\nCast.\nMost of the characters are survivors of the virus who are now in their late twenties or younger.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nIn 1991, Scott Mitchell Rosenberg published black-and-white English translations of the first three volumes of Belgian writer Hermann Huppen's \"Jeremiah\" under Malibu Comics\u2019s Adventure Comics imprint. Later, as CEO of Platinum Studios, Rosenberg acquired the media rights to the series and developed a television adaptation. \nThe show, created by \"Babylon 5\" creator J. Michael Straczynski, was executive-produced by Straczynski and Sam Egan in its first season, and by Straczynski and Grant Rosenberg in its second. Loosely based on Huppen's 1979 comic, the series retained only the names of the two main characters, the protagonist\u2019s general personality, and the post-apocalyptic setting. \nShooting began in Vancouver, British Columbia in the fall of 2001. Actors Luke Perry, from \"Beverly Hills 90210\", and Malcolm-Jamal Warner, from \"The Cosby Show\", were cast in the leads. Featuring Jeremiah and Kurdy traveling the country in a military Jeep, Straczynski described \"Jeremiah\" as a \u201croad show.\"\nFilming.\nThe series was filmed in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.\nCancellation.\nStraczynski had prepared a five-year series, but a change in personnel in Showtime's administration caused the network to decide to stop producing science fiction programming and unofficially cancel \"Jeremiah\" before the second season had its debut in November 2003. Fans realized the possibility of cancellation when Showtime announced the airing of only the first seven out of fifteen episodes of the second season, and organized a campaign to write and phone executives at Showtime, MGM and Platinum Studios to convince them to show the remaining eight and continue with a third season. Ultimately, the network began airing the remaining of the second season starting on September 3, 2004 - after a ten-month break since the last aired episode - but despite continuously rising ratings did not proceed with the renewal of the show.\nBefore season 2 premiered, Straczynski vowed to never work with the then-current administration of MGM Television after experiencing major creative differences with them, and had there been a third season it would have to run under some new showrunner. Everyone on cast and crew, including Grant Rosenberg, the second season's co-executive producer, were willing to have continued.\nHome media.\nIn January 2004, MGM Home Entertainment released season 1 of \"Jeremiah\" on DVD. Season 2 was released on DVD as a \"burn on demand\" from Amazon (available to US and Canadian addresses only) in March 2010. The series episodes are also available as digital purchases on Amazon Video, Hulu and iTunes (season 2 only).\nIn other media.\nRPGs.\nAfter having been designed by Morrigan Press, Mongoose Publishing published \"Jeremiah: The Roleplaying Game\" in 2005.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75154", "revid": "38049884", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75154", "title": "Anne Lamott", "text": "American novelist and nonfiction writer (born 1954)\nAnne Lamott (born April 10, 1954) is an American novelist and nonfiction writer.\nShe is also a progressive political activist, public speaker, and writing teacher. Lamott is based in Marin County, California. Her nonfiction works are largely autobiographical. Lamott's writings, marked by their self-deprecating humor and openness, cover such subjects as alcoholism, single-motherhood, depression, and Christianity.\nEarly life and education.\nLamott was born in San Francisco, and is a graduate of Drew School. She was a student at Goucher College for two years where she wrote for the newspaper. Her father, Kenneth Lamott, was also a writer. Her first published novel \"Hard Laughter\" was written for him after his diagnosis of brain cancer. She has one son, Sam, who was born in August 1989 and a grandson, Jax, born in July 2009.\nCareer.\nLamott's life was documented in Freida Lee Mock's 1999 documentary \"Bird by Bird with Annie: A Film Portrait of Writer Anne Lamott\". Because of the documentary and her following on Facebook and other online networks, she is often called the \"People's Author\".\nLamott has described why she writes: I try to write the books I would love to come upon, that are honest, concerned with real lives, human hearts, spiritual transformation, families, secrets, wonder, craziness\u2014and that can make me laugh. When I am reading a book like this, I feel rich and profoundly relieved to be in the presence of someone who will share the truth with me, and throw the lights on a little, and I try to write these kinds of books. Books, for me, are medicine.\nLamott was featured on the second episode of the first season of the show \"The Midnight Gospel\".\nAwards and honors.\nLamott was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1985. She was inducted into the California Hall of Fame in 2010.\nPersonal life.\nLamott was born in San Francisco, California on April 10, 1954 to her mother, Dorothy Lamott, and the writer Kenneth Lamott, who served as Anne Lamott's inspiration. \nOn April 13, 2019, at the age of 65, Lamott married Neal Allen, 63, a former vice president for marketing at the McKesson Corporation in San Francisco. He is a twice-divorced father of four, who left his job at McKesson to devote himself to writing. The couple met in August 2016. Lamott has a son named Sam (born in 1989) from a previous relationship.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75155", "revid": "33299132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75155", "title": "Majorian", "text": "Western Roman emperor from 457 to 461\nMajorian (; c.\u2009420\u00a0\u2013 7 August 461) was Western Roman emperor from 457 to 461. A prominent commander in the Western military, Majorian deposed Avitus in 457 with the aid of his ally Ricimer at the Battle of Placentia. Possessing little more than Italy and Dalmatia, as well as some territory in Hispania and northern Gaul, Majorian campaigned vigorously for three years against the Empire's enemies. In 461, he was murdered at Dertona in a conspiracy, and his successors until the fall of the Empire in 476 were puppets either of barbarian generals or the Eastern Roman court.\nAfter defeating a Vandal attack on Italy in 457, Majorian intercepted the Visigoths in the Battle of Arelate, defeating them and saving the city. Securing Septimania, he reduced the Goths to federate status, returning Hispania to the empire. Meanwhile, Marcellinus was convinced to recognise Majorian, reconquering Sicily in the emperor's name. Majorian then attacked the Burgundians, reconquering Lugdunum and expelling them from the Rh\u00f4ne valley. Marching into Gaul, he reintegrated the Gallo-Romans and appointed Aegidius commander of the region, whilst Nepotianus invaded the Kingdom of the Suebi and reconquered Scalabis. In 460, Majorian entered Hispania and readied a fleet for an invasion of Africa. However, the Vandals bribed traitors into defection and destroyed the fleet in the Battle of Cartagena, forcing Majorian to return to Italy.\nDuring his reign, Majorian instituted reforms to reduce corruption, rebuild the state's institutions and preserve ancient monuments. This led to an antagonistic relationship with the Roman Senate, which was exploited by Ricimer to behead Majorian upon his arrival in Italy in 461. The 6th-century writer Procopius asserted that Majorian \"surpassed in every virtue all who have ever been emperors of the Romans\", whilst Sidonius Apollinaris, a contemporary of the emperor, stated, \"That he was gentle to his subjects; that he was terrible to his enemies; and that he excelled in every virtue, all his predecessors who had reigned over the Romans.\"\nEarly life.\nThe life of Majorian and his reign are better known than those of the other Western Emperors of the same period. The most important sources are the chronicles that cover the second half of the 5th century\u2014those of Hydatius and Marcellinus Comes, as well as the fragments of Priscus and John of Antioch.\nBesides these sources, which are useful also for the biographies of the other emperors, some peculiar sources are available that make Majorian's life known in some detail, both before and after his rise to the throne. The Gallo-Roman aristocrat and poet Sidonius Apollinaris was an acquaintance of the Emperor and composed a panegyric that is the major source for Majorian's life up to 459. As regards his policy, twelve of his laws have been preserved: the so-called \"\" were included in the Breviary of Alaric, compiled for Alaric II in 506, which helps to understand the problems that pressed Majorian's government.\nMajorian was probably born after 420, as in 458 he was described as a ('young man'). He belonged to the military aristocracy of the Roman Empire. His grandfather of the same name reached the rank of under Emperor Theodosius I and, as commander-in-chief of the Illyrian army, was present at his coronation at Sirmium in 379. The 's daughter then married an officer, probably called Domninus, who administered the finances of Aetius, the most powerful general of the West. The couple gave the name \"Maiorianus\" to their child in honour of his influential grandfather, as was the custom for the firstborn son.\nIt was under the same Aetius that Majorian started his military career. He followed Aetius to Gallia, where he met two officers also under Aetius's command who were to play an important role in Majorian's life: the Suebic-Visigoth Ricimer and the Gallo-Roman Aegidius. Majorian distinguished himself in the defence of the city of Turonensis (modern Tours) and in a battle near \"Vicus Helena\" (447 or 448) against the Franks under Chlodio. In the latter, Majorian fought at the head of his cavalry on a bridge, while Aetius controlled the roads leading to the battlefield:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There was a narrow passage at the junction of two ways, and a road crossed both the village of Helena... and the river. [A\u00ebtius] was posted at the cross-roads while Majorian warred as a mounted man close to the bridge itself...\u2014\u200a\nAround 450, the Western Roman Emperor Valentinian III considered the possibility of marrying his daughter Placidia to Majorian. Valentinian had two daughters but no sons, and therefore no heir to the throne. Having Majorian as son-in-law would have strengthened Valentinian in the face of other powerful generals and would have solved the problem of the succession. Furthermore, as Emperor, Majorian could have led the army himself, freed from the dangerous bond with a powerful general, such as Valentinian had been obliged to contract with Aetius.\nThe intention of this plan was to avoid the possibility that barbarian generals like Huneric or Attila should succeed to Aetius, but clashed with the plans of Aetius himself. The Roman general, in fact, planned to marry his own son Gaudentius to Placidia. He therefore opposed Valentinian's plan, and put an end to Majorian's military career, expelling him from his staff and sending him to his country estate. According to the poet Sidonius Apollinaris, the cause of the fall of Majorian was the jealousy of Aetius's wife, who feared that Majorian could overshadow Aetius's prestige.\nIt was only in 454 that Majorian was able to return to public life. In that year, Valentinian III killed Aetius with his own hands. Fearing that Aetius's troops might revolt, he called Majorian back to office to quell any dissent. In the following year, Valentinian III was killed by two former officers of Aetius's staff. There was then a fight for the succession, as no heir existed. Majorian played the role of the candidate for the throne of Licinia Eudoxia, Valentinian's widow, and of Ricimer, who reserved for himself a role similar to Aetius's.\nIn the end, the new emperor was Petronius Maximus, a senator involved in Valentinian's murder, who outmanoeuvred the other candidates. To strengthen his position, he obliged Licinia to marry him and promoted Majorian to the rank of (commander-in-chief of the imperial guard).\nRise to the throne.\nThe revolt against Avitus.\nPetronius ruled only for a few weeks, as he was killed during the Vandal sack of Rome (May 455). He was succeeded, not by Majorian, but by the Gallo-Roman noble Avitus, who had the support of the Visigoths. Both Majorian, \"comes domesticorum\", and Ricimer, \"comes rei militaris\" of Italy, initially supported Avitus, but when the Emperor lost the loyalty of the Italian aristocracy, the two generals revolted against him. First Majorian and Ricimer killed Remistus, the \"magister militum\" entrusted by Avitus with the defence of the capital, Ravenna. Then Ricimer defeated Avitus' troops near Placentia, taking the Emperor himself prisoner, and obliging him to abdicate. Finally, Majorian caused Avitus' death, possibly starving him, in early 457.\nEmperor of the West.\nAvitus was dead and the Western throne without an emperor. It was thus for the Eastern Roman Emperor to choose the successor, but Marcian could do nothing, as he died on 27 January 457. His successor on the Eastern throne was the general Leo I, who instead decided to rule alone. On 28 February, Majorian became \"magister militum\", while Ricimer became \"patricius\" and \"magister militum\". This was more likely an act of usurpation rather than an appointment made by Leo.\nWhile the situation was in a precarious equilibrium, a troop of 900 Alemanni invaded Italy. They entered from Raetia and penetrated Italian territory down to Lake Maggiore. There they were intercepted and defeated in the Battle of Campi Cannini by the troops of \"comes\" Burco, sent by Majorian to stop them:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The savage Alaman had scaled the Alps and had emerged, plundering the Roman land; he had sent 900 foemen to scour for booty... By this time you were Master [of Soldiers], and you sent forth Burco with a band of followers... Fortune brought about a triumph not through numbers but through their love of you... You fought with the authority of a Master but the destiny of an Emperor\u2014\u200a\nThis victory was celebrated as Majorian's own, and the \"magister militum\" was acclaimed Emperor by the army (perhaps on 1 April), six miles outside Ravenna, at a place called \"ad Columellas\", \"at the Little Columns\".\nIn his panegyric to Majorian, the poet Sidonius Apollinaris tells that Majorian initially refused the election:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The world trembled with alarm while you were loath to permit your victories to benefit you, and because, overly modest, you grieved because you deserved the throne and because you would not undertake to rule what you had deemed worth defending\u2014\u200a\nMajorian was formally declared emperor on 28 December. Majorian assumed the consulate for the year 458; it was customary that a new Emperor took this magistracy on the first year started as Emperor. He apparently never obtained recognition from the eastern court, as almost all contemporary eastern sources refer to Leo I as sole consul.\nForeign affairs.\nDefence of Italy.\nIn summer 457, a group of Vandals, led by the brother-in-law of Genseric, landed in Campania, at the mouth of the Liri river, and started devastating and sacking the region. Majorian personally led the Roman army to a victory over the invaders near Sinuessa and followed the defeated Vandals, loaded with their booty, as far as their own ships, killing many of them including their commander.\nAfter this event, Majorian understood that he had to take the initiative if he wanted to defend the heart of his Empire, the only territory he actually controlled. So he decided to strengthen its defences. First, he issued a law, the \"Novella Maioriani\" 8 known as \"De reddito iure armorum\" (\"On the Return of the Right to Bear Arms\"), concerning the personal right to bear arms; in 440, Valentinian III had already promulgated a law with the same name, \"Novella Valentiniani\" 9, after another attack of the Vandals. It is probably to this time that another law is to be dated, the \"Novella Maioriani\" 12 known as \"De aurigis et seditiosis\" (\"Concerning Charioteers and Seditious Persons\"), to quell the disorders that sprang up during the chariot races. Both these laws are now lost.\nHe then strengthened the army, recruiting a large number of barbarian mercenaries, including Gepids, Ostrogoths, Rugii, Burgundians, Huns, Bastarnae, Suebi, Scythians and Alans. Finally, he rebuilt two fleets, probably those of Miseno and Ravenna, since the Vandals had a strong navy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Meanwhile you built on the two shores fleets for the upper and lower sea. Down into the water falls every forest of the Apennines\u2014\u200a\nReconquest of Gaul.\nAfter consolidating his position in Italy, Majorian concentrated on the recovery of Gaul. When news of the deposition of the Gallo-Roman emperor Avitus arrived in Gaul, the province refused to recognize Majorian as his successor. An important clue to this is an inscription found in Lugdunum (modern Lyons) and dating to 458; according to Roman custom, the inscriptions were dated by writing the names of the consuls in office, who that year were supposed to be Leo I and Majorian. This inscription, instead, records only the name of Eastern Emperor Leo I, showing that Majorian was not recognized at the time as the lawful Western Emperor.\nAnother clue is the fact that, at the death of Avitus, the citizens of Lugdunum sent an envoy to Leo, and not to Majorian, to ask for a reduction of taxation. Finally, there is a record of a failed usurpation in Gaul, around this time.\nIn late 458, Majorian entered Gaul, with an army strengthened by barbarian units. The Emperor personally led the army, leaving Ricimer in Italy and choosing Aegidius and the \"magister militum Nepotianus\" as collaborators. The imperial army defeated the Visigoths under king Theodoric II at the Battle of Arelate, forcing the Visigoths to abandon Septimania and withdraw west to Aquitania. The Roman victory was decisive: under the new treaty the Visigoths had to relinquish their vast conquests in Hispania and return to federate status. Majorian chose his trusted general Aegidius as the new \"magister militum per Gallias\" (military commander of Gaul) and sent an envoy to Hispania, to report the victory over the Visigoths and the new treaty with Theodoric II.\nWith the help of his new \"foederati\", Majorian entered the Rhone Valley, conquering its populations \"some by arms and some by diplomacy\". He defeated the Burgundians and besieged and conquered the city of Lugdunum: the rebel city was heavily fined, while the Bagaudae were forced to join the Empire. Despite the fact that the Gallo-Roman aristocracy had sided with Avitus, Majorian wanted a reconciliation, not a punishment. With the intercession of Majorian's \"magister epistolarum\" Petrus, Sidonius Apollinaris, the son-in-law of Avitus, was allowed to deliver a panegyric in honour of the Emperor (early January 459), receiving in reward the appointment to the rank of \"comes spectabilis\". Much more effective was, however, the granting of the tax remission that the citizens of Lugdunum had requested from Leo I.\nCampaign in Hispania.\nIn the wake of the Vandal sack of Rome (455), the Visigoths had conquered Hispania, formally in the name of the new Western Emperor Avitus, actually controlling the territory themselves. Majorian planned to reconquer Hispania and use it as the base for the conquest of Africa. This rich province of the Western Empire, which provided for the very important grain supply to the city of Rome, was in fact under Vandal control.\nAccording to the historian Procopius, Majorian, \"who surpassed in every virtue all who ever were emperors of the Romans\", wanted to know personally the military readiness of the Vandals and how the local populations would react to the Roman invasion. He dyed black his fair hair, for which he was famous, and went to Genseric claiming to be an envoy of the Western Emperor. Genseric tried to impress the enemy ambassador by showing him the arms collected in the warehouses and sent him back. This story is probably only a legend of Italian folklore, but it is a clue to the care with which the expedition was prepared. Majorian collected information on the enemy and gathered a fleet of three hundred ships to support the army in the reconquest of Hispania and in the invasion of Africa.\nIt was probably during the preparation of this operation that Majorian sent the \"comes\" and \"patricius Occidentis\" Marcellinus to Sicily with an army of Huns, to take the island back from the Vandals. Marcellinus was the \"comes rei militaris\" (governor) of Illyricum, but he had become practically independent since the death of Aetius, not recognizing the imperial authority. Majorian convinced him to accept him as Emperor and even to collaborate with his troops in the military recovery of the Empire.\nThe campaign started with an operation against the Suebi in North-Western Hispania, lasting the whole of 459, led by the \"magister militiae\" Nepotianus and the Gothic \"comes\" Sunieric. Majorian gathered the main part of the army in Liguria, then entered Aquitaine and \"Novempopulania\" coming from Theodoric's court in Toulouse (May 460). Genseric, fearing the Roman invasion, tried to negotiate a peace with Majorian, who rejected the proposal, since the economic investment he had done to prepare the campaign had been enormous. The Vandal king then decided to devastate Mauretania and Numidia, his own territory, by poisoning the water sources and burning the fields, because he thought that the Roman army would land there, and also ordered his navy to prepare incursions in the waters near the probable invasion area.\nIn the meantime, Majorian was conquering Hispania. While Nepotianus and Sunieric defeated the Suebi at \"Lucus Augusti\" (modern Lugo) and conquered \"Scallabis\" in Lusitania (modern Santar\u00e9m, Portugal), the Emperor passed through \"Caesaraugusta\" (Saragossa), where he performed a formal imperial \"adventus\". Finally he reached Carthaginiensis, where his fleet, docked at \"Portus Illicitanus\" (near Elche), was destroyed by traitors paid by the Vandals:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While Majorian was campaigning in the province of Carthaginiensis the Vandals destroyed, through traitors, several ships that he was preparing for himself for a crossing against the Vandals from the shore of Carthaginiensis. Majorian, frustrated in this manner from his intention, returned to Italy.\u2014\u200a\nIn autumn 460 Majorian, deprived of the fleet that was necessary for the invasion, cancelled the attack on the Vandals and received the ambassadors of Gaiseric, with whom he agreed to conclude peace, which probably included the recognition of the \"de facto\" occupation of Mauretania by the Vandals. He disbanded his costly troops, and moved to Arelate to spend the winter, while he expected to be welcome with dissent in Italy.\nDomestic policy.\nMajorian's domestic policy is known thanks to some of the laws he issued, the so-called \"Novellae Maioriani\", that were included in a collection of Roman law called the Breviary of Alaric, requested from some Gallo-Roman jurists in 506 by the Visigothic king Alaric II .\nThe preserved laws are:\nFiscal policy and coinage.\nMajorian understood that he could reign effectively only with the support of the senatorial aristocracy, whom he wanted to return to its pristine political prominence. At the same time, he planned to reduce the abuses perpetrated by the senators, many of whom cultivated their local interests disregarding the imperial policies, even refusing to pay taxes and keeping for themselves the taxes they had exacted. This fiscal evasion had a cascade effect that affected the small landowners, the citizens and the local civil magistrates.\nFor example, the decurions had to personally compensate the imperial treasury for all taxes not exacted. Sometimes, oppressed by the debts accumulated in this way, the decurions abandoned their status, a problem which was previously addressed by Emperor Julian (361\u2013363). Majorian also cancelled tax arrears, knowing that fiscal policy could not be effective if taxpayers had to pay large accumulated arrears.\nOn 11 March 458, Majorian issued a law entitled \"De indulgentiis reliquorum\", \"On the Remission of Past-Due Accounts\" (\"Novella Maioriani\" 2). This law remitted all the tax arrears of the landowners. This same law explicitly prohibited public administrators, who had a record of keeping the collected money for themselves, from collecting taxes. This task was to be reserved to the governors alone. Another law issued to reorganise the tax system was issued on 4 September of the same year, and was entitled \"De bonis caducis sive proscriptorum\", \"On Abandoned Property and That of Proscribed Persons\" (\"Novella Maioriani\" 5): the \"comes privatae largitionis\" Ennodius was to admonish the provincial judges against defrauding the imperial treasure by keeping for themselves a part of the money collected.\nThe Emperor was also interested in repairing the backbone of the imperial administration. On 8 May 458, Majorian issued a law entitled \"De defensoribus civitatum\", \"The Defenders of the Municipalities\" (\"Novella Maioriani\" 3), to re-establish the office of the Defensor civitatis. This city magistrate represented the interests of the citizens in trials against the public administration, particularly in fiscal matters; this magistracy was still in existence, but actually ineffective, since it was often held by the same officials who cheated the population.\nAnother law was issued on 6 November to strengthen the magistracy of the decurions. \"De curialibus et de agnatione vel distractione praediorum et de ceteris negotiis\", \"Decurions, Their Children and The Sale of Their Landed Estates\" (\"Novella Maioriani\" 7), was issued to forgive past abuses perpetrated by the decurions. This forbade them from leaving their status (going into hiding or marrying slave or tenant farmers) or alienating their own properties.\nMajorian minted coins in gold, silver and bronze. Gold coinage was minted in great quantities. On these coins the Emperor is depicted, with few exceptions, with a combat helmet, a spear, a shield, and a chi-rho, looking towards the right; this typology was derived from a rare type minted in Ravenna for Honorius and used in great quantities only by Majorian, it was dropped by his successors. The first series of solidi were probably minted in Ravenna, and bear on the obverse the joint portrait of Majorian and Leo I, thus celebrating the mutual recognition of the two Roman emperors. The mints of Ravenna and Milan issued both solidi and tremisses from the beginning of Majorian's reign.\nNo series of semisses are attested for these two mints, probably because the semisses were typically minted by the mint of Rome and this mint was not active under Majorian, who never visited the ancient capital of his Empire during his four years of rule. The minting of solidi is attested for the mint of Arelate in 458, a fact compatible with the presence of Majorian in Gaul in that year. This mint was again active in 460, when the Emperor returned from his campaign in Hispania. The Visigoths minted some reproductions of his solidi, modelled after the issues of the Arelate mint: as Arelate issued only solidi, the Visigoths used those designs also for the tremissis.\nSilver coinage was issued almost exclusively by the Gallic mints; it has been suggested that these series were not issued by Majorian, but by Aegidius after the Emperor's death, to mark the fact that he did not recognize his successor, Libius Severus. Majorian also produced great quantities of nummi of great weight, mostly minted at Ravenna and Milan, and some contorniates, mostly in Rome, but probably also in Ravenna.\nNatalist policies.\nThe diffusion of Christianity in the Empire caused some social changes within the aristocratic families. In several wealthy families, daughters were obliged to take religious vows and never marry, so that the family wealth would not be dispersed in dowries. Majorian thought that this behaviour was harmful to the State, because it reduced the number of Roman children, and because it caused the girls to start illicit affairs. On 26 October 458, the Emperor addressed a law, the \"Novella Maioriani\" 6, to the Praetorian prefect of Italy, Caecina Decius Basilius.\nThis law, titled \"De sanctimonialibus vel viduis et de successionibus earum\" (\"Holy Maidens, Widows, and Their Succession\"), imposed a minimum age of 40 for taking religious vows, considering that at this age the sexual drives of the initiated would be dormant. The law also granted women who had been forced to take religious vows, and were subsequently disinherited, the same rights on the legacy of parents as their brothers and sisters.\nIn order to solve this same problem of the decline of the Roman population, in particular compared with the growth of the barbarians allocated within the imperial boundaries, Majorian addressed the problem of young women widowed and without children who never remarried because of the influence of the clergy, to whom they destined their goods in their will. The young widows were prohibited from taking religious vows.\nBy the same measure, departing in this from the policy of the Eastern Empire, Majorian insisted that a marriage without dowry and pre-wedding exchange of gifts (first from the bride's family to the groom, then in the opposite direction) was invalid; he simultaneously ended the practice of requesting pre-wedding gifts of a value considerably higher than the dowry.\nRelationship with the senatorial aristocracy.\nWhen Majorian took power by deposing Avitus, the province of Gaul, where Avitus' power was based, did not recognize the new Emperor. When Majorian re-conquered the province, he chose to forgive this rebellion. The reason was that Majorian understood that one of the mistakes of his predecessor was to promote and trust only the senatorial aristocracy of Gaul, the region he came from, favouring it over the senatorial aristocracy of Italy.\nMajorian, instead, decided to gain the favour of the wealthy and noble families of the recovered province by involving them in the imperial administration, together with the Italian aristocracy that had supported him since the beginning. For evidence of this policy, one can point to the origins of the high civil servants of his administration, in particular of the consuls, whom the Emperor appointed jointly with his Eastern colleague.\nIn the first year (458) Majorian reserved the honour for himself, as was usual for the \"augusti\", while in the second year he appointed his former colleague and powerful \"magister militum\", Ricimer. Then, for the year 460, he choose the Gallic senator Magnus, and for the next year the Italian senator Severinus. Magnus had been appointed Praetorian prefect of Gaul in 458, while the Praetorian prefect of Italy was Caecina Decius Basilius, who was the patron of the Gallic senator (and poet) Sidonius Apollinaris, while the \"comes privatae largitionis\", Ennodius, was related to a family with interests in Arelate.\nMajorian also showed great respect towards the Roman senate, as suggested by the message he addressed to it on the eve of his coronation: he promised the senators he would not take into account the accusations of informers, which were much feared as they might be used by the Emperor to cause the fall of influential figures. He followed through on his promises, as told by Sidonius Apollinaris, who had been anonymously accused of the authorship of a pamphlet against some influential figures: during a dinner together, Majorian defused the risky situation with a witticism.\nConservation of the monuments of Rome.\nFrom the beginning of the 4th century, the monuments of Rome, and more generally all buildings of some value that were in a state of neglect for various reasons, were increasingly used as quarries for valuable building materials. This practice, in fact, was cheaper and more convenient than import from remote locations, which was sometimes rendered difficult or impossible by the control of the sea by the Vandals. Roman officials conceded upon petition the use for construction of marble, stone and brick recovered from demolition of ancient monuments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hence the occasion now arises that also each and every person who is constructing a private edifice through the favoritism of the judges who are situated in the City, does not hesitate to take presumptuously and to transfer the necessary materials from the public places, although those things which belong to the splendor of the cities ought to be preserved by civic affection, even under the necessity of repair.\u2014\u200a\nTo cope with this phenomenon, Majorian promulgated a law, \"Novella Maioriani\" 4, \"De aedificiis pubblicis\" (\"Public Buildings\"), in Ravenna on 11 July 459, addressed to Aemilianus, \"praefectus urbi\" of Rome. The punishment for judges who had allowed the destruction of ancient public buildings was 50 pounds of gold, while their subordinates were whipped and had both hands amputated. Those who had removed materials from public buildings were to return them. The Senate had the power to decide whether there were extreme conditions that justified the demolition of an old building and, if it decided for the demolition, the Emperor still had the right to order that the resulting materials should be used to decorate other public buildings.\nFall and death.\nJust as Avitus's fate had been decided by the betrayal by Ricimer and Majorian and by the dismissal of his German guard, so the fate of Majorian himself was decided by the disbandment of his army and a plot organized by Ricimer. In fact, while the Emperor was busy away from Italy, the barbarian \"patricius et magister militum\" had gathered around himself the aristocratic opposition to his former comrade with whom, just a few years earlier, he had cultivated dreams of power. Majorian's legislation had shown that he intended to intervene decisively on issues that plagued the empire, even if they countered the interests of influential aristocrats.\nAfter spending the winter and the spring after the defeat in the Vandal campaign at Arelate, Majorian left during summer with a small guard (probably \"domestici\"), probably with the intention to reach Rome. He did not try to cross the Alps, as he had done in 458, but moved from Arelate along the via Aurelia, in Southern Gallia and Liguria, only to change direction and move towards the north: he had probably received news that Ricimer was coming to meet him, and wanted to reach Dertona and from there take the via Aemilia towards Ravenna. However Ricimer intercepted him in Dertona (not far from Piacenza, where Avitus had been killed) on 2 August, and had him arrested and deposed.\nThe Emperor was deprived of his dress and diadem, and beaten. After five days, on 7 August, Majorian was beheaded near the river Iria. The city of Tortona now hosts, in the church of St. Matthew, a building traditionally identified as the \"mausoleum of Majorian\"; however, Ennodius complains that Majorian did not receive an appropriate burial.\nRicimer spread the news that Majorian had died of natural causes, then waited for three months before placing on the imperial throne a person he believed he could manipulate. He finally chose Libius Severus, a senator of no political distinction, probably selected to please the Italian senatorial aristocracy. The new emperor was not recognized by the Eastern Emperor Leo I, nor by any of the generals who had served under Majorian: not by Aegidius in Gaul, not by Marcellinus in Sicily and Illyria, and not by Nepotianus in Hispania.\nLegacy.\nAccording to historian Edward Gibbon, Majorian \"presents the welcome discovery of a great and heroic character, such as sometimes arise, in a degenerate age, to vindicate the honour of the human species\". The \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" likewise calls him \"the only man to hold that office [i.e. the imperial throne] in the 5th century who had some claim to greatness.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons "}
{"id": "75159", "revid": "40220352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75159", "title": "K Foundation Burn a Million Quid", "text": "1994 work of performance art\nK Foundation Burn a Million Quid was a work of performance art executed and filmed on 23 August 1994 in which the K Foundation, an art duo consisting of Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty, burned \u00a31 million (equivalent to \u00a3 million in 2023) in the back of a disused boathouse on the Ardfin Estate on the Scottish island of Jura. The money represented the bulk of the K Foundation's funds that had been previously earned by Drummond and Cauty as the KLF.\nThe event was recorded on a Hi-8 video camera by K Foundation collaborator Gimpo. On the one-year anniversary of the burning, 23 August 1995, the film was released as \"Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid\" and was toured around the UK, with Drummond and Cauty engaging audiences in debates about the burning and its meaning. In November 1995, the duo pledged to dissolve the K Foundation and to refrain from public discussion of the burning for a period of 23 years. \nDrummond discreetly spoke about the burning in 2000 and 2004. Initially, he was unrepentant, but in 2004 he admitted that he regretted burning the money. The self-imposed moratorium officially ended on 23 August 2017, 23 years after the burning, when Cauty and Drummond hosted a debate asking \"Why Did the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid?\" during their \"Welcome to the Dark Ages\" event.\nCollaborator Chris Brook edited and compiled a book, \"K Foundation Burn A Million Quid\", which was published by Ellipsis Books in 1997. It compiles stills from the film, accounts of events and viewer reactions, and an image of the brick that was manufactured from the fire's ashes. A film consisting of a static three-minute shot of the brick, \"This Brick\", was shown at London's Barbican Centre prior to Drummond and Cauty's performance as 2K in the same year.\nBackground.\nAs the KLF, Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty were the biggest-selling singles act in the world for 1991. They had also enjoyed considerable success with their album \"The White Room\" and a number one hit single \u2013 \"Doctorin' the Tardis\" \u2013 as The Timelords. In February 1992, the KLF staged an incendiary performance at the BRIT Awards, and retired from the music industry shortly thereafter in typically enigmatic fashion.\nBy their own account, neither Drummond nor Cauty kept any of the money they made as the KLF; it was all ploughed back into their extravagant productions. Cauty told an Australian \"Big Issue\" writer in 2003 that all the money they made as the KLF was spent, and that the royalties they accrued post-retirement amounted to approximately one million pounds: {\nInitially the KLF's earnings were to be distributed by way of a fund for struggling artists managed by the K Foundation, Drummond and Cauty's new post-KLF art project, but, said Drummond, \"We realised that struggling artists are meant to struggle, that's the whole point.\" Instead the duo decided to create art \"with\" the money. \"Nailed to the Wall\" was the first piece of art produced by the Foundation, and the major piece in their planned art exhibition, \"Money: A Major Body of Cash\". Consisting of one million pounds in cash nailed to a pine frame, the piece was presented to the press on 23 November 1993 during the buildup to the Foundation's announcement of the \"winner\" of their \"worst artist of the year award\", the K Foundation art award.\nDecision and burning.\nDuring the first half of 1994, the K Foundation attempted to interest galleries in staging \"Money: A Major Body of Cash\", but even old friend Jayne Casey, director of the Liverpool Festival Trust, was unable to persuade a major gallery to participate. \"'The Tate, in Liverpool, wanted to be part of the 21st Century Festival I'm involved with,' says Casey. 'I suggested they put on the K Foundation exhibition; at first they were encouraging, but they seemed nervous about the personalities involved.' A curt fax from [...] the gallery curator informed Casey that the K Foundation's exhibition of money had been done before and more interestingly\", leaving Drummond and Cauty obliged to pursue other options. The duo considered taking the exhibition across the former Soviet Union by train and on to the United States, but no insurer would touch the project. An exhibition at Kilmainham Jail in Dublin was then considered, but no sooner had a provisional August date been set for it than the duo changed their minds yet again. \"Jimmy said: 'Why don't we just burn it?' remembers Drummond. 'He said it in a light-hearted way, I suppose, hoping I'd say: 'No, we can't do that, let's do this...' But it seemed the most powerful thing to do.\" Cauty: \"We were just sitting in a cafe talking about what we were going to spend the money on and then we decided it would be better if we burned it. That was about six weeks before we did it. It was too long, it was a bit of a nightmare.\"\nThe journey from deciding to burn the money to deciding how to burn the money to actually burning the money was a long one. Jim Reid, a freelance journalist and the only independent witness to the burning, reported the various schemes the K Foundation considered. The first was offering \"Nailed to the Wall\" to the Tate Gallery as the \"1995 K Foundation Bequest to the Nation.\" The condition was that the gallery must agree to display the piece for at least 10 years. If they refused, the money would be burnt. A second idea was to hire Bankside Power Station, \"the future site of the Tate Gallery extension and an imposing building downstream from the South Bank\", as a bonfire venue. In typical KLF 'guerrilla communication' style, \"posters were to appear on 15 August bearing the legend 'The 1995 K Foundation Bequest to the Nation', under which would have been an image of Nailed to the Wall on an easel and two flame-throwers lying on the floor. On 24 August a new poster would go up, exactly the same as the first except that this time the work would be burnt.\"\nThe K Foundation's ultimate resolution for their one-million-pound \"problem\" was rather less showbiz, but dramatic nonetheless, the Foundation having decided that making a public spectacle of the event would lessen its impact. On 22 August, Reid, Drummond, Cauty and Gimpo touched down at Islay Airport in the Inner Hebrides and took a ferry to the island of Jura, previously the scene of a wicker man burning ceremony by the KLF. Early in the morning of 23 August 1994, in an abandoned boathouse on Jura, Drummond and Cauty incinerated the money. The burning was witnessed by Reid, who subsequently wrote an article about the act for \"The Observer\", and it was filmed on a Hi-8 video camera by collaborator Gimpo. As the burning began Reid said he felt guilt and shock. These feelings, he reported, quickly turned to boredom.\nThe money took well over an hour to burn as Drummond and Cauty fed \u00a350 notes into the fire. According to Drummond, only about \u00a3900,000 of the money was actually burnt, with the remainder flying straight up the chimney. Two days later, according to Reid, Jimmy Cauty destroyed all film and photographic evidence of the burning. Ten months later, Gimpo revealed to them that he had secretly kept a copy.\nFilm.\n\"Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid\" starts with a short description of the event, and then consists of Drummond and Cauty throwing \u00a350 notes onto the fire. Burning the entire amount takes around 67 minutes. \"NME\" wrote: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At the start, Cauty is agitated and says he doesn't think the money will burn because it is too wet. The camera shows 20 thick bundles of \u00a350 notes, each bundle containing \u00a350,000 in new bank notes and sealed in cellophane. When the money ignites, Drummond starts to laugh as he and Cauty stand above a small fireplace throwing \u00a350 notes on to the fire. Cauty constantly stokes the blaze with a large wooden plank and at one stage burns his hand on a flaming note. As the fire starts to dim, he scuttles around the floor sweeping stray notes into the flames. The cameraman shows a view from outside the building with charred \u00a350 notes billowing out of the chimney.\nIn November 1995, the BBC aired an edition of the \"Omnibus\" documentary series about The K Foundation entitled \"A Foundation Course in Art\" (usually mislabelled as \"The K Foundation Burn a Million Quid\" online). Amongst the footage broadcast were scenes from \"Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid\". Thomas Sutcliffe, reviewing the programme in \"The Independent\", wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Omnibus film about this intriguing pair was in part a rear-guard action in their continuing battle for recognition (and a victory \u2013 for some people, after all, art is what appears on Omnibus). It was also a peculiarly modern fable about what constitutes an artist \u2013 will the artist's say-so do, or do you need the validation of the galleries? \"You can't simply decide you're going to become an artist,\" said one gallery owner haughtily, which left you wondering how else the vocation might operate. A lottery system? Secret-ballot election?\nFor my money (meagre though it is), the video which recorded the laborious process of immolation was a decidedly intriguing work \u2013 rather more provoking than some contemporary work I've seen. For established galleries, the medium used (video, bank-notes, fire) is obviously an embarrassment, but if poverty of material is not to disqualify artworks (bricks or lard, say) why should the expense of material?\nScreening tour.\nThe first public screening of \"Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid\" was on Jura on 23 August 1995 \u2013 exactly one year after the burning. \"We feel we should face them and answer their questions\" said one of the duo. Two weeks later an advert appeared in \"The Guardian\", announcing a world tour of the film over the next 12 months at \"relevant locations\". The second screening was at In the City music industry convention on 5 September in Manchester. After the film was shown, Drummond and Cauty held a question-and-answer session with the theme \"Is It Rock'n'Roll?\". A week later, the pair travelled as guests of alternative radio station B92 to Belgrade, where the post-screening discussion was titled \"Is it a crime against humanity?\" An unauthorised screening at the BBC Television Centre was curtailed and Drummond and Cauty were escorted from the building.\nOn the weekend of 3 November 1995, the film was screened at several locations in Glasgow, including at football matches involving Celtic and Rangers; a planned screening at Barlinnie prison was cancelled after the Scottish Prison Service withdrew permission. Glasgow's artistic community broadly seemed to welcome the screenings. A further public screening on Glasgow Green on 5 November was announced by various newspapers, but there is no record of the showing having ever occurred. The K Foundation disappeared from Glasgow; they later issued a statement that on 5 November 1995 they had signed a \"contract\" on the side of a Nissan Bluebird \u2013 which had then been pushed over the cliffs at Cape Wrath in northern Scotland \u2013 agreeing to wind up the K Foundation and not to speak about the money burning for a period of 23 years.\nDespite the K Foundation's reported moratorium, further national screenings of the film organised by Chris Brook took place as planned. At each screening, Drummond and Cauty announced they would not answer questions after the film; instead, they would ask questions of the audience. These screenings were held in Bradford, Hull, Liverpool, Jamaica Street Studios, Cheltenham Ladies College, Eton College, Aberystwyth, Glastonbury Tor, Alan Moore's front room and Brick Lane, London.\nThe Brick Lane screening \u2013 on 8 December 1995 \u2013 had been previewed in \"NME\", and was chaotically busy. It was originally planned for a car park, but freezing conditions and snow forced a rethink and the screening was moved indoors, to the basement of the nearby Seven Stars pub. Hundreds of people crammed in to watch the screening, which was eventually abandoned partway through due to the cramped conditions. The \"NME\" preview had claimed that after the screening the film would be cut up and individual frames sold off to the public. Gimpo, the owner of the film, had no intention of doing so, but after the screening was nearly overwhelmed by a mob of people wanting to take home a piece of the film.\nEnd of the moratorium.\nDrummond and Cauty ended their self-imposed moratorium on 23 August 2017, 23 years after the burning. \"Why Did the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid?\" was debated during \"Welcome to the Dark Ages\", a three-day festival celebrating the launch of their novel \"\".\nBurning as a theme.\nRitualistic burnings had already been a recurring aspect of Drummond and Cauty's work. In 1987, the duo disposed of copies of their copyright-breaching debut album\u2014The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu's \"1987 (What the Fuck Is Going On?)\"\u2014by burning them in a Swedish field. This event was pictured on the back sleeve of their second album, \"Who Killed The JAMs?\", and celebrated in the song \"Burn the Bastards\". During the 1991 summer solstice, they burnt a wicker man on Jura, as chronicled in the KLF movie \"The Rites of Mu\".\nAs the K Foundation, Drummond and Cauty threatened to burn the K Foundation art award prize money (Gimpo was fumbling with matches and lighter fluid when, at the last moment, Rachel Whiteread accepted the prize). In the seventh K Foundation press advert they asked \"What would you do with a million pounds? Burn it?\"\nReaction and analysis.\nJim Reid's piece appeared in \"The Observer\" on 25 September 1994. This is \"one of the most peculiar stories of the year\", he cautioned readers. \"Peculiar because pretty much everyone who comes across this magazine is going to have trouble believing a word of it. Peculiar because every last dot and comma of what is to come is the truth.\" \"It took about two hours for that cash to go up in flames\", he added. \"I looked at it closely, it was real. It came from a bona fide security firm and was not swapped at any time on our journey. More importantly, perhaps, after working with the K Foundation I know they are capable of this.\"\nThe \"Daily Express\" ran the story on 1 October 1994. They reported that charred \u00a350 notes were being found by islanders, who did not doubt the burning had really taken place. Drummond and Cauty had been seen eating in a hotel bar on Jura before leaving with two suitcases, the newspaper reported.\n\"The Times\" followed with essentially the same story on 4 October 1994, adding that the burning \"[had] left many on the island bewildered, incredulous and angry\". \u00a31,500 had been handed in by a local fisherman to Islay police: \"Sergeant Lachlan Maclean checked the money with both banks on Islay and with Customs and Excise, who pronounced it genuine. 'I telephoned Mr Drummond in London and told him the money had been found. I asked him if it was his. He said he would get in touch with his partner, Mr Cauty. So far he has not telephoned back'\".\nThe media returned to the story in earnest in October and November 1995, previewing and then reviewing \"Foundation Course in Art\", and reporting on the K Foundation's tour screening \"Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid\".\nAn October 1995 feature quoted Kevin Hull, the BBC documentary maker responsible for the \"Omnibus\" item, saying he had found \"the boys rather depressed, and almost in a state of shock\". \"Every day I wake up and I think 'Oh God, I've burnt a million quid and everyone thinks it's wrong'\", Cauty told him.\nA piece in \"The Times\" on 5 November 1995, coinciding with the Glasgow screenings, reported that the K Foundation had no solid reason for burning the money or view of what, if anything, the act represented, but concluded \"The K Foundation may not have changed or challenged much but they have certainly provoked thousands to question and analyse the power of money and the responsibilities of those who possess it. And what could be more artistic than that?\" In the same issue, the newspaper's K Foundation art award witness, Robert Sandall, wrote that the Foundation's award, million-pound artwork and the burning were all \"entertaining, and satirically quite sharp\", but \"the art world has chosen not to think [of it as art]... The general view remains that the K Foundation's preoccupation with money, though undoubtedly sincere, simply isn't very original. Although they didn't blow their entire life's savings along the way, other artists, notably Yves Klein and Chris Burden, have been here before.\"\n\"The Guardian\"'s TV reviewer was sceptical. \"Snag is, the K men have always dealt in myth and sown a trail of confusion, so nobody quite believes they really burned the money. And if they did, they must be nuts.\"\nLater reaction.\nIn the following years, the burning was mentioned regularly in the press, with Drummond and Cauty often relegated to a cultural status of \"the men who burnt a million quid\".\nA February 2000 article in \"The Observer\" newspaper again insisted that the duo really had burnt one million pounds. \"It wasn't a stunt. They really did it. If you want to rile Bill Drummond, you call him a hoaxer. 'I knew it was real,' a long-time friend and associate of his group The KLF tells me, 'because afterwards, Jimmy and Bill looked so harrowed and haunted. And to be honest, they've never really been the same since'\".\nA 2004 listener poll by BBC Radio 6 Music saw the KLF/K Foundation placed second after The Who in a list of \"rock excesses\".\nDrummond's former prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Julian Cope was unimpressed, claiming that Drummond still owed him money. \"He burned a million pounds which was not all his, and some of it was mine. People should pay off their creditors before they pull intellectual dry-wank stunts like that.\"\nLegacy.\nOn 17 September 1997, a new film, \"This Brick\", was premiered. The film consisted of one three-minute shot of a brick made from the ashes of the money burnt at Jura. It was shown at the Barbican Centre prior to Drummond and Cauty's performance as 2K.\nOn 27 September 1997, \"K Foundation Burn A Million Quid\" (, paperback) was published. The book, by Chris Brook and Gimpo, contains stills from the film and transcriptions of various Q&amp;A sessions from the tour. It also includes a timeline of K Foundation activity and sundry essays including one from Alan Moore. Publisher Ellipsis promoted the book with an advert modelled on those of the K Foundation \u2013 \"Why did Ellipsis publish K Foundation Burn A Million Quid?\" they asked.\nInitially, Drummond was unrepentant, telling \"The Observer\" in 2000 that he couldn't imagine ever feeling regret unless his child was ill and only \"an expensive clinic\" could cure him. By 2004, however, he had admitted to the BBC the difficulty of explaining his decision. \"It's a hard one to explain to your kids and it doesn't get any easier. I wish I could explain why I did it so people would understand.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75160", "revid": "45200411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75160", "title": "Lubin", "text": "Town in Lower Silesia, Poland\nLubin (; ) is a city in Lower Silesian Voivodeship in south-western Poland. It is the administrative seat of Lubin County, and also of the rural district called Gmina Lubin, although it is not part of the territory of the latter, as the town forms a separate urban gmina. As of 2021, the city had a total population of 70,815.\nLubin was a small town with medieval origins, being a castellan seat in the 12th century. Over the centuries it prospered as a center of cloth and linen making. It owed its recent great growth to the discovery of the largest copper ore deposits in Europe in 1957. The city is one of the major industrial locations in Lower Silesia, with the headquarters of the third-largest Polish corporation, the KGHM Polska Mied\u017a mining company, one of the world's leading copper and silver producers. It is one of four cities in the Copper Belt (along with Legnica, G\u0142og\u00f3w and Polkowice). It is located on the main highway connecting the port city of Szczecin with the Czech\u2013Polish border, part of the European route E65. Lubin has free public transport.\nThe city contains Gothic and Baroque landmarks, and is home to accomplished men's football and women's handball teams.\nGeography.\nLubin is situated on the Zimnica river in the Lower Silesian historical region.\nHistory.\nPiast dynasty rule.\nThe area of Lubin lies midway between the main settlements of two West Slavic \u015al\u0119\u017canie tribes, the Dziadoszanie and the Trzebowianie, whose lands were both subdued by Mieszko I of Poland about 990. It is unclear which of the two tribes, if either, founded the town. One legend states that the town derives its name from \"Luba\", a young man credited with slaying a giant bear that had been terrifying the inhabitants. A papal bull dated to circa 1155 mentions Lubin as one of 13 Silesian castellanies.\nAccording to legend the Polish voivode Piotr W\u0142ostowic of Dunin (1080\u20131153) had a fieldstone church built on the hill in the west of Lubin, where about 1230 a castellany and a village arose that until today is called the \"Old City\" (). The settlement in the Duchy of G\u0142og\u00f3w was first mentioned under the Old Polish name of \"Lubin\" in a 1267 deed by Pope Clement IV as a fiefdom of Trzebnica Abbey.\nThe New City of what is today Lubin was probably founded in the 1280s under the rule of Duke Przemko of \u015acinawa by German settlers, maybe descending from Lower Lorraine or Franconia, in the course of the \"Ostsiedlung\". It obtained its city rights about 1295. In 1329 Duke John of \u015acinawa paid homage to King John of Bohemia, who upon the death of John's brother Duke Przemko II of G\u0142og\u00f3w in 1331 invaded the lands, which were incorporated into the Kingdom of Bohemia and shared the political fortunes of the Silesian crown land.\nFrom 1348 Lubin Castle served as the residence of the Piast duke Louis I the Fair and his descendants. In the quarrel with his elder brother Duke Wenceslaus I of Legnica a 1359 judgement by Emperor Charles IV allotted Lubin along with Krzeczyn Wielki, Krzeczyn Ma\u0142y, Osiek and Pieszk\u00f3w to Louis. About 1353 he had a manuscript on the life of Saint Hedwig of Andechs drawn up, later called \"Schlackenwerth\" (Ostrov) Codex, which today is kept at the J. Paul Getty Museum. The Castle Chapel in Lubin dates to the 14th century.\nIn the late 15th century the Lubin parish church was rebuilt in its present-day Gothic style, its high altar was moved to Wroc\u0142aw Cathedral in 1951. Under the rule of Duke George I of Brieg (died 1521) and his widow Anna of Pomerania, the reformer Caspar Schwenckfeld, born in nearby Osiek, made the town a centre of the Protestant Reformation in Lower Silesia. With Lower Silesia, Lubin in 1526 fell under suzerainty of the Habsburg monarchy. It was devastated several times during the Thirty Years' War. Lubin remained part of the Piast-ruled Duchy of Legnica until 1675, when it was incorporated to the Habsburg-ruled Bohemia.\nLate modern period and World War II.\nConquered in the Silesian Wars by King Frederick II of Prussia in the mid-18th century, the town became a part of Prussia and later, in 1871, Germany. In 1871, after creation of the German Empire, it was connected by rail to Legnica (Liegnitz) and G\u0142og\u00f3w (Glogau). In reports on their parishes at the end of the 18th century, local pastors wrote about native Poles, who spoke a local dialect of the Polish language. The native Silesian population was subjected to planned Germanisation, which lasted until the 1930s. A labour camp of the Reich Labour Service was operated in the town under Nazi Germany.\nDuring World War II about 70% of the town's buildings were destroyed. In 1945 between the days of 8\u201310 February Red Army soldiers mass-murdered 150 German pensioners in an old-people's home and 500 psychiatric hospital patients in Lubin. The city eventually became again part of Poland, although with a Soviet-installed communist regime, which stayed in power until the 1980s. The remaining German population of the city was either expelled in accordance with the Potsdam Agreement, or prohibited from returning home by the communist authorities.\nDiscovery of copper deposits.\nIn 1957 Jan Wy\u017cykowski discovered and in 1959 documented in Lubin the largest copper ore deposits in Europe and one of the largest in the world. Soon copper mines were built and the KGHM company was established.\nFrom 1975 to 1998 it belonged to the former Legnica Voivodeship. In 1982 the city saw significant demonstrations against the martial law declared by the Communist regime, which were put down by its death squads, resulting in the murder of three people.\nTransport.\nMajor roads running through Lubin:\nLubin has a general aviation airport which is available for public use, it has a 1000m concrete/asphalt runway.\nPublic transport:\nCurrently the city has a newly built train station which offers connection to many locations across the country. And sometimes even out to Berlin, Germany with the EuroCity services.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nLubin is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75161", "revid": "50758720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75161", "title": "Cadmus", "text": "Greek mythology character, founder of Thebes\nIn Greek mythology, Cadmus (; ) was the legendary Phoenician founder of Boeotian Thebes. He was, alongside Perseus and Bellerophon, the greatest hero and slayer of monsters before the days of Heracles. Commonly stated to be a prince of Phoenicia, the son of king Agenor and queen Telephassa of Tyre, the brother of Phoenix, Cilix and Europa, Cadmus traced his origins back to Poseidon and Libya.\nOriginally, he was sent by his royal parents to seek out and escort his sister Europa back to Tyre after she was abducted from the shores of Phoenicia by Zeus. In early accounts, Cadmus and Europa were instead the children of Phoenix. Cadmus founded or refounded the Greek city of Thebes, the acropolis of which was originally named \"Cadmeia\" in his honour.\nHe is also credited with the foundation of several cities in Illyria, like Bouthoe and Lychnidus. In ancient Greek literature, the end of the mythical narrative of Cadmus and Harmonia is associated with Enchelei and Illyrians, a tradition deeply rooted among the Illyrian peoples.\nHis parentage was sometimes modified to suit, e.g. claims of Theban origin name his mother as one of the daughters of Nilus, one of the river gods and deity of the Nile river.\nOverview.\nCadmus was credited by the Greek historian Herodotus with introducing the original Phoenician alphabet to the Greeks, who adapted it to form their Greek alphabet. Modern scholarship has almost unanimously agreed with Herodotus concerning the Phoenician source of the alphabet.\nHerodotus estimates that Cadmus lived sixteen hundred years before his time, which would be around 2000 BC. Herodotus had seen and described the Cadmean writing in the temple of Apollo at Thebes engraved on certain tripods. He estimated those tripods to date back to the time of Laius the great-grandson of Cadmus. On one of the tripods there was this inscription in Cadmean writing, which, as he attested, resembled Ionian letters: (\"Amphitryon dedicated me from the spoils of [the battle of] Teleboae.\").\nAlthough Greeks like Herodotus dated Cadmus's role in the founding myth of Thebes to well before the Trojan War (or, in modern terms, during the Aegean Bronze Age), this chronology conflicts with most of what is now known or thought to be known about the origins and spread of both the Phoenician and Greek alphabets. The earliest Greek inscriptions match Phoenician letter forms from the late 9th or 8th centuries BC\u2014in any case, the Phoenician alphabet properly speaking was not developed until around 1050 BC (or after the Bronze Age collapse). The Homeric picture of the Mycenaean age betrays extremely little awareness of writing, possibly reflecting the loss during the Dark Age of the earlier Linear B script. Indeed, the only Homeric reference to writing was in the phrase \"\u03c3\u03ae\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1 \u03bb\u03c5\u03b3\u03c1\u03ac\", \"s\u0113mata lugra\", literally \"baneful signs\", when referring to the Bellerophontic letter. Linear B tablets have been found in abundance at Thebes, which might lead one to speculate that the legend of Cadmus as bringer of the alphabet could reflect earlier traditions about the origins of Linear B writing in Greece (as Frederick Ahl speculated in 1967).\nAccording to Greek myth, Cadmus's descendants ruled at Thebes on and off for several generations, including the time of the Trojan War.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of Cadmus's name remains uncertain. According to one view, the name originates from Phoenician, from the Semitic root \"qdm\", which signifies \"the east\", the equation of \"Kadmos\" with the Semitic \"qdm\" was traced to a publication of 1646 by R. B. Edwards. According to another view, the name is of Greek origin, ultimately from the word \"kekasmenos\". (, lit.\u2009'excellent').\nPossible connected words include the Semitic triliteral root \"qdm\" () which signifies \"east\" in Ugaritic, in Arabic, words derived from the root \"qdm\" include the verb \"qdm\" meaning \"to come\" as well as words meaning \"primeval\" and \"forth\" as well as \"foot\", names derived from it are \"Qadim\", which means \"the elder one\",\u2500in Hebrew, \"qedem\" means \"front\", \"east\" and \"ancient times\"; the verb \"qadam\" () means \"to be in front\", and the Greek \"kekasmai\" (&lt;*\"kekadmai\") \"to shine\". Therefore, the complete meaning of the name might be: \"He who excels\" or \"from the east\".\nWanderings.\nTravel to Samothrace.\nAfter his sister Europa had been carried off by Zeus from the shores of Phoenicia, Cadmus was sent out by his father to find her, and enjoined not to return without her. Unsuccessful in his search\u2014or unwilling to go against Zeus\u2014he came to Samothrace, the island sacred to the \"Great Gods\" or the Kabeiroi, whose mysteries would be celebrated also at Thebes.\nCadmus did not journey alone to Samothrace; he appeared with his mother Telephassa in the company of his nephew (or brother) Thasus, son of Cilix, who gave his name to the island of Thasos nearby. An identically composed trio had other names at Samothrace, according to Diodorus Siculus: the Pleiad Electra and her two sons, Dardanos and Eetion or Iasion. There was a fourth figure, Electra's daughter, Harmonia, whom Cadmus took away as a bride, as Zeus had abducted Europa.\nThe wedding was the first celebrated on Earth to which the gods brought gifts, according to Diodorus and dined with Cadmus and his bride.\nFounder of Thebes.\nCadmus came in the course of his wanderings to Delphi, where he consulted the oracle. He was ordered to give up his quest and follow a special cow, with a half moon on her flank, which would meet him, and to build a town on the spot where she should lie down exhausted.\nThe cow was given to Cadmus by Pelagon, King of Phocis, and it guided him to Boeotia, where he founded the city of Thebes.\nIntending to sacrifice the cow to Athena, Cadmus sent some of his companions, Deioleon and Seriphus, to the nearby Ismenian spring for water. They were slain by the spring's guardian water-dragon (compare the Lernaean Hydra), which was in turn destroyed by Cadmus, the duty of a culture hero of the new order.\nHe was then instructed by Athena to sow the dragon's teeth in the ground, from which there sprang a race of fierce armed men, called the \"Spartoi\" (\"sown\"). By throwing a stone among them, Cadmus caused them to fall upon one another until only five survived, who assisted him to build the Cadmeia or citadel of Thebes, and became the founders of the noblest families of that city.\nThe dragon had been sacred to Ares, so the god made Cadmus do penance for eight years by serving him. According to Theban tellings, it was at the expiration of this period that the gods gave him Harmonia (\"harmony\", literally \"putting or assembling together\", \"good assembly\", or \"good composition\") as wife. At Thebes, Cadmus and Harmonia began a dynasty with two sons Polydorus and Illyrius, and four daughters, Agave, Autono\u00eb, Ino and Semele. In rare accounts, the couple instead had six daughters which are called the Cadmiades: Ino, Agaue, Semele, Eurynome, Kleantho and Eurydike.\nAt the wedding, whether celebrated at Samothrace or at Thebes, all the gods were present; Harmonia received as bridal gifts a \"peplos\" worked by Athena and a necklace made by Hephaestus. This necklace, commonly referred to as the Necklace of Harmonia, brought misfortune to all who possessed it. Notwithstanding the divinely ordained nature of his marriage and his kingdom, Cadmus lived to regret both: his family was overtaken by grievous misfortunes, and his city by civil unrest. Cadmus finally abdicated in favor of his grandson Pentheus, and went with Harmonia to Illyria, to fight on the side of the Enchelii. Later, as king, he founded the city of Lychnidos and Bouthoe.\nNevertheless, Cadmus was deeply troubled by the ill-fortune which clung to him as a result of his having killed the sacred dragon, and one day he remarked that if the gods were so enamoured of the life of a serpent, he might as well wish that life for himself. Immediately, he began to grow scales and change in form. Harmonia, seeing the transformation, thereupon begged the gods to share her husband's fate, which they granted (Hyginus).\nIn another telling of the story, the bodies of Cadmus and his wife were changed after their deaths; the serpents watched their tomb while their souls were translated to the fields. In Euripides's \"The Bacchae\", Cadmus is given a prophecy by Dionysus whereby both he and his wife will be turned into snakes for a period before eventually being brought to live among the blessed.\nGenealogy.\nCadmus was of ultimately divine ancestry, the grandson of the sea god Poseidon and Libya on his father's side, and of Nilus (the River Nile) on his mother's side; overall he was considered a member of the fifth generation of beings following the (mythological) creation of the world:\nOffspring.\nWith Harmonia, he was the father of Semele, Polydorus, Autonoe, Agave and Ino. Their youngest son was Illyrius. According to Greek mythology, Cadmus is the ancestor of Illyrians and Theban royalty.\nSamothracian connection.\nThe fact that Hermes was worshipped in Samothrace under the name of Cadmus or Cadmilus seems to show that the Theban Cadmus was interpreted as an ancestral Theban hero corresponding to the Samothracians. Another Samothracian connection for Cadmus is offered via his wife Harmonia, who is said by Diodorus Siculus to be daughter of Zeus and the Samothracian Electra, who was one of the seven Pleides.\nModern scholarship.\nOrigins of Cadmus and his myth.\nThe question of Cadmus's eastern origin have been debated for a long time in modern scholarship.\nHomer mentions Cadmus only once, but he had already referred to the inhabitants of Thebes with the name \"Cadmeans\". Aeschylus and Sophocles, in particular, repeatedly mention the \"city of Cadmus\" and \"Cadmeans\", relating Thebes with Cadmus. Also Euripides linked Thebes with Cadmus, but he was one of the earliest authors and the only tragedian to mention \"Cadmus the Tyrian\". Herodotus refers to Cadmus the Tyrian, and he was the first to mention Cadmus's 'Phoenician' origins, but he certainly was not the initiator of this transformation, as his \"Histories\" provides evidence that the myth was already widespread. Since Herodotus Cadmus has been commonly described as a prince of Phoenicia. According to Diodorus Siculus (1st century BC), Cadmus had Theban origins.\nModern historian Albert Schachter has suggested that Cadmus was a fictitious hero named after the Thebean acropolis and was made 'Phoenician' due to the influence of immigrants from the East to Boeotia. According to M. L. West the myth of Cadmus and Harmonia at Thebes originated from 9th or 8th century BC Phoenician residents in the city. According to Jason Colavito, although modern scholars have debated on whether the myth came from Phoenicia, there is evidence that the core of Cadmus's myth originated in Near Eastern stories of the battle between a hero and a dragon. The myth of Cadmus the Phoenician was not a literal reinterpretation of an original Phoenician myth, although being probably inspired by one, rather it was the Greeks' interpretation of the Phoenician civilization and the benefits they acquired from it, specifically the alphabet. According to archaeologist John Boardman, the \"Phoenicians\" who came with Cadmus, were not \"Phoenicians\", but rather Greeks who had lived in the Near East for a while and had returned to teach what they had learned there, including the alphabet.\nGiven the absence of a Phoenician colony in Thebes, several hypotheses arguing against Cadmus's eastern origin have been proposed by modern scholars:\nAccording to historian Frederick M. Ahl, scholarly suggestions that Cadmus was a Mycenaean must be taken into account against Cadmus's Phoenician origin, as for him it is becoming harder and harder to reconcile literary and archaeological evidence, not to mention epigraphical difficulties. Ahl rather suggest that \"Cadmus was a Mycenaean, and the writing he brought to Thebes was Linear B, which may have been known to Greek-speaking peoples then or later as \"\u03c6\u03bf\u03b9\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03ae\u03b9\u03b1 \u03b3\u03c1\u03ac\u03bc\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1\".\"\nHenry Hall set forth an hypothesis, arguing that Cadmus and the Cadmeians came from Crete. There are a number of difficulties involved in this hypothesis, however, notably the assertion that Mycenaean society resulted from the triumph of the Minoan civilization over the mainland one.\nCadmus was used as an identification figure by the Argives, representing an intriguing example of mythical requisition in relation to the wars between Argos and Thebes. According to the Argive legend, Cadmus's father Agenor was descended from the Argive princess Io. In this light, Cadmus becomes an Argive and Thebes his \"home away from home\", which is connected with the emergence of hybrid identities during the period of the Great Colonization.\nHittite records controversy.\nIt has been argued by various scholars that in a letter from the King of Ahhiyawa to the Hittite King, written in the Hittite language in c.\u00a01250 BC, a specific Cadmus was mentioned as a forefather of the Ahhijawa people. The latter term most probably referred to the Mycenaean world (Achaeans), or at least to a part of it. Nevertheless, this reading about a supposed Cadmus as historical person is rejected by most scholars.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75173", "revid": "1915689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75173", "title": "Rhadamanthus", "text": "Greek mythology character, son of Zeus and Europa\nIn Greek mythology, Rhadamanthus () or Rhadamanthys () was a wise king of Crete. As the son of Zeus and Europa he was considered a demigod. He later became one of the judges of the dead and an important figure in Greek mythology.\nHis name, whose etymology is obscure, was later used to allude to persons showing stern and inflexible judgement.\nFamily.\nRhadamanthus was, according to Bulfinch's \"The Age of Fable\", the son of Zeus and Europa and brother to Sarpedon and Minos (also a king and later a judge of the dead). Together with his brother, Rhadamanthus was raised by Asterion, their stepfather. He had two sons, Gortys (associated with Gortyn, Crete) and Erythrus (founder of Erythrae).\nA different tradition represents Rhadamanthys as the son of Hephaestus, Hephaestus as a son of Talos, and Talos as a son of Cres, the personification of Crete. This tradition is reported by Pausanias, who cites the poet Cinaethon of Sparta as his source. According to Athenaeus, the lyric poet Ibycus wrote of Rhadamanthys as the lover of Talos, rather than grandson. The Suda, a Byzantine encyclopedia from the tenth-century CE, adds to this that Talos and Rhadamanthus introduced homosexuality to Crete.\nOther sources (e.g. Plutarch, \"Theseus\" 20) credit Rhadamanthys rather than Dionysus as the husband of Ariadne, and the father of Oenopion, Staphylus and Thoas. In this account, Ariadne was the daughter of Minos, Rhadamanthys's brother; another Ariadne was the daughter of Minos's grandson and namesake, who features in Theseus's legend and was rescued by Dionysus.\nMythology.\nLegislation.\nAlthough he was frequently considered one of the judges of the dead in the underworld, he was also known for a few legislative activities. There is a reference to a law of Rhadamanthus ordering the Cretans to swear oaths by animals and to another law of Rhadamanthus saying if people defend themselves against others who initiated violence then they should suffer no penalty. His legislation, and its subsequent analogue in Lacadaemonian Sparta, is briefly described in Book I of Plato's Laws, after he is introduced as the brother of Minos, and credited with being the justest of men and an administrator of justice.\nExile from Crete.\nKing Asterius died childless and Minos inherited the throne. When Minos became the king of Crete, he drove Rhadamanthus out of Crete, because he had been jealous of his popularity. Rhadamanthus fled to Boeotia, where he married Alcmene, widow of Amphitryon and mother of Heracles. According to some traditions, he became a tutor to Heracles. This is also mentioned by John Tzetzes, a medieval historian.\nIn general, the particular sphere of activity of Rhadamanthus tends to be the Aegean islands, apart from Crete itself, where Minos was active. He is also often connected by ancient authors with central Greece.\nAfterlife.\nAccording to later legends (c. 400 BC), on account of his inflexible integrity he was made one of the judges of the dead in the lower world, together with his half-brother Aeacus and his full-brother Minos. He was supposed to judge the souls of easterners, Aeacus those of westerners, while Minos had the casting vote (Plato, \"Gorgias\" 524A). He is portrayed in Books 4 and 7 of Homer's \"Odyssey\". Virgil (69\u201318 BC) makes Rhadamanthus one of the judges and punishers of the unworthy in the Underworld (Tartarus) section of the \"Aeneid\".\nHomer represents him as dwelling in the Elysian Fields (\"Odyssey\" iv. 564), the paradise for the immortal sons of Zeus. Pindar says that he is the right-hand man of Cronus (now ruling Elysium) and was the sole judge of the dead. Lucian depicts Rhadamanthus as presiding over the company of heroes on the Isles of the Blest in \"True History\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "75174", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75174", "title": "Manhattan (borough)", "text": ""}
{"id": "75176", "revid": "48546149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75176", "title": "Chenonceaux", "text": "Chenonceaux () is a commune in the French department of Indre-et-Loire, and the region of Centre-Val de Loire, France.\nIt is situated in the valley of the river Cher, a tributary of the Loire, about 26\u00a0km (16\u00a0mi) east of Tours and on the right bank of the Cher.\nThe population of permanent residents hovers about 350, but there is a large influx of tourists during the summer months because the village adjoins the former royal Ch\u00e2teau de Chenonceau, one of the most popular tourist destinations in France. The ch\u00e2teau is distinctive in being built across the river. The village is also situated in Touraine-Chenonceaux wine-growing area, and bordered on its northern edge by the Forest of Amboise.\nName.\nThe difference in spelling between the Ch\u00e2teau's name (Chenonceau) and the village (Chenonceaux) is attributed to Louise Dupin de Francueil, owner of the ch\u00e2teau during the French Revolution, who is said to have dropped the \"x\" at the end of its name to differentiate what was a symbol of royalty from the Republic. As a result of her good relations with the village, the Ch\u00e2teau was spared the iconoclastic damage suffered by many other monuments during the Revolution. Although no official sources have been found to support this claim, the Ch\u00e2teau has ever since been referred to and spelled as Chenonceau.\nMme Dupin hosted the philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau in Chenonceau as tutor to her children, and among her descendants was the writer George Sand, born Aurore Dupin.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75177", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75177", "title": "Scribes (software)", "text": " Text editor\nScribes is a minimalist lightweight free text editor Linux and BSD designed for the GNOME desktop licensed under the terms of the GPL-2.0-or-later license. It was created by Lateef Alabi-Oki and programmed in Python.\nFeatures.\nScribes supports Python plugins, remote editing with FTP, SFTP, SSH, Samba, and WebDAV, and autosave. It also supports code snippets, auto-indentation, hotkeys, bookmarks, templates, and automatic word completion or replacement. Scribes has syntax highlighting support for around 70 different programming languages, including PHP, Java XML, and HTML. Editing icons are hidden from view until a user mouses over the area.\nScribes does not support tabs, instead opening every new file in a separate window. A document switcher is provided to switch between windows by pressing F9.\nThe interface supports multiple different color themes.\nReception.\nLinuxInsider stated that Scribes was a \"revolutionary approach to working with a text editor\" though noting that the interface took some time getting used to. Linux.com said that \"after 30 minutes of usage, you will either love it or hate it.\" RedMonk.com praised the \"rethink everything\" approach of the editor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75178", "revid": "39078488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75178", "title": "Whose Line Is It Anyway? (British TV series)", "text": "British TV improvisational comedy series\nWhose Line is it Anyway? (shortened to Whose Line? or WLIIA) is a short-form improvisational comedy television panel show created by Dan Patterson and Mark Leveson, presented by Clive Anderson, and produced for Channel 4 between 23 September 1988 and 4 February 1999. The programme features a panel of four performers (six in the Christmas special) conducting a series of short-form improvisation games, creating comedic scenes per predetermined situations made by Anderson or from suggestions by the audience. Such games include creating sound effects, performing a scene to different television and film styles, using props, and making up a song on the spot. The programme originally began as a short-lived BBC radio programme, before the concept was adapted for television.\nDuring its history, the programme featured a variety of noted comedians from Britain, America and Canada. Frequent performers during the show's run included John Sessions, Stephen Fry, Archie Hahn, Josie Lawrence, Paul Merton, Rory Bremner, Tony Slattery, Mike McShane, Greg Proops, Ryan Stiles, Sandi Toksvig, Colin Mochrie, Jim Sweeney, Steve Steen, Stephen Frost, Chip Esten, Brad Sherwood, Caroline Quentin and Wayne Brady. The programme was mainly recorded in Britain, though several episodes of series 3 and 4 were made in New York, while the tenth and final series was shot entirely in California.\nThe success of \"Whose Line?\" spawned several domestic and international adaptations. An American version, featuring several of the same performers as the British version, aired on ABC between 1998 and 2007, and was revived on The CW in 2013. A short-lived Australian version ran on The Comedy Channel during 2016. Two similarly themed British comedy programmes, \"Mock the Week\" (2005\u20132022) and \"Fast and Loose\" (2011), were created by Patterson.\nHistory.\nIn 1988, Dan Patterson and Mark Leveson approached the BBC with a concept for a new comedy programme, involving a group of performers conducting games that encompassed improvisational comedy. The title of their concept was a comedic riposte to the radio programme \"What's My Line\", which had recently moved to a television format, merged to the title of a 1972 play, \"Whose Life Is It Anyway?\". Their pitch was well liked by the broadcaster, who green-lighted a radio programme for broadcast on BBC Radio 4, commissioning six episodes. Both Patterson and Leveson opted for it to be presented by Clive Anderson, with John Sessions and Stephen Fry as the regular performers accompanied by two guest stars each episode, while music was provided by Colin Sell.\nAfter the radio series came to an end, Patterson and Leveson began discussions with the BBC on creating a televised adaption of their concept. However, the broadcaster was hesitant on making the move, leading to the pair being approached by Channel 4, who eagerly liked the idea, and securing a deal from the producers to bring the programme to their channel. The move to television was initially hit with a problem, as while it was desired for the regular cast to appear on the first televised series, Fry had begun to dislike conducting improvisational comedy. The matter was resolved by allowing him to pull out, with Sessions convinced by Fry to remain as a permanent performer for the first series (Fry did agree to appear in two episodes of the first series, and would make a surprise return to the show in 1997 for one episode in series 9). In addition, Sell was unable to perform on the programme, resulting in Richard Vranch - a member of improvisational group, The Comedy Store Players, based at London's Comedy Store - becoming the resident musician for much of the programme's broadcast.\n\"Whose Line?\" proved a success when aired on Channel 4, effectively helping to boost the careers of some of its regular performers that appeared during early episodes, including several members from The Comedy Store Players - these included Paul Merton, Josie Lawrence and Sandi Toksvig - and comedy actor Tony Slattery. At times, the programme also featured a number of celebrities who made occasional appearances during the earlier series, such as Peter Cook, Jonathan Pryce and Griff Rhys Jones. After appearing in every episode of the first series, Sessions reduced his involvement with the show, making his last appearance in series 3. While the programme drew from the talent of British comedians, it also expanded to recruiting those from America, including Greg Proops and Mike McShane, both formerly of San Francisco improv group Faultline. During 1991 and 1992, several episodes of series 3 and 4 were filmed in New York. By series 5, other projects led to several regular performers, including Lawrence and McShane, to appear on the show less frequently, while others, including Merton, made their last appearances in this series. Slattery and Proops continued to appear regularly, as did American comedian Ryan Stiles and Canadian comedian Colin Mochrie. Stiles and Mochrie proved to be very popular with viewers, and the show's ratings continued to improve. Stiles eventually became a permanent performer on the show, appearing in every episode from series 7 onwards, as did Mochrie from series 8 onwards.\nAs the series progressed, the viewing figures of \"Whose Line?\" began to drop after reaching the peak of its popularity in series 6. Part of the problem was due to the constant use of regular performers, leaving little room for new talent to be showcased, one of the main appeals of the programme's early years. The departure of Slattery, one of the show's most popular performers, after series 7 also affected ratings. During this period, the show still occasionally saw one-off celebrity guest performers, including George Wendt and Eddie Izzard. By series 10, filming of the programme moved to Hollywood, California. With the exception of Anderson still as presenter, the show's cast was now entirely North American, with fresh talent found in comedians such as Wayne Brady, while Vranch was replaced by Laura Hall as the in-house musician. However, after the broadcast of its final episode in February 1999, Channel 4 decided to axe the programme following the eventual slump in the show's viewing figures. Repeats of \"Whose Line?\" continued following its cancellation, though with episodes edited and reformatted as a result.\nFormat.\nMost television episodes of \"Whose Line Is It Anyway?\" featured four performers (with the exception of six in the 1989 Christmas special) who sit in a line of chairs at the back of the stage. The host, Clive Anderson, sat at a desk facing the large performance area in front of the performers. Anderson introduced each performer with a joke or pun, usually all related on a common theme or topic.\nThe show is made up of games that are scored by Anderson, who declared arbitrary point values after the game, often citing a humorous reason for his decision. The points are purely decorative, served no practical purpose, and were often awarded to the audience or other arbitrary third persons. The styles of the games are varied (see Games, below). Some feature all four performers, while others feature fewer. The performers who are not involved in a game remain in their seats at the back of the stage. Humorous banter between Anderson and the performers between games is also sometimes included, with Anderson and Greg Proops play-arguing with each other becoming a regular feature over time.\nAt the conclusion of each episode, a winner or several winners are chosen arbitrarily by Anderson. The \"prize\" for winning the show is to read out the closing credits in a certain style, chosen by Anderson, as they scrolled on screen.\nEpisodes were culled down from longer recording sessions with the best game performances chosen to compile into one or more episodes. Each series includes one or two compilation episodes of unaired games from different taping sessions in that series.\nGames.\nThe number and type of games played vary from episode to episode, and whilst some games such as \"Questions Only\" and \"Hoedown\" became more common over time, others such as \"Authors\" and \"Remote Control\" faded from use. New games were created throughout the show's run. Some games, such as \"Tag,\" are based on traditional improv games, while others are uniquely created for the series. Most games consist of a single long skit performed by the chosen performers, but some, such as \"World's Worst\" and \"Scenes from a Hat,\" are played as a rapid-fire series of short skits.\nWhile all games are designed to test the performer's improvisational skill, some also test other skills, such as singing or doing impressions. \"Whose Line?\" features a number of musical games, which features the show's resident musicians (Richard Vranch or Laura Hall) playing live backing music. Occasionally, pre-recorded music is also used. Some performers, such as Josie Lawrence, Mike McShane, Chip Esten and Wayne Brady, particularly excelled in the musical games, while others, although they were good sports about it, openly despised performing in them, particularly Paul Merton, Stephen Fry and Ryan Stiles. During games like \"Rap\" and \"Hoedown\", Fry would almost never even attempt to sing or rap, and instead would just talk about the subject of the song. In one game of Rap, Fry actually did attempt some rapping, albeit half-heartedly, but gave up out of embarrassment after a few words. Stiles would frequently inject insults into the Hoedown whenever he is forced to sing it, usually pointed at Anderson or just the fact he was having to perform a Hoedown yet again. Colin Mochrie would generally speak his lines instead of singing them for musical games.\nSome games require suggestions or topics. Depending on the game, these may be solicited directly from the studio audience during the taping, or written down by the audience and/or production staff in advance and then randomly drawn for the performers' use. Anderson used a buzzer to signal the end of a game, or of individual sections in the rapid-fire games.\nCast.\nThe show was presented by Clive Anderson, who is the only person to appear in all 136 episodes. Richard Vranch was the in-house musician for the first nine series (1988\u20131998). Vranch was replaced by Laura Hall for the tenth and last series (1998\u20131999).\nThe following are all the performers who appeared on the show. They are listed in order of number of episodes, with those who appeared in the same number of episodes listed alphabetically:\nDVD release.\nThe first DVD of the UK show, featuring every episode of the first two series, was released in America on 27 March 2007 by A&amp;E Home Entertainment, and in the UK on 25 January 2008 by Channel 4. The UK edition is edited to remove references to the ad breaks. There were also two VHS releases (in the UK only) during the 1990s.\nLegacy.\nIn 1998, shortly before the programme's cancellation by Channel 4, Ryan Stiles introduced the programme's format to fellow comedian Drew Carey, who took great interest and subsequently pitched an American version of the same name to the ABC TV network with great success. Their pitch was to conduct the same variety of improvisational comedy-styled games as the British original, with Carey hosting the programme, and both Stiles and Colin Mochrie being permanent performers. The American version largely maintained the same style as the UK version, with only a few minor variations. As well as Stiles and Mochrie, a few other veterans of the UK original - Wayne Brady, Greg Proops, Brad Sherwood and Chip Esten - also appeared regularly on the show, with Brady very quickly (after the first few episodes as a semi-regular) joining Stiles and Mochrie as a permanent performer. The American version of \"Whose Line?\" ran on ABC from 1998 to 2007, and returned in 2013 on The CW with new host Aisha Tyler.\nOn 6 March 2011, over twelve years after the series finale, a special edition of the show, with Clive Anderson returning as host, was recorded for \"24 Hour Panel People\", a marathon of UK panel shows, in aid of Comic Relief. The recording was broadcast live on the Comic Relief website at about 9:30am, while the edited compilation shows for the event were shown between 13 and 17 March on BBC Three. The format was adjusted to feature five performers, with veterans Josie Lawrence, Tony Slattery and Neil Mullarkey appearing alongside Humphrey Ker and David Walliams.\nIn 2017, a stage-version of the show appeared at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe hosted by Anderson, with original cast members Josie Lawrence, Mike McShane, Greg Proops and Colin Mochrie among the performers. The initial shows were a sell-out and extra dates and shows were put on. Sell-out runs followed at the London Palladium and The Royal Albert Hall, with Chip Esten and Brad Sherwood also returning. In April 2019, it was announced that the stage-version of the show would be returning to the Edinburgh Festival Fringe, with two more original cast members, Tony Slattery and Stephen Frost.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75179", "revid": "10773111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75179", "title": "Esko Aho", "text": "Prime minister of Finland from 1991 to 1995\nEsko Tapani Aho (born 20 May 1954) is a Finnish politician who was prime minister of Finland from 1991 to 1995.\nEarly life and career.\nAho was born in Veteli, Finland. Prior to attending university, he began a career in politics. From 1974 to 1979, he was chairman of the Finnish Centre Youth, many of whose previous chairmen had risen to high political positions. In 1978, he became a presidential elector, a position he also held in 1982 and 1998. From 1979 to 1980, Aho was political secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. From 1980 to 1983, he was a trade promoter for the municipality of Kannus.\nAho studied at the University of Helsinki, graduating with a Master of Social Science degree in 1981.\nSince 2010, he has been a member of the board of the Skolkovo Innovation Center. Currently, he is a visiting professor at Sciences Po, Paris.\nParliamentary career.\nAho was first elected to the Finnish Parliament (eduskunta) in 1983. He became chairman of the Centre Party in 1990, a position that he held until 2002. The party was at the time one of three major political parties in Finland.\nAt 36 years of age, he was the youngest prime minister in Finnish history.\nAho was the prime minister of a centre-right coalition government (Centre Party, National Coalition Party, Christian Democrats and Swedish People's Party) from 1991 to 1995. He is best known for leading Finland into the European Union. Aho's own party, most of whose voters lived and live in rural areas, was the most opposed to EU membership among major parties. The greatest concern of these voters was the EU's effect on Finnish agriculture, but they were persuaded to support membership due to the prime minister's diplomacy. Finland applied for EU membership on 16 March 1992, and a referendum was held two and a half years later. Aho's government also faced the deep economic depression of the early 1990s. Despite a steep rise in the national debt, the Aho government applied a stringent policy of austerity that made it unpopular. This partly caused its fall in the 1995 election and the Centre Party's eight-year period in the opposition.\nAho had the nickname \"Kennedy of Kannus\" Kannus being his hometown) due to his streamlined and well coiffed habitus reminiscent of John F. Kennedy.\nEsko Aho lost the bid for President of Finland to Tarja Halonen in 2000. He subsequently retired from active politics, initially in the form of a \"sabbatical leave\" of one year, during which he led a study group on the EU in the 2000 fall semester at Harvard University (where he was a resident fellow at the Institute of Politics). In the 2003 election he left parliament and retired from daily politics. He then served as the president of the Finnish national innovation fund SITRA (the Finnish National Fund for Research and Development).\nIn 2008, Aho's name was included in an opinion poll on possible presidential candidates, in which he ranked last.\nOn 1 November 2008, Aho became Nokia's executive vice president of corporate relations and responsibility and became a member of its executive board.\nAt the time of his rise to prime minister, he was the youngest head of government in Europe.\nBanks.\nAho became a member of the board of directors of the Russian Sberbank in 2016. He resigned from the position in February 2022 following the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75180", "revid": "51027456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75180", "title": "Bos", "text": "Genus of wild and domestic cattle\nBos (from Latin \"b\u014ds\": cow, ox, bull) is a genus of bovines, which includes, among others, wild and domestic cattle. \n\"Bos\" is often divided into four subgenera: \"Bos\", \"Bibos\", \"Novibos\", and \"Poephagus\", but including these last three divisions within the genus \"Bos\" without including \"Bison\" is believed to be paraphyletic by many workers on the classification of the genus since the 1980s. The genus as traditionally defined has five extant species, but this rises to eight when the domesticated varieties are counted as separate species, and ten when the closely related \"Bison\" is also included. Most but not all modern breeds of domesticated cattle (including taurine cattle and zebu) are believed to have originated from the extinct aurochs. Others like Bali cattle and gayal are thought to have originated from South and Southeast Asian \"Bos\" species.\nDescription.\nThe species are grazers, with large teeth to break up the plant material they ingest. They are ruminants, having a four-chambered stomach that allows them to break down plant material.\nDistribution.\nThere are about 1.3 billion domestic cattle alive today, making them one of the world's most numerous mammals. Members of this genus are currently found in Africa, Asia, Europe, parts of North America, South America and also in Oceania. Their habitats vary greatly depending on the particular species; they can be found in prairies, rain forests, wetlands, savannah and temperate forests.\nEcology.\nMost \"Bos\" species have a lifespan of 18\u201325 years in the wild, with up to 36 being recorded in captivity. They have a 9\u201311 month gestation, depending on the species and birth one or, rarely, two young in the spring.\nMost species travel in small herds ranging in size from ten to thirty members. Within most herds, there is one bull (male) for all the cows (female). Dominance is important in the herds; calves will usually inherit their mother's position in the hierarchy.\nThey are generally diurnal, resting in the hot part of the day and being active morning and afternoon. In areas where humans have encroached on the territory of a herd, they may turn nocturnal. Some species are also migratory, moving with food and water availability.\nTaxonomy.\nIn 2003, the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature resolved a long-standing dispute about the naming of those species (or pairs of species) of \"Bos\" that contain both wild and domesticated forms. The commission \"conserved the usage of 17 specific names based on wild species, which are pre-dated by or contemporary with those based on domestic forms\", confirming \"Bos primigenius\" for the aurochs and \"Bos gaurus\" for the gaur. If domesticated cattle and gayal are considered separate species, they are to be named \"Bos taurus\" and \"Bos frontalis\"; however, if they are considered part of the same species as their wild relatives, the common species are to be named \"Bos primigenius\" and \"Bos gaurus\".\nDuring the 2010s, analysis of the complex genetics of the bovine lineages determined that the genus \"Bison\" needed to be relegated to a subgenus of \"Bos\" in order to retain monophyly within \"Bos\" since both extant species of \"Bison\" are phylogenetically embedded within \"Bos\". The specific relationships in these analyses determined that the two living bison species were each other's closest living relatives, with their closest relatives amongst \"Bos\" being the yaks based on nuclear DNA. The mitochondrial DNA for the wisent was found to contradict the nuclear DNA result, and was more closely related to those of cattle, while the mitochondrial DNA of the American bison supported the nuclear DNA result of a close relationship with yaks. The discrepancy between the mitochondrial DNA of the American bison and wisent is suggested to be likely due to incomplete lineage sorting or genetic introgression into \"B. bonasus\" from other \"Bos\" species.\nRelationships of members of the genus \"Bos\" based on nuclear genomes after Sinding, et al. 2021.\nSpecies.\nThe following species are known:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75182", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75182", "title": "Walcheren", "text": "Walcheren () is a region and former island in the Dutch province of Zeeland at the mouth of the Scheldt estuary. It lies between the Eastern Scheldt in the north and the Western Scheldt in the south and is roughly the shape of a rhombus. The two sides facing the North Sea consist of dunes and the rest of its coastline is made up of dykes. Middelburg, the provincial capital, lies at Walcheren's centre. Vlissingen, to the south, is the main harbour and the third municipality is Veere.\nOriginally, Walcheren was an island, but the Sloedam, constructed in 1871 for a railway, and poldering after World War II have connected it to the (former) island of Zuid-Beveland, which in turn was connected to the North Brabant mainland by the Kreekrakdam (Completed in 1867). The Veerse Gatdam, completed in 1961, has connected Walcheren to Noord-Beveland.\nEtymology.\nWalcheren is first attested in Latinized spelling, such as \"villam Walichrum\" ca. 790 and \"Vualacra\" ca. 837. Germanic spellings start appearing around the High Middle Ages, like Old Dutch \"Walacheri\" ca. 1150. The name is most likely a compound of \"*wal(a)c\", meaning \"moist\", and \"*heri/*hara\", indicating a sandy ridge. Another, less likely theory suggests that the name derives from \"Walhaz\", the name Germans used for Romans.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe Romans called the island \"Wallacra\". As early as Roman times, the island functioned as a point of departure for ships going to Britain; it had a temple of the goddess Nehalennia who was popular with those who braved the waters of the North Sea. \nWalcheren became the seat of the Danish Viking Harald (fl. 841\u2013842), who conquered what would become the Netherlands together with his brother Rorik (fl. 842\u2013873) (or Rurik) in the ninth century. One fringe theory has it that Ahmad ibn Rustah (fl. 10th century) described Walcheren when reporting on the seat of the Rus' Khaganate.\nAnother fringe theory mentions Walcheren as the seat of Hades, described by Homer.\nThe island played a role in the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588. The Spanish fleet was not able to be supported by deep water ports along the continental side of the English Channel. The Duke of Parma had occupied Antwerp, a deep water port. However, access to this port was blocked by Dutch rebels and English fighters who occupied Walcheren. As a result, the armada could not be resupplied nor could it seek shelter at Antwerp. Facing dwindling supplies, Admiral Medina-Sedonia fled northward, ending the threat to the English. \nTreaty of Dover.\nUnder the Secret Treaty of Dover, concluded in 1670 between Charles II of England and Louis XIV of France, England was supposed to get possession of Walcheren as well as the isle of Cadzand, as the reward for helping France in the then impending war against the Dutch Republic. In the event, the Dutch resistance \u2014 much stronger than anticipated \u2014 managed to repulse the French-English attack, and the treaty was not implemented.\nNapoleonic Wars.\nBeginning on 30 July 1809, a British expeditionary force of 39,000 men landed on Walcheren, intending to assist the Austrians in their efforts against Napoleon and attack the French Navy fleet moored at Flushing. The expedition turned into a disaster, as although British troops captured Flushing the Austrians had already been decisively defeated at the Battle of Wagram in early July and were suing for peace. Meanwhile, the French fleet had moved to Antwerp, and the expeditionary lost over 4,000 men to a disease called \"Walcheren Fever\", thought to be a combination of malaria and typhus, compared to only 106 men to enemy action. The French and Dutch defenders, meanwhile, suffered approximately 4,000 men killed, wounded or captured. With the strategic reasons for the campaign gone and the worsening conditions, the British withdrew in December.\nWorld War II.\nStrategically situated at the mouth of the River Scheldt, Walcheren was the key that allowed use of the deep-water port of Antwerp, located further upstream on the right bank of the southern estuary of the river. It was fought over during World War II in 1940 between Dutch and German troops in the Battle of the Netherlands, and again in 1944 in the Battle of Walcheren Causeway, the fourth and final stage of the Battle of the Scheldt. On 3 October 1944 the RAF bombed the sea wall at Westkapelle causing the Inundation of Walcheren. The 2nd Canadian Infantry Division cleared South Beveland to the east and approached the island on 31 October 1944. The plan was to cross the Sloe Channel, but leading troops of the 5th Canadian Infantry Brigade found that assault boats were useless in the deep mud of the channel. The only route open was the 40 metre wide Walcheren Causeway, a mile-long land bridge from South Beveland to the island. The Canadian Black Watch sent a company across on the evening of 31 October, but was stopped. The Calgary Highlanders sent two companies over in succession, the second attack opening up a bridgehead on the island. The Highlanders were eventually thrown back, having lost 64 killed and wounded. \"Le R\u00e9giment de Maisonneuve\" relieved them on the causeway, followed by the 1st Battalion, Glasgow Highlanders of the British 52nd Infantry Division. Meanwhile, on 1 November 1944, British Commandos landed in the village of Westkapelle in order to silence the German coastal batteries looking out over the Scheldt. The amphibious assault (\"Operation Infatuate\") proved a success and by 8 November, all German resistance on the island had ceased.\nTopography.\n\"Topographic map of Walcheren, 2015-2016. Click to enlarge.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75185", "revid": "50450040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75185", "title": "Hugh Capet", "text": "King of the Franks from 987 to 996\nHugh Capet (; ; c. 941 \u2013 24 October 996) was the King of the Franks from 987 to 996. He is the founder of and first king from the House of Capet. The son of the powerful duke Hugh the Great and his wife Hedwige of Saxony, he was elected as the successor of the last Carolingian king, Louis V. Hugh was descended from Charlemagne's son Pepin of Italy through his paternal grandmother B\u00e9atrice of Vermandois, and was also a nephew of Otto the Great.\nThe dynasty he founded ruled France for nearly nine centuries: from 987 to 1328 in the senior line, and until 1848 via cadet branches (with an interruption from 1792 to 1814 and briefly in 1815).\nDescent and inheritance.\nHugh was the son of Hugh the Great, Duke of the Franks, and Hedwige of Saxony, daughter of the German king Henry the Fowler. His birth date is not given by any source, but modern scholars often date his birth to circa 941. The son of Hugues Le Grand, duke of Francia, Hugh Capet is traditionally considered the founder of the third dynasty of French Kings, the Capetians. He was born into a well-connected and powerful family with many ties to the royal houses of France and Germany.\nThrough his mother, Hugh was the nephew of Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor; Henry I, Duke of Bavaria; Bruno the Great, Archbishop of Cologne; and finally, Gerberga of Saxony, Queen of France. Gerberga was the wife of Louis IV, King of France and mother of Lothair of France and Charles, Duke of Lower Lorraine.\nHis paternal family, the Robertians, were powerful landowners in the \u00cele-de-France. His grandfather had been King Robert I. King Odo was his granduncle and Emma of France, the wife of King Rudolph, was his aunt. Hugh's paternal grandmother Beatrice of Vermandois was a patrilineal descendant of Charlemagne.\nRise of the Robertians.\nAfter the end of the ninth century, the descendants of Robert the Strong became indispensable in carrying out royal policies. As Carolingian power failed, the great nobles of West Francia began to assert that the monarchy was elective, not hereditary, and twice chose Robertians (Odo I (888\u2013898) and Robert I (922\u2013923) as kings, instead of Carolingians.\nRobert I, Hugh the Great's father, was succeeded as King of the Franks by his son-in-law, Rudolph of Burgundy. When Rudolph died in 936, Hugh the Great had to decide whether he ought to claim the throne for himself. To claim the throne would require him to risk an election, which he would have to contest with the powerful Herbert II, Count of Vermandois, father of Hugh, Archbishop of Reims, and allied to Henry the Fowler, King of Germany; and with Hugh the Black, Duke of Burgundy, brother of the late king. To block his rivals, Hugh the Great brought Louis d'Outremer, the dispossessed son of Charles the Simple, from his exile at the court of Athelstan of England to become king as Louis IV.\nThis maneuver allowed Hugh to become the most powerful person in France in the first half of the tenth century. Once in power, Louis IV granted him the title of \"dux Francorum\" (\"Duke of the Franks\"). Louis also (perhaps under pressure) officially declared Hugh \"the second after us in all our kingdoms\". Hugh also gained power when Herbert II of Vermandois died in 943, because Herbert's powerful principality was then divided among his four sons.\nHugh the Great came to dominate a wide swath of central France, from Orl\u00e9ans and Senlis to Auxerre and Sens, while the king was rather confined to the area northeast of Paris (Compi\u00e8gne, Laon, Soissons).\nFrench monarchy in the 10th century.\nThe realm in which Hugh grew up, and of which he would one day be king, bore little resemblance to modern France. Hugh's predecessors did not call themselves kings of France, and that title was not used by his successors until the time of his descendant Philip II. Kings ruled as \"rex Francorum\" (\"King of the Franks\"), the title remaining in use until 1190 (but note the use of \"FRANCORUM REX\" by Louis XII in 1499, by Francis I in 1515, and by Henry II about 1550, and on French coins up to the eighteenth century.) The lands they ruled comprised only a small part of the former Carolingian Empire. The eastern Frankish lands, the Holy Roman Empire, were ruled by the Ottonian dynasty, represented by Hugh's first cousin Otto II and then by Otto's son, Otto III. For a time loyalty to the Carolingians remained strong in the lands south of the river Loire after Charles the Simple was deposed in 922. Both the Duchy of Normandy and the Duchy of Burgundy were largely autonomous, and Brittany entirely so\u2014although from 956 Burgundy was ruled by Hugh's brothers Otto and Henry.\nFrance under Ottonian influence.\nIn 956, when his father Hugh the Great died, Hugh, the eldest son, was then about fifteen years old and had two younger brothers. Otto I, King of Germany, intended to bring western Francia under his control, which was possible since he was the maternal uncle of Hugh Capet and Lothair of France, the new king of the Franks, who succeeded Louis IV in 954, at the age of 13.\nIn 954, Otto I appointed his brother Bruno, Archbishop of Cologne and Duke of Lorraine, as guardian of Lothair and regent of the kingdom of France. In 956, Otto gave him the same role over Hugh and the Robertian principality. With these young princes under his control, Otto aimed to maintain the balance between Robertians, Carolingians, and Ottonians. In 960, Lothair agreed to grant to Hugh the legacy of his father, the margraviate of Neustria and the title of Duke of the Franks. But in return, Hugh had to accept the new independence gained by the counts of Neustria during Hugh's minority. Hugh's brother, Otto received only the duchy of Burgundy (by marriage). Andrew W. Lewis has sought to show that Hugh the Great had prepared a succession policy to ensure his eldest son much of his legacy, as did all the great families of that time.\nThe West was dominated by Otto I, who had defeated the Magyars in 955, and in 962 assumed the restored imperial title. The new emperor increased his power over Western Francia with special attention to certain bishoprics on his border; although elected by Lothair, Adalberon, Archbishop of Reims, had imperial sympathies. Disappointed, King Lothair relied on other dioceses (Langres, Chalons, Noyon) and on Arnulf I, Count of Flanders.\nHugh, Duke of the Franks.\nIn 956, Hugh inherited his father's estates, in theory making him one of the most powerful nobles in the much-reduced kingdom of West Francia. As he was not yet an adult, his mother acted as his guardian, and young Hugh's neighbours took advantage. Theobald I of Blois, a former vassal of Hugh's father, took the counties of Chartres and Ch\u00e2teaudun. Farther south, on the border of the kingdom, Fulk II of Anjou, another former client of Hugh the Great, carved out a principality at Hugh's expense and that of the Bretons.\nThe royal diplomas of the 960s show that the nobles were faithful not only to the Duke of the Franks, as in the days of Hugh the Great, but also to King Lothair. Indeed, some in the royal armies fought against the Duchy of Normandy on behalf of Lothair. Finally, even Hugh's position as second man in the kingdom seemed to slip. Two charters of the Montier-en-Der Abbey (968 and 980) refer to Herbert III, Count of Vermandois, while Count of Chateau-Thierry, Vitry and lay abbot of Saint-M\u00e9dard of Soissons, bearing the title of \"Count of the Franks\" and even \"count of the palace\" in a charter of Lothair.\nFor his part, Lothair also lost power with the ascendance of the Ottonian monarchy. It waned by participating in the gathering of relatives and vassals of Otto I in 965. However, from the death of the emperor in 973, Lothair wanted to revive the policy of his grandfather to recover Lorraine. Otto's son and successor, Otto II, appointed his cousin, Charles, brother of Lothair, as Duke of Lower Lorraine. This infuriated both Lothair and Hugh, whose sister, Beatrice was the regent for the young Duke Theodoric I of Upper Lorraine. In 978, Hugh thus supported Lothair in opening a war against Otto.\nIn August 978, accompanied by the nobles of the kingdom, Lothair surprised and plundered Aachen, residence of Otto II, forcing the imperial family to flee. After occupying Aachen for five days, Lothair returned to France after symbolically disgracing the city. In September 978, Otto II retaliated against Lothair by invading France with the aid of Charles. He met with little resistance on French territory, devastating the land around Rheims, Soissons, and Laon. Otto II then had Charles crowned as King of France by Theodoric I, Bishop of Metz. Lothair then fled to the French capital of Paris where he was besieged by Otto II and Charles. Sickness among his troops brought on by winter, and a French relief army under Hugh Capet, forced Otto II and Charles to lift the siege on 30 November and return to Germany. On the journey back to Germany, Otto's rearguard, unable to cross the Aisne in flood at Soissons, was completely wiped out, \"and more died by that wave than by the sword.\" This victory allowed Hugh Capet to regain his position as the first noble of the Frankish kingdom.\nHugh aids Archbishop of Reims.\nUntil the end of the tenth century, Reims was the most important of the archiepiscopal seats of France. Situated in Carolingian lands, the archbishop claimed the primacy of Gaul and the privilege to crown kings and direct their chancery. Therefore, the Archbishop of Reims traditionally had supported the ruling family and had long been central to the royal policy. But the episcopal city was headed by Adalberon of Rheims, nephew of Adalberon of Metz (a faithful prelate to the Carolingians), elected by the King Lothair in 969, but who had family ties to the Ottonians. The Archbishop was assisted by one of the most advanced minds of his time, the schoolmaster and future Pope Sylvester II Gerbert of Aurillac. Adalberon and Gerbert worked for the restoration of a single dominant empire in Europe. King Lothair, 13 years old, was under the tutelage of his uncle Otto I. But upon reaching his majority, he became independent, which defeated their plans to bring the whole of Europe under a single crown. Therefore, they turned their support from Lothair to Hugh Capet.\nIndeed, for the Ottonian to make France a vassal state of the empire, it was imperative that the Frankish king was not of the Carolingian dynasty, and not powerful enough to break the Ottonian tutelage. Hugh Capet was for them the ideal candidate, especially since he actively supported monastic reform in the abbeys while other contenders continued to distribute church revenues to their own partisans. Such conduct could only appeal to Reims, who was very close to the Cluniac movement.\nReign of Louis V.\nWith the support of Adalberon of Reims, Hugh became the new leader of the kingdom. Gerbert d'Aurillac stated that \"Lothair is king of France in name alone; Hugh is, however, not in name but in effect and deed.\" \nIn 979, Lothair sought to ensure his succession by associating his eldest son with the throne. Hugh Capet supported him and summoned the great nobles of the kingdom. The ceremony took place at Compi\u00e8gne, in the presence of the king, of Arnulf (an illegitimate son of the king), and of Archbishop Adalberon, under Hugh's blessing. The congregation acclaimed Louis V, following the Carolingian custom, and the archbishop anointed the new king of the Franks.\nThe following year, Lothair, seeing the growing power of Hugh, decided to reconcile with the Emperor Otto II by agreeing to renounce Lorraine. But Hugh did not want the king and the emperor reconciled, so he quickly took the fortress of Montreuil, and then went to Rome. There he met the emperor and the pope, with his confidants Burchard I of Vend\u00f4me and Arnulf of Orl\u00e9ans. Tension mounted between Lothair and Hugh. The king married his 15-year-old son Louis to Adelaide of Anjou, who was then more than 40 years old. She brought with her Auvergne and the county of Toulouse, enough to pincer the Robertian territories from the south. However, the marriage failed and the couple separated two years later.\nAt the death of Otto II in 983, Lothair took advantage of the minority of Otto III and, after making an alliance with the Duke of Bavaria, decided to attack Lorraine. Hugh was careful not to join this expedition.\nWhen the king took Verdun and imprisoned Godfrey (brother of the Archbishop of Reims), Adalberon and Gerbert sought the aid of the duke of the Franks. But Lothair's enterprises came to naught when he died in March 986.\nLouis V, following Louis IV and Lothair, declared that he would take the counsels of the duke of the Franks for his policies. It seems the new king wished to launch an offensive against Reims and Laon because of their rapprochement with the empire. Sources are vague on Hugh's role at this time, but it would be his interest to limit the king's excessive pretensions. Louis summoned the archbishop of Reims at his palace at Compi\u00e8gne to answer for his actions. But while hunting in the forest of Senlis, Louis was killed in a riding accident on 22 May 987.\nHugh elected King of Franks.\nIn May 987, chroniclers, including Richerus and Gerbert of Aurillac, wrote that in Senlis \"died the race of Charles\". However, even if Louis died childless, there remained a Carolingian who could ascend the throne: Charles, Duke of Lower Lorraine, brother of Lothair, uncle of Louis V, first cousin of Hugh Capet through their mothers.\nThis was nothing extraordinary; it was not the first time that a Robertian would be competing with a Carolingian. In the time of Hugh the Great, the Robertians found it expedient to support the claim of a Carolingian. By 987, however, times had changed. For ten years, Hugh Capet had been openly competing against his king, and appeared to have subjected the great vassals. And his opponent Charles of Lorraine was accused of all evils: he wanted to usurp the crown (978), had allied himself with the emperor against his brother, and had defamed Queen Emma of Italy, his brother's wife. The archbishop of Reims convened the greatest lords of France at Senlis and denounced Charles of Lorraine for not maintaining his dignity, having made himself a vassal of the Emperor Otto II and marrying a woman from a lower class of nobility. Then he promoted the candidacy of Hugh Capet:\nCrown the Duke. He is most illustrious by his exploits, his nobility, his forces. The throne is not acquired by hereditary right; no one should be raised to it unless distinguished not only for nobility of birth, but for the goodness of his soul.\nHugh was crowned \"rex Francorum\" on 1 June, in Noyon, and again on 3 July 987, in Paris. Immediately after his coronation, Hugh began to push for the coronation of his son Robert. The archbishop, wary of establishing hereditary kingship in the Capetian line, answered that two kings could not be created in the same year. Hugh claimed, however, that he was planning an expedition against the Moorish armies harassing Borrel II, Count of Barcelona (a vassal of the French crown), and that the stability of the country necessitated two kings should he die while on expedition. Ralph Glaber, however, attributes Hugh's request to his old age and inability to control the nobility. Modern scholarship has largely imputed to Hugh the motive of establishing a dynasty against the pretension of electoral power on the part of the aristocracy, but this is not the typical view of contemporaries and even some modern scholars have been less skeptical of Hugh's \"plan\" to campaign in Spain. Robert was eventually crowned on 25 December that same year.\nElection contested by Charles of Lorraine.\nCharles of Lorraine, the Carolingian heir, contested the succession. He drew support from the Count of Vermandois, a cadet of the Carolingian dynasty; and from the Count of Flanders, loyal to the Carolingian cause. Charles took Laon, the seat of Carolingian royalty. Hugh Capet and his son Robert besieged the city twice, but were compelled to withdraw each time. Hugh decided to make an alliance with Theophano (regent for her son Otto III), but she never replied.\nWhen Adalberon, Archbishop of Reims, died, the archbishopric was contested by his right-hand man, Gerbert of Aurillac, and Arnulf, illegitimate son of King Lothair of France (and nephew of Charles of Lorraine). Choosing Arnulf to replace Adalberon seemed a great gamble, but Hugh made it anyway, and chose him as archbishop instead of Gerbert, in order to appease Carolingian sympathizers and the local populace. Following the customs of those times, he was made to invoke a curse upon himself if he should break his oath of fidelity to Hugh. Arnulf was duly installed, and was confirmed by the pope.\nYet to Arnulf the ties of blood with his uncle Charles was the stronger than the oath he had given Hugh. Gathering the nobles in his castle, Arnulf sent one of his agents and opened the gates of the city to Charles. Arnulf acted as if terrified, and took the nobles with him to a tower, which he had emptied out of supplies beforehand. Thus was the city of Reims compelled to surrender; to keep up appearances, Arnulf and Charles denounced each other, until Arnulf swore fealty to Charles.\nGreat was the predicament of Hugh, and he began doubting whether he could win the contest by force. Adalberon, bishop of Laon, whom Charles expelled when he took the city, had sought the protection of Hugh Capet. The bishop made overtures to Arnulf and Charles, to mediate a peace between them and Hugh Capet. Adalberon was received by Charles favorably, but was made to swear oaths that would bring curses upon himself if broken. Adalberon swore to them all, \"I will observe my oaths, and if not, may I die the death of Judas.\" That night the bishop seized Charles and Arnulf in their sleep, and delivered them to Hugh. Charles was imprisoned in Orl\u00e9ans until his death. His sons, born in prison, were released.\nDispute with the papacy.\nAfter the loss of Reims by the betrayal of Arnulf, Hugh demanded his deposition by Pope John XV. But the pope was then embroiled in a conflict with the Roman aristocracy. After the capture of Charles and Arnulf, Hugh resorted to a domestic tribunal, and convoked a synod at Reims in June 991. There, Gerbert testified against Arnulf, which led to the archbishop's deposition and Gerbert being chosen as replacement.\nPope John XV rejected this procedure and wished to convene a new council in Aachen, but the French bishops refused and confirmed their decision in Chelles (winter 993\u2013994). The pope then called them to Rome, but they protested that the unsettled conditions en route and in Rome made that impossible. The Pope then sent a legate with instructions to call a council of French and German bishops at Mousson, where only the German bishops appeared, the French being stopped on the way by Hugh and Robert.\nGerbert, supported by other bishops, advocates for the independence of the churches vis-\u00e0-vis Rome (which is controlled by the German emperors). Through the exertions of the legate, the deposition of Arnulf was finally pronounced illegal. To avoid excommunication of the bishops who sat in the council of St. Basle, and thus a schism, Gerbert decided to let go. He abandoned the archdiocese and went to Italy. After Hugh's death, Arnulf was released from his imprisonment and soon restored to all his dignities. Under the auspices of the emperor, Gerbert eventually succeeded to the papacy as Pope Sylvester II, the first French pope.\nExtent of power.\nHugh Capet possessed minor properties near Chartres and Angers. Between Paris and Orl\u00e9ans he possessed towns and estates amounting to approximately . A plot in 993, masterminded by Adalberon, Bishop of Laon and Odo I of Blois, was to deliver Hugh Capet into the custody of Otto III. The plot failed, but the fact that no one was punished illustrates how tenuous his hold on power was. Beyond his power base, in the rest of France, there were still as many codes of law as there were fiefdoms. Uniting all this into one cohesive unit was a formidable task and a constant struggle between those who wore the crown of France and its feudal lords. Therefore, Hugh Capet's reign was marked by numerous power struggles with the vassals on the borders of the Seine and the Loire.\nWhile Hugh Capet's military power was limited and he had to seek military aid from Richard I of Normandy, his unanimous election as king gave him great moral authority and influence. Ad\u00e9mar de Chabannes records, probably apocryphally, that during an argument with the Count of Auvergne, Hugh demanded of him: \"Who made you count?\" The count riposted: \"Who made you king?\".\nLegacy.\nHugh Capet died on 24 October 996, and was interred in the Basilica of Saint-Denis. His son Robert continued to reign.\nMost historians regard the beginnings of modern France as having initiated with the coronation of Hugh Capet. This is because, as Count of Paris, he made the city his power centre. The monarch began a long process of exerting control of the rest of the country from there.\nHe is regarded as the founder of the Capetian dynasty. The direct Capetians, or the House of Capet, ruled France from 987 to 1328; thereafter, the Kingdom was ruled by cadet branches of the dynasty. All French kings through Louis Philippe, and all royals since then, have belonged to the dynasty. Furthermore, cadet branches of the House continue to reign in Spain and Luxembourg.\nAll monarchs of the Kingdom of France from Hugh Capet to Philip II of France were titled 'King of the Franks'. Documents during Philip II's reign began using the title 'King of France' as dawn of the intimate unification of medieval French population even though Latin was the main language.\nMarriage and issue.\nHugh Capet married Adelaide, daughter of William Towhead, Count of Poitou. Their children are as follows:\nA number of other daughters are less reliably attested.\nProphecy.\nAccording to tradition, sometime in 981, Hugh Capet recovered the relics of St. Valery, which had been stolen by the Flemings, and restored them to their proper resting place. The saint appeared to the duke in a dream, and said: \"For what you have done, you and your descendants shall be kings unto the seventh generation\". When he became king, Hugh refused to wear the insignia of royalty, hoping that it would extend his descendants' reign by one generation.\nBy the literal interpretation, Capetian kingship would thus have ended with Philip Augustus, the seventh king of his line. Figuratively, seven meant completeness, and would mean that the Capetians would be kings for ever. In fact, Capetian kingship lasted until 1848 in France, although the current King of Spain and the Grand Duke of Luxembourg are Capetians.\nReception.\nItalian poet Dante Alighieri features Hugh Capet as a character in \"Purgatorio\", the second canticle of the \"Divine Comedy\". The pilgrim meets Capet on the fifth terrace of Mount Purgatory among souls performing penitence for avarice (\"Purgatorio\" 20). In this portrayal, Capet acknowledges himself as the \"root of the obnoxious plant / that shadows all the Christian lands\" (\"Purg.\" 20.43-44). The metaphor of the root of the plant is reminiscent of a family tree. Dante thus condemns Hugh as a main source of the evil that has pervaded and corrupted the French monarchy. Dante's personal resentment towards Hugh's legacy likely stemmed from the fact that his exile had been caused by interference in Florentine politics by the French crown and Pope Boniface VIII in the early fourteenth century. In this way, the \"obnoxious plant\" of the Capetians casts a shadow over both the papacy and the chance for an emperor that might bring order to Italy, Dante's \"two suns.\"\nThe myth of Capet's humble origins is another crucial component of Dante's representation of this historical figure in \"Purgatorio\". Though the notion that Capet was the son of a butcher is rightfully reported by critics to be untrue\u2014he was the son of a duke\u2014situating Capet in a lower social position is vital for Dante. This framing draws the Frankish king closer to Dante's own experience as a member of the lower aristocracy, and makes Capet's rise to power feel more extreme. In penance for grasping so high above himself in life, Capet and the other avaricious souls of this terrace must lie face down into the rock. The souls inch slowly up the mountain where they lay, acting in moderation in purgatory, when on earth they moved through life guided by greed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75193", "revid": "45015056", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75193", "title": "Natural semantic metalanguage", "text": "Linguistic theory of semantic description\nNatural semantic metalanguage (NSM) is a linguistic theory that reduces lexicons down to a set of semantic primitives. It is based on the conception of Polish professor Andrzej Bogus\u0142awski. The theory was formally developed by Anna Wierzbicka at Warsaw University and later at the Australian National University in the early 1970s, and Cliff Goddard at Australia's Griffith University.\nApproach.\nThe natural semantic metalanguage (NSM) theory attempts to reduce the semantics of all lexicons down to a restricted set of semantic primitives, or primes. Primes are universal in that they have the same translation in every language, and they are primitive in that they cannot be defined using other words. Primes are ordered together to form explications, which are descriptions of semantic representations consisting solely of primes.\nResearch in the NSM approach deals extensively with language and cognition, and language and culture. Key areas of research include lexical semantics, grammatical semantics, phraseology and pragmatics, as well as cross-cultural communication.\nDozens of languages, including representatives of 16 language groups, have been studied using the NSM framework. They include English, Russian, Polish, French, Spanish, Italian, Swedish, Danish, Finnish, Malay, Japanese, Chinese, Korean, Ewe, Wolof, East Cree, Koromu, at least 16 Australian languages, and a number of creole languages including Trinidadian creole, Roper River Kriol, Bislama and Tok Pisin.\nApart from the originators Anna Wierzbicka and Cliff Goddard, a number of other scholars have participated in NSM semantics, most notably Bert Peeters, Zhengdao Ye, Felix Ameka, Jean Harkins, Marie-Odile Junker, Anna Gladkova, Jock Wong, Carsten Levisen, Helen Bromhead, Karen Stollznow, Adrian Tien, Carol Priestley, Yuko Asano-Cavanagh and Gian Marco Farese.\nSemantic primes.\nSemantic primes (also known as semantic primitives) are concepts that are \"universal\", meaning that they can be translated literally into any known language and retain their semantic representation, and \"primitive\", as they are proposed to be the most simple linguistic concepts and are unable to be defined using simpler terms.\nProponents of the NSM theory argue that every language shares a core vocabulary of concepts. In 1994 and 2002, Goddard and Wierzbicka studied languages across the globe and found strong evidence supporting this argument.\nWierzbicka's 1972 study proposed 14 semantic primes. That number was expanded to 60 in 2002 by Wierzbicka and Goddard, and the current agreed-upon number is 65.\nEach language's translations of the semantic primes are called exponents. Below is a list of English exponents, or the English translation of the semantic primes. It is important to note that some of the exponents in the following list are polysemous and can be associated with meanings in English (and other languages) that are not shared. However, when used as an exponent in the Natural semantic metalanguage, it is only the prime concept which is identified as universal.\nThe following is a list of English exponents of semantic primes adapted from Levisen and Waters (eds.) 2017.\nNSM syntax.\nNSM primes can be combined in a limited set of syntactic frames that are also universal. These valency options stipulate the specific types of grammatical functions that can be combined with the primes. While these combinations can be realized differently in other languages, it is believed that the meanings expressed by these syntactic combinations are universal.\nExamples of valency frames for the \"say\" semantic prime:\nExplications.\nA semantic analysis in the NSM approach results in a reductive paraphrase called an explication that captures the meaning of the concept explicated. An ideal explication can be substituted for the original expression in context without change of meaning.\nFor example: \"Someone X broke something Y\":\nsomeone X did something to something Y\nbecause of this, something happened to Y at the same time\nit happened in one moment\nbecause of this, after this Y was not one thing anymore\npeople can think about it like this: \"it can't be one thing anymore\"\nSemantic molecules.\nSemantic molecules are intermediary words used in explications and cultural scripts. While not semantic primes, they can be defined exclusively using primes. Semantic molecules can be determined as words that are necessary to build upon to explicate other words. These molecules are marked by the notation [m] in explications and cultural scripts. Some molecules are proposed to be universal or near-universal, while others are culture- or area-specific.\nExamples of proposed universal molecules:\nApplications.\nMinimal English.\nMinimal English is a derivative of the natural semantic metalanguage research, with the first major publication in 2018. It is a reduced form of English designed for non-specialists to use when requiring clarity of expression or easily translatable materials. Minimal English uses an expanded set of vocabulary to the semantic primes. It includes the proposed universal and near-universal molecules, as well as non-universal words which can assist in clarity. As such, it already has counterparts targeted at speakers of other natural languages, e.g. Minimal French, Minimal Polish, 65 Sanaa (\"Minimal Finnish\") and so on. Minimal English differs from other simple Englishes (such as Basic English) as it has been specifically designed for maximal cross-translatability.\nLanguage engineering.\nApplications of NSM have also been proposed for natural-language processing, natural-language understanding and artificial intelligence.\nRevivalistics.\nGhil'ad Zuckermann suggests that NSM can be of benefit in (language revitalization) as it \"can neutralize the Western semantic bias involved in reconnecting with ancient Aboriginal traditions using English, and may allow a fuller understanding of the original meaning of the Aboriginal lexical items.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75194", "revid": "29081026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75194", "title": "Flap", "text": "Flap may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75196", "revid": "49425883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75196", "title": "Jean-Antoine Houdon", "text": "18th and 19th-century French artist\nJean-Antoine, chevalier Houdon (; 20 March 1741 \u2013 15 July 1828) was a French neoclassical sculptor.\nHoudon is famous for his portrait busts and statues of philosophers, inventors and political figures of the Enlightenment. Houdon's subjects included Denis Diderot (1771), Benjamin Franklin (1778-1809), Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1778), Voltaire (1781), Moli\u00e8re (1781), George Washington (1785\u20131788), Thomas Jefferson (1789), Louis XVI (1790), Robert Fulton (1803\u201304), and Napol\u00e9on Bonaparte (1806).\nBiography.\nHoudon was born in Versailles, on 20 March 1741.\nIn 1752, he entered the Acad\u00e9mie royale de peinture et de sculpture, where he studied with Ren\u00e9-Michel Slodtz, Jean-Baptiste Lemoyne, and Jean-Baptiste Pigalle. From 1761 to 1764, he studied at the \u00c9cole royale des \u00e9l\u00e8ves prot\u00e9g\u00e9s.\nHoudon won the Prix de Rome in 1761, but was not greatly influenced by ancient and Renaissance art in Rome. His stay in the city is marked by two characteristic and important productions: the superb \u00e9corch\u00e9 (1767), an anatomical model which has served as a guide to all artists since his day, and the statue of Saint Bruno in the church of Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri in Rome. \nAfter four years in Italy, Houdon returned to Paris.\nHe submitted \"Morpheus\" to the Salon of 1771. He developed his practise of portrait busts.\nHe became a member of the Acad\u00e9mie de peinture et de sculpture in 1771, and a professor in 1778. In 1778, he modeled Voltaire, producing a portrait bust with wig for the Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise; one for the Palace of Versailles, and one for Catherine the Great.\nIn 1778, he joined the masonic lodge Les Neuf S\u0153urs, where he later met Benjamin Franklin, and John Paul Jones.\nFor Salon of 1781, he submitted a \"Diana\" which was refused without drapery.\nHoudon's portrait sculpture of Washington was the result of a specific invitation by Benjamin Franklin to cross the Atlantic in 1785, specifically to visit Mount Vernon, so that Washington could model for him. Washington sat for wet clay life models and a plaster life mask. \nThese models served for many commissions of Washington, including the standing figure commissioned by the Virginia General Assembly, for the Virginia State Capitol in Richmond. \nNumerous variations of the Washington bust were produced, portraying him variously as a general in uniform, in the classical manner showing chest musculature, and as Roman Consul Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus clad in a toga.\nIn the 1780s, Houdon produced two semi-nude sculptures, \"Winter\" and \"Bather\".\nPerceived as bourgeois for his connections to the court of Louis XVI, he fell out of favour during the French Revolution, although he escaped imprisonment. \nHoudon returned to favor during the French Consulate and Empire, being taken on as one of the original artistic team for what became the Column of the Grande Arm\u00e9e at Wimille.\nHe was made a Chevalier de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur, on 17 December 1804. He was created a \"Chevalier de l'Empire\" in 1809, which was made hereditary by letters patent in 1816.Houdon died in Paris on 15 July 1828, and was interred at the Montparnasse Cemetery.\nFamily.\nOn 1 July 1786, he married Marie-Ange-Cecile Langlois; they had three daughters: Sabine, Anne-Ange, and Claudine.\nLegacy and influence.\nHoudon's sculptures were used as models for the engravings used on various U.S. postage stamps of the late 19th and early 20th centuries which depict Washington in profile.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75197", "revid": "20444050", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75197", "title": "F\u00e9lix Mayol", "text": "French singer and entertainer (1872\u20131941)\nF\u00e9lix Mayol (18 November 1872 \u2013 26 October 1941) was a French singer and entertainer.\nCareer.\nMayol was born in Toulon, France. His parents, amateur singers and actors, arranged for Felix to make his debut stage at six years of age. In 1895, he went to the Montparnasse Quarter of Paris where he began a career in entertainment that spanned more than forty years. He adopted a campy effeminate manner on stage as part of his theatrical persona.\nHe sang the famous song \"Viens poupoule, viens poupoule, viens...\", and performed many songs by Th\u00e9odore Botrel.\nIn the early years of the 20th century some of Mayol's performances were captured by an early form of talking picture. He would record his voice, then the motion picture camera would film him as he lip-synced to the record. Several of his Phonosc\u00e8nes exist.\nOther activities.\nThe teenaged Maurice Chevalier took a risk by impersonating Mayol in small-time cafe entertainments, Mayol reportedly recognised the young man's talent and gave him his blessing, which led Chevalier to the Casino de Paris and the Folies Berg\u00e8re.\nShortly after World War I, he purchased a plot of land in Toulon and donated it to the local sports club, RC Toulonnais, for the building of a stadium. The facility, named Stade Mayol in his honor, remains in use today (after several renovations) as the home ground for the Toulon rugby team.\nPersonal life.\nMayol never married, and many stories circulated of his homosexual liaisons, including an attempt to seduce Chevalier. His brother, Charles Mayol, founded a music publishing company to print his works.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75200", "revid": "46406938", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75200", "title": "Marie-Louise Damien", "text": "French actress and singer\nMarie-Louise Damien (born Louise Marie Damien; 5 December 1889 \u2013 30 January 1978), better known by the stage name Damia, was a French singer and actress.\nEarly life.\nLouise Marie Damien was born on 5 December 1889 to Marie Jos\u00e9phine Louise (n\u00e9e Claude) and Nicolas Damien on rue Jeanne d'Arc in the 13th arrondissement of Paris. Her father was a police sergeant in Lorraine and she was raised in a family of eight siblings. Running away from home after being sent to a reform school, Damien arrived in Paris when she was fifteen.\nCareer.\nDamien initially worked as a model and actress playing bit parts with the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Ch\u00e2telet, but by 1909 was performing as a dancer, using the stage name Marise Damia, with Max Dearly in London. After returning from London, she was encouraged to sing by the impresario Robert Hollard, who used the stage name \"Roberty\". Hollard was the husband of the singer, Fr\u00e9hel, at the time and his affair with Damia ended his stormy marriage. Her singing debut occurred in 1911 at the P\u00e9pini\u00e8re and was followed by a performance at the Alhambra, which was arranged by Harry Fragson. He also arranged for her to perform at the Alcazar d'\u00c9t\u00e9, where she worked with Maurice Chevalier. When Fragson was murdered by his father, Damia left France in 1913 and went to the United States. Performing on Broadway until 1916, she returned to France and during the remainder of the war sang on the war front.\nFelix Mayol and Loie Fuller.\nAfter being seen by F\u00e9lix Mayol, one of the leading male singing stars at the time, she was hired by him to perform at his concerts. Despite this, her career evolved slowly, taking second billing for a number of years but with help in her stage presentation from the American dancer, Loie Fuller, she eventually became a singing star. At the beginning of World War I she opened Le Concert Damia, in Montmartre, where she became the first star ever to have a single spotlight trained on her face, bare arms and hands. From this point in her career she became the most important exponent of the \"chanson r\u00e9aliste\" genre until \u00c9dith Piaf came along in 1936. Her nickname was \"la trag\u00e9dienne de la chanson\", and amongst her big hits were \"Les go\u00e9lands\", \"Johnny Palmer\", \"C'est mon gigolo\" and \"Tu ne sais pas aimer\"\u2014the last-named song later became a theme for French people with AIDS.\nEileen Gray.\nAround 1922, Damia became the lover of the architect Eileen Gray, who was a member of a circle of lesbians that included Fuller and her lover Gab Sor\u00e8re, Natalie Barney and Romaine Brooks. Upon Fuller's death in 1928, Damia and Sor\u00e8re became lovers.\nFilms.\nIn 1927, she appeared in the film, \"Napol\u00e9on\" directed by Abel Gance with early silent film stars Antonin Artaud, Philippe H\u00e9riat, Annabella, and Suzanne Bianchetti. Her other film successes included \"Sola\" and \"Notre Dame De Paris\", alongside Anthony Quinn. Damia had enduring appeal that stretched to audiences as far away as Japan, where she toured in 1953.\nFarewell tour.\nA few years later she did a farewell tour, ending her more than forty-year career in a double bill with Marie Dubas in front of a full house at the Paris Olympia. Her actual swansong, however, was singing \"Les Croix\" on \"La joie de vivre d'Edith Piaf\", in 1956.\nWhen asked in 1974 by the Anglo-French biographer David Bret to divulge the secret of her long life and fabulous voice, Damia replied, \"Three packs of Gitanes a day!\"\nDeath.\nDamia died on 30 January 1978 at La Celle-Saint-Cloud, a western suburb of Paris, and was interred in the Cimeti\u00e8re de Pantin. Today, she is considered to be the second greatest singer of \"chansons r\u00e9alistes\", after Edith Piaf.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75202", "revid": "1016462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75202", "title": "Clovis", "text": "Clovis may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75204", "revid": "327363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75204", "title": "Alice Prin", "text": "French model and painter (1901\u20131953)\nAlice Ernestine Prin (2 October 1901 \u2013 29 April 1953), nicknamed the Queen of Montparnasse and often known as Kiki de Montparnasse, was a French model, chanteuse, memoirist and painter during the Jazz Age. She flourished in, and helped define, the liberated culture of Paris in the so-called Ann\u00e9es folles (\"crazy years\" in French). She became one of the most famous models of the 20th century and in the history of avant-garde art.\nEarly life.\nBorn as an illegitimate child in Ch\u00e2tillon-sur-Seine, C\u00f4te d'Or, Alice Prin had \"a wretched childhood that could only lead to laughter or despair\". She was raised in abject poverty by her grandmother. At age twelve, she was sent by train to live with her mother, a linotypist, in Paris in order to help earn an income for her family. Harsh, degrading jobs followed, and she worked in printing shops, shoe factories, and bakeries. During this time, she began her lifelong joy of decorating herself. She \"would crumble a petal from her mother's fake geraniums to give color to her cheeks and was fired from a nasty job at a bakery because she darkened her eyebrows with burnt matchsticks\".\nBy the age of fourteen, Prin's \"large and splendid body\" had garnered the artistic and sexual attention of various Parisian denizens, and she began surreptitiously posing nude for sculptors. \"It bothered me a little to take off my clothes,\" Prin wrote her in her memoirs, but \"it was the custom\". Her decision to become a nude model created discord with her mother. One day, her mother unexpectedly intruded into an artist's studio in a rage, denounced Prin as a shameless prostitute, and disowned her forever.\nNow without money or a roof over her head, the teenage Kiki determined to make her living exclusively by posing for artists. As a beautiful dark-haired girl, she soon found herself in popular demand. At the time, she had scant pubic hair, and when posing, she occasionally drew fake hair with a piece of charcoal. As her fame grew, she became a local celebrity who symbolized the Montparnasse quarter's nonconformity and its rejection of the social norms of the .\nModeling career.\nAdopting a single name, \"Kiki\", Prin became a fixture of the Montparnasse social scene and a popular model, posing for dozens of artists, including Sanyu, Cha\u00efm Soutine, Julien Mandel, Tsuguharu Foujita, Constant Detr\u00e9, Francis Picabia, Jean Cocteau, Arno Breker, Alexander Calder, Per Krohg, Hermine David, Pablo Gargallo and Tono Salazar. Mo\u00efse Kisling painted a portrait of Kiki titled \"Nu assis\", one of his best known. In his 1976 book \"Memoirs of Montparnasse\", Canadian poet John Glassco recalled that: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Her maquillage was a work of art in itself ...her mouth painted a deep scarlet that emphasized the sly erotic humor of its contours. Her face was beautiful from every angle, but I liked it best in full profile, when it had the lineal purity of a stuffed salmon.\nIn Autumn 1921, Prin met the American visual artist Man Ray, and the two soon entered into a stormy eight-year relationship. She lived with Man Ray in his studio on rue Campagne-Premi\u00e8re until 1929 during which time he made hundreds of portraits of her. She became his muse at the time and the subject of some of his best-known images, including the surrealist image \"Le Violon d'Ingres\" (Ingres' Violin) and \"Noire et blanche\" (Black and White).\nDuring their turbulent relationship, Man Ray labored obsessively on Prin's makeup and visual image. He \"took her many steps beyond the primitive charcoal eyebrow-pencil she used for makeup as a teenager.\" Every night before going out together, he \"meticulously applied her cosmetics and assisted in the choice of her clothes, creating a visual style that is as much a part of his \"oeuvre\" as any of his signed paintings\". Her makeup often varied in \"the color, thickness, and angle according to his mood. Her heavy eyelids, next, might be done in copper one day and royal blue another, or else in silver and jade.\"\nBy 1929, Prin had reached the zenith of her fame. She had appeared in nine short and frequently experimental films, including Fernand L\u00e9ger's 1923 Dadaist work \"Ballet m\u00e9canique\" without any credit. A symbol of bohemian and creative Paris and of the possibility of being a woman and finding an artistic place, she was elected the \"Queen of Montparnasse\" at age 28. Despite her local fame, she continued to live a hand-to-mouth existence. Even during difficult times, she maintained her positive attitude, saying \"all I need is an onion, a bit of bread, and a bottle of red [wine]; and I will always find somebody to offer me that.\"\nArtwork and autobiography.\nA painter in her own right, Prin had a sold-out exhibition of her paintings in 1927 at the Galerie au Sacre du Printemps in Paris. Signing her work with her chosen single name, \"Kiki\", her drawings and paintings comprise portraits, self-portraits, social activities, fanciful animals and dreamy landscapes composed in a light, slightly uneven, expressionist style that is a reflection of her carefree manner and boundless optimism.\nIn 1929, she published an autobiography titled \"Kiki's Memoirs\", with Ernest Hemingway and Tsuguharu Foujita providing introductions. In 1930, the book was translated by Samuel Putnam and published in Manhattan by Black Manikin Press, but it was immediately banned by the United States government. A copy of the first US edition was held in the section for banned books in the New York Public Library through the 1970s. However, the book had been reprinted under the title \"The Education of a Young Model\" throughout the 1950s and 1960s (e.g., a 1954 edition by Bridgehead has the Hemingway Introduction and photos and illustrations by Mahlon Blaine).\nThese editions were mainly put out by unscrupulous publisher Samuel Roth. Taking advantage that banned books did not receive copyright protection in the U.S., Roth put out a series of supposedly copyrighted editions (which never was registered with the Library of Congress) which altered the text and added illustrations\u2014line drawings and photographs\u2014which were not by Prin. After 1955, Roth appended an extra ten chapters falsely credited to Prin 23 years after the original book, including an invented visit to New York where she met with Roth himself. None of this was true. The original autobiography finally saw a new translation and publication in 1996.\nFor a few years during the 1930s, Prin owned the Montparnasse cabaret L'Oasis, which was later renamed Chez Kiki. Her music hall performances in black hose and garters included crowd-pleasing risqu\u00e9 songs, which were uninhibited, yet inoffensive. She later departed Paris to avoid the occupying German army during World War II, which entered the city in June 1940. She did not return to live in the city immediately after the war.\nDeath and legacy.\nPrin died at age 51 on 29 April 1953 after collapsing outside her flat in Montparnasse, apparently of complications of alcoholism or drug dependence. A large crowd of artists and admirers attended her Paris funeral and followed the procession to her interment in the \"Cimeti\u00e8re parisien de Thiais\". Her tomb identifies her as: \"Kiki, 1901\u20131953, singer, actress, painter, Queen of Montparnasse\".\n\"Life\" magazine featured a three-page obituary of Prin in its 29 June 1953 edition, concluding with a memory from one of her friends who said: \"We laughed, my God how we laughed.\" Tsuguharu Foujita remarked that, with Kiki's death, the glorious days of Montparnasse were buried forever.\nLong after her death, Prin remains the embodiment of the outspokenness, audacity and creativity that marked the interwar period of life in Montparnasse. She represents a strong artistic force in her own right as a woman. In 1989, biographers Billy Kl\u00fcver and Julie Martin called her \"one of the century's first truly independent women\". In her honor, a daylily has been named \"Kiki de Montparnasse\".\nOn 14 May 2022, \"Le Violon d'Ingres\", which depicts Prin's back overlaid with a violin's f-holes, sold for $12.4 million, setting a record as the most expensive photograph ever sold at auction.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "75205", "revid": "5957417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75205", "title": "Gallia (disambiguation)", "text": "Gallia (English: Gaul), was a region of Western Europe during the Iron Age occupied by present-day France, Belgium and other neighbouring countries.\nGallia or Gallian may also refer to:\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75208", "revid": "59", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75208", "title": "Al-Buraq Wall", "text": ""}
{"id": "75210", "revid": "33154413", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75210", "title": "Bottom (TV series)", "text": "British TV sitcom (1991\u20131995)\nBottom is a British sitcom created by Rik Mayall and Adrian Edmondson that ran for three series on BBC2 from 1991 to 1995. It focuses on Richard \"Richie\" Richard (Mayall) and Edward Elizabeth \"Eddie\" Hitler (Edmondson), two unemployed, crude, and perverted flatmates living in Hammersmith, London, who aspire to better themselves. \"Bottom\" became known for its chaotic, nihilistic humour and violent slapstick comedy. In 2004, \"Bottom\" was ranked 45th in a BBC poll for \"Britain's Best Sitcom\".\nMayall and Edmondson had worked together since the mid-1970s, and developed \"Bottom\" as an extension of their own relationship and their on-screen characters in \"The Young Ones\" and \"Filthy Rich &amp; Catflap\", their earlier BBC sitcoms. In addition to the series, the pair completed five stage show tours between 1993 and 2003, and adapted the sitcom into a feature-length film, \"Guest House Paradiso\", released in 1999. A proposed spin-off series featuring various \"Bottom\" characters, \"\", was cancelled in 2013 before production. Mayall's death in the following year ended plans for a revival.\nCast.\nMain characters\nRecurring characters\nPremise.\nEddie and Richie are two pathetic, sex-crazed, slobby flatmates living in a filthy, damp flat at 11 Mafeking Parade in Hammersmith, London. Mayall described them as \"unemployed survivors\". They spend their time concocting desperate schemes to convince women to have sex with them, including buying sex spray, forging money, and pretending to be aristocrats. Their plans are never successful, however, and the stress of their miserable lives can cause them to become irritable with each other. Whenever tensions hit a breaking point, Richie and Eddie end up fighting (albeit in a comical, Tom and Jerry-style, with adult themes). Both men are immature. Richie is a virgin; he is insecure and clueless on how to talk to women. Despite being a penniless slob, he occasionally projects a pompous sort of snobbery in an attempt to impress others and boost his self-esteem; he is sexually frustrated and obsessed with losing his virginity. Eddie, the more popular of the two, enjoys drinking regularly, and often secretly steals family heirlooms and cash from Richie, although he occasionally has inventive moments, like building a cash forger, an electric toilet, and a time machine. Eddie's friends, the gormless Spudgun and Dave Hedgehog, both fear Richie, believing him to be psychotic. Although the four of them sometimes venture out, usually to the local pub, the Lamb and Flag, most of the episodes are set within the confines of the squalid flat.\nMusic.\nThe opening and closing themes are cover versions of B. B. King's \"BB's Blues\" and The Mar-Keys' \"Last Night\", respectively. Both themes and the episode bridge instrumentals are played by The Bum Notes, an ensemble featuring Edmondson.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nMayall and Edmondson first met as drama students at Manchester University in 1975, when Edmondson joined the improvisational comedy troupe 20th Century Coyote, of which Mayall was a member. The act grew in popularity following successful runs at the Edinburgh Fringe and the Comic Strip in London, which led to the pair starring in the stage and television double act The Dangerous Brothers and sitcoms \"The Young Ones\" and \"Filthy, Rich &amp; Catflap\". After the latter ended in 1987, the pair \"drifted away\" for a period before reuniting after they caught the attention of producer and executive Paul Jackson, who had also worked on \"The Young Ones\", and pitched initial ideas they had for a new sitcom. Jackson was interested enough, and Mayall and Edmondson proceeded to write a draft script. Episodes were developed around improvisational writing, and Mayall recalled Edmondson \"did the typing and he allowed me to go to the off licence to buy all the drinks.\" Upon delivering their scripts, the BBC expressed concern that the show could not sustain itself with two characters alone, to which Mayall and Edmondson used Tony Hancock and Sid James as an example, and got their way. Mayall said that the BBC was too focused on the show's content being \"morally sound and politically correct\", but gave the green-light on the series.\nThe show's original working title was \"Your Bottom\", for the humour of people having to say \"I saw 'Your Bottom' on television last night\", before it was shortened because Mayall said they \"liked the shape of the word.\" It started as a joke until they learned that Alan Yentob, then head of BBC2, disliked the title which convinced the pair to stick with it. Mayall added that the title was deliberate to make viewers think of \"bottom jokes\", but that it also reflects on the show's premise of \"two guys at the bottom of the heap\". Mayall and Edmondson were aware of the failures of other sitcoms, and purposely wrote tight scripts. Edmondson said writing \"Bottom\" was liberating \"because it's obvious what the idea is \u2013 to be as funny as possible.\" The pair based Eddie and Richie on characters that they had improvised with as part of 20th Century Coyote, and on their own friendship. They made a conscious effort to avoid any pop culture or contemporary references when writing, as \"The Young Ones\" had been popular with young people and instead wanted to portray characters who had left student life behind and reached their \"thirties and forties\". Instead, the two were interested in more everyday scenarios \"that have always been there\", such as a gas meter reading. Eddie and Richie have been compared to their characters on \"The Young Ones\", but 10 years older. After the first series had been recorded, Mayall ranked \"Bottom\" as their best work and marked \"a new chapter\" in his relationship with Edmondson.\nIn June 1990, a pilot episode was recorded which was later titled \"Contest\" and broadcast as part of the first series. Problems over content came to light when recording began. Mayall recalled they were allowed three \"bloodies\" or \"bloody hell\"s per episode, and arguments were often had with as many as 20 BBC executives who went on the set. Some executives criticised the series for being sexist, but Mayall pointed out that they would have had more women on the show if they had not cut around twenty \"shagging scenes\" that were written, and argued that lesbian scenes were also removed. After the first series was recorded in June and July 1991, \"Bottom\" was first announced in August, when, in an attempt to attract viewers, the BBC reported that it had commissioned over 400 hours of new television programming for the upcoming autumn schedule. This included new productions from comics known as the Comic Strip, which included Mayall and Edmondson for \"Bottom\" and Dawn French for \"Murder Most Horrid\".\n\"Bottom\" ended after three series in February 1995. Edmondson said that one of the reasons for stopping the show was the struggle to come up with new ideas as \"we'd already hit each other with everything in the flat\". Mayall supported this view, saying they took the show as far as it could go on television while continuing the franchise with stage tours and home video releases, preferring to retain full creative control over the characters. In 2000, he said that Richie and Eddie had become \"bigger than we are\".\nRecording.\nEach episode was recorded in front of a live audience. The original scripts can be found in the published script books, and several completely removed scenes were included in the VHS release \"Fluff\" that consisted mostly of bloopers. Several (but not all) of these scenes, as well as some smaller sections of dialogue also removed for timing reasons, are included in DVD releases.\nThe final episode of the second series, \"'s Out\", was set on Wimbledon Common involving the antics of a flasher. It was not broadcast as part of the original series after Rachel Nickell was murdered on Wimbledon Common, due to which the BBC delayed its broadcast until a rerun of the second series on 10 April 1995.\nSpin-offs.\nStage shows.\nMayall and Edmondson held five nationwide theatre tours of \"Bottom\" between 1993 and 2003, adapting the original series into a stage show. The first tour, \"Bottom Live\", lasted 43 dates across 10 weeks in 1993. The 2001 tour consisted of 76 dates, which included a show at the National Arena in Birmingham to over 4,500 people. The Weapons Grade Y-Fronts Tour included 40 dates. The stage shows were often cruder than the sitcom with stronger language, and developed over time to include settings outside the flat, including a prison cell and a remote island. There were several instances of the pair getting carried away with the planned stunts, resulting in one of them getting cuts on their head. Edmondson said: \"Rik would tell them 'Don't be scared, it happens all the time.' We'd just carry on, then go off to hospital afterwards to be sewn up.\" A show from each tour was recorded and released for home video.\n\"Guest House Paradiso\".\nDuring the \"Hooligan's Island\" tour in 1997, Mayall and Edmondson sought ways of spending time before the night's performance and began to develop ideas for a script that involved Richie being a hotel manager. After some time the pair realised that they had produced a substantial work that would suit a feature film. The result was \"Guest House Paradiso\", a spin-off to \"Bottom\" featuring Mayall and Edmondson as Richard Twat (pronounced \"Thwaite\" by the character) and Eddie Elizabeth Ndingobamba, respectively, with Edmondson serving as director. The film sees the pair operating a grotty remote guesthouse next to a nuclear power plant and feeding their guests radioactive fish, causing massive amounts of vomiting. Despite the characters and humour being in the same vein as \"Bottom\", Mayall said the movie was never meant to be a direct film adaptation, because other sitcoms that had those \"didn't work\". Instead, \"Guest House Paradiso\" featured the same characters, but detached from their show counterparts, with Mayall elaborating that \"there will be other films of ours with Richie and Eddie. Just like Laurel and Hardy, they set them in prisons, or the foreign legion\u2026different stories, but the link will be Richie and Eddie.\" Produced on a \u00a33 million budget, the film premiered in December 1999.\nCancelled revivals.\nIn late 2004, surrounding the release of their \"Mindless Violence\" DVD, Mayall hinted that he and Edmondson may possibly be returning with another tour in the future. However, Edmondson said that it was \"definitely time to stop. We're both getting too old. We both realised that the show wasn't as engaging as it used to be. We were starting to look a bit ridiculous. ... We're both nearly fifty and we're starting to feel slightly undignified talking about wanking and knobs constantly.\" In 2010, Edmondson confirmed that he had quit comedy, stating that his interest in it has declined for many years, and wanted to focus more on his band. He dismissed the idea of reuniting with Mayall, saying it is \"very unlikely\".\nIn March 2011, the duo made a surprise reunion when Edmondson took part in \"Let's Dance for Comic Relief\". A pre-recorded segment ended with Mayall hurling a custard pie in Edmondson's face. Mayall appeared again, this time live on stage, to abruptly end Edmondson's performance by hitting him several times with a frying pan. In the final, Mayall returned once again to drop a ton weight upon Edmondson. In the following month, Edmondson revealed that he and Mayall had conceived an idea for a sitcom. \"Rik and I have an idea for a sitcom for when we are very, very old. We want to set it in an old people's home 30 years hence. It will be like 'Bottom', but we will be hitting each other with colostomy bags!\"\nIn August 2012, the BBC announced that it had commissioned a series based on the \"Hooligan's Island\" stage show, where Eddie and Richie cause havoc on a deserted tropical island, set to air in 2013. However, the show was scrapped just two months later. Edmondson said \"it wasn't working\" and wanted to pursue other projects. Mayall tried to have Edmondson reconsider, but he \"put his foot down and said, 'It's not going to work mate.'\", and wanted to wait ten years until they were older for a possible sitcom set in an old peoples home. Mayall died on 9 June 2014, putting an end to the plans. In 2023, Edmondson revealed that he wrote the initial scripts with Mayall in the hope that the BBC would reject them. He felt Mayall was eager to revive their old characters, but struggled to accept that Edmondson was not interested. While he hoped a rejection would put Mayall's aspirations to rest, the idea was ultimately greenlit.\n\"Bottom: Exposed\".\nIn February 2024, pay television channel Gold announced \"Bottom: Exposed\", a 2-hour documentary on the making of the sitcom, featuring exclusive behind the scenes footage and insights from Edmondson, Paul Jackson, director/producer Ed Bye, the cast and production crew, and celebrity fans. Narrated by Stephen Fry, it aired on 18 April 2024. On the following day, Gold aired extended versions of two episodes, \"Holy\" and \"Digger\", for the first time on television. Both were previously released, the former on the series two DVD and the latter on the 1996 outtakes video \"Bottom Fluff\".\nEpisodes.\nMany of the episodes' names are meant to be a humorous suffix to the word \"bottom\". Bottom \"Fluff\" was used for the outtakes for the home video releases.\nHome media.\nDVD release.\nIn 2004, a DVD featuring a compilation of violent scenes from Mayall and Edmondson throughout their career, including scenes from \"Bottom\", was released as \"Mindless Violence: The Very Best of the Violent Bits\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75211", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75211", "title": "Bottom", "text": "Bottom may refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75212", "revid": "12107077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75212", "title": "Noble Sanctuary", "text": ""}
{"id": "75214", "revid": "861759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75214", "title": "Flatland", "text": "1884 novella by Edwin Abbott Abbott\nFlatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions is a satirical novella by the English theologian, Anglican priest and schoolmaster Edwin Abbott Abbott, first published in 1884 by Seeley &amp; Co. of London. Written pseudonymously by \"A Square\", the book used the fictional two-dimensional world of Flatland to satirise the class and gender hierarchies of Victorian society, but the novella's more enduring contribution is its examination of dimensions.\nA sequel, \"Sphereland\", was written by Dionys Burger in 1957. Several films have been based on \"Flatland\", including the feature film \"Flatland\" (2007). Other efforts have been short or experimental films, including one narrated by Dudley Moore and the short films \"Flatland: The Movie\" (2007) and \"\" (2012).\nPlot.\nThe story describes a two-dimensional world inhabited by geometric figures (flatlanders); women are line segments, while men are polygons with various numbers of sides. The narrator is a square, a member of the caste of gentlemen and professionals, who guides the readers through some of the implications of life in two dimensions. The first half of the story goes through the practicalities of existing in a two-dimensional universe, as well as a history leading up to the year 1999 on the eve of the 3rd Millennium.\nOn New Year's Eve, the Square dreams of a visit to a one-dimensional world, \"Lineland\", inhabited by men, who are lines, while the women are \"lustrous points\". These points and lines are unable to see the Square as anything other than a set of points on a line. Thus, the Square attempts to convince the realm's monarch of a second dimension but cannot do so. In the end, the monarch of Lineland tries to kill the Square rather than tolerate him any further.\nFollowing this vision, the Square is visited by a sphere. Similar to the \"points\" in Lineland, he is unable to see the three-dimensional object as anything other than a circle (more precisely, a disk). The Sphere then levitates up and down through Flatland, allowing the Square to see the circle expand and contract between a great circle and small circles. The Sphere then tries further to convince the Square of the third dimension by dimensional analogies (a point becomes a line, a line becomes a square). The Square is still unable to comprehend the third dimension, so the Sphere resorts to deeds: he gives information about the \"insides\" of the house, moves a tablet through the third dimension, and even goes inside the Square for a moment. Still unable to comprehend the third dimension, the Square is taken by the Sphere to the third dimension, Spaceland. This Sphere visits Flatland at the turn of each millennium to introduce a new apostle to the idea of a third dimension in the hope of eventually educating the population of Flatland. From the safety of Spaceland, they can oversee the leaders of Flatland, acknowledging the Sphere's existence and prescribing the silencing. After this proclamation is made, many witnesses are massacred or imprisoned (according to caste), including the Square's brother.\nAfter the Square's mind is opened to new dimensions, he tries to convince the Sphere of the theoretical possibility of the existence of a fourth dimension and higher spatial dimensions. The Sphere at first scoffs at the idea of higher dimensions, just as the Square had done, showing that his comprehension is not as broad as he had thought. Still, the Sphere returns his student to Flatland in disgrace.\nThe Square then has a dream in which the Sphere revisits him, this time to introduce him to a zero-dimensional space, Pointland, of whom the Point (sole inhabitant, monarch, and universe in one) perceives any communication as a thought originating in his own mind (cf. Solipsism):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"You see,\" said my Teacher, \"how little your words have done. So far as the Monarch understands them at all, he accepts them as his own\u00a0\u2013 for he cannot conceive of any other except himself\u00a0\u2013 and plumes himself upon the variety of \"Its Thought\" as an instance of creative Power. Let us leave this god of Pointland to the ignorant fruition of his omnipresence and omniscience: nothing that you or I can do can rescue him from his self-satisfaction.\"\nThe Square recognises the identity of the ignorance of the monarchs of Pointland and Lineland with his own (and the Sphere's) previous ignorance of the existence of higher dimensions. Once returned to Flatland, the Square cannot convince anyone of Spaceland's existence, especially after official decrees are announced that anyone preaching the existence of three dimensions will be imprisoned (or executed, depending on caste). For example, he tries to convince his relative of the third dimension but cannot move a square \"upward,\" as opposed to forward or sideways. Eventually, the Square himself is imprisoned for just this reason, with only occasional contact with his brother, who is imprisoned in the same facility. He cannot convince his brother, even after all they have both seen. Seven years after being imprisoned, \"A. Square\" writes out the book \"Flatland\" as a memoir, hoping to keep it as posterity for a future generation that can see beyond their two-dimensional existence.\nSocial elements.\nMen are portrayed as polygons whose social status is determined by their regularity and the number of their sides, with a Circle considered the \"perfect\" shape. Women are lines, quite fragile but also dangerous, as they can disappear from view and possibly stab someone. To prevent this, they are required by law to sound a \"peace-cry\" while moving about and to use separate doors from men.\nIn the world of Flatland, classes are distinguished by the \"Art of Hearing\", the \"Art of Feeling\", and the \"Art of Sight Recognition\". Classes can be distinguished by the sound of one's voice, but the lower classes have more developed vocal organs, enabling them to feign the voice of a Polygon or even a Circle. Feeling, practised by the lower classes and women, determines the configuration of a person by feeling one of its angles. The \"Art of Sight Recognition\", practised by the upper classes, is aided by \"Fog\", which allows an observer to determine the depth of an object. With this, polygons with sharp angles relative to the observer will fade more rapidly than polygons with more gradual angles. Colour of any kind was banned in Flatland after Isosceles workers painted themselves to impersonate noble Polygons. The Square describes these events, and the ensuing class war at length.\nThe population of Flatland can \"evolve\" through the \"Law of Nature\", which states: \"a male child shall have one more side than his father, so that each generation shall rise (as a rule) one step in the scale of development and nobility. Thus the son of a Square is a Pentagon, the son of a Pentagon, a Hexagon, and so on\".\nThis rule is not the case when dealing with Isosceles Triangles (Soldiers and Workmen) with only two congruent sides. The smallest angle of an Isosceles Triangle gains 30 arc minutes (half a degree) each generation. Additionally, the rule does not seem to apply to many-sided Polygons. For example, the sons of several hundred-sided Polygons will often develop 50 or more sides more than their parents. Furthermore, the angle of an Isosceles Triangle or the number of sides of a (regular) Polygon may be altered during life by deeds or by surgery.\nAn Equilateral Triangle is a member of the craftsman class. Squares and Pentagons are the \"gentlemen\" class, as doctors, lawyers, and other professions. Hexagons are the lowest rank of nobility, all the way up to (near) Circles, who make up the priest class. The higher-order Polygons have much less of a chance of producing sons, preventing Flatland from being overcrowded with noblemen.\nApart from Isosceles Triangles, only regular Polygons are considered until chapter seven of the book when the issue of irregularity, or physical deformity is brought up. In a two-dimensional world, a regular polygon can be identified by a single angle and/or vertex. To maintain social cohesion, irregularity is to be abhorred, with moral irregularity and criminality cited, \"by some\" (in the book), as inevitable additional deformities, a sentiment with which the Square concurs. If the error of deviation is above a stated amount, the irregular Polygon faces euthanasia; if below, he becomes the lowest rank of civil servant. An irregular Polygon is not destroyed at birth, but allowed to develop to see if the irregularity can be \"cured\" or reduced. If the deformity remains, the irregular is \"painlessly and mercifully consumed.\"\nAs social satire.\nIn \"Flatland\", Abbott describes a society rigidly divided into classes. Social ascent is the main aspiration of its inhabitants, apparently granted to everyone but strictly controlled by the top of the hierarchy. Freedom is despised and the laws are cruel. Innovators are imprisoned or suppressed. Members of lower classes who are intellectually valuable, and potential leaders of riots, are either killed or promoted to the higher classes. Every attempt for change is considered dangerous and harmful. This world is not prepared to receive \"revelations from another world\". The satirical part is mainly concentrated in the first part of the book, \"This World\", which describes Flatland. The main points of interest are the Victorian concept of women's roles in the society and in the class-based hierarchy of men. Abbott has been accused of misogyny due to his portrayal of women in \"Flatland\". In his Preface to the Second and Revised Edition, 1884, he answers such critics by emphasizing that the description of women was satirizing the viewpoints held, stating that the Square: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;was writing as a Historian, he has identified himself (perhaps too closely) with the views generally adopted by Flatland and (as he has been informed) even by Spaceland, Historians; in whose pages (until very recent times) the destinies of Women and of the masses of mankind have seldom been deemed worthy of mention and never of careful consideration.\nCritical reception.\n\"Flatland\" did not have much success when published, although it was not entirely ignored. In the entry on Edwin Abbott in the \"Dictionary of National Biography\" for persons who died in the period of 1922 to 1930, \"Flatland\" was not even mentioned.\nThe book was discovered again after Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity was published, which brought to prominence the concept of a fourth dimension. \"Flatland\" was mentioned in a letter by William Garnett entitled \"Euclid, Newton and Einstein\" published in \"Nature\" on 12 February 1920. In this letter, Abbott is depicted, in a sense, as a prophet due to his intuition of the importance of \"time\" to explain certain phenomena:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Some thirty or more years ago a little \"jeu d'esprit\" was written by Dr. Edwin Abbott entitled \"Flatland\". At the time of its publication it did not attract as much attention as it deserved... If there is motion of our three-dimensional space relative to the fourth dimension, all the changes we experience and assign to the flow of time will be due simply to this movement, the whole of the future as well as the past always existing in the fourth dimension.\nThe \"Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\" subsequently revised his biography to state that [Abbott] \"is most remembered as the author of \"Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions\"\".\nWendy Graham reviewed \"Flatland\" for \"Adventurer\" magazine and stated that \"Once again a story with a message \u2013 crackpots aren't always crackpots.\"\nAdaptations and parodies.\nNumerous imitations or sequels to \"Flatland\" have been created. Examples include:\nBooks and short stories inspired by \"Flatland\" include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75215", "revid": "43007828", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75215", "title": "Electric chair", "text": "Execution method\nThe electric chair is a specialized device used for capital punishment through electrocution. The condemned is strapped to a custom wooden chair and electrocuted via electrodes attached to the head and leg. Alfred P. Southwick, a Buffalo, New York dentist, conceived this execution method in 1881. It was developed over the next decade as a more humane alternative to conventional executions, particularly hanging. First used in 1890, the electric chair became a symbol of capital punishment in the United States. \nThe electric chair was also used extensively in the Philippines. It was initially thought to cause death through cerebral damage, but it was scientifically established in 1899 that death primarily results from ventricular fibrillation and cardiac arrest. Originally a common method of capital punishment in the United States, its use has declined with the adoption of lethal injection which was perceived as more humane. While some states retain electrocution as a legal execution method, it is often a secondary option based on the condemned's preference. Exceptions include South Carolina, where it is the primary method, Louisiana, where the corrections secretary chooses the execution method, and Tennessee, where it can be used without prisoner input if lethal injection drugs are unavailable.\nAs of 2025, electrocution remains an option in states like Alabama, South Carolina, and Florida, where inmates may choose lethal injection instead. Arkansas, Kentucky, and Tennessee offer the electric chair to those sentenced before a certain date. Inmates not selecting this method or convicted after the specified date face lethal injection. Arkansas currently has no death row inmates sentenced before their select date. These three states also authorize electrocution as an alternative if lethal injection is deemed unavailable.\nThe electric chair remains an accepted alternative in Mississippi and Oklahoma if other execution methods are ruled unconstitutional at the time of execution. A significant shift occurred on February 8, 2008, when the Nebraska Supreme Court ruled electric chair execution as \"cruel and unusual punishment\" under the state constitution. This decision ended electric chair executions in Nebraska, the last state to rely solely on this method.\nBackground.\nInvention.\nIn the late 1870s to early 1880s, the spread of arc lighting, a type of outdoor street lighting that required high voltages in the range of 3000\u20136000 volts, was followed by one story after another in newspapers about how the high voltages used were killing people, usually unwary linemen; it was a strange new phenomenon that seemed to instantaneously strike a victim dead without leaving a mark. One of these accidents, in Buffalo, New York, on August 7, 1881, led to the inception of the electric chair. That evening a drunken dock worker named George Lemuel Smith, looking for the thrill of a tingling sensation he had noticed when grabbing the guard rail in a Brush Electric Company arc lighting power house, managed to sneak his way back into the plant at night and grabbed the brush and ground of a large electric dynamo. He died instantly. The coroner who investigated the case brought it up that year at a local Buffalo scientific society. Another member attending that lecture, Alfred P. Southwick, a dentist who had a technical background, thought some application could be found for the curious phenomenon.\nSouthwick joined physician George E. Fell and the head of the Buffalo ASPCA in a series of experiments electrocuting hundreds of stray dogs. They ran trials with the dog in water and out of water, and varied the electrode type and placement until they came up with a repeatable method to euthanize animals using electricity. Southwick went on in the early 1880s to advocate that this method be used as a more humane replacement for hanging in capital cases, coming to national attention when he published his ideas in scientific journals in 1882 and 1883. He worked out calculations based on the dog experiments, trying to develop a scaled-up method that would work on humans. Early on in his designs he adopted a modified version of the dental chair as a way to restrain the condemned, a device that from then on would be called the \"electric chair\".\nGerry Commission.\nAfter a series of botched hangings in the United States, there was mounting criticism of that form of capital punishment and the death penalty in general. In 1886, newly elected New York State governor David B. Hill set up a three-member death penalty commission, which was chaired by the human rights advocate and reformer Elbridge Thomas Gerry and included New York lawyer and politician Matthew Hale and Southwick, to investigate a more humane means of execution.\nThe commission members surveyed the history of execution and sent out a fact-finding questionnaire to government officials, lawyers, and medical experts all around the state asking for their opinion. A slight majority of respondents recommended hanging over electrocution, with a few instead recommending the abolition of capital punishment. The commission also contacted electrical experts, including Thomson-Houston Electric Company's Elihu Thomson (who recommended high voltage AC connected to the head and the spine) and the inventor Thomas Edison (who also recommended AC, as well as using a Westinghouse generator). They also attended electrocutions of dogs by George Fell who had worked with Southwick in the early 1880s experiments. Fell was conducting further experiments, electrocuting anesthetized vivisected dogs trying to discern exactly how electricity killed a subject.\nIn 1888, the Commission recommended electrocution using Southwick's electric chair idea with metal conductors attached to the condemned person's head and feet. They further recommended that executions be handled by the state instead of the individual counties with three electric chairs set up at Auburn, Clinton, and Sing Sing prisons. A bill following these recommendations passed the legislature and was signed by Governor Hill on June 4, 1888, set to go into effect on January 1, 1889.\nNew York Medico-Legal Commission.\nThe bill itself contained no details on the type or amount of electricity that should be used and the New York Medico-Legal Society, an informal society composed of doctors and lawyers, was given the task of determining these factors. In September 1888, a committee was formed and recommended 3000 volts, although the type of electricity, direct current (DC) or alternating current (AC), was not determined, and since tests up to that point had been done on animals smaller than a human (dogs), some members were unsure that the lethality of AC had been conclusively proven.\nAt this point, the state's efforts to design the electric chair became intermixed with what has come to be known as the war of the currents, a competition between Thomas Edison's direct current power system and George Westinghouse's alternating current based system. The two companies had been competing commercially since 1886 and a series of events had turned it into an all-out media war in 1888. The committee head, neurologist Frederick Peterson, enlisted the services of Harold P. Brown as a consultant. Brown had been on his own crusade against alternating current after the shoddy installation of pole-mounted AC arc lighting lines in New York City had caused several deaths in early 1888. Peterson had been an assistant at Brown's July 1888 public electrocution of dogs with AC at Columbia College, an attempt by Brown to prove AC was more deadly than DC. Technical assistance in these demonstrations was provided by Thomas Edison's West Orange laboratory and there grew to be some form of collusion between Edison Electric and Brown. Back at West Orange on December 5, 1888, Brown set up an experiment with members of the press, members of the Medico-Legal Society including Elbridge Gerry who was also chairman of the death penalty commission, and Thomas Edison looking on. Brown used alternating current for all of his tests on animals larger than a human, including 4 calves and a lame horse, all dispatched with 750 volts of AC. Based on these results the Medico-Legal Society recommended the use of 1000\u20131500 volts of alternating current for executions and newspapers noted the AC used was half the voltage used in the power lines over the streets of American cities. Westinghouse criticized these tests as a skewed self-serving demonstration designed to be a direct attack on alternating current and accused Brown of being in the employ of Edison.\nAt the request of death penalty commission chairman Gerry, Medico-Legal Society members; electrotherapy expert Alphonse David Rockwell, Carlos Frederick MacDonald, and Columbia College professor Louis H. Laudy, were given the task of working out the details of electrode placement. They again turned to Brown to supply the technical assistance. Brown asked Edison Electric Light to supply equipment for the tests and treasurer Francis S. Hastings (who seemed to be one of the primary movers at the company trying to portray Westinghouse as a peddler of death dealing AC current) tried to obtain a Westinghouse AC generator for the test but found none could be acquired. They ended up using Edison's West Orange laboratory for the animal tests they conducted in mid-March 1889. Superintendent of Prisons Austin E. Lathrop asked Brown to design the chair, but Brown turned down the offer. George Fell drew up the final designs for a simple oak chair and went against the Medico-Legal Society recommendations, changing the position of the electrodes to the head and the middle of the back. Brown did take on the job of finding the generators needed to power the chair. He managed to surreptitiously acquire three Westinghouse AC generators that were being decommissioned with the help of Edison and Westinghouse's chief AC rival, the Thomson-Houston Electric Company, a move that made sure that Westinghouse's equipment would be associated with the first execution. The electric chair was built by Edwin F. Davis, the first \"state electrician\" (executioner) for the State of New York.\nFirst execution.\nThe first person in line to die under New York's new electrocution law was Joseph Chapleau, convicted for beating his neighbor to death with a sled stake, but his sentence was commuted to life imprisonment. The next person scheduled to be executed was William Kemmler, convicted of murdering his wife with a hatchet. An appeal on Kemmler's behalf was made to the New York Court of Appeals on the grounds that use of electricity as a means of execution constituted a \"cruel and unusual punishment\" and was thus contrary to the constitutions of the United States and the state of New York. On December 30, 1889, the writ of \"habeas corpus\" sworn out on Kemmler's behalf was denied by the court, with Judge Dwight writing in a lengthy ruling:\nWe have no doubt that if the Legislature of this State should undertake to proscribe for any offense against its laws the punishment of burning at the stake, breaking at the wheel, etc., it would be the duty of the courts to pronounce upon such attempt the condemnation of the Constitution. The question now to be answered is whether the legislative act here assailed is subject to the same condemnation. Certainly, it is not so on its face, for, although the mode of death described is conceded to be unusual, there is no common knowledge or consent that it is cruel; it is a question of fact whether an electric current of sufficient intensity and skillfully applied will produce death without unnecessary suffering.\nKemmler was executed in New York's Auburn Prison on August 6, 1890; the \"state electrician\" was Edwin Davis. The first 17-second passage of 1,000 volts AC through Kemmler caused unconsciousness, but failed to stop his heart and breathing. The attending physicians, Edward Charles Spitzka and Carlos Frederick MacDonald, came forward to examine Kemmler. After confirming Kemmler was still alive, Spitzka reportedly called out, \"Have the current turned on again, quick, no delay.\" The generator needed time to re-charge, however. In the second attempt, Kemmler received a 2,000 volt AC shock. Blood vessels under the skin ruptured and bled, and the areas around the electrodes singed; some witnesses reported that his body caught fire. The entire execution took about eight minutes. George Westinghouse later commented, \"They would have done better using an axe\", and \"The New York Times\" ran the headline \"Far worse than hanging\".\nAdoption.\nThe electric chair was adopted by Ohio (1897), Massachusetts (1900), New Jersey (1906), and Virginia (1908), and soon became the prevalent method of execution in the United States, replacing hanging. Twenty-six states, the District of Columbia, the federal government, and the U.S. military either had death by electrocution on the books or actively executed criminals using the method. The electric chair remained the most prominent execution method until the early 1990s, when it was downgraded to a backup method that an inmate could choose in several states, but was rarely used.\nOther countries appear to have contemplated using the method, sometimes for special reasons. The Philippines also adopted the electric chair from 1926 to 1987. A well-publicized triple execution took place there in May 1972, when Jaime Jose, Basilio Pineda, and Edgardo Aquino were electrocuted for the 1967 abduction and gang-rape of the young actress Maggie de la Riva. The last electric chair execution in the Philippines was in 1976 and was later replaced with lethal injection when executions resumed in that country.\nKey events in the United States.\nMartha M. Place became the first woman executed in the electric chair at Sing Sing Prison on March 20, 1899, for the murder of her 17-year-old stepdaughter, Ida Place.\nLeon Czolgosz was executed in the electric chair at New York's Auburn Prison on October 29, 1901, for the assassination of then-President William McKinley.\nThe first photograph of an execution by electric chair was of housewife Ruth Snyder at Sing Sing on the evening of January 12, 1928, for the March 1927 murder of her husband. It was photographed for a front-page story in the \"New York Daily News\" the following morning by news photographer Tom Howard who had smuggled a camera into the death chamber and photographed her in the electric chair as the current was turned on. It remains one of the best-known examples of photojournalism.\nA record was set on July 13, 1928, when seven men were executed consecutively in the electric chair at the Kentucky State Penitentiary in Eddyville, Kentucky.\nOn June 16, 1944, an African-American teenager, 14-year-old George Stinney, became the youngest person ever executed in the electric chair when he was electrocuted at the Central Correctional Institution in Columbia, South Carolina. His conviction was overturned in 2014 after a circuit court judge vacated his sentence on the grounds that Stinney did not receive a fair trial. The judge determined that Stinney's legal counsel was inadequate, thus violating his rights under the Sixth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.\nOn May 3, 1946, an African-American teenager named Willie Francis became the first person known to have survived the electric chair in the Saint Martin Parish Prison in Saint Martinsville, Louisiana. His appeals to the death penalty failed, and was executed again on May 9, 1947, at age 18. His trial has claimed to be unfair, which the trial also violated his Fifth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendment rights to the U.S. Constitution.\nOn May 25, 1979, in Florida, John Spenkelink became the first person to be electrocuted after the \"Gregg v. Georgia\" decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in 1976. He was the first person to be executed in the United States in this manner since 1966.\nThe last person to be executed by electric chair without the choice of an alternative method was Lynda Lyon Block on May 10, 2002, in Alabama.\nThe most recent execution by electric chair was of Nicholas Todd Sutton on February 20, 2020, in Tennessee.\nProcess and mechanism.\nThe condemned inmate's head and legs are shaved and the condemned person is seated in the chair. Their arms and legs are tightly strapped with leather belts, and a cap with a saltwater-soaked sponge is strapped to the head, and electrodes are attached to the legs. The condemned person is optionally blindfolded or a bag is placed on their head.\nVarious cycles (changes in voltage and duration) of alternating current are passed through the individual's body in order to cause lethal damage to the internal organs. The first, more powerful electric shock (between 2,000 and 2,500 volts) is intended to cause immediate unconsciousness, ventricular fibrillation, and eventual cardiac arrest. The second, less powerful electric shock (500\u20131,500 volts) is intended to cause lethal damage to the vital organs.\nAfter the cycles are completed, a doctor checks the inmate for any signs of life. If none are present, the doctor reports and records the time of death, and prison officials will wait for the body to cool down before removing it to prepare for autopsy. If the inmate exhibits signs of life, the doctor notifies the warden, who usually will order another round of electric current or may postpone the execution.\nControversies and criticisms.\nPossibility of consciousness and pain during execution.\nCritics of the electric chair dispute whether the first jolt of electricity reliably induces immediate unconsciousness as proponents often claim.\nBotched executions.\nThe electric chair has been criticized because of several instances in which the subjects were killed only after being subjected to multiple electric shocks. This led to a call for ending of the practice, as being a \"cruel and unusual punishment\". Trying to address such concerns, Nebraska introduced a new electrocution protocol in 2004, which called for the administration of a 15-second application of current at 2,450 volts; after a 15-minute wait, an official then checks for signs of life. In April 2007, new concerns raised regarding the 2004 protocol resulted in the ushering in of a different Nebraska protocol, calling for a 20-second application of current at 2,450 volts. Prior to the 2004 protocol change, an initial eight-second application of current at 2,450 volts was administered, followed by a one-second pause, then a 22-second application at 480 volts. After a 20-second break, the cycle was repeated three more times.\nIn 1946, the electric chair failed to kill Willie Francis, who reportedly shrieked, \"Take it off! Let me breathe!\", after the current was applied. It turned out that the portable electric chair had been improperly set up by an intoxicated prison guard and inmate. A case was brought before the U.S. Supreme Court \"(Louisiana ex rel. Francis v. Resweber)\", with lawyers for the condemned arguing that although Francis did not die, he had, in fact, been executed. The argument was rejected on the basis that re-execution did not violate the double jeopardy clause of the 5th Amendment of the United States Constitution, and Francis was returned to the electric chair and executed in 1947.\nFlorida saw three highly controversial botched electrocutions in the 1990s, starting with the 1990 execution of Jesse Tafero. His case generated significant controversy, as with the first administration of electricity, Tafero's face and head caught fire. Tafero's execution ultimately required three shocks over the course of seven minutes. The error was blamed on prison officials replacing Florida's old natural sea sponge with a kitchen sponge. The 1997 execution of Pedro Medina in Florida created controversy when flames burst from his head. An autopsy found that Medina had died instantly when the first surge of electricity had destroyed his brain and brain stem. A judge ruled that the incident arose from \"unintentional human error\" rather than any faults in the \"apparatus, equipment, and electrical circuitry\" of Florida's electric chair. In Florida, on July 8, 1999, Allen Lee Davis, convicted of murder, was executed. Davis' face was bloodied, and photographs were taken, which were later posted on the Internet. An investigation concluded that Davis had begun bleeding before the electricity was applied and that the chair had functioned as intended. Florida's Supreme Court ruled that the electric chair did not constitute \"cruel and unusual punishment\".\nDecline and current status.\nThe use of the electric chair has declined since the 1982 advent of lethal injection, which is now the default method in most U.S. jurisdictions that authorize capital punishment.\nAs of 2024, the only jurisdictions that still have the electric chair as an option for execution are the U.S. states of Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Kentucky, Louisiana, South Carolina and Tennessee. Electrocution is also authorized in Florida if lethal injection is found unconstitutional. Mississippi and Oklahoma laws provide for its use should lethal injection ever be held to be unconstitutional. Inmates in the other states must select either it or lethal injection. In Arkansas, Kentucky and Tennessee, inmates sentenced before a certain date can choose to be executed by electric chair. Arkansas currently does not have any death row inmates sentenced before their select date. Electrocution is also authorized in those states if lethal injection is found unconstitutional by a court. In May 2014, Tennessee passed a law allowing the use of the electric chair if lethal injection drugs were unavailable.\nIndiana's electric chair, nicknamed \"Old Betsy\", was replaced in 1995 with lethal injection as the state's sole execution method, making Gregory Resnover, who was executed for the murder of a police officer on December 8, 1994, the last prisoner to die on the electric chair in Indiana.\nOn February 15, 2008, the Nebraska Supreme Court declared execution by electrocution to be \"cruel and unusual punishment\" prohibited by the Nebraska Constitution.\nThe last judicial electrocution in the U.S. prior to \"Furman v. Georgia\" took place in Oklahoma in 1966. The electric chair was used quite frequently in post-\"Gregg v Georgia\" executions during the 1980s, but its use in the United States gradually declined in the 1990s due to the widespread adoption of lethal injection. A number of states still allow the condemned person to choose between electrocution and lethal injection, with the most recent U.S. electrocution, of Nicholas Todd Sutton, taking place in February 2020 in Tennessee.\nIn 2021, South Carolina's governor Henry McMaster passed a law making electrocution the primary form of execution, with the options of lethal injection or a firing squad being available if the condemned requests it within 14 and 28 days of his execution. In 2022, a judge in Richland County, declared that the firing squad and electrocution were both in violation of the South Carolina State Constitution, which bans methods that are \"cruel, unusual, or corporal.\" The court, in their decision, stated that there was no evidence that electrocution could instantaneously or painlessly kill an inmate, writing that the idea of the electric chair inducing instant unconsciousness was based on \"underlying assumptions upon which the electric chair is based, dating back to the 1800s, [that] have since been disproven.\" The decision also called electrocution \"inconsistent with both the concepts of evolving standards of decency and the dignity of man\", and stated, \"Even if an inmate survived only fifteen or thirty seconds, he would suffer the experience of being burned alive\u2014a punishment that has 'long been recognized as manifestly cruel and unusual.'\" The ruling led to a permanent injunction being issued against both methods of execution, preventing the state from subjecting death row inmates to death by firing squad or electrocution. In July 2024, the Supreme Court of South Carolina ruled that electrocution and firing squad was legal. \nOn March 5, 2024, Louisiana Governor Jeff Landry signed a law reintroducing electrocution and also allowing executions to be carried out via nitrogen gas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75216", "revid": "12107077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75216", "title": "Al-Haram al-Sharif", "text": ""}
{"id": "75218", "revid": "300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75218", "title": "Manicheism", "text": ""}
{"id": "75220", "revid": "543434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75220", "title": "Baltic Germans", "text": "Ethnic Germans of Latvia and Estonia\nBaltic Germans ( or , later ; ; ;\nSince the Late Middle Ages, native German-speakers formed the majority of merchants and clergy, and the large majority of the local landowning nobility who effectively constituted a ruling class over indigenous Latvian and Estonian non-nobles. By the time a distinct Baltic German ethnic identity began emerging in the 19th century, the majority of self-identifying Baltic Germans were non-nobles belonging mostly to the urban and professional middle class.\nIn the 12th and 13th centuries, Catholic German traders and crusaders (\"see \") began settling in the eastern Baltic territories. With the decline of Latin, Low German became the dominant language of official documents, commerce, education and government and later on High German. By the first half of the 20th century, the Baltic Germans were, until after World War II, along with the Transylvanian Saxons and the Zipser Germans (in Romania and Slovakia respectively), one of the three oldest continuously German-speaking and ethnic German groups of the German diaspora in Europe.\nThe majority of medieval Catholic settlers and their German-speaking descendants lived in the local towns of medieval Livonia. However, a small wealthy elite formed the Baltic nobility, acquiring large rural estates. When Sweden had ceded its Livonian territories to the Russian Empire after the Great Northern War (1700\u20131721), many of these German-speaking aristocrats began taking high positions in the military, political and civilian life of the Russian Empire, particularly in its capital city Saint Petersburg. Most Baltic Germans were citizens of the Russian Empire until Estonia and Latvia achieved independence in 1918. Thereafter, most Baltic Germans held Estonian or Latvian citizenship until their coerced resettlement to Nazi Germany in 1939, prior to the Soviet invasion and occupation of Estonia and Latvia in 1940.\nThe Baltic German population never surpassed more than 10% of the total population. In 1881, there were 180,000 Baltic Germans in Russia's Baltic provinces; however, by 1914, this number had declined to 162,000. In 1881 there were approximately 46,700 Germans in Estonia (5.3% of the population). According to the Russian Empire Census of 1897, there were 120,191 Germans in Latvia, or 6.2% of the population.\nBaltic German presence in the Baltics came effectively close to an end in late 1939, following the signing of the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact and the subsequent Nazi\u2013Soviet population transfers. Nazi Germany resettled almost all the Baltic Germans under the program into the newly formed of and Danzig-West Prussia (on the territory of the occupied Second Polish Republic). In 1945, most ethnic Germans were expelled from these lands as part of the wider expulsion of Germans from Central and Eastern Europe after World War II. Resettlement was planned by the Allies for the territory remaining under Germany under terms of the border changes promulgated at the Potsdam Conference, i.e. west of the Oder\u2013Neisse line.\nEthnic Germans from East Prussia and Lithuania are sometimes incorrectly considered Baltic Germans for reasons of cultural, linguistic, and historical affinities. Germans of East Prussia held Prussian, and after 1871, German citizenship, because the territory they lived in was part of the Kingdom of Prussia.\nEthnic composition.\nBaltic Germans were not a purely German ethnic group. The early crusaders, tradesmen and craftsmen and even nobles often married local women,as there were no German women available. Some noble families, such as the Lievens, claimed descent through such women from native chieftains. Many of the German Livonian-Order soldiers died during the Livonian War of 1558\u20131583. New German arrivals came to the area. During this time, the Low German (\"Plattdeutsch\") of the original settlers was gradually replaced by the High German (\"Hochdeutsch\") of the new settlers.\nIn the course of their 700-year history, Baltic German families had ethnic German roots, but also intermarried extensively with Estonians, Livonians and Latvians, as well as with other Northern or Central European peoples, such as Danes, Swedes, Irish, English, Scots, Poles, Hungarians and Dutch.In the early years of the Russian empire, some even married into Russian nobility and society. In cases where any intermarriage occurred, members of the other ethnic groups frequently assimilated into German culture, adopting German language, customs, and family names. They were then considered Germans, leading to the ethnogenesis of the Baltic Germans. The families of Barclay de Tolly and of George Armitstead (1847\u20131912), who had emigrated from the British Isles, married into and became part of the Baltic-German community.\nTerritories.\nBaltic German settlements in the Baltic area consisted of the following territories:\nHistory.\nConquering the Baltics.\nSmall numbers of ethnic Germans began to settle in the area in the late 12th century, when traders and Christian missionaries began to visit the coastal lands inhabited by tribes who spoke Finnic and Baltic languages. Systematic conquest and settlement of these lands was completed during the Northern Crusades of the 12th and 13th centuries; this resulted in creation of the Terra Mariana confederation, under the protection of Roman Popes and Holy Roman Empire. After the heavy defeat in the 1236 Battle of Saule the Livonian Brothers of the Sword became a part of the Teutonic Order.\nDuring the next three centuries, German-speaking soldiers, clergymen, merchants and craftsmen constituted the majority of the quickly growing urban population, as the native inhabitants usually were prohibited from settling there. In 1230, the Livonian Order invited over 200 German merchants from Gotland to settle in Tallinn where they founded a market town. Membership in the Hanseatic League and active trade links with Russia and Europe increased the wealth of German traders.\nPolish\u2013Lithuanian and Swedish rule.\nAs the military power of the Teutonic Knights weakened during the 15th century wars with the Kingdom of Poland, Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Grand Duchy of Moscow, the Livonian branch in the north began to pursue its own policies. When the Prussian branch of the Order secularized in 1525 and became a Polish vassal state as the Duchy of Prussia, the Livonian branch remained independent while searching for a similar way to secularize. Livonia became mostly Protestant during the Reformation.\nIn 1558, the Tsardom of Russia began the Livonian War against Terra Mariana which soon involved the Kingdoms of Poland, Sweden, and Denmark and lasted for 20 years. In 1561, Terra Mariana ceased to exist and was divided among Denmark (which took the island of \u00d6sel), Sweden (which took northern Estonia) and Poland, which annexed the newly created Duchy of Livonia, and granted the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia, a vassal state of Poland-Lithuania, to the last Master of the Livonian Order Gotthard Kettler. The secularized land was divided among the remaining knights who formed the basis of Baltic nobility.\nThe Duchy of Courland and Semigallia existed as a German-speaking country until 1795, while the northern part of Duchy of Livonia was conquered by Sweden which controlled parts of Estonia between 1561 and 1710 and Swedish Livonia between 1621 and 1710, having signed an agreement with the local Baltic German nobles not to undermine their political rights and autonomy.\nThe \"Academia Gustaviana\" (now University of Tartu) was founded in 1632 by King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden. It remained the only institution of higher education in the former Livonian territories and became the intellectual focus of the Baltic Germans.\nAt the end of the 17th century, Sweden introduced the land reduction in its Baltic provinces and properties held by German nobility became the property of the Crown. That effectively turned serfs into free peasants. However, it would be overturned when Russia conquered these territories in 1710 and restored the rights of German landowners under the Treaty of Nystad.\nRussia's Baltic governorates (1710\u20131917).\nBetween 1710 and 1795, following Russia's success in the Great Northern War and the three Partitions of Poland, the areas inhabited by Baltic Germans eventually became Baltic governorates of the Russian Empire: Courland Governorate, Governorate of Livonia and Governorate of Estonia.\nAutonomy.\nThe Baltic provinces remained autonomous and were self-governed by the local Baltic nobility. Until the imperial reforms of the 1880s, local government was in the hands of the landtag of each province, in which only members of the matriculated Baltic nobility held membership and cities were ruled by German burgomasters.\nBetween 1710 and approximately 1880, the Baltic German ruling class enjoyed great autonomy from the Imperial government and achieved great political influence in the Imperial court. Starting from the 18th century, the Baltic German nobility also assumed some leading posts in the Russian imperial government.\nGermans, other than the local estate-owners, mainly lived in the cities, such as Riga, \"Reval\", \"Dorpat\", \"Pernau\" and \"Mitau\". As late as the mid-19th century, the population of many of these cities still had a German majority, with Estonian, Latvian or Jewish minorities. By 1867, Riga's population was 42.9% German. Until the late 19th century, most of the professional and learned classes in the region, the \"literati\", were Germans.\nGerman political and cultural autonomy ceased in the 1880s, when Russification replaced German administration and schooling with the usage of Russian. After 1885 provincial governors usually were Russians.\nRise of native peoples.\nYears of peace under Russian rule brought increasing prosperity and many new manor houses were built on country estates, but economic exploitation worsened the situation of the native population.\nFor examples, see List of palaces and manor houses in Latvia and List of palaces and manor houses in Estonia.\nThe native Latvian and Estonian population enjoyed fewer rights under the Baltic German nobility compared with farmers in Germany or Sweden. In contrast to the Baltic Germans, Estonians and Latvians had restricted civil rights and resided mostly in rural areas as serfs, tradesmen, or as servants in manors and urban homes. They had no rights to leave their masters and no surnames. This was in keeping with the social scheme of things in Russian Empire. It lasted until the 19th century, when emancipation from serfdom brought those inhabitants increased civil freedoms and some political rights.\nIn 1804, Livonian peasant law was introduced by the Imperial government, aimed at improving conditions for serfs. Serfdom was abolished in all Baltic provinces between 1816 and 1820, about half a century earlier than in Russia proper. For some time, there was no outward tension between the German speakers and indigenous residents.\nEarlier, if any Latvian or Estonian who managed to rise above his class was expected to Germanize and to forget his roots, by the mid-19th century German urban classes began to feel increasing competition from the natives, who after the First Latvian National Awakening and Estonian national awakening produced their own middle class and moved to German- and Jewish-dominated towns and cities in increasing numbers.\nThe Revolution of 1905 led to attacks against the Baltic German landowners, the burning of manors, and the torture and even killing of members of the nobility. During the 1905 Revolution groups of rebels burned over 400 manor houses and German-owned buildings and killed 82 Germans. In response Cossack punitive expeditions aided by German nobles and officers burned down hundreds of farms, arrested and deported thousands and summarily executed at least 2,000 people.\nReaction to 1905 Revolution included a scheme by Karl Baron von Manteuffel-Szoege and Silvio Broedrich-Kurmahlen to pacify the countryside by settling up to 20,000 ethnic German farmers, mostly from Volhynia, in Courland.\nWorld War I.\nWorld War I brought the end of the alliance of the Baltic Germans and the Russian Tsarist government. German heritage led to their being viewed as the enemy by Russians. They were also seen as traitors by the German Empire if they remained loyal to Russia. Their loyalty to the state was questioned, and rumours of a German fifth column increased with the defeats of the Imperial army led by Baltic German general Paul von Rennenkampf. All German schools and societies were closed in the Estonian Governorate and Germans were ordered to leave the Courland Governorate for inner Russia.\nCourland was conquered by Germany in 1915 and included into the military Ober Ost administration. After the Russian surrender at the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk in 1918, the German Empire occupied the remaining Baltic provinces.\nThe Ober Ost military administration began plans for German colonization of Courland. On April 20, 1917, the Commander-in-Chief of the Eastern front announced that a third of arable land there should be reserved for settlement by German war veterans. This was approved by Courland's German nobility on September 22, 1917.\nUnited Baltic Duchy.\nLivonian and Estonian nobles delivered a note of independence to Soviet representatives in Stockholm on January 28, 1918, announcing their intention to break away from Russia under the rights granted to them by the Treaty of Nystad of 1721. In response, the Bolsheviks, who controlled Estonia, arrested 567 leading Germans and deported them to Russia. After the signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk they were allowed to return. Under German-Soviet treaties, Germany gained control over Courland, Riga, Saaremaa (\u00d6sel), Livonia and Estonia.\nIn the spring of 1918, Baltic Germans announced the restoration of the independent Duchy of Courland and Semigallia and pursued plans for uniting it with the Kingdom of Prussia. On April 12, 1918, Baltic German representatives from all Baltic provinces met in Riga and called on the German Emperor to annex the Baltic lands.\nSubsequently, a plan for a United Baltic Duchy ruled by Duke Adolf Friedrich of Mecklenburg, instead of outright annexation, was developed. Its regency council met on November 9, 1918, but collapsed with the German Empire.\nIndependent Baltic states.\nThe Baltic Germans' rule and class privileges came to the end with the demise of the Russian Empire (due to the Bolshevik revolution of October 1917) and the independence of Estonia and Latvia in 1918\u20131919.\nBaltic Germans suffered greatly under Bolshevik regimes in Estonia and Latvia. While the Bolshevik regimes were short-lived, they pursued the Red Terror against Germans, often killing them purely because of their nationality.\nAfter the collapse of the German Empire, Baltic Germans in Estonia began forming volunteer units to defend against the Bolshevik threat. On November 27, 1918 this was authorized by the Estonian government, and the Volunteer Baltic Battalion (\"Freiwilligen Baltenbataillon\") was formed under the command of Colonel Constantin von Weiss ().\nDuring the Estonian and Latvian wars of independence from 1918 to 1920, many Baltic Germans voluntarily enlisted in the newly formed Estonian and Latvian armies to help secure the independence of these countries from Russia. These Baltic German military units became known as the \"Baltische Landeswehr\" in Latvia and \"Baltenregiment ()\" in Estonia. The State archives of Estonia and Latvia keep individual military records of each person who fought in this war.\n\"Baltische Landeswehr\" units took Riga on May 22, 1919 which was followed by White Terror in which up to 2,000 people, mostly Latvians, were shot as suspected Bolshevik supporters.\nBaltic German outlying estates were frequent targets of local Bolsheviks (as portrayed in the film, \"Coup de Gr\u00e2ce\") and the combination of local Bolsheviks and nationalists following independence brought about land nationalisations and a displacement of Baltic Germans from positions of authority. Baltic Germans of the Livonian Governorate found themselves in two new countries, both of which introduced sweeping agrarian reforms aimed at the large land owners, an absolute majority of whom were Germans.\nAs a result of the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the subsequent Russian Civil War, many Baltic Germans fled to Germany. After 1919, many Baltic Germans felt obliged to depart the newly independent states for Germany, but many stayed as ordinary citizens.\nIn 1925, there were 70,964 Germans in Latvia (3.6%) and 62,144 in 1935 (3.2% of population). Riga remained by far the largest German center with 38,523 Germans residing there in 1935, while Tallinn then had 6,575 Germans.\nWhile the German landed class soon lost most of their lands after the agrarian reforms, they continued to work in their professions and to lead their companies. German cultural autonomy was respected. The Committee of the German Baltic Parties in Latvia and Deutsch-baltische Partei in Estland in Estonia participated in elections and won seats.\nAt the same time, as both young states built their institutions, this often reduced the status of their minorities. In Latvia, children of mixed marriages were registered as Latvians while in Estonia they took the nationality of their fathers, who increasingly were Estonians. This quickly reduced the number of German children. German place names were eliminated from public use. German congregations lost their churches. Tallinn Cathedral was given to an Estonian congregation in 1927. After the 1923 referendum St. James's Cathedral in Riga was lost and Riga Cathedral taken away after another referendum in 1931.\nAgrarian reforms.\nAt the start of independence, Baltic Germans owned 58% of land in Estonia and 48% in Latvia. Radical agrarian reforms were implemented in both countries to break German power and to distribute land to the veterans of independence wars and landless peasants. This largely destroyed the landed class of German noble families and their economic base.\nOn October 10, 1919, the Estonian parliament expropriated 1,065 estates (96.6% of all estates). The law of March 1, 1926 set the compensation to the former owners of arable land at about 3% of its market value and no compensation at all for the forests. This almost instantly bankrupted the German noble class, even if they were allowed to keep some 50 hectares of their lands.\nOn September 16, 1920, the Constitutional Assembly of Latvia nationalized 1,300 estates comprising 3.7million hectares of land. Former German owners were allowed to keep 50 hectares of land and farm equipment. In 1924, the Saeima decided that no compensation would be paid to former owners. In 1929, the Saeima voted that veterans of the \"Baltische Landeswehr\" could not receive any land.\nEstonia.\nIn Estonia, there was only one German party, which from 1926 was led by Axel de Vries (), editor of \"Revaler Bote\". Their leading parliamentarian was Werner Hasselblatt (1890\u20131958). Germans never received ministerial posts in governments. The three largest minorities \u2013 Germans, Swedes and Russians \u2013 sometimes formed election coalitions. The \"Deutsch-baltische Partei in Estland\" was established to defend the interests of German landowners, who wanted to receive compensation for their nationalized lands and properties. After land nationalization they received no compensation, but could keep plots up to 50 hectares, which was not enough to support their manor houses.\nGermans were banned from governmental and military positions. Many Germans sold their properties and emigrated to Scandinavia or Western Europe. Most of the grand manor houses were taken over by schools, hospitals, local administration and museums.\nEstonia's Baltic German population was smaller than Latvia's, so as Estonians continued to fill professional positions such as law and medicine, there was less of a leadership role for the Baltic Germans. Baron Wilhelm Wrangell, leader of the Baltic German cultural association between 1933 and 1938 was included in the Estonian Council of State after 1937 as a token representative of minorities. The last leader of Baltic German Cultural administration was .\nOn February 12, 1925, Estonia adopted the Cultural Autonomy and National Minorities Act, which provided for some cultural autonomy of Germans. Despite this, the German community in Estonia continued to decline as the majority of young people chose to emigrate. By 1934, there were 16,346 Baltic Germans in Estonia, 1.5% of the total population.\nEstonia allowed German schools to teach in the German language. These schools were overseen by the \"Gesellschaft Deutsche Schulhilfe\", which was part of the Union of German Societies in Estonia. After adoption of the Minority law of February 5, 1925 the Baltic German Cultural Council was created on November 1, 1925. In 1928, German schools were attended by 3,456 pupils.\nLatvia.\nIn Latvia, Baltic Germans remained a politically active and organized ethnic group, although they lost some influence after the 1934 Latvian coup d'\u00e9tat. A couple of times Germans received ministerial posts in coalition governments. The commander of Latvia's Navy between 1919 and 1931 was Admiral Archibald Count of Keyserlingk.\nSix, later seven, German parties existed and formed a coalition in the Saeima. The leading politicians were Baron Wilhelm Friedrich Karl von Fircks, leader of the Baltic-German People's Party and Paul Schiemann, editor-in-chief of the \"Rigasche Rundschau\" newspaper and leader of the Baltic-German Democratic Party. Increased activity of National Socialist supporters in the German community led to the resignation of Schiemann from the \"Rigasche Rundschau\" in 1933.\nMinority cultural affairs were overseen by the Ministry of Culture and the German section was led by pastor Karl Keller (1868\u20131939) and later by Wolfgang Wachtsmuth. In 1923, there were 12,168 pupils in German schools. The Herder Institute, a private German university with three faculties (Theology, Jurisprudence and Political Science and Philosophy) was established.\nIn 1926, the German community introduced voluntary self-taxation, asking all Germans to contribute up to 3% of their monthly income to community activities. In 1928, the Baltic German National Community was established as the central representative body of Baltic Germans in Latvia.\nThe educational autonomy of Germans was severely limited in 1931\u20131933, when the Minister of Education introduced a policy of latvianization in minority schools. On July 18, 1934 the autonomous German schools were brought under complete control of the Ministry of Education.\nAfter the coup of May 15, 1934, all associations and independent business organizations had to shut down. This affected the German community especially hard, as they lost their ancient communal centers \u2013 guilds, and all of their property was nationalized. A wave of takeovers of Jewish, Russian and German businesses then followed; banks, factories and trading companies were purchased by state-owned banks at set rates in order to reduce minority control over businesses.\nResettlement of all Baltic Germans (1939\u20131944).\n1939\u20131940.\nIn 1940, Estonia and Latvia became Soviet republics. One of the main conditions imposed by Hitler on Stalin in August 1939 was the prior transfer of all ethnic Germans living in Estonia and Latvia to areas under German military control. These became known as the Nazi\u2013Soviet population transfers. Stalin proceeded to set up Soviet military bases in Estonia and Latvia in late 1939.\nIn a speech to the Reichstag on October 6, 1939, which was broadcast live on radio, Hitler announced that German minorities should be resettled in the Reich (Back home to the Reich, \"Heim ins Reich\"). Resettlement was overseen by Himmler who created a new Reich Commisariat for the Strengthening of Germandom for this purpose.\nTreaties were signed with Estonia and Latvia in 1939 and 1940 concerning the emigration of Baltic Germans and the liquidation of their educational, cultural, and religious institutions. Nazi Germany succeeded in getting the Baltic Germans to abandon their homes and homeland in haste. Due to the imposition of wartime rationing, Germans were banned from taking along any valuables, objects of historic value, fuels and even food. A massive sell-off of household items and small businesses followed. Larger properties, real estate and businesses were sold over a longer period of time by a special German commission to local governments.\nThe Estonian and Latvian governments published books containing alphabetical lists of the names of resettled Baltic German adults together with their birthdate, birthplace and last address in the Baltics.\nBaltic Germans left by ships from the port cities of Estonia and Latvia to the ports of Gdynia and Szczecin and then were transported to Pozna\u0144 and \u0141\u00f3d\u017a in \"Reichsgau Wartheland\" (sometimes called \"Warthegau\") and other Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany. The \"new\" homes and farms they were given to live in had been owned and inhabited by Poles and Jews just a few months earlier who were executed or deported eastwards when Nazi Germany invaded Poland. The new arrivals fulfilled Nazi plans for the ethnic Germanization of these lands.\nSpring 1941 resettlement.\nIn early 1941, the Nazi German government arranged another resettlement for all those who had refused to leave in 1939 or 1940. The action was called the \"Nachumsiedlung\". This time around no compensation was offered for any property or belongings left behind and this group of resettlers were treated with intense suspicion or considered traitors because they had refused Hitler's first call to leave the Baltics in 1939. Most of these arrivals were first settled in filtration camps. Unknown to the general public, the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union was only two to four months away, and this was Hitler's last chance to transfer these people in peacetime conditions.\nBy this time, the remaining Baltic Germans in Estonia and Latvia found themselves in a vastly different situation than in 1939. Their countries were now occupied by the Soviet Union, and intense pressure and intimidation had been put on anyone with a position of privilege or wealth before 1939. Mass arrests and some killings had taken place. Fearing a worsening of the situation, the vast majority of the remaining Baltic Germans decided to leave. About 7,000 resettled from Estonia by late March 1941, and approximately 10,500 resettled from Latvia by late March 1941. Even though the German government had planned a relocation that would be limited to ethnic Germans only, ultimately a considerable share of resettlers were non-Germans of various ethnicities (mostly Estonians and Latvians, but also individuals of Slavic ethnicity), who used this as the only legal route to escape the Soviet regime.\nNo books were published listing those who resettled in 1941; however, the present-day archives of Estonia and Latvia still have the lists of all those who left in this year.\n1941\u20131944.\nA very small minority of Baltic Germans refused again to be resettled and remained in the Baltics past March 1941. Some fell victim to the Soviet deportations to Siberian gulags beginning in early June 1941. The names and data of those deported from Estonia from 1941 to 1953 have been published in books. Details are kept at the Museum of Occupations in Estonia.\nAfter the Nazi attack on the Soviet Union and the conquest of Latvia and Estonia, a small number of Baltic Germans were allowed to return in order to serve as translators, but requests of many resettled Germans to be allowed to return to their homelands were denied by Himmler's SS. Many German Baltic men were mobilized in the occupied Warthegau and served in the German army.\nThe resettled Germans fled west with the retreating German army in 1944. No precise numbers or lists are available for them. However, several thousand Baltic Germans remained in the Baltics after 1944, but they were subject to widespread discrimination (and possible deportation to Siberia until 1953) by the Soviet authorities ruling Estonia and Latvia. As a result of this, many hid or lied about their Baltic German origins. Most of those who stayed after 1944 were children of mixed ethnic marriages or themselves married to ethnic Estonians, Latvians or Russians and their descendants no longer consider themselves German.\n\"Second resettlement\" 1945.\nThe Soviet Union's advance into Poland and Germany in late 1944 and early 1945 resulted in the Baltic Germans being evacuated by the German authorities (or simply fleeing) from their \"new homes\" to areas even further in the west to escape the advancing Red Army. Most of them settled in West Germany, with some ending up in East Germany.\nIn stark contrast to the resettlements in 1939\u20131941, this time the evacuation in most of the areas was delayed until the last moment, when it was too late to conduct it in an orderly fashion, and practically all of them had to leave most of their belongings behind. Seeing as they had been living in these \"new\" homes only for about five years, this was almost seen as a second forced resettlement for them, albeit under different circumstances.\nMany Baltic Germans were on board the KdF Ship \"Wilhelm Gustloff\" when it was sunk by a Soviet submarine on January 30, 1945. By one estimate, about 9,400 people on board died, which would make it the largest loss of life in a single ship sinking in history. Additionally, many Baltic Germans died during the sinking of the SS \"General von Steuben\" on February 10, 1945.\nTwo books listing the names and personal data of all Baltic Germans who died as a result of the resettlements and wartime conditions between 1939 and 1947 have been published by the Baltic German genealogical society: \"Deutsch-baltisches Gedenkbuch. Unsere Toten der Jahre 1939\u20131947\" by Karin von Borb\u00e9ly, Darmstadt, 1991; and \"Nachtrag zum Deutsch-baltisches Gedenkbuch\" by Karin von Borb\u00e9ly, Darmstadt, 1995.\nWith Estonia and Latvia falling under Soviet rule after 1944, most Baltic Germans did not return to the Soviet-occupied Baltics.\nCanada.\nMany thousands of Baltic Germans emigrated to Canada starting in 1948 with the support of Canadian Governor General The Earl Alexander of Tunis, who had known many Baltic Germans when he had commanded the Baltic German Landeswehr for a short time in 1919. Initially, only 12 Germans were allowed to settle in 1948. Based on the good behavior of this group, many thousands of Baltic Germans were soon allowed to immigrate during the following years.\nA small group of Latvians and Baltic Germans emigrated to Newfoundland as part of then Premier Joseph Smallwood's New Industries Program. Several families in Corner Brook built, operated and worked in the cement and gypsum plants that provided essential material for the creation of Newfoundland's infrastructure after Confederation.\nDestruction of cultural heritage in the Soviet Baltics (1945\u20131989).\nDuring the Soviet Baltic time, Soviet authorities governing the Estonian SSR and the Latvian SSR, politically empowered by their victory in World War II, were keen to erase any traces of ethnic German rule in past centuries. Numerous statues, monuments, structures or landmarks with German writing were destroyed, vandalized or left to ruin.\nThe largest Baltic German cemeteries in Estonia, Kopli cemetery and M\u00f5igu cemetery, both standing since 1774, were completely destroyed by the Soviet authorities. The Great Cemetery of Riga, the largest burial ground of Baltic Germans in Latvia, standing since 1773, also had the vast majority of its graves destroyed by the Soviets.\n1989 to present.\nThe present-day governments of Estonia and Latvia, who regained their independence in 1991, generally take a positive, or sometimes neutral, view towards the contributions of the Baltic Germans in the development of their cities and countries throughout their history. An occasional exception to this comes with some criticism in relation to the major landowners, who controlled most of the rural areas of the Baltics, and the ethnic Estonians and Latvians, until 1918.\nAfter Estonia regained independence from the Soviet Union on August 20, 1991, the exiled association of the German Baltic nobility sent an official message to the president-to-be Lennart Meri that no member of the association would claim proprietary rights to their former Estonian lands. This, and the fact that the first German ambassadors to Estonia and Latvia were both Baltic Germans, helped to further reconcile the Baltic Germans with these two countries.\nCooperation between Baltic German societies and the governments of Estonia and Latvia has made the restoration of many small Baltic German plaques and landmarks possible, such as monuments to those who fought in the 1918\u20131920 War of Independence.\nSince 1989, many elderly Baltic Germans, or their descendants, have taken holidays to Estonia and Latvia to look for traces of their own past, their ancestral homes, and their family histories. Most of the remaining manor houses have new owners, and operate as hotels that are open to the public.\nNotable Baltic Germans.\nBaltic Germans played leading roles in the society of what are now Estonia and Latvia throughout most of the period from 13th to mid-20th century, with many of them becoming noted scientists, including Karl Ernst von Baer, Emil Lenz, and Friedrich Zander and explorers, such as Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen, Adam Johann von Krusenstern, Ferdinand von Wrangel and Otto Schmidt. A number of Baltic Germans served as ranking generals in the Russian Imperial Army and Navy, including Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly, Friedrich Wilhelm von Buxhoeveden, Paul von Rennenkampf and Franz Eduard von Totleben.\nMany Baltic Germans, such as Baron Pyotr Wrangel, Baron Ungern, Eugen M\u00fcller and Prince Anatol von Lieven, sided with the Whites and related anti-Bolshevik forces (like the \"Baltische Landeswehr\" and the \"Freikorps\" movement) during the Russian Civil War.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75222", "revid": "50695746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75222", "title": "Spaceballs", "text": "1987 film by Mel Brooks\nSpaceballs is a 1987 American space opera parody film co-written, produced and directed by Mel Brooks. It primarily parodies the original \"Star Wars\" trilogy, but also other popular franchises such as \"Star Trek\", \"Alien\", \"The Wizard of Oz\", \"\", \"Planet of the Apes\", and \"Transformers\". The film stars Bill Pullman, John Candy, Rick Moranis and Daphne Zuniga, with the supporting cast including Dick Van Patten, George Wyner, Lorene Yarnell, and the voice of Joan Rivers. In addition to Brooks playing a dual role, the film features Brooks regulars Dom DeLuise and Rudy De Luca in cameo appearances.\nIn \"Spaceballs\", heroic mercenary Lone Starr (Pullman) and his alien sidekick Barf (Candy) rescue Princess Vespa (Zuniga) of the planet Druidia and her droid, Dot Matrix (Yarnell, voiced by Rivers), from being captured by the Spaceballs, led by President Skroob (Brooks), who wants to use Vespa as ransom to obtain Druidia's air for their own planet. However, the heroes get stranded on a desert moon, where they encounter the wise Yogurt (also Brooks), who teaches Starr about the metaphysical power known as \"the Schwartz\". Meanwhile, Spaceball commanders Dark Helmet (Moranis) and Colonel Sandurz (Wyner) lead the search for them, but are hindered by their own incompetence.\nThe film was released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) on June 24, 1987. It received mixed reviews upon release, but has since attained a cult following. A sequel is in production as of September 2025. Directed by Josh Greenbaum and co-written by Josh Gad and Brooks, the sequel will star Lewis Pullman, Keke Palmer, and Gad, with Brooks, Bill Pullman, Moranis, and Zuniga reprising their roles. The sequel, \"Spaceballs 2\", is scheduled to be released theatrically by MGM in 2027.\nPlot.\nIn a galaxy very, very, very, very far away, the ruthless Spaceballs, led by President Skroob, have squandered their planet's atmosphere. Desperate for oxygen, Skroob hatches a plan to steal it from the neighboring planet Druidia by obtaining the code to its air shield, destroying Druidia in the process.\nOn Druidia, the spoiled Princess Vespa flees an arranged marriage to the narcoleptic Prince Valium, having already rejected all other suitors in her search for true love. Meanwhile, mercenary Lone Starr and his half-man, half-dog companion Barf are contacted by crime boss Pizza the Hutt, who demands repayment of a one-million space buck debt. King Roland of Druidia offers Starr the same amount to rescue Vespa and her droid servant, Dot Matrix.\nAboard their Winnebago RV spaceship \"Eagle 5\", Starr and Barf rescue the pair just before they are captured by the Spaceball ship \"Spaceball One\", commanded by Colonel Sandurz and Skroob's enforcer, Dark Helmet, who wields the mystical power of the Schwartz. However, \"Eagle\u00a05\" runs out of fuel, forcing Starr to crash-land on the desert moon of Vega.\nThe four wander through the scorching landscape, with Starr and Vespa exchanging barbed remarks and mutual attraction. They cannot act on their feelings, however, as Vespa is duty-bound to marry a prince. They collapse from the heat, but are rescued by the Dink-Dinks, a group of robed, diminutive aliens, and taken to the hidden temple of Yogurt, a wise sage who breaks the fourth wall to shamelessly advertise \"Spaceballs\" merchandise. Yogurt guides Starr in using the Schwartz, using a ring to channel its power. He also deciphers Starr's medallion\u2014found with him as an abandoned baby\u2014but withholds its meaning.\nUnable to locate Vespa, Helmet and Sandurz watch a VHS copy of \"Spaceballs\" and skip forward in the film to find her. On the moon, Helmet uses the Schwartz to impersonate King Roland, tricking Vespa into revealing herself. She and Dot are captured and taken to \"Spaceball One\"; Starr and Barf give chase.\nHelmet extorts the shield code from Roland by threatening to reverse Vespa's plastic surgery and restore her large nose. Starr and Barf infiltrate the Planet Spaceball prison, rescue the captives (leaving stunt doubles behind as a distraction), and escape in \"Eagle\u00a05\". With the shield code in hand, \"Spaceball One\" transforms into \"Mega-Maid\", a giant robot maid, and begins vacuuming Druidia's atmosphere.\nUsing the Schwartz, Starr reverses the vacuum from \"suck\" to \"blow\", saving the planet. He pilots \"Eagle\u00a05\" into Mega-Maid's head, finds the self-destruct button, and battles Helmet in a Schwartz duel using ring-projected lightsaber-like beams. Helmet steals Starr's ring and drops it down a grate, but Starr hears a telepathic message from Yogurt telling him: \"The Schwartz is in you.\" Starr wields the Schwartz to reflect Helmet's energy blast with a mirror, sending him flying into the self-destruct button. As \"Eagle\u00a05\" escapes, Mega-Maid explodes. Skroob, Helmet, and Sandurz are left behind when all the escape pods are taken. They crash-land in the remains of Mega-Maid on a nearby planet populated by intelligent apes, who are horrified to witness their arrival.\nOn Druidia, Starr and Barf learn that Pizza the Hutt locked himself into a limousine and ate himself to death, clearing their debt. They return Vespa to her father, but decline payment for rescuing her. Starr leaves, reluctantly accepting that Vespa must marry a prince.\nIn space, Starr and Barf discover a final message from Yogurt hidden in a fortune cookie: The medallion proves Starr is a prince. They return to Druidia just in time to stop Vespa's wedding to Valium. Starr reveals his royal lineage and he and Vespa are joyously married.\nCast.\nVarious actors and comedians appear in unnamed roles, with Sal Viscuso, Michael Pniewski, Stephen Tobolowsky, Robert Prescott, Tom Dreesen, Rick Ducommun, Rob Paulsen (who was uncredited), Tommy Swerdlow, and Tim Russ all appearing as soldiers of Dark Helmet. Additional unnamed appearances include Dey Young as a waitress, Jack Riley as a newsman covering the news about Pizza the Hutt's death, Ken Olfson as the head usher, and Bryan O'Byrne as an organist. Brenda Strong appears as Gretchen, Dr. Schlotkin's nurse, alongside Johnny Silver as Arnold, Dr. Schlotkin's caddy. Denise and Dian Gallup appear as Charlene and Marlene, two twin girls in Spaceball City who President Skroob keeps mixing up the names for. Ed Gale, Felix Silla, Tony Cox, Antonio Hoyos, Arturo Gil, and John Kennedy Hayden appear as the Dinks (based on the Jawas) while their uncredited voices are provided by Corey Burton, Phil Hartman, Tress MacNeille, John Paragon, and Rob Paulsen. John Hurt makes a cameo appearance as a parody of his character Gilbert Kane in the film \"Alien\" (1979). In the same scene archival recordings of William \"Bill\" Roberts' performance of \"Hello! Ma Baby\" as heard in the animated short film \"One Froggy Evening\" were used as the Xenomorph bursts out of Kane's chest and suddenly breaks into song and dance.\nProduction.\nWhen Brooks developed \"Spaceballs\", he wanted his parody to be as close to the original as possible. Even though the Yogurt character (Mel Brooks) mentions merchandising in the film, Brooks's deal with George Lucas on parodying \"Star Wars\" was that no \"Spaceballs\" action figures be made. According to Brooks, \"[Lucas] said, 'Your [action figures] are going to look like mine.' I said okay.\" However, this agreement inspired Brooks to write Yogurt's \"Merchandising\" scene and include multiple \"Spaceballs\"-branded products at other points in the film, such as placemats and toilet paper. While no mass produced \"Spaceballs\" merchandise was ever created, Max Brooks revealed in 2023 that he is in possession of the Yogurt doll used in the merchandise scene.\nBrooks also had Lucas's company handle some post-production, saying, \"I was playing ball with the people who could have said no.\" Lucas later sent Brooks a note saying how much he loved the film, including its story structure, and that he \"was afraid [he] would bust something from laughing\". According to Rick Moranis, \"In the original script, the description of [Dark Helmet] was that the whole costume was one gigantic helmet. Then it got scaled back to just an exaggerated version of the Darth Vader helmet.\"\nThe bulk of the film's visual effects were executed by Apogee Inc., which was founded by former Industrial Light &amp; Magic employee John Dykstra.\nPullman got the part of Lone Starr when Brooks and his wife Anne Bancroft saw him in a play. Brooks had been unsuccessfully trying to sign on big-name actors such as Tom Cruise and Tom Hanks for the film. Pullman said,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think [Mel] was hurt that they didn't take him up on it... but then it attract[ed] two of the big comics at that time: John Candy and Rick Moranis. Once that was secured, then he said, \"Heck, I'll get somebody nobody knows!\" And I got a chance to do it.\nZuniga initially found Brooks' film parodies \"too crass and not too funny\" but, after working with Brooks, she said: \"I have this image of Mel as totally wacko and out to lunch. And he is. But he's also really perceptive, real sensitive in ways that make actors respond.\"\nMusic.\nAn official soundtrack was released on Atlantic Records on LP, CD, and cassette, featuring many of the songs heard in the film, as well as three score cues by frequent Brooks collaborator John Morris.\n\"Raise Your Hands\" by Bon Jovi is also used prominently in the film.\n\"My Heart Has a Mind of Its Own\" was made into a hit in 1990 by Sally Moore (U.S. AC #42).\nIn the film, the Dinks (based on Jawas) perform the 1914 marching song \"Colonel Bogey March\", though they only sing the word \"Dink\" repeatedly in rhythm to the song rather than whistle, parodying the scene from \"The Bridge on the River Kwai\".\nIn 2006, La-La Land Records released \"Spaceballs \u2013 The 19th Anniversary Edition\" CD of the film's score, with bonus tracks of alternate takes and tracks not used in the film.\nReception and legacy.\nBox office.\nThe film had an estimated $25.5 million budget, and ultimately grossed $40,306,483 during its run in the United States, taking in $6,613,837 on its opening weekend, finishing behind \"Dragnet\".\nCritical reception.\nThe film received mixed reviews from critics. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 104 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5.9/10. The website's consensus reads: \"There's fine spoofery and amusing characters in \"Spaceballs\", though it's a far cry from Mel Brooks' peak era.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 46 out of 100, based on 14 critics, indicating . Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"B\u2212\" on an A+ to F scale.\nAt the time of the film's release, Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" gave the film 2.5 stars out of 4, and remarked \"I enjoyed a lot of the movie, but I kept thinking I was at a revival... it should have been made several years ago, before our appetite for \"Star Wars\" satires had been completely exhausted.\" Gene Siskel of the \"Chicago Tribune\" gave the film 3 out of 4 stars, saying that there were \"just enough funny visual gags to recommend this wildly uneven film\". \"Variety\" said that the film was a misguided parody and not very funny.\nThe film won Worst Picture at the 1987 Stinkers Bad Movie Awards.\nImpact.\nThe film gained a cult following in the following years.\nTesla has used the film's starship speeds (Light Speed, Ridiculous Speed, Ludicrous Speed, Plaid Speed) as inspiration for naming their acceleration modes. In homage to \"Spaceballs\" a Tesla has \"Ludicrous Mode\" for acceleration beyond its Insane Mode, and \"Plaid Mode\", overtop Ludicrous.\nA clip from the film, alongside clips of other \"Star Wars\" parody works, was used in a \"special look\" internet video used to promote \"\" in order to show the cultural impact of Star Wars.\nHome media.\n\"Spaceballs\" was released on VHS and LaserDisc in February 1988. The VHS edition was issued twice, first in a aspect ratio and the 1996 edition was presented in widescreen. The 1996 LaserDisc reissue includes a commentary track with Brooks, which was also included on the DVD and Blu-ray releases. The film was released on DVD on April 25, 2000. This version includes a \"making of\" documentary and booklet. A collectors edition DVD was released on May 3, 2005, with more extras including a video conversation about the making of the film with Brooks and Thomas Meehan. On August 7, 2012, a 25th anniversary edition Blu-ray was released containing many of the same bonus features as the 2005 DVD with the addition of a new featurette. The film was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray and a remastered Blu-ray on April 12, 2021, by Kino Lorber, with all of the special features from previous home video releases included.\nProps.\nA &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204412-scale model of the \"Eagle 5\" was auctioned on December 11, 2018. The model was created by film special effects designer Grant McCune, who also created models for \"Star Wars\" and \"Star Trek\". The model makes an appearance early in the film with the introduction of Barf and Lone Starr. The model, along with other special effects artifacts from then-current films such as \"Masters of the Universe\" and \"\", was displayed at Chicago's Museum of Science and Industry in the summer of 1988.\nSequel.\nIn 2013, Moranis claimed in an interview that he and Brooks had discussed a potential \"Spaceballs\" sequel, with Moranis pitching the title \"Spaceballs\u2013III: The Search for Spaceballs\u00a0II\". However, he and Brooks were unable to structure a deal that would allow the project to move forward. Brooks said in February 2015 that he would like to make a sequel to be released after the and hoped that Moranis would reprise his role. This proposed film, Brooks said, may be called \"Spaceballs 2: The Search for More Money\". However, in February 2020, Bill Pullman said during an interview with \"Daily Blast Live\", \"It's up to Mel. Ask him if he has too much money and that's why he doesn't do it.\" In June 2024, a sequel to \"Spaceballs\" was announced with Brooks serving as producer alongside Josh Gad, and that Josh Greenbaum would serve as director.\nIn June 2025, Amazon MGM Studios announced that a \"Spaceballs\" sequel will be released theatrically by MGM in 2027. Imagine Entertainment will produce the sequel, with Ron Howard, Brian Grazer and Jeb Brody as co-producers. Alongside this announcement, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" said that the film will star Lewis Pullman (Bill Pullman's real-life son) as Starburst, the son of Lone Starr and Vespa; and Keke Palmer as a character named Destiny, as well as Gad. Brooks will be reprising the role of Yogurt and President Skroob. According to \"Deadline Hollywood\", both Bill Pullman and Rick Moranis (the latter in his first live-action film role since the 1990s) are returning, reprising Lone Starr and Dark Helmet, respectively, while \"The Wrap\" confirmed that Daphne Zuniga will reprise her role as Princess Vespa. According to the press release, the film has been described by those who have not yet read the script as \"A Non-Prequel Non-Reboot Sequel Part Two but with Reboot Elements Franchise Expansion Film\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75223", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75223", "title": "Attila (disambiguation)", "text": "Attila (406\u2013453) was a king of the Huns in the 5th century.\nAttila may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "75224", "revid": "218586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75224", "title": "LINC", "text": "Computer made at MIT in 1962\nThe LINC (Laboratory INstrument Computer) is a 12-bit, 2048-word transistorized computer. The LINC is considered by some to be the first minicomputer and a forerunner to the personal computer. Originally named the Linc, suggesting the project's origins at MIT's Lincoln Laboratory, it was renamed LINC after the project moved from the Lincoln Laboratory. The LINC was designed by Wesley A. Clark and Charles Molnar.\nThe LINC and other \"MIT Group\" machines were designed at MIT and eventually built by Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) and Spear Inc. of Waltham, Massachusetts (later a division of Becton, Dickinson and Company). The LINC sold for more than $40,000 at the time. A typical configuration included an enclosed 6'X20\" rack; four boxes holding (1) two tape drives, (2) display scope and input knobs, (3) control console and (4) data terminal interface; and a keyboard.\nThe LINC interfaced well with laboratory experiments. Analog inputs and outputs were part of the basic design. It was designed in 1962 by Charles Molnar and Wesley Clark at Lincoln Laboratory, Massachusetts, for NIH researchers. The LINC's design was in the public domain, perhaps making it unique in the history of computers. A dozen LINC computers were assembled by their eventual biomedical researcher owners in a 1963 summer workshop at MIT. Digital Equipment Corporation (starting in 1964) and, later, Spear Inc. of Waltham, Massachusetts, manufactured them commercially.\nDEC's pioneer C. Gordon Bell states that the LINC project began in 1961, with first delivery in March 1962, and the machine was not formally withdrawn until December 1969. A total of 50 were built (all using DEC System Module Blocks and cabinets), most at Lincoln Labs, housing the desktop instruments in four wooden racks. The first LINC included two oscilloscope displays. Twenty-one were sold by DEC at $43,600 (), delivered in the Production Model design. In these, the tall cabinet sitting behind a white Formica-covered table held two somewhat smaller metal boxes holding the same instrumentation, a Tektronix display oscilloscope over the \"front panel\" on the user's left, a bay for interfaces over two LINC-Tape drives on the user's right, and a chunky keyboard between them. The standard program development software (an assembler/editor) was designed by Mary Allen Wilkes; the last version was named LAP6 (LINC Assembly Program 6).\nArchitecture.\nThe LINC has 2048 12-bit words of memory in two sections. Only the first 1024 words were usable for program execution. The second section of memory could only be used for data.\nPrograms can use a 12-bit accumulator and a one-bit link register. The first sixteen locations in program memory have special functions. Location 0 supports the single-level of subroutine call, automatically being updated with a return address on every jump instruction. The next fifteen locations can be used as index registers by one of the addressing modes. A programmable, six-bit relay register is intended for use by external instruments.\nA later modification to the LINC added a 12-bit Z register to facilitate extended precision arithmetic, and an interrupt was provided forcing execution to location 21 (octal).\nAlphanumeric input/output devices included a dedicated keyboard, and the ability to display text on the attached point-addressed CRT. A teleprinter could be connected for printed output.\nArithmetic was ones' complement, which meant that there were representations for \"plus zero\" and \"minus zero\".\nThe original LINC required 8 microseconds for each instruction.\nInstruction set.\nThe natural notation used for the LINC was octal. In this section, all numbers are given as base ten unless identified as octal. The LINC instruction set was designed for ease of use with scientific instruments or custom experimental apparatus.\nControl panel.\nThe LINC control panel is used for single-stepping through programs and for program debugging. Execution can be stopped when the program counter matched a set of switches. Another function allows execution to be stopped when a particular address was accessed. The single-step and the resume functions can be automatically repeated. The repetition rate can be varied over four orders of magnitude by means of an analog knob and a four-position decade switch, from about one step per second to about half of the full speed. Running a program at one step per second and gradually accelerating it to full speed provided an extremely dramatic way to experience and appreciate the speed of the computer.\nLINCtape.\nA noteworthy feature of the LINC was the LINCtape. It was a fundamental part of the machine design, not an optional peripheral, and the machine's OS relied on it. The LINCtape can be compared to a linear diskette with a slow seek time. The magnetic tape drives on large machines of the day stored large quantities of data, took minutes to spool from end to end, but could not reliably update blocks of data in place. In contrast, the LINCtape was a small, nimble device which stored about 400K, had a fixed formatting track allowing data to be repeatedly read and re-written to the same locations, and took less than a minute to spool from one end to the other. The tape was formatted in fixed-sized blocks, and was used to hold a directory and file system. A single hardware instruction could seek and then read or write multiple tape blocks all in one operation.\nFilenames were six characters long. The file system allowed for two files\u2014a source file and an executable binary file to be stored under the same name. In effect it was a 6.1 filename in which the extension was restricted to \"S\" or \"B\". Since the basic LINC had only 1024 12-bit words of core memory (RAM)\u2014and the big, expanded LINC had only 2048\u2014normal operations depended heavily on swapping to and from LINCtape. Digital later patented and marketed a similar design under the name DECtape; Digital's patents on DECtape were eventually tested in court and found invalid.\nLINCtape is also remembered for its reliability, which was higher than that of the diskettes which supplanted it. LINCtape incorporated a very simple form of redundancy\u2014all data was duplicated in two locations across the tape. LINC users demonstrated this by punching holes in a tape with an ordinary office paper punch. Tape damaged in this way was perfectly readable. The formatting track made operation almost independent of tape speed, which was, in fact, quite variable. There was no capstan; the motion of the tape during reading and writing was directly controlled by the reel motors. There was no fast forward or rewind\u2014reading and writing was performed at fast forward and rewind speeds. In some modes of operation, the data transfers were audible over the built-in loudspeaker and produced a very characteristic series of harsh bird-like squawks with varying pitch.\nKeyboard.\nThe LINC keyboard, manufactured by a company named Soroban Engineering, had a unique locking solenoid. The internal mechanism of each key had a slot that worked with a set of bars to encode the character and another slot that caught a locking bar, which locked all the keys in one mechanical movement of the locking solenoid.\nWhen the user pressed a key, the pressed key was locked in its down position, and all the other keys were locked in the up position. When the running program read the keyboard, the lock was released, and the pressed key would pop back up. This could have the effect of slowing down typing and preventing even 2-key rollover.\nThis exotic keyboard was abandoned in favor of Teletype terminals, such as the Teletype Model 33, Teletype Model 35, and Teletype Model 37, in the LINC-8 and PDP-12 follow-on computers.\nKnobs.\nThe LINC included a set of eight three-turn potentiometers (numbered 0-7) that could each be read by a computer instruction. The dial box was a convenient user input device at a time before general adoption of the mouse. For example, one knob could control the scaling of a displayed graph, and another might be used as a cursor to display the actual data value at a point.\nText display.\nThe LINC hardware allowed a 12-bit word to be rapidly and automatically displayed on the screen as a 4-wide by 6-high matrix of pixels, making it possible to display full screens of flicker-free text with a minimum of dedicated hardware. The standard display routines generated 4 by 6 character cells, giving the LINC one of the coarsest character sets ever designed.\nThe display screen was a CRT about 5\u00a0inches square which was actually a standard Tektronix oscilloscope with special plug-in amplifiers. The special plug-ins could be replaced with standard oscilloscope plug-ins for use in diagnostic maintenance of the computer. Many LINCs were supplied as kits to be assembled by the end user, so the oscilloscope came in handy.\nThe CRT used a very-long-persistence white or yellow phosphor, so that lines and curves drawn point-by-point at a relatively slow speed would remain visible throughout programmed drawing loops that frequently lasted half a second or more. The y-axis displayed both plus and minus zero as different values, unnecessarily reflecting the fact that the LINC used ones' complement arithmetic. Programmers quickly learned to move any negative displayed data up one point to hide the artifact that otherwise tended to appear at y=0.\nNotoriously, a tight loop that displayed points repetitively in one place on the screen would burn a permanent dark hole in the delicate phosphor in well under a minute; programmers had to be ready to hit the Stop lever fast if a very bright spot suddenly appeared because of a programming mistake.\nTeletype output.\nPrinted output on a Teletype Model 33 ASR was controlled by toggling a single bit in the relay register. A subroutine converted LINC character codes into ASCII and use timing loops to toggle the relay register bit on and off, generating the correct 8-bit output at 110 baud to control the Teletype printer.\nLaboratory interface.\nThe LINC connector module included bays for two plug-in chassis allowing custom interfacing to experimental setups. Analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters were built into the computer and each could be accessed by a single machine instruction. Six relays were also available.\nVariants.\nIn addition to the original \"classic\" LINC, slight programming variations occurred when using the micro-LINC (\u03bc-LINC) (1965), micro-LINC 300 (\u03bc-LINC 300) (1968) (integrated circuit [MECL] versions), and LINC-8. There were variations in the input/output equipment, access to memory. Later models had a faster clock speed.\nLINC-8 and PDP-12 computers.\nWhile Bell in his book says designing the LINC provided the ideas for DEC's second and third machines, the PDP-4 and the PDP-5. Digital Equipment Corporation would launch the extremely successful PDP-8 before it manufactured the first next-generation LINC-compatible computer, the LINC-8, which had both a PDP-8 CPU and a LINC CPU, only one of which could be running at a time. The PDP-8 used two's complement arithmetic and the LINC used one's complement arithmetic. This was followed by the PDP-12, which had one CPU capable of executing either PDP-8 instructions or LINC instructions. It was the last machine from DEC incorporating the LINC instruction set. DEC's final 12-bit lab machine, the LAB-8/E, did not incorporate the LINC instruction set. The first follow-on, the LINC-8, booted (slowly) to a PDP-8 program called PROGOFOP (PROGram OF OPeration) which interfaced to the separate LINC hardware. The PDP-12 was the last and most popular follow-on to the LINC. It was a capable and improved machine, and was more stable than the LINC-8, but architecturally was still an imperfect hybrid of a LINC and a PDP-8, full of many small technical glitches. (For example, the LINC had an overflow bit which was a small but important part of the LINC's machine state; the PDP-12 had no provision for saving and restoring the state of this bit across PDP-8 interrupts.)\nMINC-11 computer.\nDigital produced a version of the PDP-11/03 called the MINC-11, housed in a portable cart, and equipable with Digital-designed laboratory I/O modules supporting capabilities such as analog input and output. A programming language, MINC BASIC, included integrated support for the laboratory I/O modules. MINC stood for \"Modular Instrument Computer.\" The name undoubtedly was intended to evoke memories of the LINC, but the 16-bit machine had no architectural resemblance to, or compatibility with, the LINC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75225", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75225", "title": "Western Wall", "text": "Holy site of Judaism in Jerusalem\nThe Western Wall (; ; Ashkenazi Hebrew pronunciation: \"HaKosel HaMa'arovi\") is an ancient retaining wall of the built-up hill known to Jews and Christians as the Temple Mount of Jerusalem. Its most famous section, known by the same name, often shortened by Jews to the Kotel or Kosel, is known in the West as the Wailing Wall, and in Arab world and Islamic world as the Buraq Wall (; ). In a Jewish religious context, the term Western Wall and its variations is used in the narrow sense, for the section used for Jewish prayer; in its broader sense it refers to the entire retaining wall on the western side of the Temple Mount.\nAt the prayer section, just over half the wall's total height, including its 17 courses located below street level, dates from the end of the Second Temple period, and is believed to have been begun by Herod the Great. The very large stone blocks of the lower courses are Herodian, the courses of medium-sized stones above them were added during the Umayyad period, while the small stones of the uppermost courses are of more recent date, especially from the Ottoman period.\nThe Western Wall plays an important role in Judaism due to it being part of the man-made \"Temple Mount\", an artificially expanded hilltop best known as the traditional site of the Jewish Temple. Because of the Temple Mount entry restrictions, the Wall is the holiest place where Jews are permitted to pray outside the Temple Mount platform, because the presumed site of the Holy of Holies, the most sacred site in the Jewish faith, presumably lies just above and behind it. The original, natural, and irregular-shaped Temple Mount was gradually extended to allow for an ever-larger Temple compound to be built at its top. The earliest source possibly mentioning this specific site as a place of Jewish worship is from the 10th century. The Western Wall, in the narrow sense, i.e. referring to the section used for Jewish prayer, is also known as the \"Wailing Wall\", in reference to the practice of Jews weeping at the site. During the period of Christian Roman rule over Jerusalem (ca. 324\u2013638), Jews were completely barred from Jerusalem except on Tisha B'Av, the day of national mourning for the Temples. The term \"Wailing Wall\" has historically been used mainly by Christians, with use by Jews becoming marginal. Of the entire retaining wall, the section ritually used by Jews now faces a large plaza in the Jewish Quarter, near the southwestern corner of the Temple Mount, while the rest of the wall is concealed behind structures in the Muslim Quarter, with the small exception of an section, the so-called \"Little Western Wall\" or \"Small Wailing Wall\". This segment of the western retaining wall derives particular importance from having never been fully obscured by medieval buildings, and displaying much of the original Herodian stonework. In religious terms, the \"Little Western Wall\" is presumed to be even closer to the Holy of Holies and thus to the \"presence of God\" (Shechina), and the underground Warren's Gate, which has been out of reach for Jews from the 12th century till its partial excavation in the 20th century.\nThe entire Western Wall constitutes the western border of \"al-Haram al-Sharif\" (\"the Noble Sanctuary\"), or the Al-Aqsa compound. It is believed to be the site where the Islamic Prophet Muhammad tied his winged steed, the Bur\u0101q, on his Night Journey, which tradition connects to Jerusalem, before ascending to heaven. While the wall was considered an integral part of the Haram esh-Sharif and \"waqf\" property of the Moroccan Quarter under Muslim rule, a right of Jewish prayer and pilgrimage has long existed as part of the Status Quo regulations. This position was confirmed in a 1930 international commission during the British Mandate period. \nWith the rise of the Zionist movement in the early 20th century, the wall became a source of friction between the Jewish and Muslim communities, the latter being worried that the wall could be used to further Jewish claims to the Temple Mount and thus Jerusalem. During this period outbreaks of violence at the foot of the wall became commonplace, with a particularly deadly riot in 1929 in which 133 Jews and 116 Arabs were killed, with many more people injured. After the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War the eastern portion of Jerusalem was occupied by Jordan. Under Jordanian control Jews were completely expelled from the Old City including the Jewish Quarter, effectively banning Jewish prayer at the site of the Western Wall for 19 years. This period ended on June 10, 1967, when Israel gained control of the site following the Six-Day War. Three days after establishing control over the Western Wall site, the Moroccan Quarter was bulldozed by Israeli authorities to create space for what is now the Western Wall plaza.\nEtymology.\nWestern Wall.\nEarly Jewish texts referred to a \"western wall of the Temple\", but there is doubt whether the texts were referring to the outer, retaining wall called today \"the Western Wall\", or to the western wall of the actual Temple. The earliest Jewish use of the Hebrew term \"ha-kotel ha-ma'aravi\", \"the Western Wall\", as referring to the wall visible today, was by the 11th-century poet Ahimaaz ben Paltiel.\nWailing Wall.\nThe name \"Wailing Wall\", and descriptions such as \"wailing place\", appeared regularly in English literature during the 19th century. The name \"Mur des Lamentations\" was used in French and \"Klagemauer\" in German. This description stemmed from the Jewish practice of coming to the site to mourn and bemoan the destruction of the Temple and the loss of national freedom it symbolized.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJews may often be seen sitting for hours at the Wailing-place bent in sorrowful meditation over the history of their race, and repeating oftentimes the words of the Seventy-ninth Psalm. On Fridays especially, Jews of both sexes, of all ages, and from all countries, assemble in large numbers to kiss the sacred stones and weep outside the precincts they may not enter.\nCharles Wilson, 1881\nAl-Buraq Wall.\nArab world and Islamic world have associated the name Al-Buraq with the wall at least since the 1860s.\nLocation, dimensions, stones.\nPrayer section vs. entire wall.\nThe term Western Wall commonly refers to a exposed section of a much longer retaining wall, built by Herod on the western flank of the Temple Mount. Only when used in this sense is it synonymous with the term Wailing Wall. This section faces a large plaza and is set aside for prayer.\nIn its entirety, the western retaining wall of the Herodian Temple Mount complex stretches for , most of which is hidden behind medieval residential structures built along its length.\nThere are only two other revealed sections: the southern part of the Wall (see Robinson's Arch area), which measures approximately , and is separated from the prayer area by just a narrow stretch of archaeological remains; and another, much shorter section, known as the Little Western Wall, which is located close to the Iron Gate.\nThe entire western wall functions as a retaining wall, supporting and enclosing the ample substructures built by Herod the Great around 19 BCE. Herod's project was to create an artificial extension to the small quasi-natural plateau on which the First Temple stood, already widened in Hasmonean times during the Second Temple period, by finally transforming it into the almost rectangular, wide expanse of the Temple Mount platform visible today.\nHeight, courses, building stones.\nAt the Western Wall Plaza, the total height of the Wall from its foundation is estimated at , with the above-ground section standing approximately high. The Wall consists of 45 stone courses, 28 of them above ground and 17 underground. The first seven above-ground layers are from the Herodian period. This section of wall is built from enormous meleke limestone blocks, possibly quarried at either Zedekiah's Cave situated under the Muslim Quarter of the Old City, or at Ramat Shlomo northwest of the Old City. Most of them weigh between each, but others weigh even more, with one extraordinary stone located slightly north of Wilson's Arch measuring long, high, approximately deep, and weighing between . Each of these ashlars is framed by fine-chiseled borders. The margins themselves measure between wide, with their depth measuring . In the Herodian period, the upper of wall were thick and served as the outer wall of the double colonnade of the Temple platform. This upper section was decorated with pilasters, the remainder of which were destroyed when the Byzantines reconquered Jerusalem from the Persians in 628.\nThe next four courses, consisting of smaller plainly dressed stones, are Umayyad work (8th century, Early Muslim period). Above that are 16 to 17 courses of small stones from the Mamluk period (13th\u201316th centuries) and later.\nHistory.\nConstruction and destruction (19 BCE \u2013 70 CE).\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, Solomon's Temple was built atop what is known as the Temple Mount in the 10th century BCE and destroyed by the Babylonians in 586 BCE, and the Second Temple completed and dedicated in 516 BCE. Around 19 BCE Herod the Great began a massive expansion project on the Temple Mount. In addition to fully rebuilding and enlarging the Temple, he artificially expanded the platform on which it stood, doubling it in size. Today's Western Wall formed part of the retaining perimeter wall of this platform. In 2011, Israeli archaeologists announced the surprising discovery of Roman coins minted well after Herod's death, found under the foundation stones of the wall. The excavators came upon the coins inside a ritual bath that predates Herod's building project, which was filled in to create an even base for the wall and was located under its southern section. This seems to indicate that Herod did not finish building the entire wall by the time of his death in 4 BCE. The find confirms the description by historian Josephus Flavius, which states that construction was finished only during the reign of King Agrippa II, Herod's great-grandson. Given Josephus' information, the surprise mainly regarded the fact that an unfinished retaining wall in this area could also mean that at least parts of the splendid Royal Stoa and the monumental staircase leading up to it could not have been completed during Herod's lifetime. Also surprising was the fact that the usually very thorough Herodian builders had cut corners by filling in the ritual bath, rather than placing the foundation course directly onto the much firmer bedrock. Some scholars are doubtful of the interpretation and have offered alternative explanations, such as, for example, later repair work.\nHerod's Temple was destroyed by the Romans, along with the rest of Jerusalem, in 70 CE, during the First Jewish\u2013Roman War.\nLate Roman and Byzantine periods (135\u2013638).\nDuring much of the 2nd\u20135th centuries of the Common Era, after the Roman defeat of the Bar Kokhba revolt in 135 CE, Jews were banned from Jerusalem. There is some evidence that Roman emperors in the 2nd and 3rd centuries did permit them to visit the city to worship on the Mount of Olives and sometimes on the Temple Mount itself. When the empire started becoming Christian under Constantine I, they were given permission to enter the city once a year, on the Tisha B'Av, to lament the loss of the Temple at the wall. The Bordeaux Pilgrim, who wrote in 333 CE, suggests that it was probably to the perforated stone or the Rock of Moriah, \"to which the Jews come every year and anoint it, bewail themselves with groans, rend their garments, and so depart\". This was because an imperial decree from Rome barred Jews from living in Jerusalem. Just once per year they were permitted to return and bitterly grieve about the fate of their people. Comparable accounts survive, including those by the Church Father, Gregory of Nazianzus (c. 329\u2013390) and by Jerome in his commentary to Zephaniah written in 392 CE. In the 4th century, Christian sources reveal that the Jews encountered great difficulty in buying the right to pray near the Western Wall, at least on the 9th of Av. In 425 CE, the Jews of the Galilee wrote to Byzantine empress Aelia Eudocia seeking permission to pray by the ruins of the Temple. Permission was granted and they were officially permitted to resettle in Jerusalem.\nArchaeology.\nDiscovery of underground rooms that could have been used as food storage carved out of the bedrock under the 1,400-year-old mosaic floor of Byzantine structure was announced by Israel Antiquities Authority in May in 2020.\n\"At first we were very disappointed because we found we hit the bedrock, meaning that the material culture, the human activity here in Jerusalem ended. What we found here was a rock-cut system\u2014three rooms, all hewn in the bedrock of ancient Jerusalem\" said co-director of the excavation Barak Monnickendam-Givon.\nEarly Muslim to Mamluk period (638\u20131517).\nSeveral Jewish authors of the 10th and 11th centuries write about the Jews resorting to the Western Wall for devotional purposes. Ahimaaz relates that Samuel ben Paltiel (980\u20131010) gave money for oil at \"the sanctuary at the Western Wall.\" Benjamin of Tudela (1170) wrote \"In front of this place is the western wall, which is one of the walls of the Holy of Holies. This is called the Gate of Mercy, and hither come all the Jews to pray before the Wall in the open court.\" The account gave rise to confusion about the actual location of Jewish worship, and some suggest that Benjamin in fact referred to the Eastern Wall along with its Gate of Mercy. While Nahmanides (d. 1270) did not mention a synagogue near the Western Wall in his detailed account of the temple site, shortly before the Crusader period a synagogue existed at the site. Obadiah of Bertinoro (1488) states \"the Western Wall, part of which is still standing, is made of great, thick stones, larger than any I have seen in buildings of antiquity in Rome or in other lands.\"\nShortly after Saladin's 1187 siege of the city, in 1193, the sultan's son and successor al-Afdal established the land adjacent to the wall as a charitable trust (\"waqf\"). The largest part of it was named after an important mystic, Abu Madyan Shu'aib. The Abu Madyan waqf was dedicated to Maghrebian pilgrims and scholars who had taken up residence there, and houses were built only metres away from the wall, from which they were thus separated by just a narrow passageway, some wide.\nThe first likely mention of the Islamic tradition that Buraq was tethered at the site is from the 14th century. A manuscript by Ibrahim b. Ishaq al-Ansari (known as Ibn Furkah, d. 1328) refers to Bab al-Nabi (lit.\u2009'Gate of the Prophet'), an old name for Barclay's Gate below the Maghrebi Gate. Charles D. Matthews however, who edited al-Firkah's work, notes that other statements of al-Firkah might seem to point to the Double Gate in the southern wall.\nOttoman period (1517\u20131917).\nIn 1517, the Turkish Ottomans under Selim I conquered Jerusalem from the Mamluks who had held it since 1250. Selim's son, Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent, ordered the construction of an imposing wall to be built around the entire city, which still stands today. Various folktales relate Suleiman's quest to locate the Temple site and his order to have the area \"swept and sprinkled, and the Western Wall washed with rosewater\" upon its discovery. According to a legend cited by Moses Hagiz, Jews received official permission to worship at the site and Ottoman architect Mimar Sinan built an oratory for them there, but, as of Purim 1625, Jews were banned from praying on the Temple Mount and only sometimes dared to pray at the Western Wall, for which purpose a special liturgy had been arranged. Gedaliah of Siemiatycze, who lived in Jerusalem from 1700 to 1706, reports that Jews then had access to the wall and would pray there as often as possible.\nOver the centuries, land close to the Wall became built up. Public access to the Wall was through the Moroccan Quarter, a labyrinth of narrow alleyways. In May 1840 a firman issued by Ibrahim Pasha forbade the Jews to pave the passageway in front of the Wall. It also cautioned them against \"raising their voices and displaying their books there.\" They were, however, allowed \"to pay visits to it as of old.\"\nRabbi Joseph Schwarz writing in the mid-19th century records:\nThis wall is visited by all our brothers on every feast and festival; and the large space at its foot is often so densely filled up, that all cannot perform their devotions here at the same time. It is also visited, though by less numbers, on every Friday afternoon, and by some nearly every day. No one is molested in these visits by the Mahomedans, as we have a very old firman from the Sultan of Constantinople that the approach shall not be denied to us, though the Porte obtains for this privilege a special tax, which is, however, quite insignificant.\nOver time the increased numbers of people gathering at the site resulted in tensions between the Jewish visitors who wanted easier access and more space, and the residents, who complained of the noise. This gave rise to Jewish attempts at gaining ownership of the land adjacent to the Wall.\nIn the late 1830s a wealthy Jew named Shemarya Luria attempted to purchase houses near the Wall, but was unsuccessful, as was Jewish sage Abdullah of Bombay who tried to purchase the Western Wall in the 1850s. In 1869 Rabbi Hillel Moshe Gelbstein settled in Jerusalem. He arranged that benches and tables be brought to the Wall on a daily basis for the study groups he organised and the minyan which he led there for years. He also formulated a plan whereby some of the courtyards facing the Wall would be acquired, with the intention of establishing three synagogues\u2014one each for the Sephardim, the Hasidim and the Perushim. He also endeavoured to re-establish an ancient practice of \"guards of honour\", which according to the mishnah in Middot, were positioned around the Temple Mount. He rented a house near the Wall and paid men to stand guard there and at various other gateways around the mount. However, this set-up lasted only for a short time due to lack of funds or because of Arab resentment. In 1874, Mordechai Rosanes paid for the repaving of the alleyway adjacent to the wall.\nIn 1887 Baron Rothschild conceived a plan to purchase and demolish the Moroccan Quarter as \"a merit and honor to the Jewish People.\" The proposed purchase was considered and approved by the Ottoman Governor of Jerusalem, Rauf Pasha, and by the Mufti of Jerusalem, Mohammed Tahir Husseini. Even after permission was obtained from the highest secular and Muslim religious authority to proceed, the transaction was shelved after the authorities insisted that after demolishing the quarter no construction of any type could take place there, only trees could be planted to beautify the area. Additionally the Jews would not have full control over the area. This meant that they would have no power to stop people from using the plaza for various activities, including the driving of mules, which would cause a disturbance to worshippers. Other reports place the scheme's failure on Jewish infighting as to whether the plan would foster a detrimental Arab reaction.\nIn 1895 Hebrew linguist and publisher Rabbi Chaim Hirschensohn became entangled in a failed effort to purchase the Western Wall and lost all his assets. The attempts of the Palestine Land Development Company to purchase the environs of the Western Wall for the Jews just before the outbreak of World War I also never came to fruition. In the first two months following the Ottoman Empire's entry into the First World War, the Turkish governor of Jerusalem, Zakey Bey, offered to sell the Moroccan Quarter, which consisted of about 25 houses, to the Jews in order to enlarge the area available to them for prayer. He requested a sum of \u00a320,000 which would be used to both rehouse the Muslim families and to create a public garden in front of the Wall. However, the Jews of the city lacked the necessary funds. A few months later, under Muslim Arab pressure on the Turkish authorities in Jerusalem, Jews became forbidden by official decree to place benches and light candles at the Wall. This sour turn in relations was taken up by the Chacham Bashi who managed to get the ban overturned. In 1915 it was reported that Djemal Pasha, closed off the wall to visitation as a sanitary measure. Probably meant was the \"Great\", rather than the \"Small\" Djemal Pasha.\nDecrees (\"firman\")s issued regarding the Wall:\n* These firmans were cited by the Jewish contingent at the International Commission, 1930, as proof for rights at the Wall. Muslim authorities responded by arguing that historic sanctions of Jewish presence were acts of tolerance shown by Muslims, who, by doing so, did not concede any positive rights.\nBritish rule (1917\u20131948).\nIn December 1917, Allied forces under Edmund Allenby captured Jerusalem from the Turks. Allenby pledged \"that every sacred building, monument, holy spot, shrine, traditional site, endowment, pious bequest, or customary place of prayer of whatsoever form of the three religions will be maintained and protected according to the existing customs and beliefs of those to whose faith they are sacred\".\nIn 1919 Zionist leader Chaim Weizmann approached the British Military Governor of Jerusalem, Colonel Sir Ronald Storrs, and offered between \u00a375,000 and \u00a3100,000 (approx. \u00a35m in modern terms) to purchase the area at the foot of the Wall and rehouse the occupants. Storrs was enthusiastic about the idea because he hoped some of the money would be used to improve Muslim education. Although they appeared promising at first, negotiations broke down after strong Muslim opposition. Storrs wrote two decades later:\nThe acceptance of the proposals, had it been practicable, would have obviated years of wretched humiliations, including the befouling of the Wall and pavement and the unmannerly braying of the tragi-comic Arab band during Jewish prayer, and culminating in the horrible outrages of 1929.\nIn early 1920, the first Jewish-Arab dispute over the Wall occurred when the Muslim authorities were carrying out minor repair works to the Wall's upper courses. The Jews, while agreeing that the works were necessary, appealed to the British that they be made under supervision of the newly formed Department of Antiquities, because the Wall was an ancient relic.\nAccording to Hillel Halkin, in the 1920s, among rising tensions with the Jews regarding the wall, the Arabs ceased using the more traditional name El-Mabka, \"the Place of Weeping\", which related to Jewish practices, and replaced it with El-Burak, a name with Muslim connotations.\nIn 1926 an effort was made to lease the Maghrebi \"waqf\", which included the wall, with the plan of eventually buying it. Negotiations were begun in secret by the Jewish judge Gad Frumkin, with financial backing from American millionaire Nathan Straus. The chairman of the Palestine Zionist Executive, Colonel F. H. Kisch, explained that the aim was \"quietly to evacuate the Moroccan occupants of those houses which it would later be necessary to demolish\" to create an open space with seats for aged worshippers to sit on. However, Straus withdrew when the price became excessive and the plan came to nothing. The Va'ad Leumi, against the advice of the Palestine Zionist Executive, demanded that the British expropriate the wall and give it to the Jews, but the British refused.\nIn 1928 the World Zionist Organization reported that John Chancellor, High Commissioner of Palestine, believed that the Western Wall should come under Jewish control and wondered \"why no great Jewish philanthropist had not bought it yet\".\nSeptember 1928 disturbances.\nIn 1922, a Status Quo agreement issued by the mandatory authority forbade the placing of benches or chairs near the Wall. The last occurrence of such a ban was in 1915, but the Ottoman decree was soon retracted after intervention of the Chacham Bashi. In 1928 the District Commissioner of Jerusalem, Edward Keith-Roach, acceded to an Arab request to implement the ban. This led to a British officer being stationed at the Wall making sure that Jews were prevented from sitting. Nor were Jews permitted to separate the sexes with a screen. In practice, a flexible modus vivendi had emerged and such screens had been put up from time to time when large numbers of people gathered to pray.\nOn September 24, 1928, the Day of Atonement, British police resorted to removing by force a screen used to separate men and women at prayer. Women who tried to prevent the screen being dismantled were beaten by the police, who used pieces of the broken wooden frame as clubs. Chairs were then pulled out from under elderly worshipers. The episode made international news and Jews the world over objected to the British action. Yosef Chaim Sonnenfeld, the Chief Rabbi of the Haredi Jews in Jerusalem, issued a protest letter on behalf of his community, the Edah HaChareidis and Agudas Yisroel, strongly condemning the desecration of the holy site. Various communal leaders called for a general strike. A large rally was held in the Etz Chaim Yeshiva, following which an angry crowd attacked the local police station in which they believed Douglas Valder Duff, the British officer involved, was sheltering.\nCommissioner Edward Keith-Roach described the screen as violating the Ottoman status quo that forbade Jews from making any construction in the Western Wall area. He informed the Jewish community that the removal had been carried out under his orders after receiving a complaint from the Supreme Muslim Council. The Arabs were concerned that the Jews were trying to extend their rights at the wall and with this move, ultimately intended to take possession of the Masjid Al-Aqsa. The British government issued an announcement explaining the incident and blaming the Jewish beadle at the Wall. It stressed that the removal of the screen was necessary, but expressed regret over the ensuing events.\nA widespread Arab campaign to protest against presumed Jewish intentions and designs to take possession of the Al Aqsa Mosque swept the country and a \"Society for the Protection of the Muslim Holy Places\" was established. The Jewish National Council (Vaad Leumi) responding to these Arab fears declared in a statement that \"We herewith declare emphatically and sincerely that no Jew has ever thought of encroaching upon the rights of Moslems over their own Holy places, but our Arab brethren should also recognise the rights of Jews in regard to the places in Palestine which are holy to them.\" The committee also demanded that the British administration expropriate the wall for the Jews.\nFrom October 1928 onward, Mufti Amin al-Husayni organised a series of measures to demonstrate the Arabs' exclusive claims to the Temple Mount and its environs. He ordered new construction next to and above the Western Wall. The British granted the Arabs permission to convert a building adjoining the Wall into a mosque and to add a minaret. A muezzin was appointed to perform the Islamic call to prayer and Sufi rites directly next to the Wall. These were seen as a provocation by the Jews who prayed at the Wall. The Jews protested and tensions increased.\nA British inquiry into the disturbances and investigation regarding the principal issue in the Western Wall dispute, namely the rights of the Jewish worshipers to bring appurtenances to the wall, was convened. The Supreme Muslim Council provided documents dating from the Turkish regime supporting their claims. However, repeated reminders to the Chief Rabbinate to verify which apparatus had been permitted failed to elicit any response. They refused to do so, arguing that Jews had the right to pray at the Wall without restrictions. Subsequently, in November 1928, the Government issued a White Paper entitled \"The Western or Wailing Wall in Jerusalem: Memorandum by the Secretary of State for the Colonies\", which emphasised the maintenance of the \"status quo\" and instructed that Jews could only bring \"those accessories which had been permitted in Turkish times.\"\nA few months later, Haj Amin complained to Chancellor that \"Jews were bringing benches and tables in increased numbers to the wall and driving nails into the wall and hanging lamps on them.\"\n1929 Palestine riots.\nIn the summer of 1929, the Mufti Haj Amin Al Husseinni ordered an opening be made at the southern end of the alleyway which straddled the Wall. The former cul-de-sac became a thoroughfare which led from the Temple Mount into the prayer area at the Wall. Mules were herded through the narrow alley, often dropping excrement. This, together with other construction projects in the vicinity, and restricted access to the Wall, resulted in Jewish protests to the British, who remained indifferent.\nOn August 14, 1929, after attacks on individual Jews praying at the Wall, 6,000 Jews demonstrated in Tel Aviv, shouting \"The Wall is ours.\" The next day, the Jewish fast of Tisha B'Av, 300 youths raised the Zionist flag and sang Hatikva at the Wall. The day after, on August 16, an organized mob of 2,000 Muslim Arabs descended on the Western Wall, injuring the beadle and burning prayer books, liturgical fixtures and notes of supplication. The rioting spread to the Jewish commercial area of town, and was followed a few days later by the Hebron massacre. One hundred and thirty-three Jews were killed and 339 injured in the Arab riots, and in the subsequent process of quelling the riots 110 Arabs were killed by British police. This was by far the deadliest attack on Jews during the period of British Rule over Palestine.\n1930 international commission.\nIn 1930, in response to the 1929 riots, the British Government appointed a commission \"to determine the rights and claims of Muslims and Jews in connection with the Western or Wailing Wall\", and to determine the causes of the violence and prevent it in the future. The League of Nations approved the commission on condition that the members were not British.\nThe Commission noted that \"the Jews do not claim any proprietorship to the Wall or to the Pavement in front of it (concluding speech of Jewish Counsel, Minutes, page 908).\"\nThe Commission concluded that the wall, and the adjacent pavement and Moroccan Quarter, were solely owned by the Muslim \"waqf\". However, Jews had the right to \"free access to the Western Wall for the purpose of devotions at all times\", subject to some stipulations that limited which objects could be brought to the Wall and forbade the blowing of the shofar, which was made illegal. Muslims were forbidden to disrupt Jewish devotions by driving animals or other means.\nThe recommendations of the Commission were brought into law by the Palestine (Western or Wailing Wall) Order in Council, 1931, which came into effect on June 8, 1931. Persons violating the law were liable to a fine of 50 pounds or imprisonment up to 6 months, or both.\nDuring the 1930s, at the conclusion of Yom Kippur, young Jews persistently flouted the shofar ban each year and blew the shofar resulting in their arrest and prosecution. They were usually fined or sentenced to imprisonment for three to six months. The Shaw commission determined that the violence occurred due to \"racial animosity on the part of the Arabs, consequent upon the disappointment of their political and national aspirations and fear for their economic future.\"\nJordanian rule (1948\u20131967).\nDuring the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War the Old City together with the Wall was controlled by Jordan. Article VIII of the 1949 Armistice Agreement called for a Special Committee to make arrangements for (amongst other things) \"free access to the Holy Places and cultural institutions and use of the cemetery on the Mount of Olives\". The committee sat multiple times during 1949, but both sides made additional demands and at the same time the Palestine Conciliation Commission was pressing for the internationalization of Jerusalem against the wishes of both parties. No agreement was ever reached, leading to recriminations in both directions. Neither Israeli Arabs nor Israeli Jews could visit their holy places in the Jordanian territories. An exception was made for Christians to participate in Christmas ceremonies in Bethlehem. Some sources claim Jews could only visit the wall if they traveled through Jordan (which was not an option for Israelis) and did not have an Israeli visa stamped in their passports. Only Jordanian soldiers and tourists were to be found there. A vantage point on Mount Zion, from which the Wall could be viewed, became the place where Jews gathered to pray. For thousands of pilgrims, the mount, being the closest location to the Wall under Israeli control, became a substitute site for the traditional priestly blessing ceremony which takes place on the Three Pilgrimage Festivals.\n\"Al Buraq (Wailing Wall) Rd\" sign.\nDuring the Jordanian rule of the Old City, a ceramic street sign in Arabic and English was affixed to the stones of the ancient wall. Attached up, it was made up of eight separate ceramic tiles and said \"Al Buraq Road\" in Arabic at the top with the English \"Al-Buraq (Wailing Wall) Rd\" below. When Israeli soldiers arrived at the wall in June 1967, one attempted to scrawl Hebrew lettering on it. \"The Jerusalem Post\" reported that on June 8, Ben-Gurion went to the wall and \"looked with distaste\" at the road sign; \"this is not right, it should come down\" and he proceeded to dismantle it. This act signaled the climax of the capture of the Old City and the ability of Jews to once again access their holiest sites. Emotional recollections of this event are related by David Ben-Gurion and Shimon Peres.\nFirst years under Israeli rule (1967\u20131969).\nDeclarations after the conquest.\nFollowing Israel's victory during the 1967 Six-Day War, the Western Wall came under Israeli control. Brigadier Rabbi Shlomo Goren proclaimed after its capture that \"Israel would never again relinquish the Wall\", a stance supported by Israeli Minister for Defence Moshe Dayan and Chief of Staff General Yitzhak Rabin. Rabin described the moment Israeli soldiers reached the Wall:\n\"There was one moment in the Six-Day War which symbolized the great victory: that was the moment in which the first paratroopers\u2014under Gur's command\u2014reached the stones of the Western Wall, feeling the emotion of the place; there never was, and never will be, another moment like it. Nobody staged that moment. Nobody planned it in advance. Nobody prepared it and nobody was prepared for it; it was as if Providence had directed the whole thing: the paratroopers weeping\u2014loudly and in pain\u2014over their comrades who had fallen along the way, the words of the Kaddish prayer heard by Western Wall's stones after 19 years of silence, tears of mourning, shouts of joy, and the singing of 'Hatikvah'\".\nDemolition of the Moroccan Quarter.\nForty-eight hours after capturing the wall, the military, without explicit government order, hastily proceeded to demolish the entire Moroccan Quarter, which stood from the Wall. The Sheikh Eid Mosque, built on the site of one of Jerusalem's earliest Islamic schools (the \"Afdiliyyah\"), was pulled down to make way for the plaza. 106 Arab families consisting of 650 people were ordered to leave their homes at night. When they refused, bulldozers began to demolish the buildings with people still inside, killing one person and injuring a number of others.\nAccording to Eyal Weizman, Chaim Herzog, who later became Israel's sixth president, took much of the credit for the destruction of the neighbourhood:\nWhen we visited the Wailing Wall we found a toilet attached to it ... we decided to remove it and from this we came to the conclusion that we could evacuate the entire area in front of the Wailing Wall ... a historical opportunity that will never return. ... We knew that the following Saturday [sic Wednesday], June 14, would be the Jewish festival of Shavuot and that many will want to come to pray ... it all had to be completed by then.\nThe narrow pavement, which could accommodate a maximum of 12,000 per day, was transformed into an enormous plaza that could hold in excess of 400,000. Several months later, the pavement close to the wall was excavated to a depth of two and half metres, exposing an additional two courses of large stones.\nA complex of buildings against the wall at the southern end of the plaza, that included Madrasa Fakhriya and the house that the Abu al-Sa'ud family had occupied since the 16th century, were spared in the 1967 destruction, but demolished in 1969. The section of the wall dedicated to prayers was thus extended southwards to double its original length, from , while the space facing the wall grew to .\nThe narrow, approximately pre-1948 alley along the wall, used for Jewish prayer, was enlarged to , with the entire Western Wall Plaza covering , stretching from the wall to the Jewish Quarter.\nPlaza.\nThe new plaza created in 1967 is used for worship and public gatherings, including Bar mitzvah celebrations and the swearing-in ceremonies of newly full-fledged soldiers in the Israel Defense Forces. Tens of thousands of Jews flock to the wall on the Jewish holidays, and particularly on the fast of Tisha B'Av, which marks the destruction of the Temple and on Jerusalem Day, which commemorates the reunification of Jerusalem in 1967 and the delivery of the Wall into Jewish hands.\nIn November 2010, the government approved a NIS 85 million ($23 million) plan to improve access from the Jewish Quarter and upgrade infrastructure at the Wall.\nOrthodox rules.\nConflicts over prayer at the national monument began a little more than a year after Israel's victory in the Six-Day War, which again made the site accessible to Jews. In July 1968 the World Union for Progressive Judaism, which had planned the group's international convention in Jerusalem, appealed to the Knesset after the Ministry of Religious Affairs prohibited the organization from hosting mixed-gender services at the Wall. The Knesset committee on internal affairs backed the Ministry of Religious Affairs in disallowing the Jewish convention attendees, who had come from over 24 countries, from worshiping in their fashion. The Orthodox held that services at the Wall should follow traditional Jewish law for segregated seating followed in synagogues, while the non-Orthodox perspective was that \"the Wall is a shrine of all Jews, not one particular branch of Judaism.\"\nWilson's Arch area.\nTransformation into worship area.\nIn September 1983, U.S. Sixth Fleet Chaplain, Rabbi Arnold Resnicoff was allowed to hold an unusual interfaith service\u2014the first interfaith service ever conducted at the Wall during the time it was under Israeli control\u2014that included men and women sitting together. The ten-minute service included the Priestly Blessing, recited by Resnicoff, who is a Kohen. A Ministry of Religions representative was present, responding to press queries that the service was authorized as part of a special welcome for the U.S. Sixth Fleet.\nIn 2005, the Western Wall Heritage Foundation initiated a major renovation effort under Rabbi-of-the-Wall Shmuel Rabinovitch. Its goal was to renovate and restructure the area within Wilson's Arch, the covered area to the left of worshipers facing the Wall in the open prayer plaza, in order to increase access for visitors and for prayer.\nThe restoration of the men's section included a Torah ark that can house over 100 Torah scrolls, in addition to new bookshelves, a library, heating for the winter, and air conditioning for the summer. A new room was also built for the scribes who maintain and preserve the Torah scrolls used at the Wall. New construction also included a women's section, overlooking the men's prayer area, so that women could use this separate area to \"take part in the services held inside under the Arch\" for the first time.\nOn July 25, 2010, a \"ner tamid\", an oil-burning \"eternal light,\" was installed within the prayer hall within Wilson's Arch, the first eternal light installed in the area of the Western Wall. According to the Western Wall Heritage Foundation, requests had been made for many years that \"an olive oil lamp be placed in the prayer hall of the Western Wall Plaza, as is the custom in Jewish synagogues, to represent the menorah of the Temple in Jerusalem as well as the continuously burning fire on the altar of burnt offerings in front of the Temple,\" especially in the closest place to those ancient flames.\nA number of special worship events have been held since the renovation. They have taken advantage of the cover, temperature control, and enhanced security.\nRobinson's Arch area.\nArchaeology.\nAt the southern end of the Western Wall, Robinson's Arch along with a row of vaults once supported stairs ascending from the street to the Temple Mount.\nThe so-called Isaiah Stone, located under Robinson's Arch, has a carved inscription in Hebrew with a partial and slightly faulty quote from (or paraphrase of) : \"And you will see and your heart will rejoice and \"their\" bones like an herb [will flourish]\" (the correct line from Isaiah would read \"... \"your\" bones\".) This gave room to various interpretations, some speculating about it being written during a period of hope for Jews. Alternatively, it might be connected to nearby graves. The inscription has tentatively been dated to the 4th\u20138th century, some extending the possible timespan all the way to the 11th century.\nNon-Orthodox worship area.\nBecause it does not come under the direct control of the Rabbi of the Wall or the Ministry of Religious Affairs, the site has been opened to religious groups that hold worship services that would not be approved by the Rabbi of the Western Wall or the Ministry of Religious Affairs in the major men's and women's prayer areas against the Wall. The worship site was inaugurated in 2004 and has since hosted services by Reform and Conservative groups, as well as services by the Women of the Wall. A platform has been added in 2013 in order to expand the prayer area.\nIn Judaism.\nHistory as place of prayer.\nJews were banned from Jerusalem by the Roman authorities after the Second Jewish revolt (2nd century CE) and, although there are intermittent accounts of limited 9th of Av services on the Temple Mount, no sources from before the 7th-century Islamic conquest attest to any other Jewish services allowed near the Mount and many report that none were permitted. Sources conflict with regard to the Mount's status under Islamic rule, but Karaite commentator Salmon ben Jeroham (c.\u2009950 CE) reports that Jews were initially granted wide access to the Mount, then restricted to gathering near \"one of its gates\", then banned entirely before his own time.\n10th\u201312th centuries.\nHowever, a synagogue was apparently founded by the Western Wall (in the broader sense) shortly after the time of Salmon. The Scroll of Ahimaaz, a historical chronicle written in 1050 CE, describes:Samuel his son arose to replace [Paltiel], and this great man filled his father's place [in c.\u2009980 CE] ... [He] dedicated 20,000 golden drachmas to the One Who Dwells on High, to entreat the favor of the Rider of Clouds. These were alms for the poor...; oil for the synagogue in the western wall, for [the lamps on] its \"bema\" ...This account of Jewish prayer at the edge of the Mount in confirmed by Daniel ben Azariah, who writes (c.\u20091055 CE) that Jews were then permitted to \"pray near the Mount's gates\".\nIn 1099 CE the Crusader army captured Jerusalem, killing almost every Jew inside, and banned Jewish pilgrims from approaching the Mount. In his \"Scroll of Revelation\" (c.\u20091125 CE), Abraham bar Hiyya records that:... the Romans who destroyed the Temple in the days of the evil Titus, though they despoiled its sanctuary, never claimed any ownership of the holy Mount or any need to pray there. But ever since the evil Constantine converted to Christianity, they have begun to make these claims ... Since [1099 CE] the Christians have desecrated the Mount, made the citadel their church, brought their idols within it, and prevented Jews from praying there. Ever since those villains took over the Mount, no Jew has been allowed to enter it, and none are to be found in all Jerusalem.\nIn another reversal by c.\u20091167 CE, during the later Crusader period, the Western Wall was reopened to Jewish prayer. Benjamin of Tudela attests:. . . and the Gate of Jehoshaphat, which faced the Temple in ancient times. There is the \"Templi Domini,\" which is the site of the Temple, and on it is a large and very beautiful dome built by Umar bin al-Khataab. Although they come to pray, the gentiles do not bring any images or effigies onto the site. And in front of this place is the western wall, which was one of the walls in the Holy of Holies; this is called the Gate of Mercy and hither come all the Jews to pray before the wall in the courtyard.\n17th century.\nIn 1625, David Finzi reported to the Jewish leadership of Carpi that:. . . from there we went up to the Temple Mount, passing mundane structures until we reached the peak of the Mount, where once the Temple stood, which was destroyed for our sins. Now a mosque is built upon it, and Jews are prohibited from entering it; only outside it, near the Western Wall, are Jews allowed to gather, and even this only in peaceful times\u2014in difficult times, such as these, the Jewish community has decreed that no one go there.\nBut in the first week of our visit, before this decree, we went all the way in, and kissed it, and I prostrated myself before its base, and there I said the ordered prayers, and also entreated God to bless all the Jews of Carpi ... Though it is called the Western Wall, nothing of the Temple whatever survived the destruction, the looting by thieves, and the construction of the mosque. They built a citadel on the site of the Foundation Stone, surpassingly lovely ...Tensions eventually calmed again. Gedaliah of Siemiatycze, who lived in Jerusalem from 1700 to 1706, records that:Only Muslims are permitted to enter the Mount and not Jews or other peoples, unless they convert to the Muslim faith. They say that not just any faith is worthy of the Mount, and they continually remind us that the Muslims have superseded the Jews in the eyes of God. When we go to pray at the Wall, we press right up against it, like the lover in Song of Songs who \"standeth behind our wall\". On the eve of the New Moon, on Tisha ba'Av, and on other fast days, we go there to pray, and the women to raise their plangent cries, but no one challenges us, and even the \"qadi\" who lives there does not object. Though the Arab youths sometimes come to prey on us, they are easily bribed to leave us alone, and if caught by their own elders they are rebuked ... Prayer by the Wall usually meets with God's favor ... . Once in olden times, or so I heard, there was a terrible drought. The Jews declared a day of fasting, and they went with a Torah scroll to the Western Wall to pray, and God answered their prayers so readily that they had to wrap the scroll in their clothes on their return to the synagogue. Every Sabbath morning, after the services at the synagogue, we immediately set off for the Western Wall ... every single one of us, Ashkenazic and Sephardic, old and young ... there we recite those Psalms that mention Jerusalem, and \"Pitom haQtores\", and \"Aleinu l'Shabeach\", and the Kaddish, and we bless those in the diaspora who fundraise for Eretz Yisrael ... .\n18th\u201319th centuries.\n The writings of various travellers in the Holy Land, especially in the 18th and 19th centuries, tell of how the Wall and its environs continued to be a place of devotion for the Jews. Isaac Yahuda, a prominent member of the Sephardic community in Jerusalem recalled how men and women used to gather in a circle at the Wall to hear sermons delivered in Ladino. His great-grandmother, who arrived in Palestine in 1841, \"used to go to the Western Wall every Friday afternoon, winter and summer, and stay there until candle-lighting time, reading the entire Book of Psalms and the Song of Songs...she would sit there by herself for hours.\"\n20th\u201321st centuries.\nIn the past women could be found sitting at the entrance to the Wall every Sabbath holding fragrant herbs and spices in order to enable worshipers to make additional blessings. In the hot weather they would provide cool water. The women also used to cast lots for the privilege of sweeping and washing the alleyway at the foot of the Wall.\nThroughout several centuries, the Wall is where Jews have gathered to express gratitude to God or to pray for divine mercy. On news of the Normandy landings on June 6, 1944 thousands of Jews went to the Wall to offer prayers for the \"success of His Majesty's and Allied Forces in the liberation of all enemy-occupied territory.\" On October 13, 1994, 50,000 gathered to pray for the safe return of kidnapped soldier Nachshon Wachsman. August 10, 2005 saw a massive prayer rally at the Wall. Estimates of people protesting Israel's unilateral disengagement plan ranged from 50,000 to 250,000 people. Every year on Tisha B'Av large crowds congregate at the Wall to commemorate the destruction of the Temple. In 2007 over 100,000 gathered. During the month of Tishrei 2009, a record 1.5 million people visited the site.\nRelation to the Foundation Stone.\nIn Judaism, the Western Wall is venerated as the sole remnant of the Holy Temple. It has become a place of pilgrimage for Jews, as it is the closest permitted accessible site to the holiest spot in Judaism, namely the \"Even ha-shetiya\" or Foundation Stone, which lies on the Temple Mount. According to one rabbinic opinion, Jews may not set foot upon the Temple Mount and doing so is a sin punishable by Kareth. While almost all historians and archaeologists and some rabbinical authorities believe that the rocky outcrop in the Dome of the Rock is the Foundation Stone, some rabbis say it is located directly opposite the exposed section of the Western Wall, near the El-kas fountain. This spot was the site of the Holy of Holies when the Temple stood.\nPart of the Temple proper.\nRabbinic tradition teaches that the western wall was built upon foundations laid by the biblical King Solomon from the time of the First Temple.\nSome medieval rabbis claimed that today's Western Wall is a surviving wall of the Temple itself and cautioned Jews from approaching it, lest they enter the Temple precincts in a state of impurity. Many contemporary rabbis believe that the rabbinic traditions were made in reference to the Temple Mount's Western Wall, which accordingly endows the Wall with inherent holiness.\nDivine custody.\nA 7th-century Midrash refers to a western wall of the Temple which \"would never be destroyed\", and a 6th-century Midrash mentions how Rome was unable to topple the western wall due to the Divine oath promising its eternal survival.\nDivine Presence.\nAn 11th-century Midrash quotes a 4th-century scholar: \"Rav Acha said that the Divine Presence has never departed from the Western Wall\", and the Zohar (13th century) similarly writes that \"the Divine Presence rests upon the Western Wall\".\nEighteenth-century scholar Jonathan Eybeschutz writes that \"after the destruction of the Temple, God removed His Presence from His sanctuary and placed it upon the Western Wall where it remains in its holiness and honour\". It is told that great Jewish sages, including Isaac Luria and the Radvaz, experienced a revelation of the Divine Presence at the wall.\nKabbalah of the word \"kotel\".\nRabbi Zvi Hirsch Kaindenover discusses the mystical aspect of the Hebrew word \"kotel\" when discussing the significance of praying against a wall. He cites the Zohar which writes that the word \"kotel\", meaning wall, is made up of two parts: \"Ko\", which has the numerical value of God's name, and \"Tel\", meaning mount, which refers to the Temple and its Western Wall.\nRitual.\nStatus as a synagogue.\nMany contemporary Orthodox scholars rule that the area in front of the Wall has the status of a synagogue and must be treated with due respect. This is the view upheld by the authority in charge of the wall. As such, men and married women are expected to cover their heads upon approaching the Wall, and to dress appropriately. When departing, the custom is to walk backwards away from the Wall to show its sanctity. On Saturdays, it is forbidden to enter the area with electronic devices, including cameras, which infringe on the sanctity of the Sabbath.\nContact with the Wall.\nSome Orthodox Jewish codifiers warn against inserting fingers into the cracks of the Wall as they believe that the breadth of the Wall constitutes part of the Temple Mount itself and retains holiness, while others who permit doing so claim that the Wall is located outside the Temple area.\nIn the past, some visitors would write their names on the Wall, or based upon various scriptural verses, would drive nails into the crevices. These practices stopped after rabbis determined that such actions compromised the sanctity of the Wall. Another practice also existed whereby pilgrims or those intending to travel abroad would hack off a chip from the Wall or take some of the sand from between its cracks as a good luck charm or memento. In the late 19th century the question was raised as to whether this was permitted and a long responsa appeared in the Jerusalem newspaper \"Havatzelet\" in 1898. It concluded that even if according to Jewish Law it was permitted, the practices should be stopped as it constituted a desecration. More recently the \"Yalkut Yosef\" rules that it is forbidden to remove small chips of stone or dust from the Wall, although it is permissible to take twigs from the vegetation which grows in the Wall for an amulet, as they contain no holiness. Cleaning the stones is also problematic from a halachic point of view. Blasphemous graffiti once sprayed by a tourist was left visible for months until it began to peel away.\nBarefoot approach.\nThere was once an old custom of removing one's shoes upon approaching the Wall. A 17th-century collection of special prayers to be said at holy places mentions that \"upon coming to the Western Wall one should remove his shoes, bow and recite...\". Rabbi Moses Reicher wrote that \"it is a good and praiseworthy custom to approach the Western Wall in white garments after ablution, kneel and prostrate oneself in submission and recite \"This is nothing other than the House of God and here is the gate of Heaven.\" When within four cubits of the Wall, one should remove their footwear.\" Over the years the custom of standing barefoot at the Wall has ceased, as there is no need to remove one's shoes when standing by the Wall, because the plaza area is outside the sanctified precinct of the Temple Mount.\nMourning over the Temple's destruction.\nAccording to Jewish Law, one is obliged to grieve and rend one's garment upon visiting the Western Wall and seeing the desolate site of the Temple. Bach (17th century) instructs that \"when one sees the Gates of Mercy which are situated in the Western Wall, which is the wall King David built, he should recite: Her gates are sunk into the ground; he hath destroyed and broken her bars: her king and her princes are among the nations: the law is no more; her prophets also find no vision from the Lord\". Some scholars write that rending one's garments is not applicable nowadays as Jerusalem is under Jewish control. Others disagree, pointing to the fact that the Temple Mount is controlled by the Muslim \"waqf\" and that the mosques which sit upon the Temple site should increase feelings of distress. If one hasn't seen the Wall for over 30 days, the prevailing custom is to rend one's garments, but this can be avoided if one visits on the Sabbath or on festivals. According to Donneal Epstein, a person who has not seen the Wall within the last 30 days should recite: \"Our Holy Temple, which was our glory, in which our forefathers praised You, was burned and all of our delights were destroyed\".\nSignificance as place of prayer.\nThe Sages of the Talmud stated that anyone who prays at the Temple in Jerusalem, \"it is as if he has prayed before the throne of glory because the gate of heaven is situated there and it is open to hear prayer.\" Jewish Law stipulates that the Silent Prayer should be recited facing towards Jerusalem, the Temple and ultimately the Holy of Holies, as God's bounty and blessing emanates from that spot. It is generally believed that prayer by the Western Wall is particularly beneficial since it was that wall which was situated closest to the Holy of Holies. Rabbi Jacob Ettlinger (1798\u20131871) writes, making reference to a medieval rabbi, \"since the Theology and ritual Israel's prayers ascend on high there... as one of the great ancient kabbalists Rabbi Joseph Gikatilla said, when the Jews send their prayers from the Diaspora in the direction of Jerusalem, from there they ascend by way of the Western Wall.\" A well-known \"segula\" (efficacious remedy) for finding one's soulmate is to pray for 40 consecutive days at the Western Wall, a practice apparently conceived by Rabbi Yisroel Yaakov Fisher (1928\u20132003).\nEgalitarian and non-Orthodox prayer.\nWhile during the late 19th century, no formal segregation of men and women was to be found at the Wall, conflict erupted in July 1968 when members of the World Union for Progressive Judaism were denied the right to host a mixed-gender service at the site after the Ministry of Religious Affairs insisted on maintaining the gender segregation customary at Orthodox places of worship. The progressives responded by claiming that \"the Wall is a shrine of all Jews, not one particular branch of Judaism.\"\nIn 1988, the small but vocal group called Women of the Wall launched a campaign for recognition of non-Orthodox prayer at the Wall. Their form and manner of prayer elicited a violent response from some Orthodox worshippers and they were subsequently banned from holding services at the site. After repeated attacks by haredim, in 1989 the Women of the Wall petitioned to secure the right of women to pray at the wall without restrictions.\nA decade on, some commentators called for the closure of the Wall unless an acceptable solution to the controversy was found.\nIn 2003 Israel's Supreme Court upheld the ban on non-Orthodox worship at the Wall, disallowing any women from reading publicly from the Torah or wearing traditional prayer shawls at the plaza itself, but instructed the Israeli government to prepare the site of Robinson's Arch to host such events, given that this area does not come under the direct control of the Rabbi of the Wall or the Ministry of Religious Affairs. The government responded by allocating Robinson's Arch for such purposes.\nThe Robinson's Arch worship site was inaugurated in August 2004 and has since hosted services by Reform and Conservative groups, as well as services by the Women of the Wall.\nIn 2012, critics still complained about the restrictions at the Western Wall, saying Israel had \"turned a national monument into an ultra-Orthodox synagogue.\"\nIn April 2013 things came to a head. In response to the repeated arrest of women, including Anat Hoffman, found flouting the law, the Jewish Agency observed 'the urgent need to reach a permanent solution and make the Western Wall once again a symbol of unity among the Jewish people, and not one of discord and strife.\" Jewish Agency leader Natan Sharansky spearheaded a concept that would expand and renovate the Robinson's Arch area into an area where people may \"perform worship rituals not based on the Orthodox interpretation of Jewish tradition.\" The Jerusalem District Court ruled that as long as there was no other appropriate area for pluralistic prayer, prayer according to non-Orthodox custom should be allowed at the Wall, and a judge ruled that the 2003 Israeli Supreme Court ruling prohibiting women from carrying a Torah or wearing prayer shawls had been misinterpreted and that Women of the Wall prayer gatherings at the Wall should not be deemed as disturbing the public order.\nOn August 25, 2013, a new 4,480 square foot prayer platform named \"Ezrat Yisrael Plaza\" was completed as part of this plan of facilitating non-Orthodox worship, with access to the platform at all hours, even when the rest of the area's archaeological park is closed to visitors. After some controversy regarding the question of authority over this prayer area, the announcement was made that it would come under the authority of a future government-appointed \"pluralist council\" that would include non-Orthodox representatives.\nIn January 2016, the Israeli Cabinet approved a plan to designate a new space at the Kotel that would be available for egalitarian prayer and that would not be controlled by the Rabbinate. Women of the Wall welcomed the decision, although Sephardic Chief Rabbi Shlomo Amar of Jerusalem said creating a mixed-gender prayer section was paramount to destroying the Wall. The Chief Rabbinate said it would create an alternate plan. In June 2017, it was announced that the plan approved in January 2016 had been suspended.\nPrayer notes.\nThere is a much publicised practice of placing slips of paper containing written prayers into the crevices of the Wall. The earliest account of this practice describes Chaim ibn Attar (d. 1743) writing an amulet for a petitioner and instructing him to place it inside the wall. More than a million notes are placed each year and the opportunity to e-mail notes is offered by a number of organisations. It has become customary for visiting dignitaries to place notes too.\nChabad tefillin stand.\nShortly after the Western Wall came under Israeli control in 1967, a stand of the Chabad movement offering phylacteries (\"tefillin\") was erected with permission from Rabbi Yehuda Meir Getz, the first rabbi of the Kotel. The stand offers male visitors the chance to put on \"tefillin\", a daily Jewish prayer ritual. In the months following the Six-Day War an estimated 400,000 Jews observed this ritual at the stand. The stand is staffed by multilingual Chabad volunteers and an estimated 100,000 male visitors put on tefillin there annually.\nIn Islam.\nTradition of the place of tethering.\nMuslim reverence for the site is derived from the belief that the Islamic prophet Muhammad tied his winged mount Buraq nearby during his night journey to Jerusalem. Various places have been suggested for the exact spot where Buraq was tethered, but for several centuries the preferred location has been the al-Buraq Mosque, which is just inside the wall at the south end of the present Western Wall plaza. The mosque is located above an ancient passageway, which once came out through the long-sealed Barclay's Gate whose huge lintel is still visible directly below the Maghrebi Gate.\nThere are four different locations, along the southern, eastern, and western wall, with gates known successively or simultaneously as the Gate of the Prophet and al-Buraq.\nEarly Muslim vs. Mamluk-period traditions.\nUS scholar Charles D. Matthews wrote in 1932 that, based on the work of Muslim authors of the 10th to 11th centuries (the later part of the Early Muslim period), the place where Prophet Muhammad had tethered Buraq and entered the \"haram\" was considered at the time to be the Double Gate of the Temple Mount's southern wall. To reach this conclusion, which he shares with Charles Wilson and Guy Le Strange, he analysed the relevant texts by Ibn al-Faqih (903), Ibn Abd Rabbih (913), and mainly by Muqaddasi (985) and Nasir-i-Khusrau (1047). One of the earliest authors who are more ambiguous, opening the possibility of identifying the Gate of the Prophet and al-Buraq with either the Double or Barclay's Gate, is Burhan ad-Din ibn al-Firkah of Damascus (d. 1329). Another Mamluk-period writer, Mujir ad-Din (1496), is the first one to unambiguously identify Barclay's Gate as the Gate of al-Buraq or of the Prophet. However, Mujir ad-Din's work is effectively a rework of earlier texts, with as-Suyuti (1471) being the main source\u2014and he fails to mention that as\u2014Suyuti stated that the Gate of the Inspector, located close to the \"northern\" end of the western wall, was also known as the Gate of al-Buraq or of the Prophet.\nOttoman-period identification.\nTo the previously mentioned variations in identification adds yet another gate, the now walled-up Funeral Gate (\"bab al-jana'iz\"), just south of the Golden Gate, also known as 'Gate of al-Buraq' and marked as such on a 1864 Temple Mount map by Melchior de Vog\u00fc\u00e9, based on the 1833 survey by Frederick Catherwood (see https:// at MadainProject.com for a photo and short description).\nWhen a British Jew asked the Egyptian authorities in 1840 for permission to re-pave the ground in front of the Western Wall, the governor of Syria wrote:\nIt is evident from the copy of the record of the deliberations of the Consultative Council in Jerusalem that the place the Jews asked for permission to pave adjoins the wall of the Haram al-Sharif and also the spot where al-Buraq was tethered, and is included in the endowment charter of Abu Madyan, may God bless his memory; that the Jews never carried out any repairs in that place in the past. ... Therefore the Jews must not be enabled to pave the place.\nCarl Sandreczki, who was charged with compiling a list of place names for Charles Wilson's Ordnance Survey of Jerusalem in 1865, reported that the street leading to the Western Wall, including the part alongside the wall, belonged to the \"Hosh\" (court/enclosure) of \"al Bur\u00e2k\", \"not \"Obr\u00e2k\", nor \"Obrat\"\". In 1866, the Prussian Consul and Orientalist Georg Rosen wrote that \"The Arabs call Obr\u00e2k the entire length of the wall at the wailing place of the Jews, southwards down to the house of Abu Su'ud and northwards up to the substructure of the Mechkemeh [Shariah court]. Obr\u00e2k is not, as was formerly claimed, a corruption of the word Ibri (Hebrews), but simply the neo-Arabic pronunciation of B\u014dr\u00e2k, ... which, whilst (Muhammad) was at prayer at the holy rock, is said to have been tethered by him inside the wall location mentioned above.\"\nThe name Hosh al Buraq appeared on the maps of Wilson's 1865 survey, its revised editions of 1876 and 1900, and other maps in the early 20th century.\nBritish Mandate.\nIn 1922, Hosh al Buraq was the street name specified by the official Pro-Jerusalem Council.\nIn Christianity.\nSome scholars believe that when Jerusalem came under Christian rule in the 4th century, there was a purposeful \"transference\" of respect for the Temple Mount and the Western Wall in terms of sanctity to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, while the sites around the Temple Mount became a refuse dump for Christians. However, the actions of many modern Christian leaders, including Pope John Paul II and Pope Benedict XVI, who visited the Wall and left prayer messages in its crevices, have symbolized for many Christians a restoration of respect and even veneration for this ancient religious site.\nIdeological views.\nJewish.\nMost Jews, religious and secular, consider the wall to be important to the Jewish people since it was originally built to hold the Second Temple. They consider the capture of the wall by Israel in 1967 as a historic event since it restored Jewish access to the site after a 19-year gap.\nIsraeli philosopher Yeshayahu Leibowitz referred to the attitude towards the Western Wall as \"idolatry\" and publicly decried the Israelis' triumphalism following the 1967 victory.\nDan Bahat, former district archaeologist of Jerusalem who headed the Western Wall Tunnel excavations in the years 1986\u20132007, decried in 2018 the transformation of this iconic historical site into a regulated place of worship: \"The Western Wall is sacrosanct. But out of a national monument, it has become a synagogue.\"\nIsraeli.\nA poll carried out in 2007 by the Jerusalem Institute for Israel Studies indicated that 96% of Israeli Jews were against Israel relinquishing the Western Wall. \nYitzhak Reiter writes that \"the Islamization and de-Judaization of the Western Wall are a recurrent motif in publications and public statements by the heads of the Islamic Movement in Israel.\"\nMuslim.\nIn December 1973, King Faisal of Saudi Arabia stated that \"Only Muslims and Christians have holy places and rights in Jerusalem\". The Jews, he maintained, had no rights there at all. As for the Western Wall, he said, \"Another wall can be built for them. They can pray against that\".\nPalestinian.\nThe Palestinian National Authority's State Information Service (SIS) stated as fact that the Jews did not consider the Wall as a place for worship until after the Balfour Declaration was issued in 1917.\nIn 2006, Dr. Hassan Khader, founder of the Al Quds Encyclopedia, told PA television that the first connection of the Jews to the Wall is \"a recent one, which began in the 16th century...not ancient...like the roots of the Islamic connection\".\nThe Mufti of Jerusalem, Sheikh Ekrima Sa'id Sabri said in 2007 that \"there never was a Jewish temple on the Temple Mount\" and that \"there is not a single stone with any relation at all to the history of the Hebrews.\"\nIn November 2010, an official paper published by the PA Ministry of Information denied Jewish rights to the Wall. It stated that \"Al-Buraq Wall is in fact the western wall of Al-Aksa Mosque\" and that Jews had only started using the site for worship after the 1917 Balfour Declaration.\nAmerican.\nWhile recognizing the difficulties inherent in any ultimate peace agreement that involves the status of Jerusalem, the official position of the United States includes a recognition of the importance of the Wall to the Jewish people, and has condemned statements that seek to \"delegitimize\" the relationship between Jews and the area in general, and the Western Wall in particular. For example, in November 2010, the Obama administration \"strongly condemned a Palestinian official's claim that the Western Wall in the Old City has no religious significance for Jews and is actually Muslim property.\" The U.S. State Department noted that the United States rejects such a claim as \"factually incorrect, insensitive and highly provocative.\"\nAdministration.\nAfter the 1967 Arab\u2013Israeli war, Rabbi Yehuda Meir Getz was named the overseer of proceedings at the wall. After Rabbi Getz's death in 1995, Rabbi Shmuel Rabinowitz was given the position. The Western Wall Heritage Foundation is the administrative body put in charge of the Wall.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nPhotographs\nGoogle Street View"}
{"id": "75226", "revid": "4460044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75226", "title": "Formation of the New Testament Canon", "text": ""}
{"id": "75229", "revid": "1309948395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75229", "title": "The Gulag Archipelago", "text": "1973 non-fiction book by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn\nThe Gulag Archipelago: An Experiment in Literary Investigation () is a three-volume nonfiction series written between 1958 and 1968 by Russian writer Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, a Soviet dissident. It was first published in 1973 by the Parisian publisher YMCA-Press, and it was translated into English and French the following year. It explores a vision of life in what is often known as the Gulag, the Soviet labour camp system. Solzhenitsyn constructed his highly detailed narrative from various sources including reports, interviews, statements, diaries, legal documents, and his own experience as a Gulag prisoner. \nFollowing its publication, the book was initially circulated in the Soviet Union by \"samizdat\" underground publication. It was not widely published there until 1989. It appeared that year in the literary journal \"Novy Mir\"; a third of the work was published in three issues. Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, \"The Gulag Archipelago\" has been officially published in Russia.\nStructure.\nAs structured in most printed editions, the text comprises seven sections divided into three volumes: parts 1 and 2, parts 3 and 4, and parts 5 to 7. At one level, the \"Gulag Archipelago\" traces the history of the system of forced labor camps that operated in the Soviet Union from 1918 to 1956. Solzhenitsyn begins with Vladimir Lenin's original decrees that were made shortly after the October Revolution; they established the legal and practical framework for a series of camps where political prisoners and ordinary criminals would be sentenced to forced labor.Note 2\nThe book describes and discusses the waves of purges and the assembling of show trials by Stalin through the 1930s in the context of the development of the greater Gulag system; Solzhenitsyn closely examines its purposive legal and bureaucratic development. The narrative ends in 1956 at the time of Nikita Khrushchev's Secret Speech (\"On the Personality Cult and its Consequences\"). Khrushchev gave the speech at the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, denouncing Joseph Stalin's personality cult, his autocratic power, and the widespread surveillance of all classes of people that pervaded the Stalin era.\nParallel to this historical and legal narrative, Solzhenitsyn follows the typical course of a \"zek\" through the Gulag. This was a slang term for an inmate, derived from the widely used abbreviation \"z\"/\"k\" for \"zakliuchenny\" (\"prisoner\"). He started with arrest, show trial, and initial internment, continuing with the transport to the Gulag. In that setting, he explored the treatment of prisoners and their general living conditions, slave labor gangs and the technical prison camp system, camp rebellions and strikes, such as the Kengir uprising; the practice of continued internal exile following the completion of the original prison sentence, and the ultimate but not guaranteed release of the prisoner, if one survived. Solzhenitsyn's examination details the trivial and commonplace events of an average prisoner's life, as well as specific and noteworthy events during the history of the Gulag system, including revolts and uprisings.\nThesis.\nAt Chapter 4, Solzhenitsyn writes: \"Macbeth\u2019s self-justifications were feeble \u2013 and his conscience devoured him. Yes, even Iago was a little lamb, too. The imagination and spiritual strength of Shakespeare's evildoers stopped short at a dozen corpses. Because they had no \"ideology\". Ideology \u2013 that is what gives evildoing its long-sought justification and gives the evildoer the necessary steadfastness and determination. That is the social theory which helps to make his acts seem good instead of bad in his own and others' eyes... That was how the agents of the Inquisition fortified their wills: by invoking Christianity; the conquerors of foreign lands, by extolling the grandeur of their Motherland; the colonizers, by civilization; the Nazis, by race; and the Jacobins (early and late), by equality, brotherhood, and the happiness of future generations... Without evildoers there would have been no Archipelago.\"\nSolzhenitsyn painstakingly laid the theoretical, legal, and practical origins of the Gulag system at Lenin's feet, not Stalin's. According to Solzhenitsyn's testimony, Stalin amplified a concentration camp system that was already in place and this was significant because he said many Western intellectuals considered the Soviet prison camp system to be a Stalinist aberration.\nSolzhenitsyn claims that although many practices had been stopped, the basic structure of the system had survived and it could be revived and expanded by future leaders. While Khrushchev, the Communist Party, and the Soviet Union's supporters in the West viewed the Gulag as a deviation of Stalin, Solzhenitsyn and others among the opposition tended to view it as a systemic fault of Soviet political culture, and an inevitable outcome of the Bolshevik political project.\nPublication.\nAfter the KGB had confiscated Solzhenitsyn's materials in Moscow, during 1965\u20131967, he worked to develop his preparatory drafts of \"The Gulag Archipelago\" into finished typescript. He accomplished some of this while in hiding at his friends' homes in the Moscow region and elsewhere.\nWhile held at the KGB's Lubyanka Prison in 1945, Solzhenitsyn had befriended Arnold Susi, a lawyer and former Estonian Minister of Education, who had been taken captive after the Soviet Union occupied Estonia in 1944. Solzhenitsyn entrusted Susi with the original typed and proofread manuscript of the finished work, after copies had been made of it both on paper and on microfilm. Susi got the manuscript to his daughter, Heli Susi, who kept the \"master copy\" hidden from the KGB in Estonia until the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.\nIn 1973, the KGB seized one of only three existing copies of the text still on Soviet soil. This was achieved by interrogating Elizaveta Voronyanskaya, one of Solzhenitsyn's trusted typists who knew where the typed copy was hidden. Within days of her release by the KGB she was found hanged in the stairwell of her apartment on the 3rd of August 1973. She had apparently either hanged herself or been murdered. Solzhenitsyn had wanted the manuscript to be first published in Russia, but knew this was impossible under conditions then extant. After Solzhenitsyn learned of Voronyanskaya's death he decided to allow its publication in Paris. The first edition of the work was published in Russian by the Parisian publishing house YMCA-Press (founded by Russian immigrants) a few days after Christmas 1973. They had received a go-ahead from Solzhenitsyn but had decided to release the work about ten days earlier than he had expected. News of the nature of the work immediately caused a stir, and translations into many other languages followed within the next few months, sometimes produced in a race against time. American Thomas P. Whitney produced the English version. The English and French translations of Volume I appeared in the spring and summer of 1974.\nThe work had a profound effect internationally. Not only did it provoke energetic debate in the West; a mere six weeks after the work had left Parisian presses Solzhenitsyn himself was forced into exile. Because possession of the manuscript incurred the risk of a long prison sentence for \"anti-Soviet activities\", Solzhenitsyn never worked on the manuscript in complete form. Since he was under constant KGB surveillance, Solzhenitsyn worked on only parts of the manuscript at any one time, so as not to put the full book into jeopardy if he happened to be arrested.\nFor this reason, he secreted the various parts of the work throughout Moscow and the surrounding suburbs, in the care of trusted friends. Sometimes when he was purportedly visiting them on social calls he actually worked on the manuscript in their homes. During much of this time, Solzhenitsyn lived at the dacha of the world-famous cellist Mstislav Rostropovich, and due to the reputation and standing of the musician, despite the elevated scrutiny of the Soviet authorities, Solzhenitsyn was reasonably safe from KGB searches there.\nWith the possible exception of \"One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich\", it is his best-known and most popular work, at least in the West. Finished in 1968, \"The Gulag Archipelago\" was microfilmed and smuggled out to Solzhenitsyn's main legal representative, Fritz Heeb of Z\u00fcrich, to await publication; a later paper copy, also smuggled out, was signed by Heinrich B\u00f6ll at the foot of each page to prove against possible accusations of a falsified work. Solzhenitsyn was aware that there was a wealth of material and perspectives about Gulag to be continued in the future, but he considered the book finished for his part. The royalties and sales income for the book were transferred to the Solzhenitsyn Aid Fund for aid to former camp prisoners. His fund, (The Russian Social Fund), which had to work in secret in its native country, managed to transfer substantial amounts of money towards helping former gulag prisoners in the 1970s and 1980s.\nReception and impact.\nBeginning in 2009, Russian schools issued the book as required reading. Russian president Vladimir Putin called the book \"much-needed\", while the Russian Ministry of Education said that the book showed \"vital historical and cultural heritage on the course of 20th-century domestic history.\" Arseny Roginsky, the then head of the human-rights organization Memorial, welcomed Putin's backing for the Solzhenitsyn textbook.\nNatalya Reshetovskaya described her ex-husband's book as \"folklore\", telling a newspaper in 1974 that she felt the book was \"not in fact the life of the country and not even the life of the camps but the folklore of the camps.\" In her 1974 memoir, Reshetovskaya wrote that Solzhenitsyn did not consider the novel to be \"historical research, or scientific research\", and stated that the significance of the novel had been \"overestimated and wrongly appraised.\" Reshetovskaya created an abridged version for Russian high-school students, including an introduction about the nature of Solzhenitsyn's \"experiment in literary investigation.\" Her books were published by the Novosti Press, a state-run media founded by the USSR Council of People's Commissars and the Communist Party Central Committee. Her editor there was Konstantin Semyonov, and he became her third husband.\nAcademic.\nHistorian and archival researcher Stephen G. Wheatcroft described the book as \"a fine literary masterpiece, a sharp political indictment against the Soviet regime, and has had tremendous importance in raising the issue of Soviet repression in the Russian consciousness.\" Wheatcroft wrote that the book was essentially a \"literary and political work\", and \"never claimed to place the camps in a historical or social-scientific quantitative perspective\" but that in the case of qualitative estimates, Solzhenitsyn gave his inaccurately high estimate as he wanted to challenge the Soviet authorities to show that \"the scale of the camps was less than this.\" Wheatcroft stated that historians relied on Solzhenitsyn to support their estimates of deaths under Stalin in the tens of millions but research in the state archives vindicated the lower estimates, while adding that the popular press has continued to include serious errors that should not be cited, or relied on, in academia.\"\nUCLA historian J. Arch Getty wrote of Solzhenitsyn's methodology that \"such documentation is methodologically unacceptable in other fields of history\" and that \"the work is of limited value to the serious student of the 1930s for it provides no important new information or original analytical framework. Gabor Rittersporn shared Getty's criticism, saying that \"he is inclined to give priority to vague reminiscences and hearsay ... [and] inevitably [leads] towards selective bias\", adding that \"one might dwell at length on the inaccuracies discernible in Solzhenitsyn\u2019s work\". Vadim Rogovin writes of the eyewitness accounts that Solzhenitsyn had read, saying he \"took plenty of license in outlining their contents and interpreting them\". Both Rogovin and Walter Laquer argue that the book belongs to the genre of 'oral history'.\nIn an interview with the German weekly newspaper \"Die Zeit\", British historian Orlando Figes stated that many Gulag inmates he interviewed for his research identified so strongly with the book's contents that they became unable to distinguish between their own experiences and what they read: \"\"The Gulag Archipelago\" spoke for a whole nation and was the voice of all those who suffered.\" Soviet dissident and historian Roy Medvedev referred to the book as \"extremely contradictory\". In a review for the book, Medvedev described it as without parallel for its impact, saying: \"I believe there are few who will get up from their desks after reading this book the same as when they opened its first page. In this regard I have nothing with which to compare Solzhenitsyn's book either in Russian or world literature.\" In the same review, he also writes that \"This book is full of thoughts and observations, some profound and true, others perhaps not always true but born in the monstrous sufferings of tens of millions of persons.\"\nPopular press.\nNovelist Doris Lessing said that the book \"brought down an empire\", while author Michael Scammell described the book as a gesture that \"amounted to a head-on challenge to the Soviet state, calling its very legitimacy into question and demanding revolutionary change.\" About its impact, philosopher Isaiah Berlin wrote: \"Until the Gulag, the Communists and their allies had persuaded their followers that denunciations of the regime were largely bourgeois propaganda.\" United States diplomat George F. Kennan said that the book was \"the most powerful single indictment of a political regime ever to be levied in modern times.\"\nAuthor Tom Butler-Bowdon has described the book as a \"Solzhenitsyn's monument to the millions tortured and murdered in Soviet Russia between the Bolshevik Revolution and the 1950s.\" An edition of \"The Book Show\" said that the book helped expose the brutality of the Soviet system. Psychologist Jordan Peterson, who wrote the foreword of an abridged fiftieth anniversary edition released on 1 November 2018, described \"The Gulag Archipelago\" as the most important book of the twentieth century.\nParallels have been drawn between the book and the treatment of Liao Yiwu, a dissident who is dubbed \"the Chinese Solzhenitsyn\" according to the Agence France-Presse. Author David Aikman stated that Liao is the first Chinese dissident writer to \"come up with a very detailed account of prison conditions including torture in China in the same way that [Soviet dissident Aleksandr] Solzhenitsyn did in \"The Gulag Archipelago\".\"\nTelevision documentary.\nIn December 2009, the Russian channel \"Rossiya K\" showed the French television documentary \"L'Histoire Secr\u00e8te de l'Archipel du Goulag\" made by Jean Cr\u00e9pu and Nicolas Miletitch, and translated it into Russian under the title \"Taynaya Istoriya \"Arkhipelaga GULAG\"\" (\"Secret History: The Gulag Archipelago\"). The documentary covers events related to the writing and publication of \"The Gulag Archipelago\".\n1.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ In Russian, the term \"GULAG\" () is an acronym for Main Directorate of Camps ().\n2.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ A similar (but on vastly smaller scale) network of forced labour camps, known as \"katorga\", existed in the Russian Empire since the early 18th century. It was abolished by the Russian Provisional Government in 1917.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "75232", "revid": "26074453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75232", "title": "Wailing Wall (disambiguation)", "text": "Wailing Wall is a controversial term for the Western Wall of the Temple Mount in Jerusalem.\nWailing Wall may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
