{"id": "76252", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76252", "title": "Gottfried Semper", "text": "German architect and theorist (1803\u20131879)\nGottfried Semper (; 29 November 1803 \u2013 15 May 1879) was a German architect, art critic, and professor of architecture who designed and built the Semper Opera House in Dresden between 1838 and 1841. In 1849 he took part in the May Uprising in Dresden and was put on the government's wanted list. He fled first to Z\u00fcrich and later to London. He returned to Germany after the 1862 amnesty granted to the revolutionaries.\nSemper wrote extensively on the origins of architecture, especially in his book \"The Four Elements of Architecture\" (1851), and was one of the major figures in the controversy surrounding the polychrome architectural style of ancient Greece. He designed works at all scales\u2014from major urban interventions such as the redesign of the Ringstra\u00dfe in Vienna, to a baton for Richard Wagner. His unrealised design for an opera house in Munich was, without permission, adapted by Wagner for the Bayreuth Festspielhaus.\nLife.\nEarly life (to 1834).\nSemper was born into a well-to-do industrialist family in Hamburg in 1803. When French troops occupied the city in 1806 during the Napoleonic Wars, the family moved to nearby Altona, at the time part of Denmark. The fifth of eight children, he attended the Gelehrtenschule des Johanneums in Hamburg before starting his university education at G\u00f6ttingen in 1823, where he studied historiography and mathematics. He subsequently studied architecture in 1825 at the University of Munich under Friedrich von G\u00e4rtner. In 1826, Semper travelled to Paris in order to work for the architect Franz Christian Gau, and he was present when the July Revolution of 1830 broke out. Between 1830 and 1833 he travelled to Italy and Greece in order to study the architecture and designs of antiquity. In 1832, he participated for four months in archaeological research at the Acropolis in Athens.\nDuring this period he became very interested in the Biedermeier-inspired polychromy debate, which centered on the question whether buildings in Ancient Greece and Rome had been colorfully painted or not. The drawn reconstructions of the painterly decorations of ancient villas he created in Athens inspired his later designs for the painted decorations in Dresden and Vienna. His 1834 publication \"Vorl\u00e4ufige Bemerkungen \u00fcber bemalte Architectur und Plastik bei den Alten\" (\"Preliminary Remarks on Polychrome Architecture and Sculpture in Antiquity\"), in which he took a strong position in favor of polychromy - supported by his investigation of pigments on the Trajan's column in Rome - brought him sudden recognition in architectural and aesthetic circles across Europe.http://\nDresden period (1834\u20131849).\nOn September 30, 1834, Semper obtained a post as Professor of Architecture at the K\u00f6niglichen Akademie der bildenden K\u00fcnste (today called the Hochschule) in Dresden thanks largely to the efforts and support of his former teacher Franz Christian Gau and swore an oath of allegiance to the King (formerly Elector) of Saxony, Anthony Clement. The flourishing growth of Dresden during this period provided the young architect with considerable creative opportunities. In 1838\u20131840 a synagogue was built in Dresden to Semper's design, it was ever afterward called the Semper Synagogue and is noted for its Moorish Revival interior style. The Synagogue's exterior was built in romanesque style so as not to call attention to itself. The interior design included not only the Moorish inspired wall decorations but furnishings: specifically, a silver lamp of eternal light, which caught Richard Wagner and his wife Cosima's fancy. They gave a great deal of effort to have a copy of this lamp. Semper's student, Otto Simonson would construct the magnificent Moorish Revival Leipzig synagogue in 1855.\nCertain civic structures remain today, such as the Elbe-facing gallery of the Zwinger Palace complex. He designed the Dresden Hoftheater in 1841, which burned down in 1869. It was rebuilt in 1878 by his son to Semper's plans and today is called the Semperoper. Other buildings also remain indelibly attached to his name, such as the Maternity Hospital, the Synagogue (destroyed during the Third Reich), the Oppenheim Palace, and the \"Villa Rosa\" built for the banker Martin Wilhelm Oppenheim. This last construction stands as a prototype of German villa architecture.\nOn September 1, 1835, Semper married Bertha Thimmig. The marriage ultimately produced six children.\nA convinced Republican, Semper took a leading role, along with his friend Richard Wagner, in the May 1849 uprising which swept over the city. He was a member of the Civic Guard (Kommunalgarde) and helped to erect barricades in the streets. When the rebellion collapsed, Semper was considered a leading agitator for democratic change and a ringleader against government authority and he was forced to flee the city.\nHe was destined never to return to the city that would, ironically, become most associated with his architectural (and political) legacy. The Saxon government maintained a warrant for his arrest until 1863. When the Semper-designed Hoftheater burnt down in 1869, King John, on the urging of the citizenry, commissioned Semper to build a new one. Semper produced the plans but left the actual construction to his son, Manfred.\n\"What must I have done in 48, that one persecutes me forever? One single barricade did I construct - it held, because it was practical, and as it was practical, it was beautiful\", wrote Semper in dismay.\nPost-revolutionary period (1849\u20131855).\nAfter stays in Zwickau, Hof, Karlsruhe and Strasbourg, Semper eventually ended up back in Paris, like many other disillusioned Republicans from the 1848 Revolutions (such as Heinrich Heine and Ludwig B\u00f6rne). In the fall of 1850, he travelled to London, England. But while he was able to pick up occasional contracts \u2014 including participation in the design of the funeral carriage for the Duke of Wellington and the designs of the Canadian, Danish, Swedish, and Ottoman sections of the 1851 Great Exhibition in the Crystal Palace \u2014 he found no steady employment. If his stay in London was disappointing professionally, however, it proved a fertile period for Semper's theoretical, creative and academic development. He published \"Die vier Elemente der Baukunst\" (\"The Four Elements of Architecture\") in 1851 and \"Wissenschaft, Industrie und Kunst\" (\"Science, Industry and Art\") in 1852. These works would ultimately provide the groundwork for his most widely regarded publication, \"Der Stil in den technischen und tektonischen K\u00fcnsten oder Praktische \u00c4sthetik,\" which was published in two volumes in 1861 and 1863.\nZ\u00fcrich period (1855\u20131871).\nConcurrently with the onset of the industrial revolution, the Swiss Federation planned to establish a polytechnical school. As the principal judge for the competition held to select a design for the new building, Semper deemed the submitted entries unsatisfactory and, ultimately, designed the building himself. Proudly situated (where fortified walls once stood), visible from all sides on a terrace overlooking the core of Z\u00fcrich, the new school became a symbol of a new epoch. The building (1853\u20131864), which despite frequent remodeling continues to evoke Semper's concept, was initially required to accommodate not only the new school (known today as the ETH Zurich), but the existing University of Zurich, as well.\nIn 1855, Semper became a professor of architecture at the new school and the success of many of his students who attained success and renown served to ensure his legacy. The Swiss architect Emil Schmid was one such student. With his income as a professor, Semper was able to reunite his family, bringing them to Z\u00fcrich from Saxony. The City Hall in Winterthur is among other buildings designed by Semper in Switzerland.\nIn 1861, Semper and his family were awarded Swiss citizenship by the Swiss municipality of Affoltern am Albis in return for the planning and construction of their main church's bell-tower. This citizenship was later confirmed by the Z\u00fcrich cantonal government in December 1861 and with these new Swiss passports in hand, Semper was once again able to travel and finally also visit Germany, after the warrant for his arrest had been cancelled in May 1863.\nSemper provided Bavaria's King Ludwig II with a conceptual design for a theatre dedicated to the work of Richard Wagner to be built in Munich. The project, developed from 1864 to 1866, was never realized, although Wagner 'borrowed' many of its features for his own later theatre at Bayreuth.\nLater life (from 1871).\nAlready in 1833, there were first plans in Vienna for the public presentation of the Imperial Art Collections. With the planning of the Vienna Ring Road, the museum question became pressing again. Works forming the imperial art collection were scattered among several buildings. Semper was assigned to submit a proposal for locating new buildings in conjunction with redevelopment of the Ring Road. In 1869, he designed a gigantic 'Imperial Forum' which was not realized. The National Museum of Art History and the National Museum of Natural History were erected, however, opposite the Palace according to his plan, as was the Burgtheater. In 1871, Semper moved to Vienna to undertake the projects.\nDuring construction, repeated disagreements with his appointed associate architect (Karl Freiherr von Hasenauer), led Semper to resign from the project in 1876. In the following year, his health began to deteriorate. He died two years later while on a visit to Italy and is buried in the Protestant Cemetery, Rome.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76256", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76256", "title": "Niue/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "76259", "revid": "47158624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76259", "title": "Louis the Child", "text": "Final Carolingian-dynasty King of East Francia (reigned 899 to 911)\nLouis the Child (893 \u2013 20/24 September 911), sometimes called Louis III or Louis IV, was the king of East Francia from 899 until his death and was also recognized as king of Lotharingia after 900. He was the last East Frankish ruler of the Carolingian dynasty. He succeeded his father, Arnulf, in East Francia and his elder illegitimate half-brother Zwentibold in Lotharingia.\nLouis became king when he was six and reigned until his death aged 17 or 18. During his reign the country was ravaged by Magyar raids.\nLife.\nLouis was born in September or October 893 in Alt\u00f6tting, Duchy of Bavaria. He was the only legitimate son of king Arnulf of Carinthia and his wife, Ota, a member of the Conradine dynasty. He had at least two brothers: his elder, illegitimate brother Zwentibold, who ruled Lotharingia, and another brother named Ratold, who briefly ruled the Kingdom of Italy. \nEast Francia.\nLouis was crowned in Forchheim on 4 February 900. This is the earliest East Frankish royal coronation about which records are known to exist. Louis was of a weak personal constitution, often sick, and due to his young age, the reins of government were entirely in the hands of others \u2013 the nobles and bishops. Indeed, the coronation was probably a result of the fact that there was little Louis could gain at the expense of the nobles.\nThe most influential of Louis's councillors were Hatto I and Solomon III (bishop of Constance). It was these two who assured that the royal court decided in favour of the Conradines against the Babenbergers in the matter of the Duchy of Franconia. They appointed Louis's nephew, Conrad as a duke. In 903 the Raffelstetten customs regulations were promulgated under Louis' reign, the first customs regulations in the East Frankish part of Europe.\nLotharingia.\nLouis succeeded Zwentibold in 900. He maintained a separate chancery for East Francia and Lotharingia, the latter under Archbishop Radbod of Trier. He appointed an East Frank, Gebhard, as duke of Lotharingia, alienating the Lotharingian nobility. The latter did not participate in East Frankish assemblies.\nMagyar invasions.\nIn 900, during the Hungarian invasions of Europe, the Magyar army ravaged Bavaria. Another group of Magyars were defeated by Luitpold, Margrave of Bavaria and Bishop Richer of Passau. In 901 they devastated the Duchy of Carinthia. In 904 Louis invited Kursz\u00e1n, the kende of the Magyars, to negotiations, but killed him and his delegation. In 906 Magyars twice ravaged the Duchy of Saxony. In 907 they inflicted a heavy defeat on the Bavarians who had invaded Hungary, killing the Margrave Luitpold and many high nobles in the Battle of Pressburg. Next year it was the turn of Saxony and Thuringia, and in 909 that of Alemannia. On their return, however, Arnulf, Duke of Bavaria inflicted a defeat on them on the river Rott, but in 910 they, in their turn, defeated Louis the Child's army in the Battle of Augsburg. Louis himself tried to take some military control as he grew older, but he had little success against the Magyars. His army was destroyed at Ennsburg in 907.\nDeath and succession.\nIn a state of despair, possibly afflicted by severe depression, Louis died at Frankfurt am Main on 20 or 24 September 911, seventeen or eighteen years old. Louis was buried in the monastery of Saint Emmeram's in Regensburg, where his father Arnulf also lay. His death brought an end to the eastern branch of the Carolingian dynasty.\nIn 911 the dukes of East Francia elected Conrad of Franconia, son of Gebhard, as the king, while the nobles of Lotharingia elected the Carolingian Charles the Simple, already king of West Francia, as their king.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76260", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76260", "title": "Henry I the Fowler", "text": ""}
{"id": "76262", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76262", "title": "Ghana/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "76264", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76264", "title": "Winamp", "text": "Media player for Microsoft Windows\nWinamp is a media player for Microsoft Windows originally developed by Justin Frankel and Dmitry Boldyrev by their company Nullsoft, which they later sold to AOL in 1999 for $80\u00a0million. It was then acquired by Radionomy in 2014, now known as the Llama Group. Since version 2, it has been sold as freemium and supports extensibility with plug-ins and skins, and features music visualization, playlist and a media library, supported by a large online community.\nVersion 1 of Winamp was released in 1997, along with basic counterparts for MS-DOS and Macintosh, and quickly grew popular with over 3 million downloads, paralleling the developing trend of MP3 file sharing. Winamp 2.0 was released on September 8, 1998. The 2.x versions were widely used and made Winamp one of the most downloaded Windows applications. By 2000, Winamp had over 25 million registered users and by 2001 it had 60\u00a0million users. A poor reception to the 2002 rewrite, Winamp3, was followed by the release of Winamp 5 in 2003, and a later release of version 5.5 in 2007. Winamp for Android was released in 2010. The last AOL-developed version, Winamp 5.666, was released in 2013.\nAfter a five-year hiatus, Winamp 5.8 (written as Winamp 5.formula_1) was leaked to the public in 2018 before its eventual release by Radionomy; development has since resumed with the latest version 5.9.2 released on April 26, 2023. Its developer Radionomy has since rebranded as Llama Group and launched a streaming service that allows users to support artists by buying perks or NFTs. The service launched on the web in April 2023, followed by beta apps for Android and iOS in July 2023. In September 2024, Llama Group partially released the Winamp source code for Windows under a custom source-available license; the source repository was deleted soon afterwards following criticism for its license terms and inclusion of proprietary code.\n*\"Input\": decodes specific file formats.\n*\"Output\": sends data to specific devices or files.\n*\"Visualization\": provides sound activated graphics.\n*\"DSP/Effect\": manipulates audio for special effects.\n*\"General Purpose\" plug-ins add convenience or UI features (\"Media Library\", \"alarm clock\", or \"pause when logged out\").\n*\"Media Library\" plug-ins add functions to the Media Library plug-in.\n*\"Portables\" plug-ins support portable media players.\nFeatures.\nPlug-in development support increased Winamp's flexibility\u00a0\u2013 for example, the creation of specialized plug-ins for game console music files such as NSF, USF, GBS, GSF, SID, VGM, SPC, PSF, and PSF2.\nHistory.\nInitial releases.\nWinamp was first released in 1997, when Justin Frankel and Dmitry Boldyrev, formerly students at the University of Utah, integrated their Windows user interface with the Advanced Multimedia Products (\"AMP\") MP3 file playback engine. The name Winamp (originally spelled WinAMP) was a portmanteau of \"Windows\" and \"AMP\". The minimalist WinAMP 0.20a was released as freeware on April 21, 1997.\nIts windowless, menu bar-only interface showed only play (open), stop, pause, and unpause functions. A file specified on the command line or dropped onto its icon would be played. MP3 decoding was performed by the AMP decoding engine developed by Advanced Multimedia Products co-founder Tomislav Uzelac, which was free for non-commercial use. It was compatible with Windows 95 and Windows NT 4.0. Winamp was the second real-time MP3 player for Windows, the first being WinPlay3.\nWinAMP 0.92 was released as freeware in May 1997. Within the standard Windows frame and menu bar, it had the beginnings of the \"classic\" Winamp GUI: dark gray rectangle with silver 3D-effect transport buttons, a red/green volume slider, time displayed in a green LED font, with track name, MP3 bitrate, and \"mixrate\" in green. Overlength titles appear as slowly scrolling text (or \"marquee\"). The skeuomorphic design somewhat resembles shelf stereos. There was no position bar, and a blank space where the spectrum analyzer and waveform analyzer would later appear. Multiple files on the command line or dropped onto its icon were enqueued in the playlist.\nWinamp 1.\nVersion 1.006 was released June 7, 1997, renamed \"Winamp\", with \"amp\" now in lowercase. It showed a spectrum analyzer and color-changing volume slider, but no waveform display. The AMP non-commercial license was included in its help menu.\nAccording to Tomislav Uzelac, Frankel licensed the AMP 0.7 engine June 1, 1997. Frankel formally founded Nullsoft Inc. in January 1998 and continued development of Winamp, which changed from freeware to $10 shareware. Despite the fact that there would be no extra features by paying $10, Winamp's popularity and warm reception brought Nullsoft $100,000 a month that year from $10 paper checks in the mail from paying users.\nIn March, Brian Litman, managing co-founder with Uzelac of Advanced Multimedia Products, which by then had been merged into PlayMedia Systems, sent a cease-and-desist letter to Nullsoft, claiming unlawful use of AMP. Nullsoft responded that they had replaced AMP with Nitrane, Nullsoft's proprietary decoder, but Playmedia disputed this. Third-party reviews found that Nitrane had bugs that resulted in playing back MP3s incorrectly, and that this resulted in unstable tones being added to the playback, and undoubtedly therefore violated the ISO standard. This also means that Nitrane was unlikely to have been based on the AMP software, and was more likely evidence of a hastily written MP3 decoder that didn't concern itself with standards compliance.\nVersion 1.90, released March 31, 1998, was the first release as a general-purpose audio player, and documented on the Winamp website as supporting plugins, of which it included two input plugins (\"MOD\" and \"MP3\") and a visualization plugin.\nThe installer for Version 1.91, released 18 days later, included \"wave\", \"cdda\", and \"Windows tray handling\" plugins, as well as the famous Wesley Willis-inspired DEMO.MP3 file \"Winamp, it really whips the llama's ass\". \"Mike the Llama\" is the company mascot.\nBy July 1998, Winamp's various versions had been downloaded over three million times.\nWinamp 2.\nWinamp 2.0 was released on September 8, 1998. The new version improved the usability of the playlist, made the equalizer more accurate, and introduced more plug-ins. The modular windows for playlist and equalizer now matched the player's skin and could be moved around and be separated or \"docked\" to each other anywhere in any order.\nThe 2.x versions were widely used and made Winamp one of the most downloaded pieces of software for Windows. By the end of 1998, there were already over 60 plugins and hundreds of skins made for the software.\nPlayMedia filed a federal lawsuit against Nullsoft in March 1999. In May 1999, PlayMedia was granted an injunction by Federal Judge A. Howard Matz against distribution of Nitrane by Nullsoft, and the same month the lawsuit was settled out-of-court with licensing and confidentiality agreements. Soon after, Nullsoft switched to an ISO decoder from the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, the developers of the MP3 format.\nWinamp 2.10, released March 24, 1999, included a new version of the \"Llama\" \"demo.mp3\" featuring a musical sting and bleating.\nNullsoft was purchased by AOL in June 1999 for $80\u00a0million in stock, with Nullsoft becoming a subsidiary. AOL itself merged with Time Warner in 2000.\nNullsoft relaunched the Winamp-specific winamp.com in December 1999 to provide easier access to skins, plug-ins, streaming audio, song downloads, forums, and developer resources.\nAs of June 22, 2000, Winamp surpassed 25 million registrants.\nWinamp3.\nThe next major Winamp version, Winamp3 (so spelled to include \"mp3\" in the name and to mark its separation from the Winamp 2 codebase), was released on August 9, 2002. It was a complete rewrite of version 2, newly based on the Wasabi application framework, which offered additional functionality and flexibility. Winamp3 was developed parallel to Winamp 2, but \"many users found it consumed too many system resources and was unstable (or even lacked some valued functionality, such as the ability to count or find the total duration of tracks in a playlist)\". Winamp3 had no backward compatibility with Winamp 2 plugins, and the SHOUTcast sourcing plugin was not supported. No Winamp3 version of SHOUTcast was ever released.\nIn response to users reverting to Winamp 2, Nullsoft continued the development of Winamp 2 to versions 2.9 and 2.91 in 2003, even alluding to it humorously. The beta versions 2.92 and 2.95 were released with the inclusion of some of the functionality of the upcoming Winamp 5. During this period the Wasabi (software)|Wasabi cross-platform application framework and skinnable GUI toolkit was derived from parts of the Winamp3 source code. For Linux, Nullsoft released an alpha version of Winamp3 on October 9, 2001, but has not updated it despite continued user interest.\nDuring this time Winamp faced stiff competition from Apple's iTunes.\nWinamp 5.\nWinamp 5 was based on the Winamp 2 codebase, but with Winamp3 features such as modern skins incorporated via a plugin, thus incorporating the main advantages of both products. Regarding the omission of a version 4, Nullsoft joked that \"nobody wants to see a Winamp 4 skin\" (\"4 skin\" being a pun on foreskin). It was also joked that \"Winamp 5 is so good they skipped a number\" and \"Winamp 2+3=5,\". Winamp 5.0 was released in December 2003. A blue themed \"Modern\" skin became the default interface. The media library was improved, CD burning and ripping was introduced, and other additions.\nThe original Nullsoft team quit in 2004. As of version 5.1, Winamp development is credited to Ben Allison (Benski) and Maksim Tyrtyshny.\nFrom version 5.2 onwards, support for synchronizing with an iPod and other portable music players is built-in. This was developed by Will Fisher, as a re-write of the open source https://.\nWinamp 5.5.\nWinamp 5.5: The 10th Anniversary Edition was released on October 10, 2007, ten years after the first release of Winamp (a preview version had been released on September 10, 2007). New features to the player included album art support, improved localization support (with several officially localized Winamp releases, including German, Polish, Russian, and French), and a new default interface skin called \"Bento\" which unlike the previous skins is a unified player and media library in one window as opposed to a multi-window interface. This version dropped support for Windows 9x.\nWinamp 5.6.\nWinamp 5.6 was released in November 2010 and features Android Wi-Fi support and direct mouse wheel support. Fraunhofer AAC codec with VBR encoding support was implemented. Moreover, the option to write ratings to tags (for MP3, WMA/WMV, Ogg, and FLAC) was added. Hungarian and Indonesian installer translations and language packs were added.\nWith the release of Winamp version 5.66 on November 20, 2013, AOL announced that Winamp.com would shut down on December 20, 2013, and Winamp would cease to be offered for download after that date.\nFive days later, version 5.666 was released with the \"Pro\" and \"Full\" installers being one and the same, in the process removing OpenCandy, Emusic, AOL Search, and AOL Toolbar from the installation bundle. This was announced to be the last release of Winamp from AOL/Nullsoft.\nWinamp 5.7.\nThere was a Winamp 5.7 beta program for an invitation-based Winamp Cloud feature, which would let Winamp play a user's entire cloud-stored music library across all supported devices. This feature would have allowed AOL to provide a music locker service that would essentially compete with other online music lockers. The beta program was cancelled months before the announcement to shut down the Winamp project.\nAcquisition by Radionomy.\nOn November 20, 2013, AOL announced that it would shut down Winamp.com on December 20, 2013, and the software would no longer be available for download nor supported by the company after that date. The following day, an unofficial report surfaced that Microsoft was in talks with AOL to acquire Nullsoft. Despite AOL's announcement, the Winamp site was not shut down as planned, and on January 14, 2014, it was officially announced that Belgian online radio aggregator Radionomy had bought the Nullsoft brand, which includes Winamp and SHOUTcast. No financial details were publicly announced. However, TechCrunch reported that the sale of Winamp and Shoutcast was worth between $5 and $10 million, with AOL taking a 12% stake (a financial, not strategic, investment) in Radionomy in the process.\nRadionomy relaunched the Winamp website, and the software was available for download again. In December 2015, Vivendi bought a majority stake in Radionomy.\nFollowing Radionomy's acquisition, no new releases would officially surface until Winamp 5.8 in 2018.\nWinamp 5.8.\nIn September 2018, it was reported that a Winamp 5.8 beta build 3563 was leaked to various file-sharing sites. The leaked build, bearing a build date of October 26, 2016, would be the first public build under Radionomy's umbrella, with changes including compatibility with Windows 8.1, 10 and 11, and the removal of the paid Winamp Pro.\nFollowing the leak, Radionomy officially released Winamp 5.8 build 3660 on October 18, 2018.\nWinamp 5.9.\nWinamp 5.9 was released on September 9, 2022, with mostly under-the-hood improvements. The development team migrated the project from Visual Studio 2008 to Visual Studio 2019, in addition to improving support for Windows 11, high-resolution audio, and playback of HTTPS streams. The minimum supported operating system was increased to Windows 7 SP1.\nOn December 6, 2022, Winamp 5.9.1 was released, adding a music NFT playback feature. Users are able to add music NFTs on Ethereum and Polygon to the media library by connecting to the Metamask wallet.\nIn April 2023, Winamp 5.9.2 was officially released, which, according to the developers themselves, is a minor update to the previous version.\nWinamp service.\nOn October 15, 2018, Radionomy's CEO Alexandre Saboundjian announced that a new version of Winamp \u2013 then called Winamp 6 \u2013 would be released in 2019. The new version launched on April 13, 2023, as an online service. The platform features Winamp Player, a music streaming service with plans to integrate with other music platforms such as Spotify and to play local audio files. Another feature of the new platform is Winamp Fanzone, where artists can upload and license their music for commercial use, and listeners can support artists directly by buying perks, such as early access to new songs or NFTs.\nSource code release.\nOn May 16, 2024, Llama Group announced that Winamp would be going partially open source on September 24, 2024. The source code was released in a GitHub repository under the \"Winamp Collaborative License\", a license restricting the ability to create forks or distribute modified binaries (which is not considered free or open source) and requires waiving ownership of contributions to Llama Group.\nAfter the source code was released, multiple pieces of proprietary source code were found: the entirety of the SHOUTcast server software, as well as code from Microsoft, Dolby and Intel. After \"The Register\" contacted the Llama Group about the code on October 15, 2024, the GitHub repository was deleted.\nOn other platforms.\nAndroid.\n\"Winamp for Android\" is a mobile version for the Android (version 2.1) operating system, released in beta in October 2010 with a stable release in December 2010. It includes syncing with Winamp desktop (ver. 5.59 beta+) over USB or Wi-Fi. It was received with some enthusiasm in the consumer blog press. The app was removed from the Play Store in 2014 due to a combination of factors, including a decline in user interest and the cessation of support from its parent company, AOL.\nIt was reported in 2018 by TechCrunch that a redesigned Android app was planned alongside the announcement of the development of Winamp 6.\nAn app for the Winamp service was released in beta for Android in July 2023.\nMacintosh.\nIn 1997, Nullsoft also released MacAmp, an Apple Macintosh equivalent of Winamp.\nIn October 2011, \"Winamp Sync for Mac\" was introduced as a beta release. It is the first Winamp version for the Mac OS X platform and runs under version 10.6 and above. Its focus is on syncing the Winamp Library to Winamp for Android and the iTunes Music Library (hence the name, \"Winamp Sync for Mac\"). Nonetheless, a full Winamp Library and player features are included. The developer's blog stated that the \"Winamp Sync for Mac Beta\" would pave the way for future Winamp-related development on Mac and a fully featured media player as Winamp on Windows. However no further development occurred.\nLinux.\nAn early alpha preview of Winamp3 for desktop Linux was developed in October 2001, but support was dropped not long after. Nonetheless, some versions of Winamp for Windows are functional using Wine.\nMS-DOS.\nDOSamp for MS-DOS operating systems was released in 1997. The software was soon abandoned by Nullsoft to focus on the Windows version (Winamp).\niOS.\nIn July 2023, a beta version of a Winamp service was released via TestFlight for the iOS mobile platform.\nEaster eggs.\nWinamp has historically included a number of Easter eggs: hidden features that are accessible via undocumented operations. One example is an image of Justin Frankel, one of Winamp's original authors, hidden in Winamp's About dialog box. The included Easter eggs have changed with versions of Winamp, and over thirty have been documented elsewhere.\nDerivative works.\n\"Unagi\" is the codename for the media playback engine derived from Winamp core technologies. AOL announced in 2004 that Unagi would be incorporated into \"AOL Media Player (AMP)\", in development. After beta testing, \"AMP\" was discontinued in 2005, but portions lived on in AOL's Web-based player.\nXMMS, xmms2, qmmp and Audacious are free and open source music players created as clones of Winamp. Some of these even support skins and plug-ins designed for Winamp.\nAn HTML5 and JavaScript-based web player resembling the graphical user interface of Winamp 2 was developed by programmer Jordan Eldredge in 2018.\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76266", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76266", "title": "Software patent", "text": "Patent that covers a computer program\nA software patent is a patent on a piece of software, such as a computer program, library, user interface, or algorithm. The validity of these patents can be difficult to evaluate, as software is often at once a product of engineering, something typically eligible for patents, and an abstract concept, which is typically not. This gray area, along with the difficulty of patent evaluation for intangible, technical works such as libraries and algorithms, makes software patents a frequent subject of controversy and litigation.\nDifferent jurisdictions have radically different policies concerning software patents, including a blanket ban, no restrictions, or attempts to distinguish between purely mathematical constructs and \"embodiments\" of these constructs. For example, an algorithm itself may be judged unpatentable, but its use in software judged patentable.\nBackground.\nA patent is a set of exclusionary rights granted by a state to a patent holder for a limited period of time, usually 20 years. These rights are granted to patent applicants in exchange for their disclosure of the inventions. Once a patent is granted in a given country, no person may make, use, sell or import/export the claimed invention in that country without the permission of the patent holder. Permission, where granted, is typically in the form of a license which conditions are set by the patent owner: it may be free or in return for a royalty payment or lump sum fee.\nPatents are territorial in nature. To obtain a patent, inventors must file patent applications in each and every country in which they want a patent. For example, separate applications must be filed in Japan, China, the United States and India if the applicant wishes to obtain patents in those countries. However, some regional offices exist, such as the European Patent Office (EPO), which act as supranational bodies with the power to grant patents which can then be brought into effect in the member states, and an international procedure also exists for filing a single international application under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), which can then give rise to patent protection in most countries.\nThese different countries and regional offices have different standards for granting patents. This is particularly true of software or computer-implemented inventions, especially where the software is implementing a business method.\nEarly example of a software patent.\nOn 21 May 1962, a British patent application entitled \"A Computer Arranged for the Automatic Solution of Linear Programming Problems\" was filed. The invention was concerned with efficient memory management for the simplex algorithm, and could be implemented by purely software means. The patent struggled to establish that it represented a 'vendible product'. \"The focus of attention shifted to look at the relationship between the [unpatentable] computer program and the [potentially patentable] programmed computer\". The patent was granted on August 17, 1966, and seems to be one of the first software patents, establishing the principle that the computer program itself was unpatentable and therefore covered by copyright law, while the computer program embedded in hardware was potentially patentable.\nJurisdictions.\nMost countries place some limits on the patenting of inventions involving software, but there is no one legal definition of a software patent. For example, U.S. patent law excludes \"abstract ideas\", and this has been used to refuse some patents involving software. In Europe, \"computer programs as such\" are excluded from patentability, thus European Patent Office policy is consequently that a program for a computer is not patentable if it does not have the potential to cause a \"technical effect\" which is by now understood as a material effect (a \"transformation of nature\"). Substantive law regarding the patentability of software and computer-implemented inventions, and case law interpreting the legal provisions, are different under different jurisdictions.\nSoftware patents under multilateral treaties:\nSoftware patents under national laws:\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, there is no particular exclusion for patents relating to software. The subject matter of an invention is patentable in Australia, if it is a \"manner of manufacture\" within the meaning of section 6 of the Statute of Monopolies. The High Court of Australia has refrained from ruling on the precise definition of manner of manufacture stating that any such attempt is bound to fail for the policy reason of encouraging national development in fields that may be unpredictable. In assessing whether an invention is a manner of manufacture, the High Court has relied on the inquiry of whether the subject of the claims defining the invention has as its end result an \"artificially created state of affairs\".\nIn a decision of the Federal Court of Australia, on the patentability of an improved method of representing curved images in computer graphics displays, it was held that the application of selected mathematical methods to computers may involve steps which are foreign to the normal use of computers and hence amount to a manner of manufacture. In another unanimous decision by the Full Federal Court of Australia, an invention for methods of storing and retrieving Chinese characters to perform word processing was held to be an artificially created state of affairs and consequently within the concept of a manner of manufacture.\nNevertheless, in a recent decision on the patentability of a computer implemented method of generating an index based on selection and weighing of data based on certain criterion, the Full Federal Court of Australia reaffirmed that mere methods, schemes and plans are not manners of manufacture. The Full Court went on to hold that the use of a computer to implement a scheme did not contribute to the invention or the artificial effect of the invention. The subject matter of the invention was held to be an abstract idea and not a manner of manufacture within the meaning of the term in the Patents Act. The same Full Federal Court in another decision regarding the patentability of an invention regarding a method and system for assessing an individual's competency in relation to certain criterion, reiterated that a business method or mere scheme were per se are not patentable.\nIn principle, computer software is still a valid patentable subject matter in Australia. But, in circumstances where patents have been sought over software to merely implement abstract ideas or business methods, the courts and the Commissioner of Patents have resisted granting patent protection to such applications both as a matter of statutory interpretation and policy.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, courts have held that the use of a computer alone neither lends, nor reduces patentability of an invention. However, it is the position of the Canadian Patent Office that where a computer is an \"essential element\" of a patent's claims, the claimed invention is generally patentable subject matter.\nChina.\nIn China, the starting time of software patent is relatively late. Before 2006, software patents were basically not granted, and software and hardware had to be combined when applying for a patent. With the development of network technology and software technology, China's patent examination system has been constantly updated. Recently, the design idea of the software itself has been allowed to apply for patent separately, instead of requiring to be combined with hardware. However, software patent writing requirements are relatively high.\nSoftware patents can be written as either a product or a method, depending on the standards of review. However, no matter what form it is written in, it is difficult to highlight the creativity of the scheme, which requires specific case analysis.\nSoftware that can be patented mainly includes (but is not limited to):\n(1) Industrial control software, such as controlling the movement of mechanical equipment;\n(2) Software to improve the internal performance of the computer, such as a software can improve the virtual memory of the computer;\n(3) External technical data processing software, such as digital camera image processing software.\nIt is fair to say that a considerable proportion of software belongs to category (3).\nThe patent protection measures can be seen in the patent law and the regulations on the protection of computer software.\nEurope.\nWithin European Union member states, the EPO and other national patent offices have issued many patents for inventions involving software since the European Patent Convention (EPC) came into force in the late 1970s. https:// EPC excludes \"programs for computers\" from patentability (Art. 52(2)) to the extent that a patent application relates to a computer program \"as such\" (Art. 52(3)). This has been interpreted to mean that any invention that makes a non-obvious \"technical contribution\" or solves a \"technical problem\" in a non-obvious way is patentable even if that technical problem is solved by running a computer program.&lt;ref name=\"t0469/03\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; When the EPO examines a patent application with questionable subject matter eligibility, their approach is to simply disregard any ineligible portions or aspects and evaluate the rest. This is notably different from the U.S. approach (see below).\nComputer-implemented inventions that \"only\" solve a business problem using a computer, rather than a technical problem, are considered unpatentable as lacking an inventive step (see T 258/03). Nevertheless, the fact that an invention is useful in business does not mean it is not patentable if it also solves a technical problem.\nA summary of the developments concerning patentability of computer programs under the European Patent Convention is given in (see G 3/08) as a response of the Enlarged Board of Appeal to questions filed by the President of the European Patent Office according to https:// EPC.\nConcerns have been raised by free software campaigners, such as the Free Software Foundation, that the Unified Patent Court will be much more open to patents generally and software patents in particular.\nGermany.\nIn April 2013, the German Parliament adopted a joint motion \"against the growing trend of patent offices to grant patents on software programs\".\nUnited Kingdom.\nUnited Kingdom patent law is interpreted to have the same effect as the European Patent Convention such that \"programs for computers\" are excluded from patentability to the extent that a patent application relates to a computer program \"as such\". Current case law in the UK states that an (alleged) invention will only be regarded as an invention if it provides a contribution that is not excluded and that is also technical. A computer program implementing a business process is therefore not an invention, but a computer program implementing an industrial process may well be.\nIndia.\nIn India, a clause to include software patents was quashed by the Indian Parliament in April 2005. However, following publication of the new guidelines on the examination of computer-related inventions on 19 February 2016, the Office of the Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade marks accepts applications for software patents, as long as the software is claimed in conjunction with a novel hardware. On 30 June 2017, revised guidelines on the examination of computer related inventions were published. This 2017 guidelines provides clarity on patentability of software invention in India, i.e., the claimed computer-related invention needs to be ascertained whether it is of a technical nature involving technical advancement as compared to the existing knowledge or having economic significance or both, and is not subject to exclusion under Section 3 of the Patents Act.\nIn 2019, the Court observed,\nPatent applications in these fields would have to be examined to see if they result in a \u201ctechnical contribution\u201d, it added. Further elaborating on the usage of the term \u2018per se\u2019 in Section 3(k), the Court said,\nWith respect to the term per se, the joint parliamentary committee had expressed the following view:\nJapan.\nSoftware-related inventions are patentable. To qualify as an invention, however, there must be \"a creation of technical ideas utilizing a law of nature\" although this requirement is typically met by \"concretely realising the information processing performed by the software by using hardware resources\". Software-related inventions may be considered obvious if they involve the application of an operation known in other fields, the addition of a commonly known means or replacement by equivalent, the implementation in software of functions which were previously performed by hardware, or the systematisation of known human transactions.\nIn 1999, the allowance rate for business method patents at the Japan Patent Office (JPO) reached an all-time high of roughly 35 percent. Subsequently, the JPO experienced a surge in business method patent filings. This surge was met with a dramatic decrease in the average grant rate of business method patents during the following six years; it lingered around 8 percent between 2003 and 2006 (8 percent is extremely low in comparison to the average of 50 percent across all technical fields). A report from 2012 found that the average grant rate since 2006 for business method patents has risen to the current rate of roughly 25 percent.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand computer programs are excluded from patentability under the Patents Act 2013, but guidelines permitting embedded software were added since the initial Patents Bill. From 2013 computer programs 'as such' are excluded from patentability. The as such wording rules out only those software based patents where novelty lies solely in the software. Similar to Europe.\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, \"schemes, rules and methods of performing mental acts, playing games or doing business, and programs for computers\" are non-patentable inventions under Sec. 22.2 of Republic Act No. 8293, otherwise known as the \"Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines\".\nRussian Federation.\nIn the Russian Federation according to article #1350 of the Civil Code of the Russian Federation the following do not qualify as inventions:\nHowever, the article provides for that the patentability of these objects is excluded only in the case when the application for the grant of a patent for an invention concerns these objects \"as such\".\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa, \"a program for a computer\" is excluded from recognition as an invention by section 25(2) of the Patents Act. However, this restriction applies \"only to the extent to which a patent or an application for a patent relates to that thing as such\" and should not prevent, for example, a product, process, or method which may be implemented on a computer from being an invention, provided that the requirements of novelty and inventiveness are met.\nSouth Korea.\nIn South Korea, software is considered patentable and many patents directed towards \"computer programs\" have been issued. In 2006, Microsoft's sales of its \"Office\" suite were jeopardized due to a possible patent infringement. A ruling by the Supreme Court of Korea found that patents directed towards automatic language translation within software programs were valid and possibly violated by its software.\nThailand.\nAs like as 52(2) of the European Patent Convention (EPC), section 9 of the Thai Patent Act 1999 states that Thai patent law does not include software (or computer program) from patentability because the computer software is not considered as an \u201cinvention\u201d, in which it is not the idea of the product itself. Hence, the software is considered as the manual or instruction that was controlled by users to perform the tasks.\nA software patents law in Thailand has been controversial debates among the economists and national developers\u2019 overtime since there were two significant developments in the international patent law; (1) the European Union's attempt to harmonize national patent laws by the Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and Council on the patentability of computer-implemented inventions, and (2) the US court decision to expand patent protection to business methods. The opinions are divided into two sides. Dr. Tangkitvanich, the IT specialist of Thailand Development Research Institute (TDRI), raised his concern that Thailand is not in a good stage for a software patent as there were several flaws in patent rights. For example, the business method prevention has high tendency to hinder the growth in innovations especially for the infant software companies. Moreover, the software patent may cause monopoly and innovation problems. \u201cMonopoly will thwart innovations of new software products, particularly open-source software\u201d, said by a group of Thai Economists. However, Dr. Hirapruk who is the Director of Software Park Thailand, on the other hand, provides his support on allowing the computer programs to be patentable: \u201cThailand had to provide a patent-right protection for computer software to ensure foreign high-tech investors that software producers' creativity would be secured from violations in Thailand\u201d. As a result, Mr. Sribhibhadh, president of the Association of Thai Software Industry, emphasized that there will need to be a clear overview of the impact on the local industry if Thailand really had to fully implement the patent right protections.\nUnited States.\nThe first software patent was issued June 19, 1968 to Martin Goetz for a data sorting algorithm. The United States Patent and Trademark Office has granted patents that may be referred to as software patents since at least the early 1970s. In Gottschalk v. Benson (1972), the United States Supreme Court ruled that a patent for a process should not be allowed if it would \"wholly pre-empt the mathematical formula and in practical effect would be a patent on the algorithm itself\", adding that \"it is said that the decision precludes a patent for any program servicing a computer. We do not so hold.\" In 1981, the Supreme Court stated that \"a claim drawn to subject matter otherwise statutory does not become nonstatutory simply because it uses a mathematical formula, computer program, or digital computer\" and a claim is patentable if it contains \"a mathematical formula [and] implements or applies the formula in a structure or process which, when considered as a whole, is performing a function which the patent laws were designed to protect\". When a patent application is examined by the USPTO, the initial threshold question (for each claim) is whether the subject matter is eligible, so this is evaluated separately and prior to the other patentability criteria (novelty, nonobviousness). This is notably different than the European approach (see above).\nDue to different treatment of federal patent rights in different parts of the country, in 1982 the U.S. Congress created a new court (the Federal Circuit) to hear patent cases. Following several landmark decisions by this court, by the early 1990s the patentability of software was well established, and in 1996 the USPTO issued Final Computer Related Examination Guidelines stating that \"A \"practical application\" of a computer-related invention is statutory subject matter. This requirement can be discerned from the variously phrased prohibitions against the patenting of abstract ideas, laws of nature or natural phenomena\" (emphasis added).\nThe emergence of the Internet and e-commerce led to many patents being applied for and being granted for business methods implemented in software and the question of whether business methods are statutory subject matter is a separate issue from the question of whether software is. Critics of the Federal Circuit believe that the non-obviousness standard is partly responsible for the large increase in patents for software and business methods. There have been several successful enforcement trials in the United States, some of which are listed in the list of software patents article.\nAn issue with software patent intellectual property rights is typically revolved around deciding whether the company or inventor owns it.\nAs a matter of law, in the United States, the employee generally owns the IP right unless the employee's inventing skills or task to create the invention is the main specific hiring reason or a specific clause in the employment agreement assigning invention rights.\nA work for hire created after 1978 has copyright protection for 120 years from its creation date or 90 years from its publication date whichever comes first. Patent protection for software lasts 20 years.\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia, software cannot be protected by patents, until the implementation of the Law No. 13 Year 2016, Patent Law in Indonesia. To begin evaluation, it is necessary to distinguish whether or not the application is considered an invention. Under Law No. 14 Year 2001, Article 1 of Patent Law in Indonesia, application is considered as an invention if the activity is created to solve a particular conflict or problem in the technology sector. Furthermore, it can be executed in the medium of a new process or product or a developmental enhancement in a product or process. According to Law No. 14 Year 2001, Article 7 of Patent Law in Indonesia., an application can not be patented as an invention if the product or process contradicts or challenges the current regulations and rules, public order or ethics, and religious morality. In addition, if the application is treated as a method or theory in the scientific or mathematics, argued to be any type of living creatures, with the exception of micro-organisms, or is considered as an essential biological measure to produce plants or animals, the application is not a patentable invention.\nAs software contains algorithms, it is deemed to be part of the field of mathematics; hence, software cannot be protected by patents in Indonesia. However, one way for the Indonesian Intellectual Property office to grant software patents in Indonesia is if the application has been patented in other nations, which have ratified the Patent Corporation Treaty (PCT). Therefore, in accordance to the regulations under the Patent Cooperation Treaty, a software will have a regional protection among the participating entities of World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).\nAn important update was enacted on 26 August 2016, the Law No. 13 Year 2016, Patent Law in Indonesia. This update is geared to encourage innovation and growth by augmenting the number of patents within the public and private sector in Indonesia. This update proposes an extension of protection for simple patent, which grants application for patents for new improvements or inventions to existing processes. Intangible inventions can also be patented; under the former law, simple patent is restricted for tangible inventions, which has a positive implication for software patents in Indonesia. Furthermore, these changes provide more protection to the pharmaceutical industry and encourage public access to medical knowledge. This can boost new software ideas and processes within the healthcare and pharmaceutical sector. This update provides a stronger protection of traditional knowledge. In addition, a significant update is the usability of electronic filling and electronic media. Under this new law, application can be made electronically.\nPurpose of patents.\nFor the U.S., the purpose of patents is laid down in the constitutional clause that gives Congress the power to \"promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries;\" (Article I, Section 8, Clause 8). For Europe, there is no similar definition. Commonly four patent justification theories are recognised, as laid down for instance by Machlup in 1958, which include justice to the inventor and benefit for society by rewarding inventors. Disclosure is required in return for the exclusive right, and disclosure may promote further development. However, the value of disclosure should not be overestimated: some inventions could not be kept secret otherwise, and patents also prohibit independent reinventions to be exploited.\nThere is debate as to whether or not these aims are achieved with software patents.\nProposals.\nIn seeking to find a balance, different countries have different policies as to where the boundary between patentable and non-patentable software should lie. In Europe, a number of different proposals for setting a boundary line were put forward during the debate concerning the proposed Directive on the patentability of computer-implemented inventions, none of which were found acceptable by the various parties to the debate. Two particular suggestions for a hurdle that software must pass to be patentable include:\nIn the US, Ben Klemens, a Guest Scholar at the Brookings Institution, proposed that patents should be granted only to inventions that include a physical component that is by itself nonobvious. This is based on Justice William Rehnquist's ruling in the U.S. Supreme Court case of Diamond v. Diehr that stated that \"... insignificant postsolution activity will not transform an unpatentable principle into a patentable process.\" By this rule, one would consider software loaded onto a stock PC to be an abstract algorithm with obvious postsolution activity, while a new circuit design implementing the logic would likely be a nonobvious physical device. Upholding an \"insignificant postsolution activity\" rule as per Justice Rehnquist's ruling would also eliminate most business method patents.\nObviousness.\nA common objection to software patents is that they relate to trivial inventions. A patent on an invention that many people would easily develop independently of one another should not, it is argued, be granted since this impedes development.\nDifferent countries have different ways of dealing with the question of inventive step and non-obviousness in relation to software patents. Europe uses an 'Inventive step test'; see the Inventive step requirement in Europe and, for instance, T 258/03.\nCriticism.\nCompatibility.\nThere are a number of high-profile examples where the patenting of a data exchange standards forced another programming group to introduce an alternative format. For instance, the Portable Network Graphics (PNG) format was largely introduced to avoid the Graphics Interchange Format (GIF) patent problems, and Ogg Vorbis to avoid MP3. If it is discovered that these new suggested formats are themselves covered by existing patents, the final result may be a large number of incompatible formats. Creating such formats and supporting them costs money and creates inconvenience to users.\nComputer-implemented invention (CII).\nUnder the European Patent Convention (EPC), and in particular its Article 52, \"programs for computers\" are not regarded as inventions for the purpose of granting European patents, but this exclusion from patentability only applies to the extent to which a European patent application or European patent relates to a computer program as such. As a result of this partial exclusion, and despite the fact that the EPO subjects patent applications in this field to a much stricter scrutiny when compared to their American counterpart, that does not mean that all inventions including some software are \"de jure\" not patentable.\nOverlap with copyright.\nPatent and copyright protection constitute two different means of legal protection which may cover the same subject matter, such as computer programs, since each of these two means of protection serves its own purpose. Software is protected as works of literature under the Berne Convention. This allows the creator to prevent another entity from copying the program and there is generally no need to register code in order for it to be copyrighted.\nPatents, on the other hand, give their owners the right to prevent others from using the technology defined by the patent claims, even if the technology was independently developed and there was no copying of a software or software code involved. In fact, one of the most recent EPO decisions clarifies the distinction, stating that software is patentable, because it is basically only a technical method executed on a computer, which is to be distinguished from the program itself for executing the method, the program being merely an expression of the method, and thus being copyrighted.\nPatents cover the underlying methodologies embodied in a given piece of software, or the function that the software is intended to serve, independent of the particular language or code that the software is written in. Copyright prevents the direct copying of some or all of a particular version of a given piece of software, but does not prevent other authors from writing their own embodiments of the underlying methodologies. Assuming a dataset meets certain criteria, copyright can also be used to prevent a given set of data from being copied while still allowing the author to keep the contents of said set of data a trade secret.\nWhether and how the numerus clausus principle shall apply to the legal hybrid software to provide a judicious balance between property rights of the title holders and freedom rights of computing professionals and society as a whole, is in dispute.\nDebate.\nThere is a debate over the extent to which software patents should be granted, if at all. Important issues concerning software patents include:\nOpen source software.\nThere is strong dislike in the free software community towards software patents. Much of this has been caused by free software or open source projects terminating when the owners of patents covering aspects of a project demanded license fees that the project could not pay, or was not willing to pay, or offered licenses with terms that the project was unwilling to accept, or could not accept, because it conflicted with the free software license in use.\nSeveral patent holders have offered royalty-free patent licenses for a very small portion of their patent portfolios. Such actions have provoked only minor reaction from the free and open source software communities for reasons such as fear of the patent holder changing their mind or the license terms being so narrow as to have little use. Companies that have done this include Apple, IBM, Microsoft, Nokia, Novell, Red Hat, and Sun (now Oracle).\nIn 2005, Sun Microsystems announced that they were making a portfolio of 1,600 patents available through a patent license called Common Development and Distribution License.\nIn 2006, Microsoft's pledge not to sue Novell Linux customers, openSUSE contributors, and free/open source software developers over patents and the associated collaboration agreement with Novell was met with disdain from the Software Freedom Law Center while commentators from the Free Software Foundation stated that the agreement would not comply with GPLv3. Meanwhile, Microsoft has reached similar agreements with Dell and Samsung, due to alleged patent infringements of the Linux operating system. Microsoft has also derived revenue from Android by making such agreements-not-to-sue with Android vendors.\nUnisys case.\nIn the late 1990s, Unisys claimed to have granted royalty free licenses to hundreds of not-for-profit organizations that used the patented LZW compression method and, by extension, the GIF image format. However, this did not include most software developers and Unisys were \"barraged\" by negative and \"sometimes obscene\" emails from software developers.\nLicensing.\nPatenting software is widespread in the US. As of 2015[ [update]], approximately 500,000 patents had issued in the 23 classes of patents covering \"computer implemented inventions\" (see table).\nMany software companies cross license their patents to each other. These agreements allow each party to practice the other party's patented inventions without the threat of being sued for patent infringement. Microsoft, for example, has agreements with IBM, Sun (now Oracle), SAP, Hewlett-Packard, Siemens, Cisco, Autodesk, and recently Novell. Microsoft cross-licensed its patents with Sun, despite being direct competitors, and with Autodesk even though Autodesk has far fewer patents than Microsoft.\nThe ability to negotiate cross licensing agreements is a major reason that many software companies, including those providing open source software, file patents. As of June 2006, for example, Red Hat had developed a portfolio of 10 issued US patents, 1 issued European patent, 163 pending US patent applications, and 33 pending international PCT (Patent Cooperation Treaty) patent applications. Red Hat uses this portfolio to cross license with proprietary software companies so that they can preserve their freedom to operate.\nOther patent holders are in the business of inventing new \"computer implemented inventions\" and then commercializing the inventions by licensing the patents to other companies that manufacture the inventions. Walker Digital, for example, has generated a large patent portfolio from its research efforts, including the basic patent on the Priceline.com reverse auction technology. US universities also fall into this class of patent owners. They collectively generate about $1.4 billion per year through licensing the inventions they develop to both established and start up companies in all fields of technology, including software.\nStill other patent holders focus on obtaining patents from original inventors and licensing them to companies that have introduced commercial products into the marketplace after the patents were filed. Some of these patent holders, such as Intellectual Ventures, are privately held companies financed by large corporations such as Apple, Microsoft, Intel, Google, etc. Others, such as Acacia Technologies, are publicly traded companies with institutional investors being the primary shareholders.\nThe practice of acquiring patents merely to license them is controversial in the software industry. Companies that have this business model are pejoratively referred to as patent trolls. It is an integral part of the business model that patent licensing companies sue infringers that do not take a license. Furthermore, they may take advantage of the fact that many companies will pay a modest license fee (e.g. $100,000 to $1,000,000) for rights to a patent of questionable validity, rather than pay the high legal fees ($2,000,000 or more) to demonstrate in court that the patent is invalid.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76267", "revid": "8807932", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76267", "title": "Shatranj", "text": "Old form of chess\nShatranj (, ; from Middle Persian ) is an old form of chess, as played in the Sasanian Empire. Its origins lie in the Indian game of chaturanga. Modern chess gradually developed from this game, as it was introduced to Europe by contacts in Muslim Al-Andalus (modern Spain) and in Sicily in the 10th century. In modern Persian, the term is also used as the translation of chess.\nEtymology and history.\nThe name of the game in adjoining countries appears to be derived from chaturanga - chatrang in Persian, shatranj in Arabic, Chanderaki in Tibetan are examples. This suggests that the game, as well as its name, came from India. Also, as will appear, it was believed in Persia that the game arrived there from India. \nThe Persian word ultimately derives from Sanskrit (; ) (: \"four\"; : \"arm\"), referring to the game of the same name: Chaturanga. In Middle Persian the word appears as , with the 'u' lost due to syncope and the 'a' lost to apocope, such as in the title of the text (\"Book of Chess\") from the 7th century AD.\nThe Kar-Namag i Ardashir i Pabagan refers to Ardashir I as a master of the game: \"By the help of Providence, Ardeshir became more victorious and warlike than all, on the polo and the riding-ground, at Chatrang and Vine-Artakhshir, and in several other arts.\" However, \"Karnamak\" contains many fables and legends, and this only establishes the popularity of chatrang at the time of its composition.\nDuring the reign of the later Sassanid king Khosrau I (531\u2013579), a gift from an Indian king (possibly a Maukhari Dynasty king of Kannauj) included a chess game with sixteen pieces of emerald and sixteen of ruby (green vs. red). The game came with a challenge which was successfully resolved by Khosrau's courtiers. This incident, originally referred to in the (c. 620 AD), is also mentioned in Ferdowsi's Shahnama (c. 1010).\nThe rules of chaturanga seen in India today have enormous variation, but all involve four branches (\"angas\") of the army: the horse (knight), the elephant (bishop), the chariot (rook) and the foot soldier (pawn), played on an 8\u00d78 board. (However, there is some variation in the names in the pre-modern game in North India, which is still played in villages. The rook is called either the haathi (elephant) or quila (castle), but the bishop is called the feela, or camel, as the camel-mounted soldier was common.) Shatranj adapted much of the same rules as chaturanga, and also the basic 16-piece structure. In some later variants the darker squares were engraved. The game spread Westwards after the Islamic conquest of Persia and a considerable body of literature on game tactics and strategy was produced from the 8th century onwards. \nIn early Indian chaturanga (c. 500\u2013700), the king could be &lt;dfn id=\"&gt;captured&lt;/dfn&gt; and this ended the game. Persian shatranj (c. 700\u2013800) introduced the idea of warning that the king was under attack (announcing \"check\" in modern terminology). This was done to avoid the early and accidental end of a game. Later the Persians added the additional rule that a king could not be moved into check or left in check. As a result, the king could not be captured, and checkmate was the only decisive way of ending a game.\nWith the spread of Islam, chess diffused into the Maghreb and then to Andalusian Spain. During the Islamic conquest of India (c. 12th century), some forms came back to India as well, as evidenced in the North Indian term \"m\u0101t\" (mate, derivative from Persian ) or the Bengali (pawn, presumed derived from the Arabic ). \nOver the following centuries, chess became popular in Europe, eventually giving rise to modern chess.\nRules.\nShatranj starting setup\nThe initial setup in shatranj was essentially the same as in modern chess; however, the position of the white shah (king), on the right or left side was not fixed. Either the arrangement as in modern chess or as shown in the diagram were possible. In either case, the white and black sh\u0101h would be on the same file. The game was played with these pieces:\nMoves of the ferz\nMoves of the alfil, which can jump over other pieces\nComplementarity of the shatranj pieces' movements, excluding king and pawn.\nPieces are shown on the diagrams and recorded in the notation using the equivalent modern symbols, as in the table above. In modern descriptions of shatranj, the names king, rook, knight and pawn are commonly used for shah, rukh, faras, and baidaq. However, the ferz and alfil are sometimes treated as distinct, and given their own symbols. Specific ferz and alfil symbols have been provisionally accepted for a future version of Unicode.\nThere were also other differences compared to modern chess: Castling was not allowed (it was invented much later). Stalemating the opposing king resulted in a win for the player delivering stalemate. Capturing all one's opponent's pieces apart from the king (\"baring the king\") was a win, unless the opponent could capture the last piece on their next move, which was considered a draw in most places in the Islamic world (except for Medina, where it was a win).\nThe possible movements of the main shatranj pieces, excluding that of the king and pawn, are complementary to one another, and without any omission or redundancy occupy all available squares with respect to the central position of a 5x5 grid, as shown in the figure to the right.\nHistory.\nMiddle Persian literature.\nThree books written in Pahlavi, \"Kar-Namag i Ardashir i Pabagan\", \"Khosrow and ridag\", and \"Wiz\u0101ri\u0161n \u012b \u010dhatrang\" (\"Treatise on Chess\"), also known as the \"Chatrang Nama\" (\"Book of Chess\"), all mention \"chatrang\". In \"K\u0101r-n\u0101mak\" it is said that Ardash\u012br \"with the help of the gods became more victorious and experienced than all others in polo, horsemanship, chess, backgammon, and other arts,\" and in the small treatise on \"Khosrow and ridag\", the latter declares that he is superior to his comrades in chess, backgammon, and \"ha\u0161t p\u0101y\". \nBozorgmehr, the author of \"Wiz\u0101ri\u0161n \u012b \u010dhatrang\", describes how the game of chess was sent as a test to Khosrow I (r. 531\u201379) by the \"king of the Hindus D\u0113vsarm\" with the envoy Takhtar\u012bt\u016bs and how the test was answered by the vizier Bozorgmehr, who in his turn invented the game Backgammon as a test for the Hindus. These three Middle Persian sources do not give any certain indication of the date when chess was introduced into Persia. The mentions of chess in \"Kar-Namag i Ardashir i Pabagan\" and \"Khosrow and ridag\" are simply conventional and may easily represent late Sasanian or even post-Sasanian redactions. \nAccording to Touraj Daryaee, \"Kar-Namag i Ardashir i Pabagan\" is from 6th century. \"Wiz\u0101ri\u0161n \u012b \u010dhatrang\" was written in the 6th century.\nEarly Arabic literature.\nDuring the Islamic Golden Age, many works on shatranj were written, recording for the first time the analysis of opening moves, game problems, the knight's tour, and many more subjects common in modern chess books. Many of these manuscripts are missing, but their content is known due to compilation work done by the later authors.\nThe earliest listing of works on chess is in the \"Fihrist\", a general bibliography produced in 377 AH (988 AD) by Ibn al-Nadim. It includes an entire section on the topic of chess, listing:\nThere is a passage referring to chess in a work said to be by al-Hasan al-Basri, a philosopher from Basra who died in 728 AD. The attribution of authorship is dubious, however.\nPlayer classification.\nAl-Adli as well as As-Suli introduced classifications of players by their playing strength. Both of them specify five classes of players:\nTo determine a player's class, a series or match would be undertaken with a player of a known class without odds. If the player won 7 or more games out of 10, he belonged to a higher class.\nNotable players.\nDuring the reign of the Arab caliphs, shatranj players of highest class were called \"aliyat\" or grandees. There were only a few players in this category including:\nGameplay.\nOpenings.\nMujannah\u2013Mashaikhi opening\nIn the opening, players usually tried to reach a specific position, \"&lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;tabiya&lt;/dfn&gt;\".\nOpenings in shatranj were usually called ta\u02bfb\u012bya (pl. ta\u02bfb\u012by\u0101t), in Arabic, which can be translated as \"battle array\". Due to slow piece development in shatranj, the exact sequence of moves was relatively unimportant. Instead players aimed to reach a specific position, tabiya, mostly ignoring the play of their opponent.\nThe works of al-Adli and as-Suli contain collections of tabiyat. Tabiyat were usually given as position on a half-board with some comments about them. The concrete sequence of moves to reach them was not specified. In his book Al-Lajlaj analyzed some tabiya in detail. He started his analysis from some given opening, for example \"Double Mujannah\" or \"Mujannah\u2013Mashaikhi\", and then continued up to move 40, giving numerous variations.\nPiece values.\nBoth al-Adli and as-Suli provided estimation of piece values in their books on shatranj. They used a monetary system to specify piece values. For example, as-Suli gives piece values in dirhem, the currency in use in his time:\nMansubat.\nDilaram Problem, c. 10th century\nWhite to move and win\nPersian chess masters composed many shatranj problems. Such shatranj problems were called man\u1e63\u016bba (pl. man\u1e63\u016bb\u0101t), . This word can be translated from Arabic as \"arrangement\", \"position\" or \"situation\". Mansubat were typically composed in such a way that a win could be achieved as a sequence of checks. One's own king was usually threatened by immediate checkmate.\nOne Mansuba is the \"Dilaram Problem\". Black threatens immediate checkmate by 1...Ra2#, Ra8#, or either Rb4#. But White can win with a two-rook sacrifice:\n1. Rh8+ Kxh8 2. Bf5+ Kg8 3. Rh8+ Kxh8 4. g7+ Kg8 5. Nh6#\nNote that the alfil (\u2657) moves two squares diagonally, jumping over intermediate pieces; this allows it to jump over the white knight to deliver the discovered check from the second rook with 2.Bf5+. It was said that a nobleman (playing White) wagered his wife Dil\u0101r\u0101m on a chess game and this position arose. She appealed \"Sacrifice your two Rooks, and not me.\"\nShatranj variants.\nThere were also many variants of shatranj, some using larger boards or new pieces. An early large board variant of shatranj was \"complete shatranj\" (\"shatranj al-tamma\") which used a board of 10x10 squares and introduced two pieces called dabbabas (siege engines). Ferdowsi's \"Shahnameh,\" also discusses an alternative version of complete shatranj which uses the camel (shutur) piece instead of the dabbaba.\nThe most popular variant was citadel chess (\"shatranj al-husun\"), which is discussed in many surviving manuscripts, such as in \"Nafa'is al-funun\" (\"Treasury of the Sciences\") by the persian al-Amuli. This variant includes four extra squares on each corner of the board called citadels (husun). If a king reaches one of his opponent's citadels, the game is drawn. Some manuscripts depict the citadels as being attached diagonally, while others depict them as being attached directly beside the two rook squares. Other than these changes, the rules followed classical shatranj. \nThere was also an even larger 10\u00d711 board derivative; the 14th-century Tamerlane chess, or (perfect chess), with a slightly different piece structure. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "76269", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76269", "title": "Comoros/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "76272", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76272", "title": "Glamis Castle", "text": "Castle in Glamis, Angus, Scotland\nGlamis Castle is situated beside the village of Glamis (, ) in Angus, Scotland. It is the home of the Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne, and is open to the public.\nGlamis Castle has been the home of the Lyon family since the 14th century, though the present building dates largely from the 17th century. Glamis Castle was the childhood home of the late Queen Elizabeth, The Queen Mother. Her second daughter, Princess Margaret was born there on 21 August 1930.\nThe castle is protected as a category A listed building, and the grounds are included on the Inventory of Gardens and Designed Landscapes in Scotland, the national listing of significant gardens.\nSetting.\nGlamis is set in the broad and fertile lowland valley of Strathmore, in Forfar, county town of Angus, which lies between the Sidlaw Hills to the south and the Grampian Mountains to the north, approximately inland from the North Sea. The estate surrounding the castle covers more than and, in addition to parks and gardens, produces several cash crops including lumber and beef. There are two streams running through the estate, one of them the Glamis Burn. An arboretum overlooking Glamis Burn features trees from all over the world, many of them rare and several hundred years old.\nHistory.\nThe vicinity of Glamis Castle has prehistoric traces; for example, a noted intricately carved Pictish stone known as the Eassie Stone was found in a creek-bed at the nearby village of Eassie.\nIn 1034, Malcolm II was murdered at Glamis, where there was a Royal Hunting Lodge. In William Shakespeare's play \"Macbeth\" (1603\u201306), the eponymous character resides at Glamis Castle, although the historical King Macbeth (d. 1057) had no connection to the castle.\nBy 1372, a castle had been built at Glamis, since in that year it was granted by Robert II to Sir John Lyon, Thane of Glamis, husband of the king's daughter. Glamis has remained in the Lyon (later Bowes-Lyon) family since this time. The castle was rebuilt as an L-plan tower house in the early 15th century.\nThe title Lord Glamis was created in 1445 for Sir Patrick Lyon (1402\u20131459), grandson of Sir John. John Lyon, 6th Lord Glamis, married Janet Douglas, daughter of the Master of Angus, at a time when James V was feuding with the Douglases. In December 1528, Janet was accused of treason for bringing supporters of the Earl of Angus to Edinburgh. She was then charged with poisoning her husband, Lord Glamis, who had died on 17 September 1528. Eventually, she was accused of witchcraft, and was burned at the stake at Edinburgh on 17 July 1537. James V subsequently seized Glamis, living there for some time.\nIn 1543, Glamis was returned to John Lyon, 7th Lord Glamis. In 1606, Patrick Lyon, 9th Lord Glamis, was created Earl of Kinghorne. He began major works on the castle, commemorated by the inscription \"Built by Patrick, Lord Glamis, and D[ame] Anna Murray\" on the central tower. The English architect Inigo Jones has traditionally been linked to the redesign of the castle, though Historic Scotland consider the King's Master Mason William Schaw a more likely candidate, due to the traditional Scottish style of the architecture.\nDuring the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, soldiers were garrisoned at Glamis. In 1670,\nPatrick Lyon, 3rd Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne, returned to the castle and found it uninhabitable. Restorations took place until 1689, including the creation of a major Baroque garden. John Lyon, 9th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne, succeeded in 1753, and in 1767 he married Mary Eleanor Bowes, heiress to a coal-mining fortune. He set about improving the grounds of the castle in the picturesque style in the 1770s. The south-west wing was rebuilt after a fire in the early 19th century. In the 1920s, a huge fireplace from Gibside, the Bowes-Lyon estate near Gateshead, was removed and placed in Glamis' Billiard Room. The fireplace displays the coat of arms of the Blakiston family; Gibside heiress Elizabeth Blakiston had married Sir William Bowes. Several interiors, including the Dining Room, also date from the 18th and 19th centuries.\nIn 1900, Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon was born, the youngest daughter of Claude Bowes-Lyon, 14th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne and his wife, Cecilia (n\u00e9e Cavendish-Bentinck). She spent much of her childhood at Glamis, which was used during the First World War as a military hospital. She was particularly instrumental in organising the rescue of the castle's contents during a serious fire on 16 September 1916. On 26 April 1923 she married Prince Albert, Duke of York, second son of George V, at Westminster Abbey. Their second daughter, Princess Margaret, was born at Glamis Castle in 1930.\nSince 1987, an illustration of the castle has featured on the reverse side of ten pound notes issued by the Royal Bank of Scotland. Glamis is currently the home of Simon Bowes-Lyon, 19th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne, who succeeded to the earldom in 2016.\nStatuary.\nIn the 17th century four \"brazen\" statues were placed on the approach avenue: Charles I in boots; James VI in a stole; Charles II in Roman dress; and James VII as in his Whitehall portrait. The first two were sculpted by Arnold Quellin.\nLegends and tales.\nThe Monster of Glamis.\nThe most famous legend connected with the castle is that of the Monster of Glamis, a hideously deformed child born to the family. Some accounts came from singer and composer Virginia Gabriel, who stayed at the castle in 1870. In the story, the monster was kept in the castle all his life and his suite of rooms bricked up after his death. Another monster is supposed to have dwelt in Loch Calder near the castle.\nAn alternative version of the legend is that to every generation of the family a vampire child is born and is walled up in that room.\nThere is an old story that guests staying at Glamis once hung towels from the windows of every room in a bid to find the bricked-up suite of the monster. When they looked at it from outside, several windows were apparently towel-less. Though this is more likely due to the owners removing them in order so that the guests would not find the rooms, according to several relatives of the family.\nThe legend of the monster may have been inspired by the true story of the Ogilvies.\nEarl Beardie.\nA legend tells of the 15th-century \"Earl Beardie,\" who has been identified with both Alexander Lyon, 2nd Lord Glamis (died 1486), and with Alexander Lindsay, 4th Earl of Crawford (died 1453). Several versions exist, but they all involve \"Earl Beardie\" playing cards. However, it was the sabbath, and either his hosts refused to play, or a servant advised him to stop. Lord Beardie became so furious that he claimed that he would play until doomsday, or with the Devil himself, depending on the version. A stranger then appears at the castle and joins Lord Beardie in a game of cards. The stranger is identified with the Devil, who takes Earl Beardie's soul and, in some versions, condemns the Earl to play cards until doomsday.\nOther traditions.\nAccording to the official website for Glamis Castle, in 1034, Malcolm II was mortally wounded in a nearby battle and taken to a Royal Hunting Lodge, which sat at the site of the present castle, where he died.\nDescription.\nThe towers in front of the castle each measure in diameter and are about high, each having a modern parapet. The walls are thick.\nThere is a small chapel within the castle with seating for 46 people. The story given to visitors by castle tour guides states that one seat in the chapel is always reserved for the \"White Lady\" (supposedly a ghost which inhabits the castle), thought to be Janet Douglas, Lady Glamis. According to the guides, the chapel is still used regularly for family functions, but no one is allowed to sit in that seat. \nArchives.\nThe clock tower houses the castle's archives which include a wide range of historical material relating to the castle and the Bowes and Lyon families. These include a papal bull and the memoirs of Mary Eleanor Bowes. The Glamis archives have a close connection with the archives at the University of Dundee, and researchers who wish to consult material held in the Glamis Castle Archive do so in the search room at the university.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the British children\u2019s television series \"Thomas &amp; Friends\", Lord Callan\u2019s castle is based on Glamis Castle. \nThe cover design of the 1982 Yoko Tsuno album \"La Proie et l'ombre\", by Roger Leloup, prominently features the fictional \"Loch Castle\", which is drawn as being near-identical to Glamis Castle.\nIn \"Star Trek The Next Generation\", season 7 episode 14, \"Sub Rosa\", Glamis Castle is mentioned by the planet's Governor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76273", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76273", "title": "Lake Constance", "text": "Lake in Germany, Switzerland and Austria\nLake Constance (, ) refers to three bodies of water on the Rhine at the northern foot of the Alps: Upper Lake Constance (\"Obersee\"), Lower Lake Constance (\"Untersee\"), and a connecting stretch of the Rhine, called the Seerhein (lit.\u2009'Rhine of the lake(s)'). These waterbodies lie within the Lake Constance Basin () in the Alpine Foreland through which the Rhine flows. The nearby \"Mindelsee\" is not considered part of Lake Constance.\nThe lake is situated where Germany, Switzerland, and Austria meet. Its shorelines lie in the German states of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg and Bavaria; the Swiss cantons of St. Gallen, Thurgau, and Schaffhausen; and the Austrian state of Vorarlberg. The actual locations of the country borders within the lake are disputed, with Austria, Germany and Switzerland all holding different opinions on the matter.\nThe Alpine Rhine forms, in its original course (Alter Rhein), the Austro-Swiss border and flows into the lake from the south. The High Rhine flows westbound out of the lake and forms (with the exception of the Canton of Schaffhausen, Rafzerfeld and Basel-Stadt) the German-Swiss border as far as to the city of Basel. The Leiblach forms the Austria\u2013Germany border east of the lake.\nThe most populous towns on the Upper Lake are Constance (), Friedrichshafen, Bregenz, Lindau, \u00dcberlingen and Kreuzlingen. The largest town on the Lower Lake is Radolfzell. The largest islands are Reichenau in the Lower Lake, and Lindau and Mainau in the Upper Lake. Bodanr\u00fcck, a large peninsula, separates the Upper and Lower Lake.\nWhile in English and in the Romance languages, the lake is named after the city of Constance, the German name derives from the village of Bodman (municipality of Bodman-Ludwigshafen), in the northwesternmost corner of the lake.\nDescription.\nLake Constance is located along the Rhine between the Alpine Rhine, its main tributary, and the High Rhine, its outflow. It is the third largest freshwater lake by surface area in Central and Western Europe (and the second largest in volume), after Lake Geneva and (in surface area) Lake Balaton.\nIt is long, and, nearly at its widest point. It covers about , and is above sea level. Its greatest depth is , exactly in the middle of the Upper Lake. Its volume is about .\nThe lake has two parts. The main east section, called Obersee or \"Upper Lake\", covers about , including its northwestern arm, the \u00dcberlinger See (), and the smaller west section, called Untersee or \"Lower Lake\", with an area of about .\nThe connection between these two lakes is the Seerhein (lit.: \"Rhine of the Lake(s)\"). Geographically, usually it is not considered to be part of the lake, but a very short river.\nThe Lower Lake Constance is loosely divided into three sections around the Island of Reichenau. The two German parts, the Gnadensee (lit.: \"Lake Mercy\") north of the island and north of the peninsula of Mettnau (the Markelfinger Winkel), and the Zeller See, south of Radolfzell and to the northwest of the Reichenau island, and the mainly Swiss Rheinsee (lit.: \"Lake Rhine\") \u2013 not to be mistaken for the \"Seerhein\" (lit.: \"Rhine of the Lake(s)\") at its start \u2013 to the south of the island and with its southwestern arm leading to its effluent in Stein am Rhein.\nThe water of the regulated Alpine Rhine flows into the lake in the southeast near Bregenz, Austria, then through the Upper Lake Constance hardly targeting the \"\u00dcberlinger See\", into the \"Seerhein\" in the town of Konstanz, then through the \"Rheinsee\" virtually without feeding both German parts of the Lower Lake, and finally feeds the start of the High Rhine in Swiss town Stein am Rhein.\nThe lake itself is an important source of drinking water for southwestern Germany.\nThe culminating point of the lake's drainage basin is the Swiss peak Piz Russein of the T\u00f6di massif of the Glarus Alps at above sea level. It starts with the creek \"Aua da Russein\" (lit.: \"Water of the Russein\").\nHistory.\nLake Constance was formed by the Rhine Glacier during the Quaternary glaciation ice age and is a \"Zungenbecken\" or Tongue lake. After the end of the last glacial period, about 10,000 years ago, the Obersee and Untersee still formed a single lake. The downward erosion of the High Rhine caused the lake level to gradually sink and a sill, the \"Konstanzer Schwelle\", to emerge.\nThe Rhine, the Bregenzer Ach, and the Dornbirner Ach carry sediments from the Alps to the lake, thus gradually decreasing the depth and reducing the extension of the lake in the southeast.\nIn antiquity, the two lakes had different names; later, for reasons which are unknown, they came to have the same name.\nIn the 19th century, there were five different local time zones around Lake Constance. Constance, belonging to the Grand Duchy of Baden, adhered to Karlsruhe time, Friedrichshafen used the time of the Duchy of W\u00fcrttemberg, in Lindau, the Bavarian Munich time was observed, and Bregenz used Prague time, while the Swiss shore used Berne time. One would have needed to travel only to visit five time zones. Given the amount of trade and traffic over Lake Constance, this led to serious confusion. Public clocks in harbors used three different clock faces, depending on the destinations offered by the boat companies. In 1892, all German territories used CET, the Austrian railways had already introduced CET the previous year and Switzerland followed in 1894. Because traffic timetables had not been yet updated, CET became the sole valid time around and on Lake Constance in 1895.\nName.\nThe earliest recorded reference to the lakes is by Roman geographer Pomponius Mela around AD\u00a043, calling the upper lake \"Lacus Venetus\" and the lower lake \"Lacus Acronius\", the Rhine passing through both. Around AD\u00a075, the naturalist Pliny the Elder called them both \"Lacus Raetiae Brigantinus\" after the main Roman town on the lake, \"Brigantium\" (later Bregenz). This name is associated with the Celtic Brigantii who lived here, although it is not clear whether the place was named after the tribe or the inhabitants of the region were named after their main settlement. Ammianus Marcellinus later used the form \"Lacus Brigantiae\".\nThe current German name of \"Bodensee\" derives from the place name Bodman, which probably originally derived from the Old High German \"bodamon\" which meant \"on the soils\", indicating a place on level terrain by the lake. This place, situated at the west end of Lake \u00dcberlingen (\"\u00dcberlinger See\"), had a more supraregional character for a certain period in the early Middle Ages as a Frankish imperial palace (\"K\u00f6nigspfalz\"), Alamannian ducal seat and mint, which is why the name may have been transferred to the lake (\"lake, by which Bodman is situated\" = \"Bodmansee\"). From 833 or 834, in Latin sources, the name appears in its Latinised form \"lacus potamicus\". Therefore, the name actually derived from the Bodman \"Pfalz\" (Latinized as \"Potamum\") was wrongly assumed by monastic scholars like Walahfrid Strabo to be derived from the Greek word \"potamos\" for \"river\" and meant \"river lake\". They may also have been influenced by the fact that the Rhine flowed through the lake.\nWolfram von Eschenbach describes it in Middle High German as the \"Bodemensee\" or \"Bodemsee\" which has finally evolved into the present German name, \"Bodensee\". The name may be linked to that of the Bodanr\u00fcck, the hill range between Lake \u00dcberlingen and the Lower Lake, and the history of the House of Bodman.\nThe German name of the lake, \"Bodensee\", has been adopted by many other languages, for example: Dutch: \"Bodenmeer\", Danish: \"Bodens\u00f8en\", Norwegian: \"Bodensj\u00f8en\", Swedish: \"Bodensj\u00f6n\", Finnish: \"Bodenj\u00e4rvi\", Russian: \"\u0411\u043e\u0434\u0435\u043d\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0435 \u043e\u0437\u0435\u0440\u043e\", Polish: \"Jezioro Bode\u0144skie\", Czech: \"Bodamsk\u00e9 jezero\", Slovak: \"Bodamsk\u00e9 jazero\", Hungarian: \"Bodeni-t\u00f3\", Serbo-Croatian: \"Bodensko jezero\", Albanian: \"Liqeni i Bodenit\".\nAfter the Council of Constance in the 15th century, the alternative name \"Lacus Constantinus\" was used in the (Roman Catholic) Romance language area. This name, which had been attested as early as 1187 in the form \"Lacus Constantiensis\", came from the town of Konstanz at the outflow of the Rhine from the Obersee, whose original name, Constantia, was in turn derived from the Roman emperor, Constantius Chlorus (around 300 AD). Hence the French: \"Lac de Constance\", Italian: \"Lago di Costanza\", Portuguese: \"Lago de Constan\u00e7a\", Spanish: \"Lago de Constanza\", Romanian: \"Lacul Constan\u021ba\", Greek: \"\u039b\u03af\u03bc\u03bd\u03b7 \u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 \u039a\u03c9\u03bd\u03c3\u03c4\u03b1\u03bd\u03c4\u03af\u03b1\u03c2 \u2013 Limni tis Konstantias\". The Arabic, \u0628\u062d\u064a\u0631\u0629 \u0643\u0648\u0646\u0633\u062a\u0627\u0646\u0633 \"bu\u0127aira Konstans\" and the Turkish, \"Konstanz g\u00f6l\u00fc\", probably go back to the French form of the name. Even in Romance-influenced English the name \"Lake Constance\" gained a foothold and was then exported into other languages such as Hebrew: \u05d9\u05de\u05ea \u05e7\u05d5\u05e0\u05e1\u05d8\u05e0\u05e5 \"yamat Konstanz\" and Swahili: \"Ziwa la Konstanz\". In many languages both forms exist in parallel e.g. Romansh: \"Lai da Constanza\" and \"Lai Bodan\", Esperanto: \"Konstanca Lago\" and \"Bodenlago\".\nThe poetic name, \"Swabian Sea\", was adopted by authors of the early modern era and the Enlightenment from ancient authors, possibly Tacitus. However, this assumption was based on an error (similar to that of the Teutoburg Forest and the Taunus): the Romans sometimes used the name \"Mare Suebicum\" for the Baltic Sea, not Lake Constance. In times when the Romans had located the so-called \"Suebi\", then an Elbe Germanic tribe near a sea, this was understandable. The authors of the Early Modern Period overlooked this and adopted the name for the largest lake in the middle of the former Duchy of Swabia, which also included parts of today's Switzerland. Today the name Swabian Sea (\"Schw\u00e4bisches Meer\") is only used jocularly as a hyperbolic term for Lake Constance.\nKey facts.\nNo Paleolithic finds have been made in the immediate vicinity of the lake, because the region of Lake Constance was long covered by the Rhine Glacier. The discovery of stone tools (microliths) indicate that hunters and gatherers of the Mesolithic period (Middle Stone Age, 8,000\u20135,500 BC) frequented the area without settling, however. Only hunting camps have been confirmed. The earliest Neolithic farmers, who belonged to the Linear Pottery culture, also left no traces behind, because the Alpine foreland lay away from the routes along which they had spread during the 6th millennium BC. This changed only in the middle and late Neolithic when shore settlements were established, the so-called pile dwelling and wetland settlements, which have now been uncovered mainly on Lake \u00dcberlingen, the Constance Hopper and on the Obersee. At Unteruhldingen, a pile dwelling village has been reconstructed, and now forms an open air museum.\nIn 2015, a 20\u00a0km line of about 170 man-made under-water stone mounds dated in the Neolithic period or early Bronze Age was discovered on the south-west shore of the lake between Bottighofen and Romanshorn.\nGrave finds from Singen am Hohentwiel date to the beginning of the Early Bronze Age and shore settlements were repeatedly built during the Neolithic Period and the Bronze Age (up to 800 BC). During the following Iron Age the settlement history is interrupted. The settlement of the shore of Lake Constance during the Hallstatt period is attested by grave mounds, which today are usually found in forests where they have been protected from the destruction by agriculture. Since the late Hallstatt period, the peoples living on Lake Constance are referred to as the Celts. During the La T\u00e8ne period from 450 BC, the population density decreases, as can be deduced partly due from the fact that no more grave mounds were built. For the first time, written reports on Lake Constance have survived. Thus, we learn that the Helvetians settled by the lake in the south, the Rhaetians in the area of the Alpine Rhine Valley and the Vindelici in the north-east. The most important places on the lake were Bregenz (Celtic \"Brigantion\") and today's Constance.\nIn the course of the Roman Alpine campaign of 16/15 BC, the Lake Constance region was integrated into the Roman Empire. During the campaign, there was also supposed to have been a battle on Lake Constance. The geographer, Pomponius Mela, makes the first mention in 43 AD of Lake Constance as two lakes \u2013 the \"Lacus Venetus\" (Upper Lake) and the \"Lacus Acronius\" (Untersee) \u2013 with the Rhine flowing through both. Pliny the Elder referred to Lake Constance as \"Lacus Brigantinus\" for the first time. The most important Roman site was Bregenz, which soon became subject to Roman municipal law and later became the seat of the Prefect of the Lake Constance fleet. The Romans were also in Lindau, but settled only on the hills around Lindau as the lakeshore was swampy. Other Roman towns were \"Constantia\" (Constance) and \"Arbor Felix\" (Arbon).\nAfter the borders of the Roman Empire were drawn back to the Rhine boundary in the 3rd century BC, the Alemanni gradually settled on the north shore of Lake Constance and, later, on the south bank as well. After the introduction of Christianity, the cultural significance of the region grew as a result of the founding of Reichenau Abbey and the Bishopric of Constance. Under the rule of the Hohenstaufens, Imperial Diets (\"Reichstage\") were held by Lake Constance. In Constance, too, a treaty was drawn up between the Hohenstaufen emperor and the Lombard League. Lake Constance also played an important role as a trading post for goods being traded between German and Italian states.\nDuring the Thirty Years' War, there were various conflicts over the control of the region during the Lake War (1632\u20131648).\nAfter the War of the Second Coalition (1798\u20131802), which also affected the region and during which Austrian and French flotillas operated on Lake Constance, there was a reorganisation of state relationships.\nGeography.\nDivisions.\nLake Constance is located in the foothills of the Alps. The shore length of both main lakes is long. Of this, are located in Germany (Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg , Bavaria ), run through Austria and through Switzerland. If the upper and lower lakes are combined, Lake Constance has a total area of , the third largest lake in Central Europe by area after Lake Balaton () and Lake Geneva (). It is also the second largest by water volume () after Lake Geneva () and extends for over between Bregenz and Stein am Rhein. Its catchment area is around , and reaching as far south as Lago di Lei in Italy.\nThe area of the Obersee, or Upper Lake, is . It extends from Bregenz to Bodman-Ludwigshafen for over and is wide between Friedrichshafen and Romanshorn. At its deepest point between Fischbach and Uttwil, it is deep.\nThe three small bays on the Vorarlberg shore have their own names: the Bay of Bregenz, off Hard and Fu\u00dfach is the Bay of Fussach and, west of that is the Wetterwinkel. Farther west, now in Switzerland, is the Bay of Rorschach. To the north, on the Bavarian side, is the Bay of Reutin. The railway embankment from the mainland to the island of Lindau and the motorway bridge over the lake border the so-called Little Lake (\"Kleiner See\"), which is located between the Lindau village of Aeschach and the island.\nThe northwestern, finger-shaped arm of the Obersee is called \u00dcberlinger See (or \u00dcberlingersee in Swiss Standard German), or Lake \u00dcberlingen. It is sometimes regarded as a separate lake, the boundary between Lake \u00dcberlingen and the rest of the Upper Lake runs approximately along the line between the southeast tip of Bodanr\u00fcck (the \"H\u00f6rnle\", which belongs to the town of Konstanz) and Meersburg. The Constance Hopper lies between the German and Swiss shores east of Konstanz.\nThe Obersee and Untersee are connected by the Seerhein.\nThe Untersee, or Lower Lake, which is separated from the Obersee and from its north-west arm, the \u00dcberlinger See, by the large peninsula of Bodanr\u00fcck, has an area of . It is strongly characterised and divided into different areas by end moraines, various glacial snouts and medial moraines. These various areas of the lake have their own names. North of Reichenau Island is the Gnadensee. West of the island of Reichenau, between the peninsula of H\u00f6ri and the peninsula of Mettnau is the Zeller See (or Zellersee in Swiss Standard German), or Lake Zell. North of the peninsula and swamp land Mettnau lies the lake part Markelfinger Winkel. The drumlins of the southern Bodanr\u00fcck continue along the bed of these northern parts of the lake. South of the Reichenau, from Gottlieben to Eschenz, stretches the \"Rheinsee\" (lit.: \"Rhine Lake\") with strong Rhine currents in places. Previously this lake part was named Lake Bernang after the village of Berlingen. On most of the maps the name of the \"Rheinsee\" is not shown, because this place is best suited for the name of the Untersee.\nEmergence and future.\nThe present-day shape of Lake Constance has resulted from the combination of several factors:\nLike any glacial lake, Lake Constance will also silt up by sedimentation. This process can best be observed at the mouths of the larger rivers, especially that of the Alpine Rhine. The silting up process is accelerated by ever-increasing erosion by the Rhine and the associated reduction in the level of the lake.\nTributaries.\nThe main tributary of Lake Constance is the Alpine Rhine. The Alpine Rhine and the Seerhein do not mix greatly with the waters of the lake and flow through the lakes along courses that change relatively little. There are also numerous smaller tributaries (236 in all). The most important tributaries of the Obersee are (counterclockwise) the Dornbirner Ach, Bregenzer Ach, Leiblach, Argen, Schussen, Rotach, Brunnisach, Seefelder Aach, Stockacher Aach, Salmsacher Aach, the Aach near Arbon, Steinach, Goldach and the Old Rhine. The outflow of the Obersee is the Seerhein, which in turn is the main tributary of the Untersee. The most important tributary of the Untersee is the Radolfzeller Aach. The source of the Radolfzeller Aach is the Aachtopf, a karst spring whose waters mostly derive from the Danube Sinkhole. Therefore, the Danube is indirectly also a tributary of the Rhine.\nBecause the Alpine Rhine brings with it drift from the mountains and deposits this material as sediment, the Bay of Bregenz will silt up in a few centuries time. The silting up of the entire Lake Constance is estimated to take another ten to twenty thousand years.\nOutflows, evaporation, water extraction.\nThe outflow of the Untersee is the High Rhine with the Rhine Falls at Schaffhausen. Both the average precipitation of 0.45\u00a0km3/a and evaporation which averages 0.29\u00a0km3/a cause a net change in the level of Lake Constance that is less when compared to the influence of the inflows and outflows. Further quantities of lake water are extracted by municipal waterworks around the lake and the water company of Bodensee-Wasserversorgung.\nIslands.\nIn Lake Constance there are ten islands that are larger than .\nBy far the largest is the island of Reichenau in the Untersee, which belongs to the municipality of Reichenau. The former abbey of Reichenau is a UNESCO World Heritage Site due to its three early and highly medieval churches. The island is also known for its intensive cultivation of fruit and vegetables.\nThe island of Lindau is located in the east of the Obersee, and is the second largest island. On it is the old town and main railway station of Lindau.\nThe third largest island is Mainau in the southeast of Lake \u00dcberlingen. The owners, the family of Bernadotte, have set up the island as a tourist attraction and created botanical gardens and wildlife enclosures.\nRelatively large, but uninhabited and inaccessible because of their status as nature reserves, are two islands off the Wollmatinger Ried: the Triboldingerbohl which has an area of and Mittler or Langbohl which is just in area.\nSmaller islands in the Obersee are:\nIn the Untersee are:\nPeninsulas.\nIn Lake Constance there are several peninsulas which vary greatly in size:\nShore.\nThe shores of Lake Constance consist mainly of gravel. In some places there are also sandy beaches, such as the Rohrspitz in the Austrian section of the lake, the Langenargen and Marienschlucht.\nAccording to the data of the International Water Protection Commission for the Lake Constance, the approximate shore length is (see Coastline paradox). The inflow of water is constantly changing, mainly due to rain and the snow melt in the Alps. Its average surface area is about \u00a0NN (in Switzerland the absolute value is slightly higher in m above sea level). The more or less regular seasonal fluctuations in the water level also lead to slight variations in shore length and differences in the shore zone habitats (depending on high and low water).\nTransportation.\nRoad.\nRoads westbound Bundesstra\u00dfe 33 (B 33, highway), Bundesautobahn 81 (A\u00a081), at Stockach, Konstanz: Bundesautobahn 98 (A\u00a098), Switzerland: Autobahn 7 (A7), Autobahn 1 (A 1), Autobahn 23 (A 23) and eastbound at Bregenz Rheintal/Walgau Autobahn (A\u00a014), at Lindau Bundesautobahn 96 (A\u00a096), Bundesstra\u00dfe 31 (B\u00a031)\nShip / Ferry.\nThere are eight main harbors offering boat services across the Upper Lake:\nAdditionally, car ferries link Romanshorn to Friedrichshafen, and Konstanz to Meersburg. Between 1869 and 1976, there used to be train ferries across the lake.\nSeveral smaller harbors on the Upper Lake offer boat trips along the German or Swiss coast (with one continuing over the Old Rhine to Rheineck).\nThe harbour in Konstanz is also served by the \"Schweizerische Schifffahrtsgesellschaft Untersee und Rhein\" (URh), which operates via the \"Seerhein\", Lower Lake and High Rhine to Schaffhausen. It docks at the harbours of Kreuzlingen, Konstanz, Gottlieben, Ermatingen, Reichenau, Mannenbach, Berlingen, Gaienhofen, Steckborn, Hemmenhofen, Wangen, Mammern, \u00d6hningen, Stein am Rhein, Diessenhofen, B\u00fcsingen and Schaffhausen. Radolfzell and Iznang are also linked by a boat line over the Lower Lake (to Konstanz).\nRail.\nA network of several railway lines surrounds the lake. The lines are operated by regional train services (S-Bahn, RegioExpress, Regional-Express) spreading over four countries (Austria, Germany, Liechtenstein, Switzerland). In Switzerland, they belong to S-Bahn St. Gallen and trains are operated by THURBO (Swiss Federal Railways, SBB), S\u00fcdostbahn (SOB) and Appenzell Railways (AB). The so-called belt railway () along the northern shore is operated by DB Regio and SBB GmbH. In Austria and Liechtenstein, train services are operated by Austrian Federal Railways (\u00d6BB) for the Vorarlberg S-Bahn. Regional train services around Lake Constance are marketed as Bodensee S-Bahn.\nRailway stations close to harbours are, among others: Bregenz Hafen, Friedrichshafen Hafen, Konstanz, Kreuzlingen Hafen, Lindau-Insel, Radolfzell, Romanshorn and Rorschach Hafen.\nLong-distance trains (RJ/RJX, EC/ECE, IC (DB)/IC (SBB), IR, IRE) link larger lakeside railway stations (e.g., Bregenz, Friedrichshafen Stadt, Konstanz, Lindau-Reutin, Romanshorn) with major cities.\nAir.\nTwo airports are located near the lake's shores: Friedrichshafen Airport (Germany) and St. Gallen\u2013Altenrhein Airport (Switzerland). Zeppelin NT offers touristic zeppelin flights around Lake Constance departing from Friedrichshafen Airport.\nClimate.\nThe climate of the Lake Constance area is characterised by mild temperatures with moderate gradients, thanks to the balancing and retarding effect of the large body of water. \nIt has a subtropical microclimate, which allows the cultivation of some exotic fruits and trees. Constance counts 2069 sunshine hours a year and is therefore considered one of the sunniest cities in Germany.\nWinters are generally short and mild, although night temperatures can fall under 0\u00b0C, especially from December to February. Typically day temperatures range between +5 and +12\u00b0C, while nights with +1 to +8\u00b0C on average stay cold, though mostly without long and severe frosts.\nThe F\u00f6hn, a warm wind from the Mediterranean Sea, that regularly blows through the Alps, can cause temperatures between 15 and 20\u00b0C with sunshine for several days, while on the other hand fog creates a few cold days between 1 and 5\u00b0C each year. Generally, Lake Constance is affected more by fog than neighboring regions more inland. \nSpring goes from March to May and is usually sunny, with day temperatures between 15 and 22\u00b0C but still relatively cold water. This is also resulting in still cold night temperatures that range between 4\u00b0C in March and 12\u00b0C in May only. \nAs the lake temperature heats up by the increasing warm days, the nights are also becoming milder, though moderated a little bit by the height and lake. This results in average morning lows of 16-18\u00b0C during the high summer months. Lake Constance counts one of the highest amount of tropical nights in Germany (lowest temperature at 20\u00b0C or more). \nThe days in Summers (June-September) are warm to hot with day temperatures of 26-33\u00b0C on average, decreasing to around 20\u00b0C until the end of September. Humidity levels raise noticeable and temperatures often move up to 35\u00b0C between June and August. This increases the heat index, causing Lake Constance to have a stressful climate.\nThe region receives most of its sunny days during high summer. In the recent years, in 2018 and 2022, the water levels fall to new record lows due to weeks without significant rain. On the other hand, the closeness to the Alps can cause thunderstorms in the evenings that sometimes occur out of nowhere.\nWhile the official bathing season ends in September, the average lake temperature stays around 20\u00b0C until October. Autumn is generally the time when Lake Constance starts to experience more foggy mornings again, but the day temperatures still range between 21 in the beginning and 10-12\u00b0C at the end of the season. Night temperatures fall from 13\u00b0C in September to an average of 5\u00b0C in November.\nLake Constance is one of the best known wine growing regions in Germany and experiences several outdoor events during harvest time in autumn. \nLake Constance is also considered to be a risky and challenging lake for water sports because of the danger of gusty winds which can whip up waves as the weather changes suddenly. The most dangerous wind is the f\u00f6hn, a warm down-slope wind from the Alps, which spreads out across the water, especially through the Alpine Rhine Valley and can generate waves several metres high.\nSimilarly dangerous for those unfamiliar with the area, are the sudden stormy gusts of wind during summer thunderstorms. They constantly claim victims from the water sports fraternity. During a thunderstorm in July 2006, waves reached heights of up to 3.50 metres.\nFor these reasons, there is a storm warning system in all three neighbouring countries. For storm warning purposes, Lake Constance is divided into three warning regions (west, centre and east). Warnings can be issued for each region independently. A \"high winds\" warning will be issued when squalls are expected of between 25 and 33\u00a0knots or registering force 6 to 8 on the Beaufort scale. A gale warning announces the likelihood of gale-force winds, i.e. those at speeds as of 34 knots or more or force 8 on the Beaufort scale. In order to issue these warnings, orange-coloured flashing lights are installed around the lake, which flash at a frequency of 40 times per minute for high winds or 90 times per minute for gales. It can happen that, due to the differently regulated responsibilities and assessments, a gale warning is issued on the Swiss side of the Obersee, but not on the German or Austrian shores, and vice versa. Ships and ferries on Lake Constance indicate a gale warning by hoisting a \"Sturmballon\" (\"storm ball\") up the mast.\nFreeze over.\nA one-hundred year event is the freezing over of Lake Constance, when the Lower Lake and the Upper Lake are completely frozen over so that people can safely cross the lake on foot. The last so-called \"Seegfr\u00f6rne\" (Alemannic) event was in 1963. The following is a list of years in which Lake Constance froze over partially or completely:\nCertain parts of the lake freeze over more frequently, mainly due to their shallow depth of water and shelter, as is the case, for example, of the so-called Markelfinger Winkel between the municipality of Markelfingen and the Mettnau peninsula.\nInternational borders.\nThe lake lies where the countries of Austria, Germany, and Switzerland meet. Beyond areas less than deep, considered to be under the jurisdiction of the nearest country, there is no legally binding agreement as to where the borders lie between the three countries. However, Switzerland holds the view that the border runs through the middle of the lake, Austria is of the opinion that the contentious area belongs to all the states on its banks, which is known as a \"condominium\", and Germany holds an ambiguous opinion. Legal questions pertaining to ship transport and fishing are regulated in separate treaties.\nDisputes occasionally arise. One concerns a houseboat which was moored in two states (ECJ c. 224/97 Erich Ciola); another concerns the rights to fish in the Bay of Bregenz. In relation to the latter, an Austrian family was of the opinion that it alone had the right to fish in broad portions of the bay. However, this was accepted neither by the Austrian courts nor by the organs and courts of the other states.\nEcology.\nFlora.\nUntil the 19th century, Lake Constance was a natural lake. Since then, nature has been heavily influenced by clearing and the cultivation of much of the land around its shores. However, some near-natural areas have been largely conserved, especially in the nature reserves, or were re-naturalised. As a result, the Lake Constance region has some unusual ecological features. These include the large forested area on the Bodanr\u00fcck, the occurrence of marsh gentian and orchids of the genera \"Dactylorhiza\" and \"Orchis\" in the Wollmatinger Ried, and the Siberian iris (\"Iris sibirica\") in the Eriskircher Ried, which was therefore given its own name. One unique species among the local flora is the Lake Constance forget-me-not (\"Myosotis rehsteineri\"), whose habitat is restricted to undisturbed limestone gravel beaches.\nFauna.\nBirds.\nLake Constance is also the home of numerous bird species, many of which nest in its nature reserves, such as the Wollmatinger Ried or the Mettnau peninsula. 412 species have so far been recorded.\nSongbirds.\nThe ten most common breeding bird species at Lake Constance according to a 2000\u20132003 survey in descending order are the: blackbird, chaffinch, house sparrow, great tit, blackcap, starling, robin, chiffchaff, greenfinch, and blue tit.\nWaterfowl.\nIn spring, the Lake Constance is an important breeding ground, especially for the coot and great crested grebe. Typical waterfowl include the: shoveler, goldeneye, goosander, pochard, grey heron, pintail, tufted duck and mallard.\nIn December 2014, 1,389 cormorant were counted. The International Lake Constance Fishery Association (IBF) estimates the food requirements of the cormorants on Lake Constance at 150 tonnes of fish annually.\nOverwintering.\nLake Constance is an important overwintering area for around 250,000 birds. annually. Bird species such as the dunlin, the curlew and the lapwing overwinter at Lake Constance. In the middle of December 2014 there were 56,798 heron, 51,713 coot and 43,938 pochard. In November/December are about 10,000 to 15,000 red-crested pochard and 10,000 great crested grebe on Lake Constance.\nMigration.\nDuring migration in late autumn there are also numerous loons on the lake (black-throated and red-throated loon, as well as a few great northern loons). Lake Constance is also very important as a staging post during the bird migration. Bird migration is often inconspicuous and most noticeable when there are special weather conditions that make day migration obvious. Only where there is a prolonged spell of widespread low-pressure is it common to observe the congestion of large groups of migratory birds. This can often be observed in autumn on the Eriskircher Ried on the northern shore of Lake Constance. This is where broad front migration converges on the lake and birds then try to move along the shore towards the northwest. The importance of Lake Constance as an important area for resting and overwintering is underlined by the Max Planck Institute for Ornithology's Radolfzell Bird Observatory (\"Vogelwarte Radolfzell\"), which is the bird ringing centre for the German states of Bavaria, Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Berlin, Rhineland-Palatinate and the Saarland as well as for Austria, and which researches bird migration.\nFish.\nAround 45 species of fish live in Lake Constance. The annual haul from fishing is 1.5 million kg. Unusual species occurring here considering the location of the lake are the whitefish (\"Coregonus\" spec.) and the Arctic char (\"Salvelinus alpinus\"). Fish that are important for the fishing industry are:\nThe Bodenseefelchen (\"Coregonus wartmanni\"), which was named after Lake Constance due to the great numbers found there, is often prepared whole or as a fillet, in the style of the miller's wife (\"nach M\u00fcllerin Art\"), in local fish restaurants in a similar way to other trout It is also often served smoked.\nTwo endemic species are known to have existed only in Lake Constance, the Bodensee-Kilch (\"Coregonus gutturosus\") and deepwater char (\"Salvelinus profundus\"). The former is now assumed to be extinct, while the latter was feared extinct for decades until its rediscovery in the 2010s.\nIntroduced species.\nFor many years non-native species have settled in the Lake Constance ecosystem and, in some cases, endangered or threatened native flora and fauna. At Lake Constance, non-native species have been increasing annually. Several have been transported from other waterbodies as 'stowaways' on the outside of boats, life jackets, anchor chains or ropes or diving gear. Others have immigrated from the Black Sea or the Danube since the opening of the Main-Danube Canal. Others have been deliberately introduced.\nWell-known non-native species.\nEven the rainbow trout (\"Oncorhynchus mykiss\") is not a native fish. It was introduced into Lake Constance around 1880 for economic reasons to enhance the local fauna.\nAmong the foreign species of animal in Lake Constance are the zebra mussel (\"Dreissena polymorpha\") which, since the 18th century, has spread from the Black Sea region across most of Europe and was carried into Lake Constance between 1960 and 1965. After a huge increase in numbers during the 1980s in the Rhine and large lakes, this species is now in retreat today. The zebra mussel causes problems because, among other things, it blocks water extraction pipes. In addition, the species can be a disaster for domestic shellfish, because it competes for their food. Today, according to the Institute for Lake Research (\"Institut f\u00fcr Seenforschung\", ISF), the zebra mussel is also an important food for overwintering waterfowl. In fact, the number of overwinterers has more than doubled in around 30 years.\nThe killer shrimp (\"Dikerogammarus villosus\") has spread since 2002 from two sections of shoreline near Hagnau and Immenstaad, over the whole Lake \u00dcberlingen (2004), the whole of the Upper Lake (2006) and almost the whole Lake Constance and Rheinsee shore (2007). As its name implies, it is a voracious burglar of fish larvae and fish eggs.\nThe most recent example is the little opossum shrimp (\"Limnomysis benedeni\"), only six to eleven millimeters long, which was found in 2006 in the Vorarlberg region of Hard, and can now be found almost all over Lake Constance. It comes from the waters around the Black Sea. It was presumably first transported by ships up the Danube before it spread into the Rhine river system and entered Lake Constance. The opossum shrimp, which occurs in many places in shoals of several million in winter, are already an influential link in the food chain in Lake Constance. They consume dead animal and plant material as well as phytoplankton, but are also eaten by fish themselves.\nToday, in western Lake Constance are found: the North American spinycheek crayfish (\"Orconectes limosus\"), which was introduced into European waters in the mid-19th century to increase the yield, occasionally the Chinese mitten crab (\"Eriocheir sinensis\"), and in the lake's tributaries, the signal crayfish (\"Pacifastacus leniusulus\"). As these species of large crayfish are immune to crayfish plague, but spread the pathogen, they are a great danger to native species such as noble crayfish, white-clawed crayfish or stone crayfish. The animals are often undemanding, multiply rapidly and lead predatory lives, thus also posing a threat to various small species of fish. The ISF has been systematically researching the subject since 2003.\nWrecks on the lake bed.\nAfter a collision with the \"Stadt Z\u00fcrich\" in 1864 the wreck of the \"Jura\" has lain on the lake bed at a depth of 45 metres off the Swiss shore. In the early 20th century four ships were sunk in the Obersee after being taken out of service: in 1931 the \"Baden\", formerly the \"Kaiser Wilhelm\", in 1932 the \"Helvetia\", in 1933 the \"S\u00e4ntis\" and in 1934 the \"Stadt Radolfzell\". The hull of the burnt-out \"Friedrichshafen\" was scuttled in 1944 off the mouth of the Argen in 100 to 150 metres of water.\nTourism, leisure and sports.\nThe tourism and leisure industry is important for this region. Overnight stays reached 17,56m visitors in 2012 with a turnover of about 1.9bn Euros. The same amount comes from the 70 million visitors that visit Lake Constance each year.\nThis region is known for sightseeing, water-sports, winter-sports like Skiing, summer-sports like Swimming (sport), Sailing and recreation. It is also one of the few places where modern Zeppelin airships operate and 12\u201314 people can take a trip above the lake around various points of interest.\nIn cooperation with tourism service providers, tourism organizations and public institutions in Germany, Austria, Switzerland and Liechtenstein, the International Bodensee Tourismus GmbH (IBT GmbH) is responsible for the tourism marketing of the Lake Constance region.\nSights and cultural heritage.\nThe lake and the region around it have a substantial touristic infrastructure as well as many attractions and points of interests. Important are especially towns like Konstanz, \u00dcberlingen, Meersburg, Friedrichshafen, Lindau, Romanshorn, Rorschach and Bregenz as they are the big hubs for boating tourism and lake crossing ferries. The main tourism attractions are places like Rhine Falls, one of the three biggest waterfalls in Europe (located near Schaffhausen), the islands of Mainau, Lindau and Reichenau (UNESCO world heritage), the pilgrimage church Birnau, castles and palaces like Salem Abbey, Meersburg Castle as well as another UNESCO world heritage site, the Pfahlbaumuseum Unteruhldingen (German for Stilt house museum), Zeppelin Museum Friedrichshafen as well as the Church of St. George, Oberzell, Reichenau or the \"Rheinschauen\" heritage railway.\nOverlooks.\nHigh mountain ranges are mainly located near the southeastern shore of the Upper Lake (\"Obersee\"). The lower foothills of the Appenzell Alps in Switzerland are accessible by bus routes and two railway lines: the Rorschach\u2013Heiden railway between Rorschach Hafen/Rorschach near the lake shore and Heiden, and the Rheineck\u2013Walzenhausen mountain railway between Rheineck and Walzenhausen. Both lines are operated by Appenzell Railways and part of St. Gallen S-Bahn and Bodensee S-Bahn, respectively. A popular overlook near Heiden is \"F\u00fcnfl\u00e4nderblick\" (lit.\u2009'five countries view'). In good weather conditions, the lake is also visible from mountain peaks of the Alpstein massiv. In Austria, the Pf\u00e4nderbahn, an aerial tram, takes passengers from the valley station near Bregenz Hafen to the top station on Pf\u00e4nder mountain (Allg\u00e4u Alps).\nThe Hegau region adjacent to Lower Lake Constance (\"Untersee\") contains several higher mountains of volcanic origin, many with ruins of fortresses on their tops (e.g. Hohenkr\u00e4hen, M\u00e4gdeberg). The southernly located of these Hegau volcanoes (e.g. Hohentwiel) also offer a view over the lakes.\nCultural events.\nLake Constance is the location for the annual Bregenzer Festspiele, a well-known arts festival that, among other venues, takes place on a floating stage in Bregenz. The operas, plays and concerts performed are usually popular works, e.g. \"The Magic Flute\" by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart or \"Rigoletto\" by Giuseppe Verdi.\nSince 2001, the ART BODENSEE takes place in Dornbirn. It is an annual meeting point for the exchange between collectors, artists and art appreciators.\nBiking.\nBiking around the lake is also possible on the long trail called \"Bodensee-Radweg\". It brings its visitors to the most interesting sites and goes around the whole lake. Nevertheless, various shortcuts via ferries allow shorter routes and the trail is suitable for all levels. Note: There is also a trail that goes by the name \"Bodensee-Rundweg\". This road was intended for pedestrians so biking is sometimes not suitable or allowed.\nHiking and pilgrim trails.\nThe 260 kilometers long Lake Constance circular route, signposted as \"Bodensee Rundwanderweg\", leads around Lake Constance through the territories of Germany, Austria and Switzerland. It is mainly intended for hiking; cyclists follow the sometimes slightly different managed Lake Constance cycle path. The trail can be walked in smaller stages of various lengths and offers nice views of the lake, landscape and wildlife. However, due to industrial settlements, buildings and nature reserves, not all the coastal zones are readily accessible. Furthermore, in the estuary of the rivers, such the Leiblach, Bregenzer Ach, canalized Rhine and Old Rhine (Fu\u00dfacher breakthrough), considerable distances have to be covered inland to the next bridge or river crossing point. Due to busy riverside roads, the Bodensee-Rundweg sometimes runs as a trail above the lake with some lookout possibilities.\nLake Constance is also a hub for long-distance hikers and pilgrims. It has been a crucial reference point of important pilgrimage routes since ancient times:\nSwimming.\nSwimming in the lake is usually best from mid-June to mid-September. Depending on the weather and exact location, the water temperatures reach . Within one day, differences of up to are possible with appropriate sunlight, so that the lake invites to swim, especially on warm summer evenings.\nDiving.\nDiving in Lake Constance is considered attractive and challenging. Most of the diving areas are located in the northern part of the lake (\u00dcberlingen, Bodman-Ludwigshafen, Marienschlucht and others), a few also in the south. The areas should be dived exclusively by experienced divers under the guidance of one of the local diving schools or a seasoned diver. Diving at some spots like the devils table (\"Teufelstisch\") called rock needle in the lake in front of the Marienschlucht, is only allowed after approval by the district office Konstanz.\nA famous freshwater wreck in Europe is the paddle steamer Jura, which lies in front of Bottighofen at a depth of . The canton of Thurgau, the office for archaeology in Frauenfeld, has placed the Jura under protection as an underwater industrial monument.\nFor all divers, the water in Lake Constance\u2014even in summer\u2014is already below from a depth of which requires suitable cold-water regulators that do not freeze at such temperatures.\nBoating, recreational boating.\nPleasure boating is important. At the beginning of 2011, 57,875 amusement vehicles were registered for Lake Constance.\nThe legal basis for all shipping on the lake is the ordinance on shipping on Lake Constance, or \"Bodensee-Schifffahrtsordnung\". It is monitored on Lake Constance and on the Upper Rhine by the German, Swiss and Austrian Water Police, the \"Seepolizei\".\nAll boats must be registered, and boat drivers must hold a \"Bodenseeschifferpatent\" (authorization to drive a patented vehicle on Lake Constance). It is issued in Germany by the shipping offices of the district of Constance, the Lake Constance district, and the district of Lindau; in Switzerland by the cantonal authorities; and in Austria by the District Commission Bregenz. For pleasure boaters short-term guest licenses are possible (for the categories A for motorboats over 4.4 kW and D for sailboats over 12 m2 sail area).\nBoating events\nSettlements on the lake.\nGermany.\nFrom the entry of the Rhine, on the northern or right shore:\nSwitzerland.\nFrom the entry of the Rhine, on the southern or left shore:\nFishing.\nThe lake was frozen in the years 1077 (?), 1326 (partial), 1378 (partial), 1435, 1465 (partial), 1477 (partial), 1491 (partial?), 1517 (partial), 1571 (partial), 1573, 1600 (partial), 1684, 1695, 1709 (partial), 1795, 1830, 1880 (partial), and 1963.\nAbout of fish were caught by 150 professional fishermen in 2001 which was below the previous ten-year average of per year. The Lake Constance trout (\"Salmo trutta\") was almost extinct in the 1980s due to pollution, but thanks to protective measures they have made a significant return. Lake Constance is the home of the critically endangered species of trout \"Salvelinus profundus\", and formerly also the now extinct Lake Constance whitefish (\"Coregonus gutturosus\").\nNotes and references.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76275", "revid": "46714802", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76275", "title": "Thalys", "text": "European high-speed train service, 1996\u20132023\nThalys (French: ) was a brand name used for high-speed train services between Paris Gare du Nord and both Amsterdam Centraal and German cities in the Rhein-Ruhr, including Aachen, Cologne, D\u00fcsseldorf, Duisburg, Essen and Dortmund, both via Brussels-South.\nThalys was created out of a political ambition formalised in October 1987 to establish a network of international high-speed railway services between the cities of Paris, Brussels, Cologne and Amsterdam. The Thalys name was created in January 1995. The company procured a fleet of Alstom-built TGV trains to operate its services as they were viewed as the only existing rolling stock suitable to the task.\nOn 4 June 1996, the first Thalys-branded train departed from Paris. Early services were more reliant on slower conventional lines as many of the intended new high-speed lines were still under construction. Service speeds improved with the opening of Belgium's HSL 1 line in December 1997 and the Dutch HSL-Zuid in December 2009, alongside other infrastructure works. Thalys's busiest route was the Paris\u2013Belgium corridor; various airlines, such as Air France and KLM, opted to discontinue flights directly competing with Thalys's high speed services.\nFrom 1996 to April 2022, the service was managed by Thalys International, which was 70% owned by the French national railway company SNCF and 30% owned by the Belgian national railway company NMBS/SNCB. It was operated by THI Factory, which was 60% owned by SNCF and 40% owned by NMBS/SNCB. Between 2007 and 2013, the German national railway company had also held a 10% stake in the company.\nOn 30 March 2015, Thalys was restructured as a conventional train operating company, becoming less reliant on SNCF and NMBS/SNCB. During September 2019, a plan was announced to merge Thalys and the cross-Channel high-speed train operator Eurostar. Approval of the merger was issued by the European Commission on 28 March 2022. In February 2022, Thalys International was integrated into THI Factory, which in turn was acquired by the holding company Eurostar Group during the following month. From April 2022 to September 2023, Thalys services were operated by the Eurostar Group. Since 29 September 2023, the services operate under the Eurostar name; sometimes referred to as Eurostar Red, based on the colour of the trains.\nHistory.\nBackground and establishment.\nPrior to the creation of Thalys, an express rail service had long been operated between the capital cities of Paris and Brussels, the earliest being run in 1924 in the form of the train service l'\u00c9toile du Nord. By the 1970s, the conventional service connecting the two cities had a journey time of around two hours and 30 minutes. In the following decade, interest in an international high-speed train service along a similar route was gaining traction amongst various governments.\nDuring October 1987, the political decision to create a network of high-speed services among the cities of Paris, Brussels, Cologne, and Amsterdam was made in Brussels. However, in 1991, the Dutch parliament initially rejected the project; continued discussions led to an agreement being reached with Belgium for a route via Breda instead of Roosendaal. The building of the HSL-Zuid high speed line in the Netherlands was finally approved in 1996. Meanwhile, Germany decided against the construction of a new railway between Aachen and Cologne, instead opting to renovate the existing track between Duren and Cologne, which resulted in a top speed of 250 kilometres per hour along this section. On 28 January 1993, SNCF, SNCB/NMBS, and (which became part of in 1994) signed an agreement to operate the axis on a joint basis.\nDuring January 1995, \"Westrail International\" was created by the French and Belgian national railways to operate the new international services. That same month, both the logo and brand of \"Thalys\" were also created; the word deliberately lacked any particular meaning, save for being pronounceable in the languages of all the countries served. It was decided to procure Alstom-built TGV trains, similar to those already used by SNCF on the French national railways, as these were the only suitable rolling stock available at the time. Another key decision was to launch the service in advance of many of the planned high speed lines, being initially reliant upon slower conventional lines until these were eventually completed; the existing international services that used conventional rolling stock were deliberately withdrawn in preparation for the running of Thalys trains in early June 1996.\nOn 4 June 1996, the first Thalys-branded train departed Paris, this maiden journey took two hours and seven minutes to reach to Brussels, and four hours and 47 minutes to arrive in Amsterdam. Initially, Thalys services only operated four times per day to Amsterdam and Cologne, while a far greater volume were run between Paris and Belgium. While quite restricted early on, the number of Thalys services would be gradually expanded over time, as would the high speed network that supported it.\nChanges and improvements.\nDuring December 1997, the Belgian HSL 1 line, allowing and running from the French border to the outskirts of Brussels, was inaugurated. On 14 December 1997, the first Thalys train from Paris to Brussels ran on the HSL 1, reducing travel time to 1:25 hours. At the same time, service commenced to Cologne and Aachen in Germany, and Bruges, Charleroi, Ghent, Mons, Namur and Ostend in Belgium. On 19 December 1998, the Thalys Neige service started to the ski resorts of Tarentaise Valley and Bourg-Saint-Maurice. In May 1999, the new high-speed line serving Charles de Gaulle Airport opened, and Thalys started direct services from Paris Charles de Gaulle Airport to Brussels, including codeshare agreements with Air France, American Airlines and Northwest Airlines. On 28 November 1999, Westrail International changed its name to Thalys International.\nIn 2000, Thalys started a daily service between Brussels and Geneva. With its (French for 'Thalys Sun'), it started offering direct connections to Provence, initially to Valence, and extended to Avignon and Marseille in 2002. Service between Brussels and Cologne was improved in December 2002 when trains began running on the new HSL 2 in Belgium. During 2003, Thalys services started to Brussels Airport and the Thalys Nuits d'\u00c9t\u00e9 service to Marne-la-Vall\u00e9e. In 2007, Deutsche Bahn purchased a 10% shareholding, while SNCF reduced its stake to 62% and SNCB to 28%.\nBeginning on 14 June 2009, the journey between Brussels and Cologne was shortened by 19 minutes when the new high-speed line HSL 3 between Li\u00e8ge and Aachen opened using Deutsche Bahn's thrice-daily ICE trains running between Brussels and Frankfurt. While HSL 3 was completed during 2007, Thalys trains had not been initially equipped with the European Train Control System (ETCS) signaling equipment necessary to use the new line. Following the completion of installation and testing work, Thalys began operating on HSL 3 on 13 December 2009. For the same reasons, Thalys started operating on the HSL 4/HSL-Zuid high-speed line between Antwerp and Amsterdam on 13 December 2009, two years after the line's construction.\nSince 29 August 2011, one return journey to Cologne has been extended to Essen Hauptbahnhof, and since 30 October 2011, one return journey to Brussels had been extended to Brussels National Airport.\nOn 9 June 2013, permanently ceased the sale of tickets for Thalys services, forcing affected travellers to purchase separate tickets. The company also opted to sell its 10 per cent shareholding in Thalys, marking a general parting of ways between the two operators.\nSince the winter 2013 schedule, Thalys has operated services stopping at D\u00fcsseldorf Airport station. On 12 April 2014, it launched a regular service between Lille Europe and Amsterdam Centraal.\nAt the end of March 2015, Thalys dropped the Paris \u2013 Oostende and the Paris \u2013 Brussels \u2013 Mons \u2013 Charleroi \u2013 Namur \u2013 Li\u00e8ge routes; this withdrawal was reportedly due to a lack of funding from the Belgian government.\nOn 30 March 2015, Thalys was restructured as a conventional train operating company, adopting the name \"THI Factory\", and has since operated under its own train operator certificate. Prior to this date, the ownership of Thalys's 26 multi-voltage TGVs had been divided between the four national railway operators holding stakes in the company; they were transferred to the company at this point. These changes were promoted as making Thalys a truly independent company, reducing its interactions with both SNCF and SNCB; headquarters were established in Brussels, with a branch office in Paris.\nOn 21 March 2016, services in Germany were extended to Dortmund.\nIn March 2018, Thalys ceased all its operations from Lille-Europe, citing disappointing demand (despite lower-than-average ticket prices) and financial results.\nMerger with Eurostar.\nIn September 2019, the shareholders of the cross-Channel high speed train operator Eurostar and Thalys introduced a plan to merge the two companies, named project \"Green Speed\". Both companies already operate in France, Belgium, and the Netherlands, with Eurostar also operating in the United Kingdom, and Thalys also operating in Germany, while SNCF already held a majority stake in both operators. The project was promoted as reducing costs and providing a more seamless experience to passengers via the use of a single ticketing system and loyalty program.\nDuring September 2020, the merger between Thalys and Eurostar International was confirmed, In October 2021, it was announced that, upon the completion of the merger, it was intended for all of Thalys's services to be rebranded as Eurostar. On 28 March 2022, the European Commission approved the merger. The rebranding of Thalys services commenced in the autumn of 2023, and was planned to be completed by early in 2024. All services of the Eurostar brand will carry a common Eurostar logo, but with the cross-channel trains retaining their dark blue livery, and Thalys's rolling stock retaining its deep red livery. In April 2022, THI Factory was acquired by a new holding company, Eurostar Group; its former shareholders received a corresponding stake in the new holding company.\nThe change of logo on the trains took time to complete; during a transition period, some PBA/PBKA trains with the new \"Eurostar\" logo could be seen together with others still wearing the older \"Thalys\" logo.\nRoutes.\nBeyond Brussels, the main cities Thalys trains reached are Antwerp, Rotterdam, Amsterdam, Li\u00e8ge, Aachen and Cologne. Trains to these destinations ran partly on dedicated high-speed tracks, and partly on conventional tracks shared with normal-speed trains. The high-speed lines formerly used by Thalys are HSL 1 between Paris and Brussels, HSL 4/HSL-Zuid between Antwerp and Amsterdam, and the HSL 2 and HSL 3 between Brussels and Aachen. For its seasonal operations within France, other high-speed lines were used.\nJourneys from Brussels (Brussels-South) to Paris (\"Gare du Nord\") are normally 1 hour and 22 minutes, for a distance of approximately . The peak service speed is while travelling a dedicated high-speed railway track, which is typically electrified at 25 kV AC by an overhead line.\nThe \"ligne \u00e0 grande vitesse\" (LGV) link with Charles de Gaulle Airport allowed Air France to withdraw its air service between Paris and Brussels; instead, Air France transfers connecting passengers onto Thalys trains. Thalys has been given the IATA designator 2H. This is used in conjunction with American Airlines and Delta Air Lines. American Airlines has a code-sharing agreement with Thalys for rail service from Charles de Gaulle airport to Brussels-South. The airline alliance SkyTeam also has a code-sharing agreement with Thalys for rail service connecting its hub Amsterdam Schiphol Airport with Antwerp-Centraal and Bruxelles Midi/Brussel Zuid. Thalys and the Dutch flagcarrier KLM jointly collaborate on \"AirRail\", an initiative to encourage passengers to travel by train to connect with KLM flights; this effort led to KLM reducing air services between Brussels and Amsterdam.\nMarket.\nThalys targets a passenger market in France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Germany.\nThe percentage of income coming from different routes demonstrates on which routes the company is most used:\n52% of customers are from the leisure market, while 48% are from the business market. A large segment of Thalys's total sales and income comes from the connection between Paris and Brussels.\nUnlike many national train companies, Thalys does not allow children below 12 years old to travel alone. Children onboard Thalys services must be accompanied and possess appropriate travel documents as required by the relevant national authorities pertaining to the journey being made.\nSince 24 August 2010, there has been a supplement of \u20ac7 to Thalys (as well as other international high-speed tickets) tickets bought at SNCB/NMBS ticket offices at train stations (but not on tickets bought over the Internet). This is due to a reduction of a sales fee paid by Thalys and Eurostar to the Belgian rail company. The sales prices have evolved, by June 2019, the \"booking fee\" (as it is referred to as) had risen to \u20ac9.\nAccessibility.\nThalys trains are wheelchair-accessible, with the assistance of the train staff. Bicycles are not allowed on Thalys unless disassembled or packed in a special wrap. Folding bikes are allowed.\nIn February 2020, Thalys announced that its new first-and-last mile travel service 'My Driver by Thalys's enables passengers can choose between around 50 local taxi fleets to complete their rail journeys.\nThalys Lounge.\nThalys operates station lounges in Brussels and Paris. Opened on 9 July 2015, the newest lounge in Paris' Gare du Nord, located on \nRue de Dunkerque, offers travelers with a valid \"My Thalys World\" membership (Thalys's loyalty program) a variety of services, including free WiFi and a luggage storage service. For business travelers, a fully equipped meeting room is available for up to six people.\nPartnership with Airlines.\nPrior to September 2023, Thalys had codeshare agreements with the following airlines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrior to September 2023, Thalys had Interline agreements with the following airlines:\nRolling stock.\nThalys uses two models of trains, both of which are part of the TGV (\"train \u00e0 grande vitesse\") family of high-speed trains built by Alstom in France.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "76279", "revid": "7735637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76279", "title": "Lake of Constance", "text": ""}
{"id": "76286", "revid": "50970452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76286", "title": "Disneyland Paris", "text": "Entertainment resort in Marne-la-Vall\u00e9e, France\nDisneyland Paris is an entertainment resort in Marne-la-Vall\u00e9e, France, located about east of the city centre of Paris. It encompasses two theme parks, seven Disney-owned hotels, two convention centers, a golf course, an arena, and a shopping, dining and entertainment complex. Opened on 12 April 1992, the resort is operated by Disney Experiences, a division of the Walt Disney Company. \nIt is the second Disney park outside the United States, following the opening of the Tokyo Disney Resort in 1983. Disneyland Paris is also the only Disney resort outside of the United States to be completely owned by the company. Disneyland Park, opened in 1992, is the original theme park of the complex. A second theme park, Walt Disney Studios Park, opened in 2002. \nThe resort is located on approximately of land which is being developed under a master agreement with French governmental authorities. About half of the land has been developed, including a planned community, Val d'Europe. \nDisneyland Paris is Europe's most-visited theme park, and the largest single-site employer in France with 17,000 employees. It generated $343 million in profit for Disney in 2023. By 2022, 375 million people had visited the park.\nOwnership.\nThe Walt Disney Company announced a \u20ac plan (equivalent to US$ at the time) to rescue the financially struggling Disneyland Paris resort, the \"Financial Times\" reported on 6 October 2014. The park was burdened by its debt, which at the time was calculated at about \u20ac (US$), roughly 15 times its gross average earnings.\nUp to that point, Disney only held a minority ownership stake in the resort. In early 2017, the company purchased 9% of Euro Disney S.C.A., buying 9% from Kingdom Holding and issued a tender offer of \u20ac2 per share for the remaining stock. This brought The Walt Disney Company's total ownership to 85.7%. The Walt Disney company also invested an additional \u20ac to strengthen and develop Disneyland Paris. In June 2017, Disney completed its tender offer and at the time owned over 97% of Euro Disney. It then implemented a full buyout of the shares they did not already own. In 2018, after taking full control of Disneyland Paris, Walt Disney reported its plans to invest \u20ac (US$) into the Disneyland Paris resort.\nHistory.\nSeeking a location for a European resort.\nFollowing the success of Disneyland in California, plans to build a similar theme park in Europe emerged in 1966 with sites in Frankfurt, Paris, London or Milan under consideration. Under the leadership of E. Cardon Walker, Tokyo Disneyland opened in 1983 in Japan with instant success, forming a catalyst for international expansion. In late 1984 the heads of Disney's theme park division, Dick Nunis and Jim Cora, presented a list of approximately 1,200 possible European locations for the park. Britain, France, Italy and Spain were all considered. However, Britain and Italy were dropped from the list due to both lacking a suitable expanse of flat land. By March 1985, the number of possible locations for the park had been reduced to four; two in France and two in Spain. Both nations saw the potential economic advantages of a Disney theme park and offered competing financing deals to Disney.\nBoth Spanish sites were located near the Mediterranean and offered a subtropical climate similar to Disney's parks in California and Florida. Disney had asked each site to provide average temperatures for every month for the previous 40 years, which proved a complicated endeavour as none of the records were computerised. The site in Pego, Alicante became the front-runner, but the location was controversial as it would have meant the destruction of Marjal de Pego-Oliva marshlands, a site of natural beauty and one of the last homes of the almost extinct Samaruc or Valencia Toothcarp, so there was some local outcry among environmentalists. Disney had also shown interest in a site near Toulon in southern France, not far from Marseille. The pleasing landscape of that region, as well as its climate, made the location a top competitor for what would be called Euro Disneyland. However, shallow bedrock was encountered beneath the site, which would have rendered construction too difficult. Finally, a site in the rural town of Marne-la-Vall\u00e9e was chosen because of its proximity to Paris and its central location in Western Europe. This location was estimated to be no more than a four-hour drive for 68 million people and no more than a two-hour flight for a further 300\u00a0million.\nMichael Eisner signed the first letter of agreement with the French government for the site on 18 December 1985, and the first financial contracts were drawn up during the following spring. The final contract was signed by the leaders of the Walt Disney Company and the French government and territorial collectivities on 24 March 1987. Construction began in August 1988, and in December 1990, an information centre named \"Espace Euro Disney\" was opened to show the public what was being constructed at the time. Plans for a theme park next to Euro Disneyland based on the entertainment industry, Disney-MGM Studios Europe, quickly went into development, scheduled to open in 1995 with a construction budget of US$2.3\u00a0billion. The construction manager was Bovis.\nDesign and construction.\nTo provide lodging to patrons, it was decided that 5,200 Disney-owned hotel rooms would be built within the complex. In March 1988, Disney and a council of architects (Frank Gehry, Michael Graves, Robert A.M. Stern, Stanley Tigerman, and Robert Venturi) decided on an exclusively American theme in which each hotel would depict a region of the United States. At the time of the opening in April 1992, seven hotels collectively housing 5,800 rooms had been built.\nAn entertainment, shopping, and dining complex based on Walt Disney World's Downtown Disney was designed by Frank Gehry.\nWith its towers of oxidised silver and bronze-coloured stainless steel under a canopy of lights, it opened as \"Festival Disney\". For a projected daily attendance of 55,000, Euro Disney planned to serve an estimated 14,000 people per hour inside the Euro Disneyland park. To accomplish this, 29 restaurants were built inside the park (with a further 11 restaurants built at the Euro Disney resort hotels and five at Festival Disney). Menus and prices were varied with an American flavor predominant and Disney's precedent of not serving alcoholic beverages was continued in the park.\n2,300 patio seats (30% of park seating) were installed to satisfy Europeans' expected preference of eating outdoors in good weather. In test kitchens at Walt Disney World, recipes were adapted for European tastes. Walter Meyer, executive chef for menu development at Euro Disney and executive chef of food projects development at Walt Disney World noted, \"A few things we did need to change, but most of the time people kept telling us, 'Do your own thing. Do what's American'.\"\nRecruitment/employment.\nUnlike Disney's American theme parks, Euro Disney aimed for permanent employees (an estimated requirement of 12,000 for the theme park itself), as opposed to seasonal and temporary part-time employees. Casting centres were set up in Paris, London, and Amsterdam. However, it was understood by the French government and Disney that \"a concentrated effort would be made to tap into the local French labour market\". Disney sought workers with sufficient communication skills, who spoke two European languages (French and one other), and were socially outgoing. Following precedent, Euro Disney set up its own Disney University to train workers. 24,000 people had applied by November 1991.\nIn 2011, the park provided 55,643 direct and indirect jobs in France. According to Damien Audric, Director of Development and the Environment, Disneyland Paris would generate 63,000 jobs by 2022. Overall, in 2022, Disneyland Paris was still Seine-et-Marne's largest employer.\nControversies.\nThe prospect of a Disney park in France was a subject of debate and controversy. Critics, who included prominent French intellectuals, denounced what they considered to be the cultural imperialism of Euro Disney and felt it would encourage an unhealthy American type of consumerism in France. On 28 June 1992, a group of French farmers blockaded Euro Disney in protest of farm policies supported at the time by the United States. A journalist at the centre-right French newspaper \"Le Figaro\" wrote, \"I wish with all my heart that the rebels would set fire to [Euro] Disneyland.\" Ariane Mnouchkine, a Parisian stage director, named the concept a \"cultural Chernobyl\", a phrase which would be echoed in the media during Euro Disney's initial years. In response, French philosopher Michel Serres noted, \"It is not America that is invading us. It is we who adore it, who adopt its fashions and above all, its words.\" Euro Disney S.C.A.'s then-chairman Robert Fitzpatrick responded, \"We didn't come in and say O.K., we're going to put a beret and a baguette on Mickey Mouse. We are who we are.\"\nTopics of controversy also included Disney's American managers requiring English to be spoken at all meetings and Disney's appearance code for members of staff, which listed regulations and limitations for the use of makeup, facial hair, tattoos, jewelry, and more. French labour unions mounted protests against the appearance code, which they saw as \"an attack on individual liberty\". Others criticized Disney as being insensitive to French culture, individualism, and privacy, because restrictions on individual or collective liberties were illegal under French law, unless it could be demonstrated that the restrictions are requisite to the job and do not exceed what is necessary. Disney countered by saying that a ruling that barred them from imposing such an employment standard could threaten the image and long-term success of the park. \"For us, the appearance code has a great effect from a product identification standpoint,\" said Thor Degelmann, Euro Disney's personnel director. \"Without it we couldn't be presenting the Disney product that people would be expecting.\"\nIn 2023, Disneyland Paris faced multiple strikes and protests by cast members demanding better pay and working conditions, including a \u20ac200 monthly wage increase, improved seniority bonuses, and double pay for Sundays.\nOpening day and early years.\nEuro Disney opened for employee preview and testing in March 1992. During this time, visitors were mostly park employees and their family members, who tested facilities and operations. The press was able to visit the day before the park's opening day, 12 April 1992.\nOn 12 April 1992, Euro Disney Resort and its theme park, Euro Disneyland, officially opened. Visitors were warned of chaos on the roads. A government survey indicated that half a million people carried by 90,000 cars might attempt to enter the complex. French radio warned traffic to avoid the area. By midday, the car park was approximately half full, suggesting an attendance level below 25,000. Explanations of the lower-than-expected turnout included speculation that people heeded the advice to stay away and that the one-day strike that cut the direct RER railway connection to Euro Disney from the centre of Paris made the park inaccessible. Due to the European recession that August, the park faced financial difficulties as there were a lack of things to do and an overabundance of hotels, leading to underperformance. The failure of Euro Disney caused the cancellation of several projects like WestCOT, Disney's America, Tomorrowland 2055 at Disneyland and Beastly Kingdom at Disney's Animal Kingdom.\nA new Indiana Jones roller coaster ride was opened at Euro Disney in 1993. A few weeks after the ride opened, there were problems with the emergency brakes which resulted in guest injuries.\nIn 1994, the company was still having financial difficulties. There were rumours that Euro Disney was getting close to having to file for bankruptcy. The banks and the backers had meetings to work out some of the financial problems facing Euro Disney. In March 1994, Team Disney went into negotiations with the banks so that they could get some help for their debt. As a last resort, the Walt Disney Company threatened to close the Euro Disney theme park, leaving the banks with the land.\nFinancial, attendance and employment struggles.\nIn May 1992, entertainment magazine \"The Hollywood Reporter\" reported that about 25% of Euro Disney's workforce, approximately 3,000 people, had resigned from their jobs because of unacceptable working conditions. It also reported that the park's attendance was far behind expectations. The disappointing attendance can be at least partly explained by the recession and increased unemployment, which was affecting France and most of the rest of the developed world at this time; when construction of the resort began, the economy was still on an upswing.\nEuro Disney S.C.A. responded in an interview with \"The Wall Street Journal\", in which Robert Fitzpatrick claimed only 1,000 people had left their jobs. In response to the financial situation, Fitzpatrick ordered that the Disney-MGM Studios Europe project would be put on halt until a further decision could be made. Prices at the hotels were reduced.\nDespite these efforts in May 1992, park attendance was around 25,000 (some reports give a figure of 30,000) instead of the predicted 60,000. The Euro Disney Company stock price spiraled downward and on 23 July 1992, Euro Disney announced an expected net loss in its first year of operation of approximately 300 million French francs. During Euro Disney's first winter, hotel occupancy was so low that it was decided to close the Newport Bay Club hotel during the season.\nInitial hopes were that each visitor would spend around US$33 per day, but near the end of 1992, analysts found spending to be around 12% lower. Efforts to improve attendance included serving alcoholic beverages with meals inside the Euro Disneyland park, in response to a presumed European demand, which began 12 June 1993.\nBy the summer of 1994, Euro Disney was burdened with $3\u00a0billion worth of debt. Disney CFO Richard Nanula and Wall Street financier Steve Norris worked with Alwaleed's business advisor Mustafa Al Hejailan to rescue the overleveraged company. In that deal, Disney's 49 percent stake was reduced to 39 percent, the banks agreed to forego interest payments until 1997, Disney wrote off royalties and fees until 1999, and Alwaleed agreed to pay $345\u00a0million for a 24 percent stake in Euro Disney.\n1995 turnaround.\nOn 1 October 1994, Euro Disney changed its name to Disneyland Paris. On 31 May 1995, a new attraction opened at the theme park. Space Mountain: De la Terre \u00e0 la Lune had been planned since the inception of Disneyland Paris under the name \"Discovery Mountain\", but was reserved for a revival of public interest. With a redesign of the attraction (which had premiered as Space Mountain at the Walt Disney World's Magic Kingdom in 1975) including a \"cannon launch\" system, inversions, and an on-ride soundtrack, the US$100\u00a0million attraction was dedicated in a ceremony attended by celebrities such as Elton John, Claudia Schiffer, and Buzz Aldrin.\nOn 25 July 1995, Disneyland Paris reported its first quarterly profit of US$35.3\u00a0million. On 15 November 1995, the results for the fiscal year ending 30 September 1995 were released; in one year the theme park's attendance had climbed from 8.8\u00a0million to 10.7\u00a0million, an increase of 21%. Hotel occupancy had also climbed from 60 to 68.5%. After debt payments, Disneyland Paris ended the year with a net profit of US$22.8\u00a0million.\n2000\u20132017.\nIn March 2002, Disneyland Paris underwent a second name change to Disneyland Resort Paris. That same month on 16 March, Walt Disney Studios Park opened to the public, coinciding with the 10th anniversary of the resort. In 2002, Euro Disney S.C.A. and the Walt Disney Company announced another annual profit for Disneyland Paris. However, it then incurred a net loss in the three years following. By March 2004, the Walt Disney Company had agreed to write off all debt that Euro Disney S.C.A. owed to the Walt Disney Company. On 1 December 2003, Euro Disney S.C.A launched the 'Need Magic?' campaign, which lasted until March 2006 to bring new, first-time European visitors to the resort.\nIn March 2006, Disneyland Resort Paris launched the advertising campaign \"believe in your dreams\" and paired with the TGV East European Line to encourage European family attendance to the resort. Shortly after announcing a 12% increase in revenues for the fiscal year of 2007, Euro Disney S.C.A. implemented a \"reverse split\" consolidation of shares of 100 to 1. August 2008 brought the resort's 200 millionth visitor, and made for the third consecutive year of growth in revenues for the resort as well as a record 15.3\u00a0million visitors in attendance.\nIn 2009, the resort started to recruit new employees, especially for the Christmas and summer seasons, which continued in 2010 and 2011 when 2,000 and 3,000 employment contracts being offered, respectively. The 2009 fiscal year saw a decrease in revenues by 7% and a net loss of \u20ac63 million followed by stable revenues at \u20ac1.2\u00a0billion in fiscal year 2010. Euro Disney S.C.A. refinanced their debt to Walt Disney Company again for \u20ac1.3\u00a0billion in September 2012.\nA study done by the Inter-ministerial Delegation reviewing Disneyland Paris' contribution to the French economy was released in time for the Resort's 20th anniversary in March 2012. It found that despite the resort's financial hardships, it had generated \"37\u00a0billion euros in tourism-related revenues over twenty years\", supports on average 55,000 jobs in France annually, and that one job at Disneyland Paris generates nearly three jobs elsewhere in France.\nFor the first time in the resort's history, both the Disneyland Park and Walt Disney Studios Park closed from 14 to 17 November 2015, as part of France's period of national mourning following the terrorist attacks that took place that month in Paris.\nIn 2015, Euro Disney announced major renovations for 2015, 2016 and 2017 in preparation for the complex's 25th anniversary.\nThe Themed Entertainment Association considers Disneyland Paris to be the leading European resort in 2016 with a total of 13.37\u00a0million visitors. With two amusement parks and 5,800 rooms, it is followed by the Europa-Park resort with 5.6\u00a0million visitors and 953 rooms. The Spanish complex PortAventura World completes the rank top three in Europe. It features three themed-parks as well as 2,100 rooms.\n2017\u2013present: Expansions.\nOn 19 June 2017, the resort's operating company, Euro Disney S.C.A, was acquired by The Walt Disney Company, giving them full control of the resort. In December 2018, Natacha Rafalski took over as CEO. On 1 September 2017 the resort's second nature resort opened as Les Villages Nature Paris.\nOn 26 March 2017, the opening of Star Tours: The Adventures Continue \u2013 a new version of Star Tours \u2013 marked the start of Disneyland Paris' 25th anniversary. On 31 March 2017, forums announced plans for Marvel attractions at Disney Adventure World as well as renovations to the Disneyland Hotel and Disney's Hotel New York in the next ten years. On 14 May 2017, to celebrate Disneyland Paris' 25th anniversary, the park welcomed actors from \"\", for the film's European premiere.\nOn 27 February 2018, Walt Disney Company CEO Bob Iger announced that the company would invest \u20ac2\u00a0billion into the Disneyland Paris resort. The Disney Adventure World will be expanded with three new areas between 2021 and 2025, based upon Marvel, \"Frozen\" and \"Star Wars\".\nIn March 2018, a Disney Parks West regional division was formed with Disneyland Resort in California, Walt Disney World in Florida, and Disneyland Paris under Catherine Powell, outgoing Disneyland Paris president. This mirrors the Disney Parks East regional division consisting of Shanghai Disney Resort, Hong Kong Disneyland and Walt Disney Attractions Japan and headed by Michael Colglazier. In September 2019, Powell exited her post as president of the Parks West division, with the division dissolving, and Disneyland Paris transferred to Disney Parks International.\nOn 1 June 2019, Disneyland Paris sponsored the Magical Pride Party, an LGBTQ celebration. Previous similar events have taken place at the park since 2014, but were not officially sponsored by Disney.\nNatacha Rafalski was promoted from chief financial officer to president for Disneyland Paris in December 2018. On 15 March 2020, in line with other Disney parks and resorts, Disneyland Paris was shut down due to the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic. Disneyland Park and Walt Disney Studios Park reopened to the public on 15 July with the rest of the resort. On 29 October 2020, the resort closed again due to a second nationwide lockdown. Disneyland Paris reopened on 17 June 2021.\nIn 2022, Disney's shares in Villages Nature Paris were sold.\nIn 2022, Disneyland Paris celebrated its 30th anniversary. In March 2022, in celebration of its 30th anniversary, Disneyland Paris marked its 30 years with a nightly drone show entitled 'Disney D-Light' that was realized with the use of 200 drones and won the Park World Excellence Awards' title of the 'Best Live Entertainment of the Year' in 2022.\nIn the summer of 2022, to mark the park's anniversary in France, Disneyland Paris inaugurated the Marvel Avengers Campus, an area dedicated to the superheroes of the Marvel Universe, with the presence of the actress Brie Larson.\nAt the Expo of the International Association of Amusement Parks and Attractions (IAAPA), Disneyland Paris' 30th Anniversary Celebration was elected for the 'Most Creative Property-Wide Event, Amusement Parks and Attractions, Including Water Parks, Annual Attendance More than 1 million'.\nIn 2024, Disneyland Paris continued its multi-year transformation, including the Avenger's campus and ongoing renovations at Walt Disney Studios Park. The resort reported record attendance of 16.1 million visitors for fiscal year 2023, narrowly surpassing previous highs, amid post-COVID recovery.\nWalt Disney Studios Park is scheduled to be renamed Disney Adventure World on March 29, 2026, coinciding with the public opening of the World of Frozen land. This transformation is part of a two-billion-euro expansion plan announced in 2018, enticing a fresh creative vision for the park, from the behind the scenes of movie making to a complete immersion in fully detailed worlds inspired by the most famous Disney stories.\nThe World of Frozen land is a full-scale recreation of the Kingdom of Arendelle, featuring a 36-meter-high mountain, the Frozen Ever After boat ride, and a daytime show on the fjord. The area will offer a royal encounter with Queens Anna and Elsa in their castle, and the debut of a next-generation robotic Olaf character that will make special appearances in the land.\nThe park's transformation also includes Adventure Way, a new main avenue, and Adventure Bay, a 3 hectares lake. New facilities opening along World of Frozen include the Raiponce Tangled Spin spinning ride (a carousel of swirling gondolas) and the Regal View Restaurant &amp; Lounge, a table-service venue with an adjacent lounge. The lake will host the Disney Cascade of Lights nighttime spectacular, featuring fountains, lasers, and a fleet of 379 synchronized aerial and aquatic drones. The show's score was recorded by a 90-piece orchestra.\nAn Up-inspired attraction is planned for a later phase in the Adventure Way gardens, while a dedicated The Lion King themed area, featuring a flume ride with next-generation audio-animatronics, is confirmed, with construction already started in autumn 2025. The expansion entails the creation of approximately 1,000 new jobs.\nEntertainment shows.\nElectroland Festival.\nOn 8 July 2017, Disneyland hosted its first-ever EDM festival entitled Electroland, in celebration of Disneyland Paris' 25th anniversary. The second edition of the festival was held on 29 and 30 June 2018. The third edition, whose theme was based upon Disney's movie \"The Lion King\", was held over a span of 3 days from 5 July through to 7 July in 2019. Disneyland also announced the fourth edition of the 3-day festival in 2020 starting from 4 July, which was cancelled due to the Coronavirus.\nDisney Junior Dream Factory.\nIn July 2021, Disneyland Paris launched a new show, Disney Junior Dream Factory, which lasts 20 minutes and whose theme is 'dare to believe in your dreams and they will come true'. A French sign language version of the show is presented every weekend.\nTogether.\nIn July 2023, Disneyland Paris introduced its new show 'Together' which includes Dory, Coco, Buzz Lightyear and all the characters from Pixar films. It is a cine-concert that features a live orchestra with actors on stage, music extracted from the movies and original compositions.\nOther events.\nMinecon 2012.\nFrom November 24 to 25, 2012, Disneyland Paris' Events Arena, the New York Convention Centre, and the Times Square Exhibitor's Hall hosted the 2012 edition of the official \"Minecraft\" convention \"Minecon\" which was attended by 4,500 people. During the convention, Mojang announced \"Minecraft\"'s Redstone Update. The convention featured several \"Minecraft\" YouTubers as guests along with developers from Mojang.\nRegional impact.\nDisneyland Paris is the driving force behind the urban and economic development of the Val-d\u2019Europe conurbation due to tourism brought in by the park.\nDisneyland is also one of Europe's leading private tourist destinations with nearly 15 million visitors every year. After 25 years of its opening, Disneyland Paris recorded 320 million visits in 2017. The same year, it was reported that Disneyland Paris benefited the French economy by \u20ac66\u00a0billion in added value since its opening in 1992. It was also noted that Disneyland Paris contributed to the French economy through producing 56,000 direct and indirect jobs in 2017.\nDisneyland Paris significantly contributes to the sector of tourism in France. Tourists visiting Disneyland Paris generate 6% of tourism revenue in France and 17% of sales in the Ile-de-France region. In 2023, it was reported that more than 375 million visitors have been to Disneyland Paris with an average of 50% French and 50% foreign.\nEnvironmental sustainability.\nSince 2019, plastic straws and bags have been replaced by paper equivalents and bags made from 80% recycled plastic. This is not the site's first eco-responsible initiative. In 2013, it launched a program to optimize water management. Since 2013, the park has had its own wastewater treatment plant, enabling it to produce 2,100 m3 of water a day from its wastewater. On-site treatment enables ecological and economical management. Being the only theme park in Europe to have this kind of installation, Disneyland Paris has saved over 2 million m3 of drinking water since launching the system.\nIn 2022, Disneyland Paris announced that a total of 82,000 solar panels would be installed, generating 36 GWh of electricity per year. Once complete, it will be Europe's largest solar canopy plant over its guest parking lot. The system will cover 17% of the tourist park's electricity needs and already includes 46,000 photovoltaic panels. The project is expected to help reduce greenhouse gas emissions by approximately 890 tonnes of CO2 yearly.\nIn September 2023, Disneyland Paris renewed its involvement in World-Clean-Up Day, the world's largest environmental clean-up campaign. Accordingly, Disneyland Paris encouraged its team and Disney VoluntEARS to take part of the initiative.\nSponsorships and commitments.\nEver since the opening of the park in 1992, Disneyland Paris has been a partner of the Pi\u00e8ces Jaunes operation. Indeed, the park also organizes visits for hospitalized children. On 18 May 2022, 500 hospitalized children and adolescents were invited along with their families to spend a day at Disneyland Paris.\nAwards.\nIn 2020, Disneyland Paris was named 'Europe's Best Family Park' at the European Star Awards. The same year and at the same award show, Disneyland Paris managed to win other categories such as 'Best Dark Ride or Media Based Experience', 'Best Large Park' and 'Best Live Entertainment'.\nIn 2022, Disneyland Paris won the World Travel Awards' title of 'Europe's Leading Theme Park Resort'. Disneyland Paris already won the same award in 2016, 2017,2020 and 2021. Also in 2022, Disneyland Paris won the title of the best 'European Amusement Park of the Year' during the Parksmania Awards. Spider-Man W.E.B Adventure was awarded the 'European Top New Attractions' by the Parksmania Awards as well. Designed specifically for the 30th Anniversary of Disneyland Paris, Disney D-Light was honored with the title of Best Live Entertainment 2022 at the Park World Excellence Awards held in London on 14 September.\nName changes.\nDisneyland Paris and its properties have been subject to a number of name changes, initially an effort to overcome the negative publicity that followed the inception of the Euro Disney Resort.\nThe complex.\nDisneyland Paris contains two themed-parks, an entertainment center, a commercial area and leisure activities with stores, restaurants and entertainment, as well as eight Disney hotels and partner hotels of the complex.\n&lt;mapframe width=\"250\" height=\"250\" latitude=\"48.868719\" longitude=\"2.7818\" zoom=\"13\" text=\"Disneyland Park (blue), Walt Disney Studios Park (red) and Disney Village (yellow) inside the Disneyland Paris resort\"&gt;\n \"type\": \"ExternalData\",\n \"service\": \"geomask\",\n \"ids\": \"Q206521\",\n \"type\": \"ExternalData\",\n \"service\": \"geoshape\",\n \"ids\": \"Q764906\",\n \"type\": \"ExternalData\",\n \"service\": \"geoshape\",\n \"ids\": \"Q2313567\",\n \"type\": \"ExternalData\",\n \"service\": \"geoshape\",\n \"ids\": \"Q2262535\",\n \"type\": \"ExternalData\",\n \"service\": \"geoshape\",\n \"ids\": \"Q17623877\",\n&lt;/mapframe&gt;\nAttractions.\nAccording to the Disneyland Paris website the theme park's top five attractions in Disneyland Park are \"It's a Small World\", \"Star Wars Hyperspace Mountain\" (formerly known as \"\"), \"Big Thunder Mountain\", \"Pirates of the Caribbean\", and \"Buzz Lightyear's Laser Blast\". \"It's a Small World\", located in Fantasyland, takes visitors on a musical tour of world attractions; Star Tours and Hyperspace Mountain (which is a roller coaster) are situated in the Discoveryland district; Big Thunder Mountain is a mine train roller coaster within Frontierland; Pirates of the Caribbean is located in Adventureland; and Buzz Lightyear's Lazer Blast, also located in Discoveryland, was inspired by the Disney/Pixar film \"Toy Story 2\" and features people attempting to successfully shoot lasers at seemingly moving targets to earn as many points as possible.\nThe park is approximately , and is divided into two main parks, the fairytale-themed Disneyland Park and Disney's Adventure World, each holds its separate attraction areas within them. While the first park opened in 1992 and included attractions inspired by 'classic Disney characters', the second one opened in 2002 and included 'cinema-themed rides'.\nThe park receives around fifteen million visitors a year, accordingly, it is considered to be one of the most famous amusement parks in Europe.\nIn 2018, The Walt Disney Company announced a multi-year expansion project. It had been expected to be completed by 2024 in time for the 2024 Summer Olympics in Paris, but as of June 21st, 2024, it has yet to be completed.\nIn July 2022, the park opened a new area for its Marvel superheroes which includes a new roller coaster named 'Avengers Assemble: Flight Force' and the 'interactive Spider-Man W.E.B Adventure'. Besides these two attractions, the Marvel Avengers Campus also offers a store, three restaurants, several food trucks and a meeting place for Marvel superheroes.\nHotels.\nThe complex features six Disneyland Paris hotels. The Disneyland Hotel is located over the entrance of the Disneyland Park and is marketed as the most prestigious hotel on the property. A body of water known as Lake Disney is surrounded by Disney Hotel New York \u2013 The Art of Marvel, Disney Newport Bay Club, and Disney Sequoia Lodge. Disney Hotel Cheyenne and Disney Hotel Santa Fe are located near Lake Disney; Disney Davy Crockett Ranch is located in a woodland area outside the resort perimeter.\nDisneyland Paris includes six on-site partner hotels that are not managed by The Walt Disney Company but provide free shuttle buses to the parks: B&amp;B Hotel, Algonquin's Explorers Hotel and Campanile Val de France. There are also two associated hotels located in Val d'Europe: Adagio Marne-la-Vall\u00e9e Val d'Europe and H\u00f4tel l'\u00c9lys\u00e9e Val d'Europe.\nResorts.\nLocated set back from the parks, these resorts specialize in adventurous and aquatic activities.\nTransport.\nA large railway station, Marne-la-Vall\u00e9e\u2013Chessy, is located between the theme parks and Disney Village. It opened on 1 April 1992 and is notably served by regional express line RER A which provides a direct connection with the centre of Paris and for further connections, direct to Paris-Gare-de-Lyon.\nThe railway station is also served by long-distance high-speed TGV and Ouigo trains offering direct services to many cities across France. There are also Thalys services to both Brussels and Amsterdam.\nEurostar services were introduced between Disneyland Paris and London St Pancras International in 1996. These were suspended on 7 June 2023, though Eurostar announced they may be reinstated the following year. Customers can still travel from St Pancras to the resort by changing trains at Lille Europe. The suspension has been caused by the financial collapse of Eurostar during the COVID-19 pandemic, and further complications with post-Brexit border controls although Eurostar intends to revisits options the following year.\nFree Disney shuttle buses provide transport to all Disney hotels and Les Villages Nature Paris (except Disney Davy Crockett Ranch) and Associated Hotels. They are accessed from the Disneyland bus station.\nBackstage.\nDisneyland Paris has strict rules designed to prevent guests from seeing backstage areas of the park. Photography and filming are strictly forbidden in all backstage areas. The edges of the parks are lined with ride buildings and foliage to hide areas that are not for the public to see. Numerous area gates allow entrance into the park for cast members, parade floats, etc. When area gates around the park are open, anything that can be seen through them is considered to be on-stage and part of the \"Disney Magic\". Therefore, from the moment the gates are open, all of the cast must be in character and place to 'perform'. As the complex is so big, shuttle buses take cast members to different parts of the parks via service roads located around the perimeter of the parks.\nMany attractions are housed in large, soundstage-like buildings called \"show buildings\", some of which are partially or completely disguised by external theming. Most show buildings have off-white flat roofs that support HVAC units and footpaths for maintenance cast members. Housed inside the show buildings are the actual attractions, which include hidden walkways, service areas, control rooms, and other backstage operations.\nAccessibility and Inclusivity.\nDisneyland Paris provides various accommodations for guests with disabilities, including the Priority Access Card, which allows expedited entry to attractions via dedicated entrances for those with disabilities or long-term illnesses. More than 200,000 access cards were issued in 2023.\nAttendance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable incidents.\nNotable incidents that have taken place at Disneyland Paris in France. The term \"incidents\" refers to major accidents, injuries, deaths, and significant crimes. While these incidents are required to be reported to regulatory authorities for investigation, attraction-related incidents usually fall into one of the following categories:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76290", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76290", "title": "Ukraine/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "76291", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76291", "title": "Glamis castle", "text": ""}
{"id": "76293", "revid": "51066277", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76293", "title": "Temperance movement", "text": "Social movement against drinking alcohol\nThe temperance movement is a social movement promoting temperance or total abstinence from consumption of alcoholic beverages. Participants in the movement typically criticize alcohol intoxication or promote teetotalism, and its leaders emphasize alcohol's negative effects on people's health, personalities, and family lives. Typically the movement promotes alcohol education and it also demands the passage of new laws against the sale of alcohol: either regulations on the availability of alcohol, or the prohibition of it. \nDuring the 19th and early 20th centuries, the temperance movement became prominent in many countries, particularly in English-speaking, Scandinavian, and majority Protestant ones, and it eventually led to national prohibitions in Canada (1918 to 1920), Norway (spirits only, from 1919 to 1926), Finland (1919 to 1932), and the United States (1920 to 1933), as well as some provinces in India (1948 to present). A number of temperance organizations promote temperance.\nContext.\nIn late 17th-century North America, alcohol was a vital part of colonial life as a beverage, medicine, and commodity for men, women, and children. Drinking was widely accepted and completely integrated into society; however, drunkenness was not tolerated. In the colonial period of America from around 1623, when a Plymouth minister named William Blackstone began distributing apples and flowers, up until the mid-1800s, hard cider was the primary alcoholic drink of the people. Hard cider was prominent throughout this entire period and nothing compared in scope or availability. It was one of the few aspects of American culture that all the colonies shared. Settlement along the frontier often included a legal requirement whereby an orchard of mature apple trees bearing fruit within three years of settlement were required before a land title was officially granted. For example, The Ohio Company required settlers to plant not less than fifty apple trees and twenty peach trees within three years. These plantings guaranteed land titles. In 1767, the average New England family was consuming seven barrels of hard cider annually, which equates to about 35-gallons per person. Around the mid-1800s, newly arrived immigrants from Germany and elsewhere increased beer's popularity, and the temperance movement and continued westward expansion caused farmers to abandon their cider orchards.\nAttitudes toward alcohol in Great Britain became increasingly negative in the late 18th century. One of the reasons for this shift was the need for sober laborers to operate heavy machinery developed in the Industrial Revolution. Anthony Benezet suggested abstinence from alcohol in 1775. As early as the 1790s, physician Benjamin Rush envisioned a disease-like syndrome caused by excessive drinking, the \"symptoms\" being moral and physical decay. He cited abstinence as the only treatment option. Rush saw benefits in fermented drinks, but condemned the use of distilled spirits. As well as addiction, Rush noticed the correlation that drunkenness had with disease, death, suicide, and crime. According to \"Pompili, Maurizio et al\", there is increasing evidence that, aside from the volume of alcohol consumed, the pattern of the drinking is relevant for health outcomes. Overall, there is a causal relationship between alcohol consumption and more than 60 types of diseases and injuries. Alcohol is estimated to cause about 20\u201330% of cases of esophageal cancer, liver cancer, cirrhosis of the liver, homicide, epilepsy and motor vehicle accidents. After the American Revolution, Rush called upon ministers of various churches to act in preaching the messages of temperance. However, abstinence messages were largely ignored by Americans until the 1820s.\nHistory.\nTemperance is one of the cardinal virtues listed in Aristotle's tractate the Nicomachean Ethics.\nOrigins (pre-1820).\nDuring the 18th century, Native American cultures and societies were severely affected by alcohol, which was often given in trade for furs, leading to poverty and social disintegration. As early as 1737, Native American temperance activists began to campaign against alcohol and for legislation to restrict the sale and distribution of alcoholic drinks in indigenous communities. During the colonial era, leaders such as Peter Chartier, King Hagler and Little Turtle resisted the use of rum and brandy as trade items, in an effort to protect Native Americans from cultural changes they viewed as destructive.\nIn the 18th century, there was a gin craze in Great Britain. The middle classes became increasingly critical of the widespread drunkenness among the lower classes. Motivated by the middle-class desire for order, and amplified by the population growth in the cities, the drinking of gin became the subject of critical national debate. In 1743, John Wesley, the founder of the Methodist Churches, proclaimed \"that buying, selling, and drinking of liquor, unless absolutely necessary, were evils to be avoided\".\nIn the early 19th-century United States, alcohol was still regarded as a necessary part of the American diet for both practical and social reasons. Water supplies were often polluted, milk was not always available, and coffee and tea were expensive. Social constructs of the time also made it impolite for people (particularly men) to refuse alcohol. Drunkenness was not a problem, because people would only drink small amounts of alcohol throughout the day; at the turn of the 19th century, however, overindulgence and subsequent intoxication became problems that often led to the disintegration of the family. Early temperance societies, often associated with churches, were located in upstate New York and New England, but only lasted a few years. These early temperance societies called for moderate drinking (hence the name \"\"), but had little influence outside of their geographical areas.\nIn 1810, Calvinist ministers met in a seminary in Massachusetts to write articles about abstinence from alcohol to use in preaching to their congregations. The Massachusetts Society for the Suppression of Intemperance (MSSI) was formed in 1813. The organization only accepted men of high social standing and encouraged moderation in alcohol consumption. Its peak of influence was in 1818, and it ended in 1820, having made no significant mark on the future of the temperance movement. Other small temperance societies appeared in the 1810s, but had little impact outside their immediate regions and they disbanded soon after. Their methods had little effect in implementing temperance, and drinking actually increased until after 1830; however, their methods of public abstinence pledges and meetings, as well as handing out pamphlets, were implemented by more lasting temperance societies such as the American Temperance Society.\nThe first temperance society in Pennsylvania, of which a record has been found was that of \"Darby Association for Discouraging the Unnecessary Use of Spirituous Liquors\" organized in Delaware County in 1819, at the Darby Friends Meetinghouse.\nPromoting moderation (1820s\u20131830s).\nThe temperance movement in the United States began at a national level in the 1820s, having been popularized by evangelical temperance reformers and among the middle classes. There was a concentration on advice against hard spirits rather than on abstinence from all alcohol, and on moral reform rather than legal measures against alcohol. An earlier temperance movement had begun during the American Revolution in Connecticut, Virginia and New York state, with farmers forming associations to ban whiskey distilling. The movement spread to eight states, advocating temperance rather than abstinence and taking positions on religious issues such as observance of the Sabbath.\nAfter the American Revolution there was a new emphasis on good citizenship for the new republic. With the Evangelical Protestant religious revival of the 1820s and 1830s, called the Second Great Awakening, social movements began aiming for a perfect society. This included abolitionism and temperance. The Awakening brought with it an optimism about moral reform, achieved through volunteer organizations. Although the temperance movement was nonsectarian in principle, the movement consisted mostly of church-goers.\nThe temperance movement promoted temperance and emphasized the moral, economical and medical effects of overindulgence. Connecticut-born minister Lyman Beecher published a book in 1826 called \"Six Sermons on...Intemperance\". Beecher described inebriation as a \"national sin\" and suggested legislation to prohibit the sales of alcohol. He believed that it was only possible for drinkers to reform in the early stages of addiction, because anyone in advanced stages of addiction, according to Beecher, had damaged their morality and could not be saved. Early temperance reformers often viewed drunkards as warnings rather than as victims of a disease, leaving the state to take care of them and their conduct. In the same year, the American Temperance Society (ATS) was formed in Boston, Massachusetts, within 12 years claiming more than 8,000 local groups and over 1,250,000 members. Presbyterian preacher Charles Grandison Finney taught abstinence from ardent spirits. In the Rochester, New York revival of 1831, individuals were required to sign a temperance pledge in order to receive salvation. Finney believed and taught that the body represented the \"temple of God\" and anything that harmed the \"temple\", including alcohol, must be avoided. By 1833, several thousand groups similar to the ATS had been formed in most states. In some of these large communities, temperance almanacs were released which gave information about planting and harvesting as well as current information about temperance-related issues.\nTemperance societies were being organized in England about the same time, many inspired by a Belfast professor of theology, and Presbyterian Church of Ireland minister John Edgar, who poured his stock of whiskey out of his window in 1829. He mainly concentrated on the elimination of spirits rather than wine and beer. On August 14, 1829, he wrote a letter in the \"Belfast Telegraph\" publicizing his views on temperance. He also formed the Ulster Temperance Movement with other Presbyterian clergy, initially enduring ridicule from members of his community.\nThe 1830s saw a tremendous growth in temperance groups, not just in England and the United States, but also in British colonies, especially New Zealand and Australia. The Pequot writer and minister William Apess (1798\u20131839) established the first formal Native American temperance society among the Maspee Indians on 11 October 1833.\nOut of the religious revival and reform appeared the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and Seventh-day Adventism, new Christian denominations that established criteria for healthy living as a part of their religious teachings, namely temperance.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe Word of Wisdom is a health code followed by the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and other Latter Day Saint denominations which advises how to maintain good health: what one should do and what one should abstain from. One of the most prominent items in the Word of Wisdom is the complete abstinence from alcohol. When the Word of Wisdom was written, the Latter Day Saints were residing in Kirtland, Ohio and the Kirtland Temperance Society was organized on October 6, 1830, with 239 members. According to some scholars, the Word of Wisdom was influenced by the temperance movement. In June 1830, the \"Millennial Harbinger\" quoted from a book \"The Simplicity of Health\", which strongly condemned the use of alcohol and tobacco, and the untempered consumption of meat, similar to the provisions in the Word of Wisdom revealed three years later. This gave publicity to the movement and Temperance Societies began to form. On February 1, 1833, a few weeks before the Word of Wisdom was published, all distilleries in the Kirtland area were shut down. During the early history of the Word of Wisdom, temperance and other items in the health code were seen more as wise recommendations than as commandments.\nAlthough he advocated temperance, Joseph Smith did not preach complete abstinence from alcohol. According to Paul H. Peterson and Ronald W. Walker, Smith did not enforce abstinence from alcohol because he believed that it threatened individual choice and agency and that a requirement for the Latter Day Saints to comply would cause division in the church. In Harry M. Beardsley's book \"Joseph Smith and his Mormon Empire\", Beardsley argues that some Mormon historians attempted to portray Smith as a teetotaler, but according to the testimonies of his contemporaries, he often drank alcohol in his own home or the homes of his friends in Kirtland. In Nauvoo, Illinois, Smith was far less discreet with his drinking habits. However, at the end of the 19th century, second president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Brigham Young said that the Saints could no longer justify disobeying the Word of Wisdom because of the way that it originally was presented. In 1921, Heber J. Grant, then president of the LDS church, officially called on the Latter-day Saints to strictly adhere to the Word of Wisdom, including complete abstinence from alcohol.\nMillerites and Seventh-day Adventists.\nWilliam Miller, the founder of the Millerites, claimed that the Second Coming of Jesus Christ would be in 1843 and that anyone who drank alcohol would be unprepared for the Second Coming. After the Great Disappointment in 1843, the Seventh-day Adventist denomination adopted health reforms inspired by influential church pioneers Ellen G. White and her husband, a preacher, James Springer White, who did not use alcohol or tobacco. Ellen preached healthful living to her followers, without specifying abstinence from alcohol, as most of her followers were temperance followers, and abstinence would have been implied.\nTeetotalism (1830s).\nAs a response to rising social problems in urbanized areas, a stricter form of temperance emerged called teetotalism, which promoted the complete abstinence from alcoholic beverages, this time including wine and beer, not just ardent spirits. The term \"teetotaler\" came from the capital \"T\"s that were written next to the names of people who pledged complete abstinence from alcohol. People were instructed to only drink pure water and the teetotalists were known as the \"pure-water army\". In the US, the American Temperance Union advocated total abstinence from distilled and fermented liquors. By 1835, they had gained 1.5million members. This created conflict between the teetotalists and the more moderate members of the ATS. Although there were temperance societies in the South, as the movement became more closely tied with the abolitionist movement, people in the South created their own teetotal societies. Considering drinking to be an important part of their cultures, German and Irish immigrants resisted the movement. In the UK, teetotalism originated in Preston, Lancashire in 1833. The Catholic temperance movement started in 1838 when the Irish priest Theobald Mathew established the Teetotal Abstinence Society in 1838. In 1838, the mass working class movement for universal suffrage for men, Chartism, included a current called \"temperance chartism\". Faced with the refusal of the Parliament of the time to give the right to vote to working people, the temperance chartists saw the campaign against alcohol as a way of proving to the elites that working-class people were responsible enough to be granted the vote. In short, the 1830s was mostly characterized by moral persuasion of workers.\nGrowing radicalism and influence (1840s\u20131850s).\nThe Washingtonian movement.\nIn 1840, a group of artisans in Baltimore, Maryland created their own temperance society that could appeal to hard-drinking men like themselves. Calling themselves the Washingtonians, they pledged complete abstinence, attempting to persuade others through their own experience with alcohol rather than relying on preaching and religious lectures. They argued that sympathy was an overlooked method for helping people with alcohol addictions, citing coercion as an ineffective method. For that reason, they did not support prohibitive legislation of alcohol. They were suspicious of the divisiveness of denominational religion and did not use religion in their discussions, emphasizing personal abstinence. They never set up national organizations, believing that concentration of power and distance from citizens causes corruption. Meetings were public and they encouraged equal participation, appealing to both men and women and northerners and southerners. Unlike early temperance reformers, the Washingtonians did not believe that intemperance destroyed a drinker's morality. They worked on the platform that abstinence communities could be created through sympathizing with drunkards rather than ostracizing them through the belief that they are sinners or diseased.\nOn February 22, 1842, in Springfield, Illinois, while a member of the Illinois Legislature, Abraham Lincoln gave an address to the Springfield Washington Temperance Society on the 110th anniversary of the birth of George Washington. In the speech, Lincoln criticized early methods of the temperance movement as overly forceful and advocated reason as the solution to the problem of intemperance, praising the current temperance movement methods of the Washingtonian movement.\nBy 1845, the Washingtonian movement was no longer as prominent for three reasons. First, the evangelist reformers attacked them for refusing to admit alcoholism was a sin. Secondly, the movement was criticized as unsuccessful due to the number of men who returned to drinking. Finally, the movement was internally divided by differing views on prohibition legislation. Temperance fraternal societies such as the Sons of Temperance and the Good Samaritans took the place of the Washingtonian movement with largely similar views relating to helping alcoholics by way of sympathy and philanthropy. They, however, differed from the Washingtonians through their closed rather than public meetings, fines, and membership qualifications, believing their methods were more effective in curbing men's alcohol addictions. After the 1850s, the temperance movement was characterized more by prevention by means of prohibitions laws than remedial efforts to facilitate the recovery of alcoholics.\nGospel temperance.\nBy the mid-1850s, the United States was divided from differing views of slavery and prohibition laws and economic depression. This influenced the Third Great Awakening in the United States. The prayer meeting largely characterized this religious revival. Prayer meetings were devotional meetings run by laypeople rather than clergy and consisted of prayer and testimony by attendees. The meetings were held frequently and pledges of temperance were confessed. Prayer meetings and pledges characterized the post-Civil war \"gospel\" temperance movement. This movement was similar to early temperance movements in that drunkenness was seen as a sin; however, public testimony was used to convert others and convince them to sign the pledge. New and revitalized organizations emerged including the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA) and the early Woman's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU). The movement relied on the reformed individuals using local evangelical resources to create institutions to reform drunk men. Reformed men in Massachusetts and Maine formed \"ribbon\" clubs to support men who were interested in stopping drinking. Ribbon reformers traveled throughout the Midwest forming clubs and sharing their experiences with others. Gospel rescue missions or inebriate homes were created that allowed homeless drunkards a safe place to reform and learn to practice total abstinence while receiving food and shelter. These movements emphasized sympathy over coercion, yet unlike the Washingtonian movements, emphasized helplessness as well with relief from their addictions as a result from seeking the grace of God.\nAs an expression of moralism, the membership of the temperance movement overlapped with that of the abolitionist movement and women's suffrage movement.\nDuring the Victorian period, the temperance movement became more political, advocating the legal prohibition of all alcohol, rather than only calling for moderation. Proponents of temperance, teetotalism and prohibition came to be known as the \"drys\".\nThere was still a focus on the working class, but also their children. The Band of Hope was founded in 1847 in Leeds, UK by the Reverend Jabez Tunnicliff. It aimed to save working class children from the drinking parents by teaching them the importance and principles of sobriety and teetotalism. In 1855, a national organisation was formed amidst an explosion of Band of Hope work. Meetings were held in churches throughout the UK and included Christian teaching. The group campaigned politically for the curtailment of the influence of pubs and brewers. The organization became quite radical, organizing rallies, demonstrations and marches to influence as many people as possible to sign the pledge of allegiance to the society and to resolve to abstain \"from all liquors of an intoxicating quality, whether ale, porter, wine or spirits, except as medicine.\"\nIn this period there was local success at restricting or banning the sale of alcohol in many parts of the United States. In 1838, Massachusetts banned certain sales of spirits. The law was repealed two years later, but it set a precedent. In 1845, Michigan allowed its municipalities to decide whether they were going to prohibit. In 1851, a law was passed in Maine that was a full-fledged prohibition, and this was followed by bans in several other states in the next two decades.\nThe movement became more effective, with alcohol consumption in the US being decreased by half between 1830 and 1840. During this time, prohibition laws came into effect in twelve US states, such as Maine. A Maine law was passed in 1851 by the efforts of Neal Dow. Organized opposition caused five of these states to eliminate or weaken the laws.\nTransition to a mass movement (1860s\u20131900s).\nBy the 1860s the temperance movement had become a significant mass movement and it encouraged a general abstinence from the consumption of alcohol. A general movement to build alternatives to replace the functions of public bars existed, so the Independent Order of Rechabites was formed in England, with a branch later opening in the US as a friendly society that did not hold meetings in public bars. There was also a movement to introduce temperance fountains across the United States\u2014to provide people with reliably safe drinking water rather than saloon alcohol.\nIn the United States, the National Prohibition Party which was led by John Russell gradually became more popular, gaining more votes, as they felt that the existing Democrat and Republican parties did not do enough for the temperance cause. The party was associated with the Independent Order of Good Templars, which entertained a universalist orientation, being more open to blacks and repentant alcoholics than most other organizations.\nReflecting the teaching on alcohol of their founder John Wesley, Methodist churches were aligned with the temperance movement. Methodists believed that despite the supposed economic benefits of liquor traffic such as job creation and taxes, the harm that it caused society through its contribution to murder, gambling, prostitution, crime, and political corruption outweighed its economic benefits. In Great Britain, both Wesleyan Methodists and Primitive Methodists championed the cause of temperance; the Methodist Board of Temperance, Prohibition, and Public Morals was later established in the United States to advance the movement. In 1864, the Salvation Army, another denomination in the Wesleyan-Arminian tradition, was founded in London with a heavy emphasis on abstinence from alcohol and ministering to the working class, which led publicans to fund a Skeleton Army in order to disrupt their meetings. The Salvation Army quickly spread internationally, maintaining an emphasis on abstinence. Many of the most important prohibitionist groups, such as the avowedly prohibitionist United Kingdom Alliance (1853) and the US-based (but international) Woman's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU; 1873), began in the latter half of the 19th century, the latter of which was one of the largest women's societies in the world at that time. But the largest and most radical international temperance organization was the Good Templars. In 1862, the \"Soldiers Total Abstinence Association\" was founded in British India by Joseph Gelson Gregson, a Baptist missionary. In 1898, the Pioneer Total Abstinence Association was formed by James Cullen, an Irish Catholic, which spread to other English-speaking Catholic communities.\nIn 1870, a group of physicians founded the American Association of the Cure of Inebrity (AACI) in order to treat alcohol addiction. The two goals of this organization were to convince skeptical members of the medical community of the existence and seriousness of the disease of alcoholism and prove the efficacy of asylum treatments for alcoholics. They argued for more genetic causes of alcohol addictions. Treatments often included restraining patients while they reformed, both physically and morally.\nDuring the same period, there was significant pushback against the growing temperance movement, particularly in urban areas with significant European immigrant communities. Chicago political bosses A.C. Hesing and Hermann Raster forced the Republican Party to adopt an anti-temperance platform at the 1872 Republican National Convention with the threat of taking the German and European vote away from the party. The following year, Hesing formed the People's Party, a breakaway pro-liquor faction of the Republican Party, and elected Harvey Doolittle Colvin as mayor of Chicago by a wide margin.\nThe Anti-Saloon League was an organization that began in Ohio in 1893. Reacting to urban growth, it was driven by evangelical Protestantism. Furthermore, the League was strongly supported by the WCTU: in some US states alcoholism had become epidemic and rates of domestic violence were also high. At that time, Americans drank about three times as much alcohol as they drank in the 2010s. The League simultaneously campaigned for suffrage and temperance, with its leader Susan B. Anthony stating that \"The only hope of the Anti-Saloon League's success lies in putting the ballot into the hands of women\", i.e. it was expected that the first act that women were to take upon themselves after having obtained the right to vote, was to vote for an alcohol ban.\nThe actions of the temperance movement included organizing sobriety lectures and setting up reform clubs for men and children. Some proponents also opened special temperance hotels and lunch wagons, and they also lobbied for banning liquor during prominent events. The Scientific Temperance Instruction Movement published textbooks, promoted alcohol education and held many lectures. Political action included lobbying local legislators and creating petition campaigns.\nThis new trend in the history of the temperance movement was the last but it proved to be the most effective. Scholars have estimated that by 1900, one in ten Americans had signed a pledge to abstain from drinking, as the temperance movement became the most well-organized lobby group of the time. International conferences were held, in which temperance advocacy methods and policies were discussed. By the turn of the century, temperance societies became commonplace in the US.\nDuring that time, there was also a growth in the number of non-religious temperance groups which were linked to left-wing movements, such as the Scottish Prohibition Party. Founded in 1901, it went on to defeat Winston Churchill in Dundee in the 1922 general election.\nLegislative successes and failures (1910s).\nA favorite goal of the British Temperance movement was sharply to reduce heavy drinking by closing as many pubs as possible. Advocates were Protestant nonconformists who played a major role in the Liberal Party. The Liberal Party adopted temperance platforms focused on local option. In 1908, Prime Minister H.H. Asquith\u2014although a heavy drinker himself\u2014took the lead by proposing to close about a third of the 100,000 pubs in England and Wales, with the owners compensated through a new tax on surviving pubs. The brewers controlled the pubs and organized a stiff resistance, supported by the Conservatives, who repeatedly defeated the proposal in the House of Lords. However, the People's Tax of 1910 included a stiff tax on pubs.\nThe movement gained traction during the First World War, with President Wilson issuing sharp restrictions on the sale of alcohol in many combatant countries. This was done to preserve grain for food production. During this time, prohibitionists used anti-German sentiment related to the war to rally against alcohol sales, since many brewers were of German-American descent.\n was a movement in France, inaugurated in 1914, under the auspices of the Ligue National contre l'Alcoolisme (National League Against Alcoholism), to bring public sentiment for increased restrictions upon the liquor traffic to bear upon the election of candidates for the Chamber of Deputies. As late as 1919, L'Alarme did not only oppose fermented liquors, but considered wine and wine-producers among the most powerful forces against ardent spirits, to which the alcoholism opposed by L'Alarme was considered to be due.\nAccording to alcohol researcher Johan Edman, the first country to issue an alcohol prohibition was Russia, as part of war mobilization policies. This followed after Russia had made significant losses in the war against the sober Japanese in 1905. In the UK, the Liberal government passed the Defence of the Realm Act 1914 when pub hours were licensed, beer was watered down and was subject to a penny a pint extra tax, and in 1916 a State Management Scheme meant that breweries and pubs in certain areas of Britain were nationalized, especially in places where armaments were made.\nIn 1913, the ASL began its efforts for national prohibition. Wayne Wheeler, a member of the Anti-Saloon League was integral in the prohibition movement in the United States. He used hard political persuasion called \"Wheelerism\" in the 1920s of legislative bodies. Rather than ask directly for a vote, which Wheeler viewed as weak, Wheeler covered the desks of legislators in telegrams. He was also accomplished in rallying supporters; the Cincinnati \"Enquirer\" called Wheeler \"the strongest political force of his day\". His efforts specifically influenced the passing of the eighteenth-amendment. And in 1920, the Eighteenth Amendment was successfully passed in the United States, introducing prohibition of the manufacture, sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages. The amendment, also called \"the noble experiment\", was preceded by the National Prohibition Act, which stipulated how the federal government should enforce the amendment.\nNational prohibition was proposed several times in New Zealand as well, and nearly successful. On a similar note, Australian states and New Zealand introduced\nrestrictive early closing times for bars during and immediately after the First World War. In Canada, in 1916 the Ontario Temperance Act was passed, prohibiting the sales of alcoholic beverages with more than 2.5% alcohol. In the 1920s imports of alcohol were cut off by provincial referendums.\nNorway introduced partial prohibition in 1917, which became full prohibition through a referendum in 1919, but this legislation was overturned in 1926. Similarly, Finland introduced prohibition in 1919, but repealed it in 1932 after an upsurge in violent crime associated with criminal opportunism and the illegal liquor trade. Iceland introduced prohibition in 1915, but liberalized consumption of spirits in 1933, but beer was still illegal until 1989. In the 1910s, half of the countries in the world had introduced some form of alcohol control in their laws or policies.\nAssociation with independence movements (1920s\u20131960s).\nThe temperance movement started to wane in the 1930s, with prohibition being criticised as creating unhealthy drinking habits, encouraging criminals and discouraging economic activity. Prohibition would not last long: The legislative tide largely moved away from prohibition when the Twenty-first Amendment to the Constitution was ratified on December 5, 1933, repealing nationwide prohibition. The gradual relaxation of licensing laws went on throughout the 20th century, with Mississippi being the last state to end prohibition in 1966. In Australia, early hotel closing times were reverted in the 1950s and 1960s.\nInitially, prohibition had some positive effects in some states, with Ford reporting that absenteeism in his companies had decreased by half. Alcohol consumption decreased dramatically. Also, statistical analysis has shown that the temperance movement during this time had a positive, but moderate, effect on later adult educational outcomes through providing a healthy pre-natal environment. However, prohibition had negative effects on the US economy, with thousands of jobs being lost, the catering and entertainment industries losing huge profits. The US and other countries with prohibition saw their tax revenues decrease dramatically, with some estimating this at a loss of 11 billion dollars for the US. Furthermore, enforcement of the alcohol ban was an expensive undertaking for the government. Because the Eighteenth Amendment did not prohibit consumption, but only manufacture, distribution and sale, illegal consumption became commonplace. Illegal production of alcohol rose, and a thousand people per year died of alcohol that was illegally produced with little quality control. Bootlegging was a profitable activity, and crime increased rather than decreased as expected and advocated by proponents.\nIn the United States, the temperance movement was in decline: Fundamentalist and nativist groups had become dominant in the movement, which led moderate members to leave the movement.\nDuring this time, in former colonies (such as Gujarat in India, Sri Lanka and Egypt), the temperance movement was associated with anti-colonialism or religious revival. As such, the temperance movement in India became closely tied with the Indian independence movement as Mahatma Gandhi viewed alcohol as being a foreign importation. He viewed foreign rule as the reason that national prohibition was not yet established at his time.\n1960s\u2013present.\nThe temperance movement still exists in many parts of the world, but it is generally less politically influential than it was in the early 20th century. Its efforts today include disseminating research regarding alcohol and health, in addition to its effects on society and the family unit.\nThe addition of warning labels on alcoholic beverages is supported by organizations of the temperance movement, such as the WCTU.\nProminent temperance organizations active today include the World Woman's Christian Temperance Union, Mothers Against Drunk Driving, Alcohol Justice, International Blue Cross, Independent Order of Rechabites, and International Organisation of Good Templars.\nThe Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection, a Methodist denomination in the conservative holiness movement, as well as the Salvation Army, for example, are Christian Churches that continue to require that their members refrain from drinking alcohol as well as smoking, taking illegal drugs, and gambling.\nIn youth culture in the 1990s, temperance was an important part of the straight edge scene, which stresses abstinence from other drugs.\nMr Fitzpatrick's in Lancashire, England is thought to be the oldest temperance bars and other such establishments have become popular in recent times.\nIn various parts of the world, voters continue to advocate for alcohol prohibition. For example, in 2016, many women in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu blamed alcohol for societal ills, such as domestic violence, and thus took to the polls to elect a pro-prohibition leader. Their effort succeeded and when Jayaram Jayalalithaa was voted in, she shut down five hundred liquor shops on her first day in office. In 2017, women agitated for temperance and the prohibition of alcohol in the state of Bihar; they campaigned for the election of Nitish Kumar, who upon the request of women, pledged that he would prohibit alcohol. Since signing prohibition legislation, \"Murders and gang robberies are down almost 20 percent from a year earlier, and riots by 13 percent. Fatal traffic accidents fell by 10 percent.\"\nBeliefs, principles and culture.\nTemperance proponents saw the alcohol problem as the most crucial problem of Western civilization. Alcoholism was seen to cause secondary poverty, and all types of social problems: alcohol was the enemy of everything good that modernity and science had to offer. They believed that abstinence would help decrease crime, make families stronger, and improve society as a whole. Although the temperance movement was non-denominational in principle, the movement consisted mostly of church-goers. Temperance advocates used scientific arguments to back up their views, but at the core the temperance philosophy was moral-religious in nature. The alcohol problem was connected with a sense of purpose and modernity of the western nation, and was largely international in nature, in keeping with the international optimism typical for the period preceding the First World War.\nHistorical analysis of conference documents helps create an image of what the temperance movement represented. The movement believed that alcohol use disorder was a threat to scientific progress, as it was believed citizens had to be strong and sober to be ready for the modern age. Progressive themes and causes such as abolition, natural self-determination, worker's rights, and the importance of women in rearing children to be good citizens were key themes of this citizenship ideology. The movement put itself at service of the state, but was critical of it. In that sense, it was a radical movement with liberal and socialist aspects, but in some parts of the world, notably the US, allied with conservatism. Alcohol was often associated with oppression: not only oppression in the West, but also in colonies. Temperance advocates saw alcohol as a product that \"...enables a few to become rich while it impoverishes the very many\". Temperance advocates worked closely with the labor movement, as well as the women suffrage movement, partly because there was mutual support and benefit, and the causes were seen as connected.\nPrevention, treatment and restriction.\nTemperance proponents used a variety of means to prevent and treat alcohol use disorder and restrict its consumption. At the end of the 19th century, medically oriented treatment of alcohol use disorder became more common. In a trend that was preceded by Rush's writings, alcoholism came to be seen as an illness which could be medically treated. Scientists who were temperance proponents attempted to find the underlying causes of alcohol use disorder. At the same time, criticism rose toward use of alcohol in medical care. The notion of alcohol use disorder as a disease became widely accepted much later, generally after the Second World War.\nNevertheless, restriction of consumption was most emphasized in the movement, but ideas on how to accomplish this were varied and conflicting. Apart from the prohibition by law, there were also ideas to establish state monopoly on all alcohol sales, or through law reform remove profit from the alcohol industry.\nDuring the 1900s decade, the ideal of strong citizens was developed into the hygienism ideology. Through the influence of scientific theories on heredity, temperance proponents came to believe that alcohol problems were not just a personal concern, but caused later generations of people to \"degenerate\" as well. Public hygiene and improving the population through personal lifestyle were therefore promoted. A variety of temperance halls, temperance bars and coffee palaces were established as replacements for saloons. Numerous periodicals devoted to temperance were published and temperance theatre, which had started in the 1820s, became an important part of the American cultural landscape at this time. The temperance movement generated its own popular culture. Popular songwriters such as Susan McFarland Parkhurst, George Frederick Root, Henry Clay Work and Stephen C. Foster composed a number of these songs. At temperance inns puppet plays, minstrel acts, parades and other shows were held.\nRole of women.\nMuch of the temperance movement was based on organized religion, which saw women as responsible for edifying their children to be abstaining citizens. Nevertheless, temperance was tied in with both religious renewal and progressive politics, particularly female suffrage. Furthermore, temperance activists were able to promote suffrage more effectively than suffrage activists were, because of their wide-ranging experiences as activists, and because they argued for a concrete desire for safety at home, rather than for an abstract desire for justice as suffragists did.\nBy 1831, there were over 24 women's organizations which were dedicated to the temperance movement. Women were specifically drawn to the temperance movement, because it represented a fight to end a practice that greatly affected women's quality of life. Temperance was seen as a feminine, religious and moral duty, and when it was achieved, it was also seen as a way to gain familial and domestic security as well as salvation in a religious sense. Indeed, scholar Ruth Bordin stated that the temperance movement was \"the foremost example of American feminism\". Prominent women such as Amelia Bloomer, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and Susan B. Anthony were active in temperance and abolitionist movements in the 1840s.\nA myriad of factors contributed to women's interest in the temperance movement. One of the initial contributions was the frequency in which women were the victims of those who had an alcohol use disorder. At a Chicago meeting of the National American Woman Suffrage Association, Susan B. Anthony stated that women suffer the most from drunkenness. The inability of women to control wages, vote, or own property added to their vulnerability. Another contribution was related to the role of women in the home in the 19th century, which was largely to preside over the spiritual and physical needs of their homes and families. Because of this, women believed that it was their duty to protect their families from the danger of alcohol and convert their family members to the ideas of abstinence. This newfound calling to temperance, however, did not change the widely held viewpoint that women were only responsible for matters which pertained to their homes. Consequently, women had what Ruth Bordin referred to as the \"maternal struggle\" which women felt was the internal contradiction that came with their newly discovered power to make change, while still believing in their nurturing and domestic roles without yet understanding how to use their newly acquired power. June Sochen called women who joined movements such as women's temperance organizations \"pragmatic feminists\", because they took action to solve their grievances, but were not interested in altering traditional sex roles. The missionary organizations of many Protestant denominations gave women an avenue to work from; several all-female missionary societies already existed and it was easy for them to transform themselves into women's temperance organizations.\nIn the 1870s and 1880s, the number of women who were in the middle and upper classes was large enough to support women's participation in the temperance movement. Higher class women did not need to work because they could rely on their husbands' ability to support their families and they consequently had more leisure time to engage in organizations and associations that were affiliated with the temperance movement. The influx of Irish immigrants filled the servant jobs that freed African-Americans left after the American Civil War, leaving upper and middle-class women with even more time to participate in the community while domestic jobs were being filled. Moreover, the birth rate had fallen, leaving women with an average of four children in 1880 as compared to seven children at the beginning of the 19th century. The gathering of people in urban areas and the extra leisure time for women contributed to the mass female temperance movement.\nThe Woman's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) grew out of a spontaneous crusade against saloons and liquor stores that began in Ohio and spread throughout the Midwestern United States during the winter of 1873\u20131874. The crusade consisted of over 32,000 women who stormed into saloons and liquor stores in order to disrupt business and stop the sales of alcohol. The WCTU was officially organized in late November 1874 in Cleveland, Ohio. Frances Willard, the organization's second president, helped grow the organization into the largest women's religious organization in the 19th century. Willard was interested in suffrage and women's rights as well as temperance, believing that temperance could improve the quality of life on both the family and community level. The WCTU trained women in skills such as public speaking, leadership, and political thinking, using temperance as a springboard to achieve a higher quality of life for women on many levels. In 1881, the WCTU began lobbying for the mandate of instruction in temperance in public schools. In 1901, schools were required to instruct students on temperance ideas, but they were accused of perpetuating misinformation, fear mongering, and racist stereotypes. Carrie Nation was one of the most extreme temperance movement workers and she was arrested 30 times for her \"hatchetations\" - using a hatchet to destroy property at bars, saloons, and even pharmacies, believing that even alcohol which was used for medicine was unjustified. At the approach of the 20th century, the temperance movement became more interested in legislative reform as pressure from the Anti-Saloon League increased. \nWomen, who had not yet achieved suffrage, became less central to the movement in the early 1900s.\nOther causes.\nProhibition agendas also became popular among factory owners, who strove for more efficiency during a period of increased industrialization. For this reason, industrial leaders such as Henry Ford and S.S. Kresge supported Prohibition. The cause of the sober factory worker was related to the cause of women temperance leaders: concerned mothers protested against the enslavement of factory workers, as well as the temptation which saloons offered to these workers. Efficiency was also an important argument for the government because it wanted its soldiers to be sober.\nAt the end of the 19th century, temperance movement opponents started to criticize the slave trade in Africa. This criticism came during the last period of rapid colonial expansion. Slavery and the alcohol trade in colonies were seen as two closely related problems, and they were frequently called \"the twin oppressors of the people\". Again, this subject tied in with the ideas of civilization and effectiveness: temperance advocates raised the issue that the \"natives\" could not be properly \"civilized\" and put to work, if they were provided with the vice of alcohol.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76294", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76294", "title": "Bay of Skaill", "text": "Small bay on the west coast of the Orkney Mainland, Scotland\nThe Bay of Skaill (from Old Norse \"Bugr Sk\u00e1la\") is a small bay on the west coast of the Orkney Mainland, Scotland.\nVisitor attractions.\nBay of Skaill is the location of the famous Neolithic settlement, Skara Brae, and a large residence, Skaill House, the property of the laird on whose estate Skara Brae was discovered. Skaill House has connections with Captain James Cook.\nSkaill Viking hoard.\nIn March 1858, a boy named David Linklater was digging at Muckle Brae, near the Sandwick parish church, when he came across a few pieces of silver lying in the earth. Astounded by the find, Linklater was soon joined by a number of folk. Together they unearthed over one hundred items. This hoard is the largest Viking treasure trove found so far in Scotland.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76296", "revid": "50349415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76296", "title": "Types of swords", "text": "Bladed weapon\nThis is a list of types of swords. The term sword used here is a narrow definition. This is not a general List of premodern combat weapons and does not include the machete, macuahuitl or similar \"sword-like\" weapons.\nAsian swords.\nSoutheastern Asian swords.\nSwords and knives found in Southeast Asia are influenced by Indian, Chinese, Middle Eastern, and European forms.\nWestern and Central Asian swords.\nThe Ancient Greeks and Romans also introduced various types of swords, see #Ancient Europe.\nPost-classical period.\nAll of the Islamic world during the 16th to 18th century, including the Ottoman Empire and Persia were influenced by the \"scimitar\" type of single-edged curved sword. Via the Mameluke sword this also gave rise to the European cavalry sabre.\nTerms for the \"scimitar\" curved sword:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76297", "revid": "10863197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76297", "title": "Red River (1948 film)", "text": "Film by Howard Hawks\nRed River is a 1948 American Western film, directed and produced by Howard Hawks and starring John Wayne and Montgomery Clift. It gives a fictional account of the first cattle drive from Texas to Kansas along the Chisholm Trail. The dramatic tension stems from a growing feud over the management of the drive between the Texas rancher who initiated it (Wayne) and his adopted adult son (Clift).\nThe film's supporting cast features: Walter Brennan, Joanne Dru, Coleen Gray, Harry Carey, John Ireland, Hank Worden, Noah Beery Jr., Harry Carey Jr. and Paul Fix. Borden Chase and Charles Schnee wrote the screenplay based on Chase's original story (which was first serialized in \"The Saturday Evening Post\" in 1946 as \"Blazing Guns on the Chisholm Trail\").\nUpon its release, \"Red River\" was both a critical and commercial success and was nominated for two Academy Awards. In 1990, \"Red River\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\" \"Red River\" was selected by the American Film Institute as the fifth-greatest Western of all time in the AFI's 10 Top 10 list in 2008.\nPlot.\nIn 1851, Thomas Dunson and his companion, Nadine Groot, leave St. Louis as part of a wagon train bound for the California Trail. Just north of Texas's northern border, Dunson announces that he will leave the wagon train and venture south to establish his own ranch. The trail boss says it is unsafe as there are Indians around and he needs a good gunman like Dunson with the train. Dunson tells his love interest, Fen, to stay with the wagons until he sends for her. He gives her his late mother's bracelet.\nHours later, Dunson and Groot reach the Red River, along the Texas border. They spot smoke coming from the wagon train's direction. That night they are attacked by Indians, whom they kill. On the wrist of one, Dunson finds the bracelet he gave Fen. The next day, teenager Matt Garth wanders into their camp, apparently the wagon train's sole survivor. Dunson takes the boy with them. They cross the river into Texas and four weeks later settle near the Rio Grande. Dunson names his new spread the Red River\u00a0D after his chosen cattle brand; he promises to add M when Matt earns it. Two men arrive and say they work for Don Diego, who owns all the land from there south for . Dunson declares that all land north of the Rio Grande is his. One of the men draws on Dunson, who kills him. Dunson tells the other to tell Don Diego what happened.\nAfter 14 years, Dunson has built a successful ranch, but the Civil War has left him broke. His only option is to drive his herd of 10,000 head 1,000\u00a0miles (1,600\u00a0km) to the railhead in Missouri, where he believes they will fetch a good price. Cherry Valance, a professional gunman, joins the drive. Valance relates that he has heard the railroad has reached Abilene, Kansas, which is much closer than Sedalia, where they are heading. When Dunson confirms that Valance had not actually seen the railroad, he ignores the rumor in favor of continuing to Missouri.\nOne of the drovers, Bunk Kenneally, causes a stampede by accidentally making a lot of noise while sneaking sugar from one of the chuckwagons, resulting in drover Dan Latimer's death. When Dunson attempts to whip him for causing the stampede, Kenneally draws his gun. Both Matt and Dunson draw, but Matt is faster, wounding Kenneally. Valance tells Matt that he is soft for not shooting to kill as he and Dunson would have.\nDunson keeps driving the men harder, to their disgruntlement. They find the lone survivor from an earlier drive, who says they should have followed the Chisholm Trail to Abilene. When Dunson presses him, he says he cannot remember for sure that the railway had reached Abilene, so Dunson says they will still go to Missouri. Three men say they have had enough and are going to leave the drive. Dunson says they agreed to finish when they signed on. There is a shootout and the three men are killed, with Matt helping Dunson. Three more men leave in the middle of the night, taking precious supplies. Dunson sends Valence to bring them back.\nThey cross the Red River and camp for the night. The next morning, Valance returns with two of the three deserters, the other having tried to fight and being killed. When Dunson announces that he intends to lynch them, Matt says he will not allow it. Dunson tries to shoot Matt but is shot in the hand by Valance. With the support of the cowhands, Matt takes charge of the drive, saying they will head for Abilene, with Dunson left behind. Groot is the only one who offers to stay with Dunson, but is told to go with the drive. As they leave, Dunson says he will find Matt and kill him.\nThe drive saves a wagon train of gamblers and dance hall girls from an Indian attack. One of the girls, Tess Millay, becomes very interested in Matt, who is not initially interested. With the weather worsening and the next river rising, Matt gets the drive moving early the next morning. Eight days after departing, Dunson arrives with some hired men. Dunson is surprised that Tess knows his name. Dunson notices that Tess is wearing his mother's bracelet and tells her that he wanted to leave his ranch to Matt until the young man stole his herd. Dunson offers Tess half the ranch if she will bear him a son. She agrees on the condition that he abandons his pursuit of Matt, but he says he will not, so she demands to accompany him.\nWhen Matt reaches Abilene, he finds that the town has been waiting to buy such a herd. He accepts an offer and later finds Tess in his room. She tells him that Dunson is near. The next morning, as Dunson enters town, he is challenged by Valance. They shoot each other, both getting wounded, but Dunson carries on towards Matt. He tells Matt to draw, but he refuses, even after Dunson has emptied his gun with near misses and grazing Matt's cheek. Dunson throws his gun away and does the same with Matt's. Dunson starts punching Matt, who tries not to fight back; when he does, Tess interrupts. Making peace, Dunson advises Matt to marry Tess and says when they get back to the ranch, he will incorporate an M into the brand.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\n\"Red River\" was filmed in 1946, copyrighted in 1947, and widely released on September 17, 1948. Footage from \"Red River\" was later incorporated into the opening montage of Wayne's last film, \"The Shootist\", to illustrate the backstory of Wayne's character. The film was nominated for Academy Awards for Best Film Editing (Christian Nyby) and Best Writing, Motion Picture Story (Borden Chase). John Ford, who worked with Wayne on many films such as \"Stagecoach\", \"The Searchers\" and \"The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance\", was so impressed with Wayne's performance that he is reported to have said: \"I didn't know the big son of a bitch could act!\"\nHawks felt Dru's final speech after Dunson and Matt fight didn't work, wishing his original choice to play Tess Margaret Sheridan had been available. He felt Sheridan could have done a far better job of delivering the lines than Dru did.\nThe film was shot in black and white rather than color, because director Howard Hawks found Technicolor technology to be too \"garish\" for the realistic style desired. But as with many remembrances of Hawks, he has also said the exact opposite to Peter Bogdanovich, to whom he claimed that he wished he had shot the picture in color, especially the sequence involving driving the cattle across the Red River. Had he done so, he thought it would have made a lot more money. Second unit director Arthur Rosson was given credit in the opening title crawl as co-director. He shot parts of the cattle drive and some action sequences. The film's ending differed from that of the original story. In Chase's original \"Saturday Evening Post\" story, published in 1946 as \"Blazing Guns on the Chisholm Trail\", Valance shoots Dunson dead in Abilene and Matt takes his body back to Texas to be buried on the ranch.\nAlternate versions.\nDuring the production and while the film was still being shot, Hawks was not satisfied with the editing and asked Christian Nyby to take over cutting duties. Nyby worked for about a year on the project. After production, the pre-release version was 133 minutes and included book-style transitions. This version was briefly available for television in the 1970s, but was believed to be lost. It was rediscovered after a long search as a Cin\u00e9math\u00e8que Fran\u00e7aise 35\u00a0mm print, and released by the Criterion Collection.\nBefore the film could be released, Howard Hughes sued Hawks, claiming that the climactic scene between Dunson and Matt was too similar to the film \"The Outlaw\" (1943), which both Hawks and Hughes had worked on. Hughes prepared a new 127-minute cut, which replaced the book inserts with spoken narration by Walter Brennan. Nyby salvaged the film by editing in some reaction shots, which resulted in the original theatrical version. This version was lost, and the 133-minute pre-release version was seen on television broadcasts and home video releases. The original theatrical cut was reassembled by Janus Films (in co-operation with UA parent company MGM) for their Criterion Collection Blu-ray/DVD release on May 27, 2014.\nFilm historian Peter Bogdanovich interviewed Hawks in 1972, and he was led to believe that the narrated theatrical version was the director's preferred cut. This view was upheld by Geoffrey O'Brien in his 2014 essay for the Criterion release. Contrarily, some, including film historian Gerald Mast, argue that Hawks preferred the 133-minute version. Mast points out that this is told from an objective third-person point of view, while the shorter cut has Brennan's character narrating scenes he could not have witnessed. Filmmaker/historian Michael Schlesinger, in his essay on the film for the Library of Congress' National Film Registry, argues that when Bogdanovich interviewed Hawks, the director \"was 76 and in declining health\", when he was prone to telling tall tales. Schlesinger also points out that Hughes's shortened version was prepared for overseas distribution because it is easier to replace narration than printed text.\nSoundtrack.\nThe song \"Settle Down\", by musician Dimitri Tiomkin and lyricist Frederick Herbert, was heard over the credits and at various places throughout the film score. It was later adapted by Tiomkin with a new lyric by Paul Francis Webster as \"My Rifle, My Pony, and Me\" in the 1959 film \"Rio Bravo\" for an onscreen duet by Dean Martin and Ricky Nelson as John Wayne and Walter Brennan look on.\nReception.\nBosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" gave the film a mostly positive review, praising the main cast for \"several fine performances\" and Hawks' direction for \"credible substance and detail.\" He only found a \"big let-down\" in the Indian wagon train attack scene, lamenting that the film had \"run smack into 'Hollywood' in the form of a glamorized female, played by Joanne Dru.\" \"Variety\" called it \"a spectacle of sweeping grandeur\" with \"a first rate script,\" adding, \"John Wayne has his best assignment to date and he makes the most of it.\" John McCarten of \"The New Yorker\" found the film \"full of fine Western shots,\" with the main cast's performances \"all first-rate.\" \"Harrison's Reports\" called the film \"an epic of such sweep and magnitude that it deserves to take its place as one of the finest pictures of its type ever to come out of Hollywood.\"\nOn review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes the film holds an approval rating of 100% rating, based on 34 reviews, with an average rating of 8.8/10.\nRoger Ebert considered it one of the greatest Western films of all time.\nThis movie was the last movie shown in the 1971 Peter Bogdanovich motion picture, \"The Last Picture Show\".\nIn 1990, \"Red River\" was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.\n\"Red River\" was selected by the American Film Institute as the 5th greatest Western of all time in the AFI's 10 Top 10 list in 2008.\nIn 2025, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" listed \"Red River\" as having the best stunts of 1948.\n\"Red River D\" belt buckles.\nTo commemorate their work on the film, director Howard Hawks had special Western belt buckles made up for certain members of the cast and crew of \"Red River\". The solid silver belt buckles had a twisted silver wire rope edge, the Dunson brand in gold in the center, the words \"Red River\" in gold wire in the upper left and lower right corners, the initials of the recipients in the lower left corner, and the date \"1946\" in cut gold numerals in the upper right corner. Hawks gave full-sized (men's) buckles to John Wayne, his son David Hawks, Montgomery Clift, Walter Brennan, assistant director Arthur Rosson, cinematographer Russell Harlan, and John Ireland. Joanna Dru and Hawks' daughter Barbara were given smaller (ladies') versions of the buckle. According to David Hawks, other men's and women's buckles were distributed, but he can only confirm the family members and members of the cast and production team listed above received Red River D buckles.\nWayne and Hawks exchanged buckles as a token of their mutual respect. Wayne wore the Red River D belt buckle with the initials \"HWH\" in nine other movies: \"Rio Bravo\" (1959), \"North to Alaska\" (1960), \"Hatari!\" (1962), \"McLintock!\" (1963), \"Circus World\" (1964), \"The Sons of Katie Elder\" (1965), \"El Dorado\" (1966), \"The War Wagon\" (1967) and \"Rio Lobo\" (1970). The actor did this even when he wasn't filming under the direction of Howard Hawks, with one known exception: Apparently John Wayne didn't wear the Red River belt buckle in films of John Ford.\nIn 1981, John Wayne's son, Michael, sent the buckle to a silversmith, in order to have duplicates made for all of Wayne's children. While in the silversmith's care, it was stolen and has not been seen since. Red River D buckles, made by a number of sources, are among the most popular and sought after icons of John Wayne fans.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76298", "revid": "36112485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76298", "title": "Regeneration (1915 film)", "text": "1915 film by Raoul Walsh\nRegeneration (alternately called The Regeneration) is a 1915 American silent biographical crime drama co-written and directed by Raoul Walsh. The film, which was the first full-length feature film directed by Walsh, stars Rockliffe Fellowes and Anna Q. Nilsson and was adapted for the screen by Carl Harbaugh and Walsh from the 1903 memoir \"My Mamie Rose\", by Owen Frawley Kildare and the adapted 1908 play by Kildare and Walter Hackett.\nIt was feared lost until a copy was located by the film preservationist David Shepard, who sent it to the Museum of Modern Art.\nPlot.\nCited as one of the first full-length gangster films, \"Regeneration\" tells the story of a poor orphan who rises to control the mob until he meets a woman for whom he wants to change.\nThe film is a \"candid adaptation\" of the autobiography of Owen Frawley Kildare, called the Kipling of the Bowery. The story follows the life of Owen (Rockliffe Fellowes), a young Irish American boy who is forced into a life of poverty after his mother dies. As a result, Owen is forced to live on the street eventually turning to a life of crime. Owen is eventually reformed, however, by the benevolent social worker Marie Deering (Anna Q. Nilsson). Also featured is a fire aboard an excursion ferry, much like the General Slocum disaster of 1904.\nDeering's choices perplex her beau, a district attorney (Harbaugh) who has declared war on the gangs.\nProduction.\nSet in New York City, \"Regeneration\" was shot on location in New York City's Lower East Side and used real prostitutes, gangsters and homeless people as extras. It is the first produced by Fox Film Corporation, a forerunner of the 20th Century Fox.\nBy 1915, 28-year-old director Raoul Walsh was in New York, with a three-picture contract with Fox Film Corporation for $400 a week - he was assigned \"Regeneration\", to be the first feature-length gangster film in the United States. It was based on the book \"My Mamie Rose\". Walsh's statement that he wrote the script was contradicted by other comments he made that he worked on it with Carl Harbaugh. Walsh had previously played John Wilkes Booth in \"The Birth of a Nation\", and this was his first directing project on a feature, with him going on to film 140 other feature films.\nWhen he filmed the scene with actors jumping off a boat into the river, fireboats and police showed up to calm the \"crowds\", and Walsh was taken to the local station house, amused. The studio \"relished\" the free publicity. French cinematographer Georges Benoit worked on the film as his first Fox picture.\nRelease.\n\"Regeneration\" was originally released on September 13, 1915, to critical acclaim and was a box office hit. It was re-released to theaters on January 12, 1919.\nThe release was \"rife with the dramatic elements that pleased broad audiences of early cinema - violence and redemption, heavy sentiment, romance and tragedy\". It opened to critical and box-office success. William Fox was so pleased, he bought Walsh a Simplex automobile and afforded him a salary of $800 a week, a small fortune in 1915. It cemented his reputation as an action director, although critics noted had \"had a gift for revealing emotional vulnerability in even his roughest, toughest heroes.\"\nHome media.\nIn 2001, \"Regeneration\" was released on Region 1 DVD by Image Entertainment, along with the 1915 film \"Young Romance\". The same two-film set was released on manufactured-on-demand DVD by Image Entertainment in 2012. The film is in the public domain.\nLegacy.\n\"Regeneration\" was previously thought to be lost but was rediscovered in the 1970s. A copy of the film is preserved and held by the Museum of Modern Art Department of Film and the Film Preservation Associates. TimeOut wrote that \"intriguingly, its eventful plotline is revealed as flatly contradicting the accepted synoptic account provided by Walsh in his autobiography. There the eventual fates of Nilsson and Fellowes are reversed, and an ending is transposed from another film entirely.\" \"The Guardian\" says \"it's a milestone in the history of the gangster film, and with its religious themes, mobile camerawork, and potent evocation of its grim locations, it's the spiritual ancestor of Martin Scorsese's \"Mean Streets\".\"\n\"Time Out\" says it is notable for its \"remarkable approach to physical casting, a robust treatment of violent action, and a sheer narrative pace to shame contemporary ponderousness.\"\nIn 2000, \"Regeneration\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76299", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76299", "title": "Republic Steel Strike Riot Newsreel Footage", "text": "1937 newsreel\nRepublic Steel Strike Riot Newsreel Footage is a 1937 newsreel of the strike at Republic Steel on Memorial Day, May 30, 1937, which escalated into a massacre when Chicago police fired on protestors (1937 Memorial Day massacre). Ten protesters were killed by the police and thirty others suffered gunshot wounds. The police also used clubs and tear gas on the protesters. The film was produced by Paramount Pictures for their Paramount News series. In 1997, the film was deemed \"culturally significant\" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. The footage contained in the newsreel was illegally banned from being shown in Chicago by the Chicago Police Department for fear of causing unrest, and later the Paramount News company agreed to refrain from screening it elsewhere. The editor of Paramount News described the footage as \"not fit to be seen,\" and that allowing the public to view it in its entirety could \"incite local riot.\" However, clips from the footage were edited and released as a newsreel that framed the strikers as a violent mob.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76300", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76300", "title": "Return of the Secaucus 7", "text": "1980 film directed by John Sayles\nReturn of the Secaucus 7 is a 1980 American independent drama film written and directed by John Sayles and starring Bruce MacDonald, Maggie Renzi, David Strathairn, Adam LeFevre, Maggie Cousineau, Gordon Clapp, and Jean Passanante, and others. The film tells the story of seven friends who spend a weekend together in New Hampshire. The weekend is marred by the break-up of a relationship between two of the friends. This causes a ripple effect among the group and brings up old desires and problems.\nThe picture was thought to have inspired \"The Big Chill\" (1983), which is a more widely known film with a similar storyline. However, writer-director Lawrence Kasdan has denied having seen \"Return of the Secaucus 7\" before working on \"The Big Chill\". In 1997, the film was added to the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress for its historic merits.\nPlot.\nTeachers Mike Donnelly (MacDonald) and Katie Sipriano (Renzi) prepare to host a gathering of their old college activist friends at their rural New Hampshire home. Frances (Cousineau), now in medical school, drives in with her old boyfriend, wannabe folk singer J.T. (LeFevre), who she found hitchhiking to the gathering. Irene (Passanante), a speechwriter for a Democratic U.S. senator, arrives with her conservative boyfriend, Chip (Clapp), who did not attend college with the others. Maura (Trott) says that she and Jeff (Arnott) are no longer a couple, which shocks the others and causes a somewhat uneasy first evening. Maura and J.T. are mutually attracted and have sex that night while Frances is nearby. The group attends a play that their old friend, Lacey, is acting in. Katie heckles Lacey, annoying Mike.\nJeff arrives and is apparently unaware that Maura has ended their relationship. This further strains the group's cohesion, especially when J.T. tells Jeff he had sex with Maura, believing she was single. Jeff acknowledges being angry at J.T., but it does not end their friendship. After playing basketball and skinny-dipping with Mike's high school friends, Ron (Strathairn) and Howie (Sayles), the group goes to a bar. Jeff and Maura get into a loud argument and Ron makes a pass at Frances, who is upset that J.T. and Maura were intimate. Ron and Frances leave for a local hotel, while Maura leaves by herself, and the rest of the group drives separately. Out on the road, the group come upon a deer carcass. An undercover cop arrests them on suspicion of illegal game hunting. While sitting in lock-up, the group recounts their various arrests during their college years and the formation of their nickname, the \"Secaucus 7\". A local drunk confesses to hitting the deer, and everyone is released. The following day, the group leaves one-by-one, and J.T. insists on hitchhiking to Boston, refusing money from Maura for a bus ticket. Jeff is left alone, and angrily chops wood on Mike's property. The film ends with Mike and Katie finding a farewell note from Jeff reading, \"I'm sorry. --Jeff\".\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nJohn Sayles had established a strong reputation as a screenwriter in exploitation films for Roger Corman, his credits including \"Piranha\", \"The Lady in Red\" and \"Battle Beyond the Stars\". Sayles wanted to direct and used his script fees to finance \"Secaucus Seven\". Roger Corman offered to assist Sayles with finance but the writer-director refused. \"I actually didn\u2019t need a producer to come in at that point,\u201d said Sayles, adding, \u201cIt was very generous of him.\"\nSayles had written the script in the late seventies. He said the story was not autobiographical but \"about people that I met after I was out of college who were in some ways more politically involved than I was or more politically aware than I was who were trying to keep their idealism together. They were trying to stay optimistic. But it was a community, even though they didn\u2019t live together anymore.\" He said he was partly motivated to write the script to demonstrate that some people still tried to live up to the ideals of the sixties.\nThe movie was shot over 25 days starring people with whom Sayles had worked in summer stock theatre as an actor and director.\nReception.\nCritical response.\nFilm critic Emanuel Levy liked the film and wrote, \"The movie became influential, launching a cycle of \"reunion\" films, which included \"The Big Chill\" and the TV series \"Thirtysomething\". As a portrait of disenchantment, \"Return\" was more authentic and honest than Lawrence Kasdan's star-studded \"Big Chill\"...A rueful movie about unexceptional lives that have prematurely grown stale, \"Secaucus\" is a bit commonplace, lacking genuine drama. But Sayles uses effectively a discursive, episodic format; he constructs strong scenes with resonant dialogue. The characters are complex and individually distinguished by speech, gesture, and manner.\"\nCritic Frederic and Mary Ann Brussat wrote, \"Here's a nice little movie about the baby boom generation...Novelist John Sayles wrote, directed, and edited this movie. It is a labor of love. We watch these laidback individuals share their stories and reminisce about the past...But these baby boomers can't handle tension; the rift between Jeff and Maura sends tremors through the weekend. And although they put up a front of having a good time, one senses that things haven't turned out well for them \u2014 either in terms of meaningful relationships or in terms of personal fulfillment. \"Return of the Secaucus Seven\" leaves one with a rueful feeling about this generation.\"\nThe review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 81% of critics gave the film a positive review, based on sixteen reviews.\nFilm critic Aljean Harmetz of \"The New York Times\" wrote in her review: \"For a movie that cost $60,000, \"The Return of the Secaucus Seven\" is traveling in heady company. Most $60,000 movies play at two film festivals, then end up on a 16-millimeter projector in their director's living room. \"The Return of the Secaucus Seven,\" about seven antiwar activists who spend a weekend together 10 years later, was the surprise hit of last spring's Los Angeles Filmex festival. The movie was also selected as one of the 10 best films of 1980 by The Boston Globe, The Los Angeles Times and Time magazine, and last week it was nominated by the Writers Guild as best comedy written directly for the screen. When it opened an unsuccessful commercial run in New York last September, Vincent Canby, although expressing some reservations, praised the film as \"sweet and engaging\" and \"an honest, fully realized movie.\" Today it will try again, opening at the Quad in Greenwich Village this time.\"\nRelease.\n\"Return of the Secaucus 7\" was released in United States theatres on September 5, 1980.\nThe film was first released for home entertainment by RCA/Columbia (VHS) and Columbia Pictures Home Entertainment (Betamax) in 1982.\nIt was released on DVD by MGM Home Entertainment on September 16, 2003.\nAccolades.\nWins\nNominations\nOther distinctions\n\"The Big Chill\".\nThe film was followed by the 1983 movie \"The Big Chill\" which had some story similarities with \"Return of the Secaucus 7\". Sayles recalled his film's title:\nHas some idea of rebirth or comeback. \"The Big Chill\" was called \"The Big Chill\" because it\u2019s about people who have lost their idealism or never had it in the first place, and that\u2019s a cold realization. The people in \"The Big Chill\" tend to be more upper-middle class rather than middle class or working class, and they\u2019re all upwardly mobile\u2014whereas the people in \"Secaucus Seven\", the men especially, are consciously downwardly mobile. If the women are upwardly mobile, they\u2019re probably having a career that their mothers didn\u2019t. Even though the form of the two movies and the plot in some ways are very close, they\u2019re really about very different people, which is why I never felt like it was a rip-off.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76301", "revid": "36378339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76301", "title": "Ride the High Country", "text": "1962 film by Sam Peckinpah\nRide the High Country (released internationally as Guns in the Afternoon) is a 1962 American CinemaScope Western film directed by Sam Peckinpah and starring Randolph Scott, Joel McCrea, and Mariette Hartley. The supporting cast includes Edgar Buchanan, James Drury, Warren Oates, and Ron Starr. The film's script, though credited solely to veteran TV screenwriter N.B. Stone Jr., was \u2013 according to producer Richard E. Lyons \u2013 almost entirely the work of Stone's friend and colleague, William S. Roberts, and Peckinpah himself. \nIn 1992, \"Ride the High Country\" was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress as being deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\nThe film featured Scott's final screen performance. After this film, Joel McCrea did not make another feature film until 1970. That year saw him make \"Cry Blood, Apache\", with his son Jody. He appeared in The Young Rounders in 1972. His final film appearance was in 1976 in \"Mustang Country\".\nPlot.\nIn the early 20th century, aging ex-lawman Steve Judd is hired by a bank to transport gold from a high country mining camp to the town of Hornitos. Six miners were recently murdered trying to transport a gold shipment. Judd was once respected, but his threadbare clothes and spectacles show that he is long past his prime. He enlists his old friend and partner Gil Westrum to guard the gold transfer. Gil, who makes his living claiming to be a legendary sharpshooter named The Oregon Kid, recruits his young sidekick, Heck Longtree.\nThe three men ride toward Coarsegold, the mining camp. Judd doesn't realize that Gil and Heck plan to steal the gold. They stop for the night at the farm of Joshua Knudsen and his daughter Elsa. Knudsen is a domineering religious man who warns against those who \"traffic in gold\" and trades Bible verses with Judd at the dinner table. That night, Elsa and Heck secretly meet in the moonlight for conversation, but Knudsen catches them and pulls her away. Back at the house, he admonishes and slaps her.\nThe next morning, after the three men have left, she catches up and asks to ride with them. She is also going to Coarsegold, to marry a miner named Billy Hammond. Along the way, Elsa and Heck flirt, and at one time he tries to force himself on her. Heck is stopped by Judd, and then punched by both Judd and Gil. He later apologizes to Elsa.\nWhen they reach Coarsegold, the two older men set up a tent to weigh and accept gold dust. Elsa and Billy are married in the camp's brothel\u2014the only substantial building there\u2014by the retired Judge Tolliver. Billy forces Elsa to a room in the brothel for their wedding night, and strikes her when she resists. Dead drunk, he fails to prevent his brothers Elder, Sylvus, Jimmy, and Henry from entering the room and attempting to rape her. Hearing her screams, Judd and Heck rescue Elsa and let her stay in their tent overnight.\nThe next day, the miners of the camp organize an extrajudicial \"miner's trial\" to make the outsiders return Elsa to her \"legal\" husband; because they are outnumbered, Judd agrees to the miners' demands. However, Gil rouses the drunken Tolliver, demands to see his license, then keeps it. He forces Tolliver at gunpoint to agree that when asked if he has a license to marry, he must say no (because Gil has it). The ruse works and the three men leave the camp with the gold and Elsa.\nAlong the way, Judd says to Gil that right and wrong are \"something you just know\". After all his years working in disreputable places, he tells Gil that he's grateful to have regained some of his self-respect. Realizing Judd will never agree to steal the gold, Gil plans to take it without his help. That night, as Gil and Heck prepare to leave with the gold, Judd confronts them at gunpoint. Heck gives up his gun immediately. Angered by Gil's betrayal, Judd puts his gun away, then slaps Gil and challenges him to draw. Instead, Gil throws down his guns and accepts that Judd will turn him in when they return to town. Judd has to change his plans when the Hammonds appear looking for Elsa. They found out about the ruse and know that the marriage is legal. In the ensuing gunfight, Jimmy and Sylvus are killed, and Billy, Elder and Henry give up and escape.\nDuring the night, Gil returns to the site of the gunfight, where he takes a horse and gun from one of the dead brothers. Then he follows Judd, Heck, and Elsa. Heck has shown himself to be trustworthy, and although he will probably go to prison, Elsa tells him she'll be there when he gets out. When they reach Elsa's farm, the Hammonds are waiting, having already killed her father. A gunfight breaks out and both Judd and Heck are wounded. Gil rides in to help his old friend, and together the pair challenge the brothers to a face-to-face shootout. When the dust settles, the Hammonds are dead, but Judd is mortally wounded. After forgiving Gil, Judd casts a look back towards the high country, then dies.\nCast.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nThe script, originally called \"Guns in the Afternoon\", was written by N.B. Stone. Producer Richard Lyon was looking for a Western at MGM and William Roberts remembered Stone's script. Lyons liked the story but had Roberts rewrite the script, as Stone refused to do so. Lyons then signed Randolph Scott and Joel McCrea to star. He was looking for a director and, impressed by episodes of \"The Westerner\", signed Sam Peckinpah. Peckinpah also rewrote the script.\nThe part of Billy Hammond was originally offered to Robert Culp who turned it down. James Drury played it instead.\nPeckinpah flipped a coin in the presence of a producer to see which leading man got top billing, Scott or McCrea. Scott won the toss. However, in the opening credits, both stars' names are shown in the same shot, so both Scott and McCrea received equal top billing.\nFilming began in October 1961.\nReception.\nThe film was released on the bottom half of a double bill. William Goldman says he spoke to an MGM executive at the time who says the film had tested strongly but they felt the film \"didn't cost enough to be that good\".\nAccording to MGM records, the film lost $160,000.\nSeeing it as half of a double bill with \"The Tartars\", Bosley Crowther greatly preferred \"Ride the High Country\", calling it a \"perfectly dandy little Western\" and \"the most disarming little horse opera in months.\" According to Crowther:\nThe two young people are quite good, especially Miss Hartley, a newcomer with real promise. R. G. Armstrong and Edgar Buchanan also contribute telling bits. We know little about the director and scenarist, but Mr. Peckinpah and Mr. Stone certainly have what it takes. And so, if anybody ever doubted it, do a couple of leathery, graying hombres named McCrea and Scott.\n\"Ride the High Country\" was hailed as a success upon its release in Europe. The film's reputation has only grown in following years, with Peckinpah's admirers citing it as his first great film. They also note that all of the themes of Peckinpah's later films, such as honor and ideals compromised by circumstance, the difficulty of doing right in an unjust world, the destruction of the West and its heroes by industrial modernity, and the importance of loyalty between men are all present in \"Ride the High Country\". In 1964 the film won the prestigious Grand Prix of the Belgian Film Critics Association.\nIn his autobiography \"In the Arena\" (1995), Charlton Heston wrote that he was considering remaking the film in the late 1980s, presumably with Clint Eastwood as a co-star, but after viewing \"Ride the High Country\" Heston proposed Harry Julian Fink's script of \"Major Dundee\" (1965) to Peckinpah.\nThe original casting was for McCrea to play the Gil Westrum part and Randolph Scott to play Steve Judd. After reading the script the two men agreed that a switch of roles was in order.\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76304", "revid": "44466778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76304", "title": "The River (1938 film)", "text": "1938 documentary film directed by Pare Lorentz\nThe River is a 1938 short documentary film which shows the importance of the Mississippi River to the United States, and how farming and timber practices had caused topsoil to be swept down the river and into the Gulf of Mexico, leading to catastrophic floods and impoverishing farmers. It ends by briefly describing how the Tennessee Valley Authority project was beginning to reverse these problems.\nIt was written and directed by Pare Lorentz and, like Lorentz's earlier 1936 documentary \"The Plow That Broke the Plains\", was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\", going into the registry in 1990. The film won the \"best documentary\" category at the 1938 Venice International Film Festival.\nBoth films have notable scores by Virgil Thomson that are still heard as concert suites, featuring an adaptation of the hymn \"How Firm a Foundation\". The film was narrated by the American baritone Thomas Hardie Chalmers. Thomson's score was heavily adapted from his own concert work \"Symphony on a Hymn Tune\". \"The River\" later served as the score for the 1983 TV movie \"The Day After\".\nThe two films were sponsored by the U.S. government and specifically the Resettlement Administration (RA) to raise awareness about the New Deal. The RA was folded into the Farm Security Administration in 1937, so \"The River\" was officially an FSA production.\nThere is also a companion book, \"The River\". The text was nominated for the Pulitzer Prize in poetry in that year.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76305", "revid": "21162912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76305", "title": "Ring of Brodgar", "text": "Neolithic stone circle in Orkney, Scotland\nThe Ring of Brodgar (or Brogar, or Ring o' Brodgar) is a Neolithic henge and stone circle about 6 miles north-east of Stromness on Mainland, the largest island in Orkney, Scotland. It is part of the UNESCO World Heritage Site known as the Heart of Neolithic Orkney.\nGeneral information.\nThe Ring of Brodgar (or Brogar, or Ring o' Brodgar) is a Neolithic henge and stone circle in Mainland, Orkney, Scotland. It is the only major henge and stone circle in Britain which is an almost perfect circle. Most henges do not contain stone circles; Brodgar is a striking exception, ranking with Avebury and Stonehenge among the greatest of such sites. The ring of stones stands on a small isthmus between the Lochs of Stenness and Harray. These are the northernmost examples of circle henges in Britain. Unlike similar structures such as Avebury, there are no obvious stones inside the circle, but since the interior of the circle has never been excavated by archaeologists, the possibility remains that wooden structures, for example, may have been present. The site has resisted attempts at scientific dating and the monument's age remains uncertain. It is generally thought to have been erected between 2500 BCE and 2000 BCE, and was, therefore, the last of the great Neolithic monuments built on the Ness. A project called The Ring of Brodgar Excavation 2008 was undertaken in the summer of that year in an attempt to settle the age issue and help answer other questions about a site that remains relatively poorly understood. The results of the excavation are still preliminary.\nThe stone circle is in diameter, and the third largest in the British Isles. The ring originally had up to 60 stones, of which only 27 remained standing at the end of the 20th century. The tallest stones stand at the south and west of the ring, including the \"Comet Stone\" to the south-east. The stones are set within a circular ditch up to deep, wide and in circumference that was carved out of the solid sandstone bedrock by the ancient residents. Technically, this ditch does not constitute a true henge as there is no sign of an encircling bank of earth and rock. Many archaeologists continue to refer to this structure as a henge; for example, Aubrey Burl classifies the ditch as a Class II henge; one that has two opposing entrances, in this case on the north-west and south-east.\nThe ditch appears to have been created in sections, possibly by workforces from different parts of Orkney. The stones may have been a later addition, maybe erected over a long period of time.\nExamination of the immediate environs reveals a concentration of ancient sites, making a significant ritual landscape. Within there are the two circle-henges, four chambered tombs, groups of standing stones, single stones, barrows, cairns, and mounds. The immediate area has also yielded a number of flint arrowheads and broken stone mace-heads that seem to date from the Bronze Age. Although its exact purpose is not known, the proximity to the Ness of Brodgar site and the Standing Stones of Stenness and its Maeshowe tomb beyond make the Ring of Brodgar a site of major importance.\nThe first formal survey of the Ring of Brodgar and surrounding antiquities was performed in 1849 by Royal Navy Captain Frederick Thomas of HM cutter \"Woodlark\". Captain Thomas was in the area drawing up Admiralty Charts from 1848\u20131849, and he and his crew performed archaeological surveys as well resulting in the publication in 1852 of \"The Celtic Antiquities of Orkney\".\nExcavations of Neolithic ruins.\nOngoing excavations by Orkney College at the nearby Ness of Brodgar site located roughly midway between the Ring and the Stones of Stenness have uncovered several buildings, both ritual and domestic. Geophysics suggest there are likely to be more in the vicinity. Pottery, bones, stone tools and a polished stone mace head have also been discovered. Perhaps the most important find is the remains of a large stone wall which may have been long and up to wide. It appears to traverse the entire peninsula the site is on and may have been a symbolic barrier between the ritual landscape of the Ring and the mundane world around it.\nNordic rites.\nInvaders from Scandinavia reached Orkney by the 9th century, bringing a complex theology that they imposed on the preexisting Orcadian monuments; at least according to local legend. For example, the Ring of Brodgar and the Standing Stones of Stenness were allegedly known as the Temple of the Sun and Moon respectively. Young people supposedly made their vows and prayed to W\u014dden at these \"temples\" and at the so-called \"Odin Stone\" that lay between the stone circles until it was destroyed by a farmer in 1814. Others view these fanciful names with skepticism; Sigurd Towrie suggests that \"they were simply erroneous terms applied by the antiquarians of the 18th or 19th centuries \u2013 romantic additions, in the same vein as the infamous \"Druid's Circle\" and \"Sacrificial Altar\".\" At the very least, several of the stones at Brodgar contain runic carvings that were left by Nordic peoples. These include the name \"Bjorn\" and a small cross as well as an anvil.\n\"Megalithic Yard\" and Neolithic astronomers at Brodgar.\nBurl notes that the diameter of the bank at Brodgar is almost exactly the same as the inner banks of the Avebury monument in England and the Newgrange ring in Ireland: 125 \"megalithic yards\" (MY), at per MY. This is a controversial unit originally proposed by Alexander Thom. Thom's thesis, based on a statistical analysis of Neolithic monuments in the United Kingdom, is that the builders of these sites employed a common unit of measurement, although it has not been demonstrated how this information could have been shared.\nHeggie casts doubt on this as well, stating that his careful analysis uncovered \"little evidence for a highly accurate unit\" and \"little justification for the claim that a highly accurate unit was in use\". Thom and his father made other controversial contentions, for example, that Brodgar and the burial mounds that surround it were designed specifically as backsights for astronomical observations of the Moon. Graham Ritchie points out that the burial mounds have not been reliably dated, and he casts doubt on the astronomical prowess of the builders.\nEuan MacKie suggested that the nearby village of Skara Brae might be the home of a privileged theocratic class of wise men who engaged in astronomical and magical ceremonies at sites like Brodgar and Stenness. Graham and Anna Ritchie cast doubt on this interpretation noting that there is no archaeological evidence for the claim, although a Neolithic \"low road\" connects Skara Brae with the chambered tomb of Maeshowe, passing near Brodgar and Stenness. Low roads connect Neolithic ceremonial sites throughout Britain.\nConservation and access.\nThe site is a scheduled monument and was included in the \"Heart of Neolithic Orkney\" World Heritage Site in 1999.\nWorld Heritage status.\nThe Heart of Neolithic Orkney includes, in addition to the Ring of Brodgar, Maeshowe, Skara Brae, the Standing Stones of Stenness and other nearby sites. It is managed by Historic Environment Scotland, whose 'Statement of Significance' for the site begins:\nThe monuments at the heart of Neolithic Orkney and Skara Brae proclaim the triumphs of the human spirit in early ages and isolated places. They were approximately contemporary with the mastabas of the archaic period of Egypt (first and second dynasties), the brick temples of Sumeria, and the first cities of the Harappa culture in India, and a century or two earlier than the Golden Age of China. Unusually fine for their early date, and with a remarkably rich survival of evidence, these sites stand as a visible symbol of the achievements of early peoples away from the traditional centres of civilisation...The Ring of Brodgar is the finest known truly circular late Neolithic or early Bronze Age stone ring and a later expression of the spirit which gave rise to Maeshowe, Stenness and Skara Brae\nAccess.\nAccess at the Ring of Brodgar, especially to the inner ring, poses conservation issues. Site management has included periods of partial site closure, required to allow areas of footpath to recover.\nCultural impact.\nThe Ring of Brodgar features in Kathleen Fidler's 1968 novel \"The Boy with the Bronze Axe\"; here, it is depicted in a midsummer ceremony in which a lamb is sacrificed. In Fidler's story, women are forbidden from entering the Ring, which is a male-only space.\nIn Troika Games 2001 title \"\", the Ring of Brodgar appears in the town of Roseborough and is pivotal to the plot.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76307", "revid": "45093283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76307", "title": "Road to Morocco", "text": "1942 film by David Butler\nRoad to Morocco is a 1942 American comedy film starring Bing Crosby, Bob Hope and Dorothy Lamour, and featuring Anthony Quinn and Dona Drake. Written by Frank Butler and Don Hartman and directed by David Butler, it's the third of the \"Road to ...\" films. It was preceded by \"Road to Zanzibar\" (1941) and followed by \"Road to Utopia\" (1946). The story is about two fast-talking guys cast away on a desert shore and sold into slavery to a princess. In 1996, \"Road to Morocco\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nA freighter explodes off the coast of North Africa under mysterious circumstances. All hands are accounted for save for stowaways Jeff Peters and Orville 'Turkey' Jackson, the latter's smoking habit causing the explosion. Upon reaching land, Orville reminds Jeff of his promise to Aunt Lucy to take care of him, but Jeff says she died before he could agree to it. Conveniently, a camel appears, and they hitch a ride.\nAs Jeff and Orville make their way into the city, they are nearly run over by Arabs led by Sheik Mullay Kasim, who has come to propose to Princess Shalmar. Orville is approached by men carrying a mysterious woman in a veiled palanquin, and her hand takes his before they leave. While at a restaurant, Jeff and Orville plan to skip out on the bill, but a man takes Jeff aside and gives him some money. Jeff has sold Orville, and although he is initially angry, he eventually calms down after Jeff promises to buy him back. Two men then throw a hood over Orville and carry him off.\nJeff has a vision of Aunt Lucy, who shames him for selling Orville. He attempts to buy Orville back but discovers that he has been sold once again. Aunt Lucy then advises Jeff to find Orville and suggests that he sing his favorite song. Jeff walks and sings until a note and Orville's locket are thrown from the palace, warning him of danger. Jeff climbs over the palace wall and hears a woman singing. He sneaks in and finds Orville with Princess Shalmar and other beautiful girls.\nJeff storms into the palace but is caught by guards. Orville pretends not to know him, resulting in the princess dismissing everyone except Jeff. Orville then confesses to their engagement, but the princess reveals that she bought him and that her wise man advised her to marry him. The princess invites Jeff to stay, and Orville is waited on by girls, including Mihirmah, who confesses her love for him. Jeff confronts Orville, who then has him thrown out.\nLater, Jeff sings and attracts the princess, and they go for a walk. Mihirmah tries to convince Orville to leave with her. Jeff tells the princess that he should be the one marrying her, but Orville threatens him with a sword. The following day, Kasim threatens to kill Orville, but the princess takes him to the wise man, who reveals a prophecy: the first husband will die a violent death within a week of marriage, and the second will have a long and happy life. The princess declares that Orville is the first husband, and Kasim finally understands.\nOrville learns of the prophecy and runs off with Mihirmah, convincing Jeff that the princess actually loves him. That night, Aunt Lucy's spirit rebukes Orville. Princess Shalmar refuses to marry Jeff and sends Orville away to prepare for the wedding. Later, the wise man tells the princess and Jeff that he misread the stars and that the prophecy is incorrect. Jeff now understands why Orville wanted to avoid the marriage, and tells him that the princess has changed her mind. Meanwhile, Kasim learns of the news and rallies his men.\nPrincess Shalmar and Jeff decide to get married in the United States along with Orville and Mihirmah. However, Kasim intervenes and abducts the princess while giving Mihirmah to one of his men. Jeff and Orville attempt to use their 'patty-cake' routine on Kasim, but it fails, and they end up getting captured along with the girls.\nKasim leaves Jeff and Orville stranded in the desert and takes the women with him. While wandering in the desert, they discover an oasis near Kasim's camp. They try to sneak in but are caught. They then witness a clash between two sheiks and take advantage of the chaos to escape with the girls. The four board a boat back home. However, things take a dangerous turn when Orville causes an explosion while smoking in the powder room. Fortunately, they all survive by clinging onto a pile of wreckage near New York Harbor.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReception.\nThe film was placed at No. 4 in the list of top-grossing movies for 1942 in the USA.\nBosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" liked it: \"Let us be thankful that Paramount is still blessed with Bing Crosby and Bob Hope, and that it has set its cameras to tailing these two irrepressible wags on another fantastic excursion, \"Road to Morocco\", which came to the Paramount yesterday. For the screen, under present circumstances, can hold no more diverting lure than the prospect of Hope and Crosby ambling, as they have done before, through an utterly slaphappy picture, picking up Dorothy Lamour along the way and tossing acid wisecracks at each other without a thought for reason or sense...The short of it is that \"Road to Morocco\" is a daffy, laugh-drafting film. And you\u2019ll certainly agree with the camel which, at one point, offers the gratuitous remark, 'This is the screwiest picture I was ever in'.\"\n\"Variety\" commented: \"Crosby, Hope and Lamour have done it again. Their click in \"Road to Singapore\" and \"Road to Zanzibar\" is eclipsed by \"Road to Morocco\"... Crosby, of course, is still more or less straighting for Hope\u2019s incessantly steaming gags. The two have never teamed better, nor have they, seemingly, romped with such abandon.\"\nSongs.\nAll lyrics to all songs are by Johnny Burke to music by Jimmy Van Heusen.\nBing Crosby recorded several of the songs for Decca Records. \"Moonlight Becomes You\" topped the \"Billboard\" charts for two weeks during a 17-week stay in the lists. \"Constantly\" and \"(We're Off on the) Road to Morocco\" also charted briefly. Crosby's songs were also included in the Bing's Hollywood series.\nAwards and honors.\nThe picture received Oscar nominations for Best Sound Recording (Loren L. Ryder) and Best Writing, Original Screenplay. In 1996, \"Road to Morocco\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nLegacy.\nIn an NPR interview, Middle East expert Dr. Jack Shaheen of Southern Illinois University cites \"Road to Morocco\" as \"one of the most stereotypical films ever to come out of Hollywood.\" The films themselves were spoofing the popular adventure movies of the time, however.\nHistory.\n\"Road to Morocco\" featured the first affectionate interracial kiss (between Bob Hope and Dona Drake) in film. Previously in 1934, the movie \"Java Head\" had a quick kiss between married characters Anna Mae Wong and Gerrit Ammidon.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76309", "revid": "44521012", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76309", "title": "Allison V-1710", "text": "Aircraft engine produced and manufactured by Allison Engine Company\nThe Allison V-1710 aircraft engine designed and produced by the Allison Engine Company was the most common US-developed V-12 liquid-cooled engine in service during World War II. Versions equipped with turbo-superchargers gave excellent performance at high altitude in the twin-engined Lockheed P-38 Lightning, and turbo-superchargers were also fitted to experimental single-engined fighters with similar results.\nThe United States Army Air Corps (USAAC) preference for turbo-superchargers early in the V-1710's development program meant that less effort was spent on developing suitable mechanically driven centrifugal superchargers for the Allison V-12 design, as other V-12 designs from friendly nations like the British Rolls-Royce Merlin were already using.\nWhen smaller-dimensioned or lower-cost versions of the V-1710 were desired, they generally had poor performance at higher altitudes.\nDesign and development.\nThe Allison Division of General Motors began developing an ethylene glycol-cooled engine in 1929 to meet a USAAC need for a modern, , engine to fit into a new generation of streamlined bombers and fighters. To ease production, the new design could be equipped with different propeller gearing systems and superchargers, allowing a single production line to build engines for various fighters and bombers.\nThe United States Navy (USN) hoped to use the V-1710 in its rigid airships \"Akron\" and \"Macon\", but both were equipped with German-built Maybach VL II engines as the V-1710 was still in testing when the \"Macon\" was lost in February 1935 (the \"Akron\" having been lost in April 1933). The USAAC purchased its first V-1710 in December 1932. The Great Depression slowed development, and it was not until December 14, 1936, that the engine next flew in the Consolidated XA-11A testbed. The V-1710-C6 successfully completed the USAAC \"150 hour Type Test\" on April 23, 1937, at , the first engine of any type to do so. The engine was then offered to aircraft manufacturers where it powered the prototype Curtiss XP-37s. All entrants in the new pursuit competition were designed around it, powering the Lockheed P-38, Bell P-39 and Curtiss P-40. When war material procurement agents from the United Kingdom asked North American Aviation to build the P-40 under license, NAA instead proposed their own improved aircraft design, using the V-1710 in their NA-u73, which became the famed P-51 Mustang.\nTechnical description.\nThe V-1710 has 12 cylinders with a bore and stroke of in 60\u00b0 V format, for a displacement of , with a compression ratio of 6.65:1. The valvetrain has a single overhead camshaft per bank of cylinders and four valves per cylinder.\nVersatility and reversibility of rotation.\nThe engine design benefited from General Motors\u2019 adoption of modular design that provided built-in aviation powerplant production and installation versatility. The engine was constructed around a long block, which could meet various design requirements by fitting the appropriate accessories section at the rear, and an appropriate power output drive at the front. A turbo-supercharger could be used, if desired.\nThe P-39, P-63, and Douglas XB-42 Mixmaster used V-1710-Es, exchanging the integral reduction gear for an extension shaft driving a remotely located reduction gear and propeller. Aircraft such as the P-38, P-40, P-51A, and North American P-82E used close-coupled propeller reduction gears, a feature of the V-1710-F series.\nThe accessory end had a one- or two-speed engine-driven supercharger that might have a second stage with or without an intercooler, the ignition magnetos and the customary assortment of oil and fuel pumps, all dictated by the application requirements. The front of the engine could have one of a number of different output drives. The drive might be a \"long-nose\" or close coupled propeller reduction gear, an extension drive to a remote gearbox, or a gearbox that could drive two wing-mounted propellers from a fuselage-mounted engine. Another key feature of the V-1710 design was its ability to turn the output shaft clockwise or counter-clockwise by assembling the engine with the crankshaft turned end-for-end, by installing an idler gear in the drive train to the supercharger, camshafts, and accessories, installing a starter turning the proper direction, and re-arranging the ignition wiring on the right side to accommodate a changed firing order. No change to the oil pump nor coolant pump circuits was needed. The ability to reverse the direction of rotation with a minimum of extra parts allowed the use of either a \"tractor\" or \"pusher\" propeller. This approach allowed easy changes of the supercharger(s) and supercharger drive-gear ratio. That gave different critical altitude (the maximum altitude at which the engine could produce full power) ratings ranging from .\nSupercharger.\nThe V-1710 has often been criticized for not having a \"high-altitude\" supercharger. The comparison is usually to the later, two-stage, versions of the Rolls-Royce Merlin 60-series engines also built by Packard as the V-1650 and used in the P-51B Mustang and subsequent variants. The USAAC had specified that the V-1710 was to be a single-stage supercharged engine and, if a higher altitude capability was desired, the aircraft could use their newly developed turbo-supercharger as was featured in the XP-37(YP-37), P-38, and XP-39.\nThe benefits of a two-stage supercharger eventually became so clear that Allison did make some efforts in this direction. Allison attached an auxiliary supercharger in various configurations to the existing engine-mounted supercharger and carburetor. Early versions of these two-stage supercharger engines were used on the P-63. No intercooler, aftercooler, or backfire screen (flame trap) were incorporated into these two-stage V-1710 engines (except for the V-1710-119 used on the experimental P-51J, which had an aftercooler and Flame Traps). The two-stage Merlin engines had all of these features, which were designed to prevent detonation from charge heating and backfire into the supercharger. The G-series V-1710s installed on the F-82 E/F/G models had only anti-detonation injection (ADI) to deal with these problems, and not surprisingly had severe reliability and maintenance problems. In one record, it was stated that the F-82 required 33 hours of maintenance for each hour of flight.\nAlthough the early V-1710 powered P-39, P-40 and P-51A were limited to combat operations at a maximum of about they were available in comparatively large numbers and were the mainstay of some Allied Air Forces in all but the European theater of war. The engines proved to be robust and little affected by machine-gun fire. In total, over 60 percent of the post-June 1941 USAAF's pursuit aircraft operated during WWII were powered by the V-1710.\nAllison slowly but continuously improved the engine during the war. The initial rating of was incrementally increased; the final V-1710-143/145(G6R/L) was rated for . By 1944, the War Emergency Power rating on the P-38L was .\nThe most powerful factory variant was the V-1710-127, designed to produce dry at low altitude and at . This engine was static tested at wet War Emergency Power and was planned for installation in an XP-63H aircraft. The end of the war ended this development, so this promising experiment never flew. The extra power of this version was derived from using exhaust turbines, not to drive a turbo-supercharger, but to return that energy to turning the crankshaft, called a turbo-compound engine. (From Aerospace Engineer Jim Leonard's Monograph dated 2010.)\nImprovements in manufacturing brought the cost to produce each engine from $25,000 down to $8,500 and allowed the installed lifetime of the engine to be increased from 300 hours to as much as 1,000 hours for the less-stressed power-plants. Weight increases needed to accomplish this were minimal, with the result that all models were able to produce more than 1\u00a0hp/lb (1.6\u00a0kW/kg) at their takeoff rating.\nThere was also a high degree of commonality of parts throughout the series. The individual parts of the Allison series were produced to a high degree of standardization and reliability, using the best technology available at the time. Even after the war, racing Merlins used Allison connecting rods. As stated previously, General Motors' policies regarding versatility meant that their Allison division would also employ modular design features on the V-1710 from its \"long block\" core V-12 unit outwards, so that it was capable of being mated to many different styles of turbo-superchargers and various other accessories, although the variety of turbo-superchargers available for installation was limited due to the constraints of single-engine fighter design. Since it was produced in large numbers and was highly standardized, the engine has been used in many postwar racing designs. Its reliability and well-mannered operation allowed it to operate at high rpm for extended periods.\nFollowing the war, North American built 250 P-82E/F for air defense roles into the early 1950s. This was the final military role for the V-1710.\nTurbo-supercharger.\nThe USAAC had earlier decided to concentrate on turbo-superchargers for high altitude boost, believing that further development of turbo-superchargers would allow their engines to outperform European rivals using crankshaft driven superchargers. Turbo-superchargers are powered by the engine exhaust and so do not draw much power from the engine crankshaft, whereas displacement superchargers are coupled directly by shafts and gears to the engine crankshaft. Turbo-superchargers do increase the exhaust back-pressure and thus do cause a very small decrease in engine power, but the power increase due to increased induction pressures more than makes up for that decrease. Crankshaft-driven superchargers require an increase in directly driven percentage of engine power as altitude increases (the two-stage supercharger of the Merlin 60 series engines consumed some at . General Electric was the sole source for research and production of American turbo-superchargers during this period, from its four decades worth of steam turbine engineering experience.\nTurbo-superchargers were highly successful in U.S. bombers, which were exclusively powered by radial engines. The P-47 fighter had the same combination of radial engine (R-2800) and turbo-supercharger and was also successful, apart from its large bulk, which was caused by the need for the ductwork for the aft-mounted turbo-supercharger.\nHowever, mating the turbo-supercharger with the Allison V-1710 proved to be problematic. As a result, designers of the fighter planes that used the V-1710 were invariably forced to choose between the poor high-altitude performance of the V-1710 versus the increased problems brought on by addition of the turbo-supercharger. The fates of all of the V-1710 powered fighters of World War II would thus hinge on that choice.\nThe original XP-39 was built with a V-1710 augmented by a General Electric Type B-5 turbo-supercharger as specified by Fighter Projects Officer Lieutenant Benjamin S. Kelsey and his colleague Gordon P. Saville. Numerous changes were made to the design during a period of time when Kelsey's attention was focused elsewhere, and Bell engineers, NACA aero-dynamic specialists and the substitute fighter project officer determined that dropping the turbo-supercharger would be among the drag reduction measures indicated by borderline wind tunnel test results; an unnecessary step, according to aviation engineer and historian Warren M. Bodie. The production P-39 was thus stuck with poor high-altitude performance and proved unsuitable for the air war in Western Europe which was largely conducted at high altitudes. The P-39 was rejected by the British, but used by the U.S. in the Mediterranean and the early Pacific air war, as well as shipped to the Soviet Union in large numbers under the Lend Lease program. The Soviets were able to make good use of P-39s because of its excellent maneuverability and because the air war on the Eastern Front in Europe was primarily short ranged, tactical, and conducted at lower altitudes. In the P-39, Soviet pilots scored the highest number of individual kills made on \"any\" American, or British fighter type.\nThe P-40, which also had only the single-stage, single-speed-supercharged V-1710, had similar problems with high-altitude performance.\nThe P-38 was the only fighter to make it into combat during World War II with turbo-supercharged V-1710s. The operating conditions of the Western European air war \u2013 flying for long hours in intensely cold weather at \u2013 revealed several problems with these engines. They had a poor manifold fuel-air distribution and poor temperature regulation of the turbo-supercharger air, which resulted in frequent engine failures (detonation occurred as the result of persistent uneven fuel-air mixture across the cylinders caused by the poor manifold design). Specially formulated fuels were a necessity for the P-38 as were specific spark plugs needed for specific cylinders. The turbo-supercharger had additional problems with getting stuck in the freezing air in either high or low boost mode; the high boost mode could cause detonation in the engine, while the low boost mode would be manifested as power loss in one engine, resulting in sudden fishtailing in flight. These problems were aggravated by sub-optimal engine management techniques taught to many pilots during the first part of WWII, including a cruise setting that ran the engine at high RPM and low manifold pressure with a rich mixture. These settings can contribute to over-cooling of the engine, fuel condensation problems, accelerated mechanical wear, and the likelihood of components binding or \"freezing up.\" Details of the failure patterns were described in a report by General Doolittle to General Spatz in January 1944. In March 1944, the first Allison engines appearing over Berlin belonged to a group of P-38Hs of 55th Fighter Group, engine troubles contributing to a reduction of the force to half strength over the target. It was too late to correct these problems in the production lines of Allison or GE, and as the numbers of Merlin-engined P-51 Mustangs based in England mounted up through the end of 1943 and into 1944, the P-38s were steadily withdrawn from Europe until October 1944 when they were no longer used for bomber escort duty with the Eighth Air Force. A few P-38s would remain in the European theater as the F-5 for photo reconnaissance.\nThe P-38 had fewer engine failures in the Pacific Theater, where operating techniques were better developed (such as those recommended by Charles Lindbergh during his development work in the theater),) and the Japanese did not operate at such high altitudes. Using the same P-38Gs which were proving difficult to maintain in England, Pacific-based pilots were able to use the aircraft to good advantage including, in April 1943, Operation Vengeance, the interception and downing of the Japanese bomber carrying Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto. New P-38 models with ever-increasing power from more advanced Allisons were eagerly accepted by Pacific air groups.\nWhen Packard started building Merlin V-1650 engines in America in 1942, certain American fighter designs using the Allison V-1710 were changed to use the Merlin. The P-40F, a Lend Lease export to Britain, was one of the first American fighters to be converted to a Packard-Merlin engine. However, the installed engine was the V-1650-1 (a Packard-produced Merlin XX) with a slightly improved single-stage, two-speed supercharger, yielding only modest gains over the Allison V-1710.\nThe last Allison powered P-51, the Mustang I(II)/P-51A, used the single-stage, single-speed Allison V-1710-81, with a 9.6:1 blower ratio. This allowed the P-51A to reach a maximum speed of at and maintain at . This was more than faster than the Merlin 45-powered Spitfire V at , and more than faster at . Its speed impressed the British, and the RAF quickly realized the airplane would possess excellent high altitude performance if the Allison V-1710 engine were replaced by the 60-Series Merlin. A similar proposal to cure the P-38's problems by replacing its Allisons with Merlins was quashed by the USAAF, after protests from Allison. \nStarting with the V-1710-45 around 1943 (after the P-51 had been fitted with a Merlin 65 by Rolls-Royce), Allison attached an auxiliary supercharger to some of its engines in an effort to improve high-altitude performance. The two-stage supercharged Allison was essentially developed as an \"add on\" to the single-stage engine, and required minimal changes to the base engine. While it lacked the refinement, compactness and after-cooler of the two-stage Merlin, the Allison used a pressure-altitude governed variable-speed first stage. Various configurations of this auxiliary supercharger were used in production versions of the V-1710 that powered aircraft such as the Bell P-63 and North American P-82E/F/G series. In addition, it was tried or studied as the powerplant for many experimental and test aircraft such as the Curtiss XP-55 Ascender, North American XP-51J \"lightweight Mustang\", Boeing XB-38 Flying Fortress, and Republic XP-47A (AP-10), both of the latter with turbo-superchargers.\nPost-war.\nThe V-1710-powered F-82 did not arrive in time for World War II, but did see brief action in the Korean War, although the type was completely withdrawn from Korea by the end of 1950. It had a short service life that was probably due to a combination of factors: poor reliability from the G-series V-1710 engines, low numbers of F-82s produced, and the arrival of jet fighters. The initial production P-82B had Merlin engines, but North American was forced to use the Allison V-1710 for the E/F/G models when Rolls Royce required a \"Royalty\" of $6,500.00 per engine and the U. S. Government stopped buying the Merlin engine because of the excessive cost.\nProduction total.\nIn total, 69,305 V-1710s were built by Allison during the war, all in Indianapolis, Indiana.\nOther uses.\nThe V-1710's useful life continued, as thousands were available on the surplus market. In the 1950s, many drag racers and land speed racers, attracted by its reliability and good power output, adopted the V-1710; Art Arfons and brother Walt in particular used one, in an early dragster version of their \"Green Monster\". It proved unsuccessful in the 1/4 mile, being unable to accelerate rapidly, but \"could taxi all day at 150\". Unlimited hydroplane racing also became a big sport across the U.S. at this time and V-1710s were often tuned for racing at up to \u2014power levels that were beyond design criteria and significantly reduced durability.\nLater, as purpose-built V8 engines became available for drag racing and unlimited boats shifted to turboshaft power, tractor pullers began using the Allison engine, again developing unimagined power. Finally, the warbird movement began to restore and return to the air examples of the classic fighters of the war and many V-1710-powered pursuit airplanes began to fly again, with freshly overhauled engines. The reliability, maintainability, and availability of the engine has led others to use it to power flying examples of aircraft whose original engines are unobtainable. This includes newly manufactured Russian Yak-3 and Yak-9 airplanes, originally powered by Klimov V-12s in World War II and the two (so far) airworthy examples of the Ilyushin Il-2, taking the place of the Mikulin V-12 it originally used, as well as ambitious projects such as a replica Douglas World Cruiser and Focke-Wulf Fw 190D by Flug Werk of Germany.\nVariants.\nAllison's internal model designation for the V-1710 started with the letter A and proceeded to the letter H. Each letter designated a family of engines that shared major components, but differed in specific design details. Each of these designs were identified by a number, starting with number 1. The last letter, which was introduced when both right hand turning and left hand turning engines were built, identified by the letter R or L respectively.\nThe military model numbers were identified by a \"dash number\" following the engine description \"V-1710\". The USAAC/USAAF models were the odd numbers, starting with \"-1\" and the USN models were the even numbers, starting with \"-2\".\n\"A\" series engines were early development engines for the USN and USAAC. The first military model was a single V-1710-2, which was first sold to the USN on June 26, 1930. The \"A\" engines had no counterweights on the crankshaft, 5.75:1\u00a0compression ratio, 2:1\u00a0internal spur gear-type reduction gear boxes, 8.77:1\u00a0supercharger gear ratio, impeller, SAE #50 propeller shaft, a float-type carburetor, and produced at 2800\u00a0rpm on 92 octane gasoline.\n\"B\" series engines were designed for USN airships. The military model was V-1710-4. They differed from the \"A\" series engines in that they did not have a supercharger, had two float-type down-draft carburetors were mounted directly to the intake manifold, an SAE #40 propeller shaft, and could be brought from full power to stop and back to full power in the opposite rotation in less than 8 seconds. They produced at 2400\u00a0rpm.\n\"C\" series engines were developed for highly streamlined pursuit aircraft for the USAAC, and are easily identified by the long reduction gear case. The military models were V-1710-3, -5, -7, -11. -13, -15, -19, -21, -23, -33, producing between at 2600\u00a0rpm. These engines came in two groups, one group rated at full power at sea level, the other rated at full power at high altitude. The altitude rating difference was in the supercharger gear ratio, four of which were used: 6.23:1, 6.75:1, 8.0:1 and 8.77:1. These engines received heavier crankcases, a stronger crankshaft, SAE #50 propeller shaft, and Bendix pressure carburetors.\n\"D\" series engines were designed for pusher applications using propeller-speed extension shafts and remote thrust bearings mounted to the airframe. The military models were V-1710-9, -13, -23, and -41, producing at 2600\u00a0rpm. Supercharger ratios were 6.23:1, 8.0:1 or 8.77:1, depending on altitude rating. These engines had the compression ratio increased to 6.65:1. Marvel MC-12 fuel injection, which was unsatisfactory and quickly replaced by a float-type carburetor on -9 and -13 models. Later dash number engines used Bendix pressure carburetors. These engines were being designed at the same time as the V-3420 engine, and shared many assemblies as they were developed. The \"D\" series engines were the last of the \"early\" V-1710 engines.\n\"E\" series engines were designed for remote gearbox applications using crankshaft-speed extension shafts and remote 1.8:1 gearboxes with SAE #60 hollow propeller shafts. The military models were V-1710-6, -17, -31, 35, -37, -47, -59, -63, -83, -85, -93, -103, -109, -117, -125, -127, -129, -133,-135 and -137, producing at 3000\u00a0rpm. Supercharger gear ratios were: 6.44:1, 7.48:1, 8.10:1, 8.80:1 and 9.6:1 depending on altitude rating. These engines were a complete redesign, and did not share many components with the earlier engine series. Almost all components were interchangeable with later series engines and the V-3420, and could be assembled as right hand or left hand turning engines in either pusher or tractor applications.\n\"F\" series engines were designed for late model pursuit aircraft, and are identified by the compact external spur gear-type reduction gear box. Military models were V-1710-27, -29, -39, -45, -49, -51, -53, -55, -57, -61, -75, -77, -81, -87, -89, -91, -95, -99, -101, -105, -107, -111, -113, -115, -119, producing at 3000\u00a0rpm. The V-1710-101, -119 and -121 models has an auxiliary supercharger, some with a liquid-cooled aftercooler. Supercharger gear ratios were: 6.44:1, 7.48:1, 8.10:1, 8.80:1 and 9.60:1 depending on altitude rating. These engines had either a six or twelve weight crankshaft, revised vibration dampeners that combined to allow higher engine speeds, SAE #50 propeller shaft, and higher horsepower ratings. The \"E\" series and \"F\" series engines were very similar, the primary difference being the front crankcase cover, which was interchangeable between the two series engines.\n\"G\" series engines were designed for high-altitude pursuit aircraft, and are identified by the auxiliary supercharger with a Bendix \"Speed-Density\" fuel control. Military models were V-1710-97, -131, -143, -145, and -147, producing at 3000\u00a0rpm. Supercharger gear ratios were: 7.48:1, 7.76:1, 8.10:1, 8.80:1 and 9.60:1 depending on altitude rating. These engines were equipped with an SAE #50 propeller shaft and a single power lever to regulate engine performance, reducing the pilot's workload when managing this very complex engine.\n\"H\" series engines were to use a two-stage supercharger driven by a two-stage air-cooled power recovery turbine. The engine was to have an aftercooler and port-type fuel injection. This variant, however, was never built.\nSpecifications (V-1710-F30R / -111).\n\"Data from\" \"Aircraft Engines of the World 1946 and Jane's Fighting Aircraft of World War II.\"\nGeneral characteristics\nComponents\nPerformance\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76310", "revid": "38164453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76310", "title": "Roman Holiday", "text": "1953 American romantic comedy\nRoman Holiday is a 1953 American romantic comedy film directed and produced by William Wyler. It stars Audrey Hepburn as a princess out to see Rome on her own and Gregory Peck as a reporter. Hepburn won an Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance; the film also won the Academy Award for Best Story and the Academy Award for Best Costume Design.\nThe script was written by Dalton Trumbo and John Dighton, though with Trumbo on the Hollywood blacklist, he did not receive a credit, and Ian McLellan Hunter fronted for him. Trumbo's name was reinstated when the film was released on DVD in 2003, and on December 19, 2011, full credit for Trumbo's work was restored. Blacklisted director Bernard Vorhaus worked on the film as an assistant director under a pseudonym.\nThe film was shot at the Cinecitt\u00e0 studios and on location around Rome during the \"Hollywood on the Tiber\" era. The film opened the 14th Venice International Film Festival within the official program. In 1999, \"Roman Holiday\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The film has been considered one of the most romantic films in cinema history.\nPlot.\nCrown Princess Ann is on a tightly scheduled tour of European capital cities for her unnamed nation. After an especially hard day in Rome, her doctor gives her an injection and advises: \"Best thing I know is to do exactly what you wish for awhile.\" She secretly leaves the embassy to explore the city and, as the drug takes effect, falls asleep atop a low wall, where Joe Bradley, an American reporter, finds her. Not recognizing her, he thinks she is intoxicated and takes her to his apartment to sleep it off.\nJoe oversleeps and misses the princess's scheduled press conference, but claims to his editor, Hennessy, that he attended. Hennessy shows him a news item about the cancellation of the press conference due to the princess's \"sudden illness\". Joe realizes the woman in his apartment is the princess from the newspaper photograph, and asks Hennessy what he would pay for an exclusive interview with her. Hennessy offers $5000, and counters with a $500 bet that Joe will not be able to get it.\nJoe calls his photographer friend, Irving Radovich, and offers to show \"Anya\" around Rome, without revealing that he is a reporter and that he knows her true identity. Ann cites an important appointment and leaves. Joe follows and sees her explore an outdoor market, buy shoes, and get her long hair cut short. Joe contrives to meet her on the Spanish Steps and convinces her to spend the day with him, taking her to a street caf\u00e9 to meet up with Irving, who takes pictures with a camera concealed in his cigarette lighter. Ann claims to be playing truant from school. When Ann clumsily drives a Vespa through Roman traffic with Joe as a passenger, they are arrested, but Joe and Irving show their \"fake\" press passes and are released. They tour the Colosseum. Joe then takes Ann to the Mouth of Truth and tells her the legend attached to it: if a liar puts their hand in the mouth, it will be bitten off. After Ann tries it after hesitating, it is Joe's turn, and he startles her by pretending that his hand has been cut off.\nAs they attend a dance on a boat that her barber had invited her to, agents from Ann's government try to forcibly take her back. Ann joins Joe, Irving, and the barber to fight them, and smashes a guitar over one of the pursuers heads. When Joe is knocked into the river, Ann jumps in after him. They swim away and kiss as they sit shivering on the riverbank. While drying their wet clothes at Joe's apartment, a radio bulletin says that the people of Ann's country are concerned that her illness may be serious. Ann asks Joe to drive her to a corner near the embassy, where they kiss again. She bids him a tearful farewell.\nUpon her return, the princess replies to those attempting to remind her of her duty, \"Were I not completely aware of my duty to my family and my country, I would not have come home tonight...or indeed ever again.\" Joe tells a disbelieving Hennessy that he did not get the story, but tells Irving he cannot stop him from selling the photographs. Joe and Irving attend the rescheduled press conference, to Ann's surprise. She asserts her faith in relations between nations just as between people, and Joe assures her that her faith is not misplaced. When asked which city she most enjoyed visiting, she begins to say it would be difficult before declaring \"Rome. By all means, Rome.\" Other photographers take pictures with their large press cameras, while Irving makes a show of using his cigarette lighter. Ann speaks briefly with each journalist, and Irving presents her with his photographs as a memento of Rome. Joe remains behind after everyone else leaves, before walking from the room.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Gregory Peck as Joe Bradley\nProduction.\nCasting.\nWyler first offered the role to Hollywood favorite Cary Grant. Grant declined, believing he was too old to play Hepburn's character's love interest, though he would do so ten years later in \"Charade\". Other sources say Grant declined because he knew all of the attention would be centered on the princess. Peck's contract gave him solo star billing, with newcomer Hepburn listed much less prominently in the credits. Halfway through the filming, Peck suggested to Wyler that he elevate her to equal billing\u2014an almost unheard-of gesture in Hollywood.\nWyler had initially considered Elizabeth Taylor and Jean Simmons for the princess role, but both were unavailable. On 18 September 1951, director Thorold Dickinson made a screen test with Hepburn and sent it to director William Wyler, who was in Rome preparing \"Roman Holiday\". Wyler wrote to Dickinson, saying that \"as a result of the test, a number of the producers at Paramount have expressed interest in casting her.\" \"Roman Holiday\" was not Hepburn's first acting role, as she had appeared in Dutch and British films from 1948 and on stage, but it was her first major film role and her first appearance in an American film. Wyler wanted an \"anti-Italian\" actress who was different from the curvy Italian stars of that era: She was perfect; his new star had, in words attributed to Wyler, \"no arse, no tits, no tight-fitting clothes, no high heels. In short a Martian. She will be a sensation.\"\nFilming locations.\nThe Italian Ministry of Tourism had originally refused permission for the movie to be filmed in Rome on the grounds that it would \"degrade Italians\". Once the matter was resolved, filming took place entirely in Rome and in the studios of Cinecitt\u00e0. Wyler wanted to shoot the film in color, but doing so on location was so expensive that it had to be done in black and white.\nLocations include:\nReception.\nThe film opened the 14th Venice International Film Festival on August 20, 1953. It opened at Radio City Music Hall in New York City on August 27, 1953, grossing $165,000 in its first week. The film also opened the same week in two theatres in Portland, Oregon, on a double bill with \"Murder Without Tears\", grossing $14,000.\nThe film received critical acclaim from reviewers of its initial release. Milton Luban of \"The Hollywood Reporter\" said the movie \"proves a charming, laugh-provoking affair that often explodes into hilarity... it has a delightful screenplay that sparkles with wit and outrageous humor that at times comes close to slapstick\" and that the \"cinematographers do a fine job of incorporating Roman landmarks into the storyline\". \"The New York Times\" observed that it was \"a natural, tender and amusing yarn\" with \"laughs that leave the spirits soaring\".\n\"Roman Holiday\" was the second most popular film at the US box office during September 1953 behind \"From Here to Eternity\", grossing almost $1 million. It earned an estimated $3 million at the United States and Canadian box office during its first few months of release, and a total of $5 million. While the domestic box office disappointed Paramount, it was very successful elsewhere, including the UK, where the film benefited from both the current romance between Princess Margaret and commoner Peter Townsend\u2014\"No film studio could have bought such publicity\", Alexander Walker wrote\u2014and a fad for Italian culture. It earned around $12 million in the overseas market.\nDue to the film's popularity, both Peck and Hepburn were approached about filming a sequel, but this project never got off the ground.\nThe film has been well received, with a 95% rating at Rotten Tomatoes, based on 63 reviews with an average rating of 8.50/10. The website's critical consensus reads: \"With Audrey Hepburn luminous in her American debut, \"Roman Holiday\" is as funny as it is beautiful, and sets the standard for the modern romantic comedy.\" It is considered a classic by twenty-first-century viewers and reviewers. Peter Bradshaw of \"The Guardian\" noted that the film is a \"modern fairytale whose two leads have a charm and innocence that irradiate the whole movie\", giving the film five out of five. \"Empire\" concluded that the film is a \"timeless, exuberant classic, with Hepburn's na\u00efve sense of fun and perfectly charming performance matched equally by Peck's louche and charismatic worldy American\". James Berardinelli of ReelViews gave the film three and a half stars out of four, calling the movie a \"staple of the romantic comedy fan's library\", and \"remains one of only a few black-and-white movies that modern audiences willingly watch\".\nThe film was very popular outside of the United States. As late as of 1990, it was cited as the favorite foreign film of all time for Japanese audiences.\nThe February 2020 issue of \"New York Magazine\" lists \"Roman Holiday\" as among \"The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars.\"\nAdaptations.\nA number of films were later claimed to be based on \"Roman Holiday\", or likened to it. They include\nthe Malayalam \"Kilukkam\" (1991), the Tamil-language \"May Madham\" (1994), and \"Notting Hill\" (1999) - which a review described as \"a 90's London-set version of \"Roman Holiday\"\"\nWhen Lewis Gilbert was making \"The Adventurers\" for Paramount, he said Charles Bludhorn, whose company owned the studio, wanted the director to make a musical remake of \"Roman Holiday\" with songs by the Sherman Brothers. Gilbert agreed but said Paramount then got \"cold feet\" and the film was cancelled. The director went on to make \"Seven Nights in Japan\" (1976), which was in the style of \"Roman Holiday\". Paramount Pictures has since licensed three musical adaptations of \"Roman Holiday\": Toho's Japanese version of 1998; Teatro Sistina's \"Vacanze romane\" (2004), using the Cole Porter score, supplemented with music by Armando Trovajoli, which has since toured Italy and Spain; and the American stage version of 2012, described as a jukebox musical using the songs of Cole Porter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76311", "revid": "41457259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76311", "title": "Rose Hobart", "text": "American actress (1906\u20132000)\nRose Hobart (born Rose Kefer; May 1, 1906 \u2013 August 29, 2000) was an American actress and a Screen Actors Guild official.\nEarly years.\nBorn in New York City, Hobart was the daughter of a cellist in the New York Symphony Orchestra, Paul Kefer, and an opera singer, Marguerite Kefer. Her parents' divorce when she was seven resulted in Hobart and her sister, Polly, going to France to live with their grandmother. When World War I began, they came back to the United States and went to boarding schools. By 1921, she was a student at Kingston High School in Kingston, New York.\nCareer.\nWhen Hobart was 15, she debuted professionally in \"Cappy Ricks\", a Chautauqua production. She was accepted for the 18-week tour because she told officials that she was 18. At that same age, she was cast in Ferenc Moln\u00e1r's \"Liliom\", which opened in Atlantic City, New Jersey. Hobart's Broadway stage debut was on September 17, 1923 at the Knickerbocker Theater, playing a young girl in \"Lullaby\". In 1925, she played Charmian in \"Caesar and Cleopatra\".\nHobart was an original member of Eva Le Gallienne's Civic Repertory Theatre. In 1928, she made her London debut, playing Nina Rolf in \"The Comic Artist\". During her career in theater, she toured with No\u00ebl Coward in \"The Vortex\" and was cast opposite Helen Hayes in \"What Every Woman Knows\".\nHer performance as Grazia in \"Death Takes a Holiday\" won her a Hollywood contract. Hobart appeared in more than 40 motion pictures over a 20-year period. Under contract to Universal, Hobart starred in \"A Lady Surrenders\" (1930), \"East of Borneo\" (1931), and \"Scandal for Sale\" (1932). On loan to other studios, she appeared in \"Chances\" (1931) and \"Compromised\" (1931). In 1931, she co-starred with Fredric March and Miriam Hopkins in Rouben Mamoulian's original film version of \"Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\" (1931). She played the role of Muriel, Jekyll's fianc\u00e9e. \nIn 1936, Surrealist artist Joseph Cornell, who bought a print of \"East of Borneo\" to screen at home, became smitten with the actress, and cut out nearly all the parts that did not include her. He also showed the film at silent film speed and projected it through a blue-tinted lens. He named the resulting work \"Rose Hobart\". Hobart often played the \"other woman\" in movies during the 1940s, with her last major film role in \"Bride of Vengeance\" (1949).\nFor the summer of 1938, Hobart appeared as the Leading Woman in the Summer stock cast at the Elitch Theatre in Denver, Colorado, opposite Kent Smith as the Leading Man.\nPolitics.\nThe House Un-American Activities Committee investigated Hobart in 1949, effectively ending her career. She believed that she first came to the attention of anti-Communist activists because of her commitment to improving working conditions for actors in Hollywood. In 1986, she recalled that \"On my first three pictures, they worked me 18 hours a day and then complained because I was losing so much weight that they had to put stuff in my evening dress... When I did \"East of Borneo\" (1931), that schlocky horror [film that] I did, we shot all night long. They started at 6 o'clock at night and finished at 5 in the morning. For two solid weeks, I was working with alligators, jaguars and pythons out on the back lot. I thought, 'This is acting?' It was ridiculous. We were militant about the working conditions. We wanted an eight-hour day like everybody else.\"\nHobart also served on the board of the Screen Actors Guild and was an active participant in the Actors' Laboratory Theatre, a group which anti-Communists like Senator Joseph McCarthy claimed was subversive. In 1948, Hobart was subpoenaed to appear before the Tenney Committee on Un-American Activities. Although Hobart was not a member of the Communist Party, she refused to cooperate, instead reading a prepared statement that concluded, \"In a democracy no one should be forced or intimidated into a declaration of his principles. If one does yield to such pressure, he gives away his birthright. I am just mulish enough not to budge when anyone uses force on me.\" In 1950, Hobart was also listed in the anti-Communist blacklisting publication, \"Red Channels\". Hobart never worked in film again, although she did work on stage, and, later as the blacklist eased, in the 1960s, she took on television roles, including a part on \"Peyton Place\".\nPersonal life.\nHobart was married three times. Her first marriage, to Benjamin L. Winter, ended in divorce in 1929. On October 9, 1932, she married William Mason Grosvenor, Jr., an executive in a chemical engineering firm. They were divorced on February 17, 1941. She had one child, son Judson Bosworth, from her third marriage to architect Barton H. Bosworth.\nLater years.\nIn 1994, Hobart published her autobiography, \"A Steady Digression to a Fixed Point\".\nDeath.\nOn August 29, 2000, Hobart died at the Motion Picture and Television Country House and Hospital in Woodland Hills, California, aged 94, from natural causes. She was survived by her only child, son Judson Bosworth (b. 1949).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76313", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76313", "title": "Safety Last!", "text": "1923 American silent romantic comedy film\nSafety Last! is a 1923 American silent romantic-comedy film starring Harold Lloyd. It includes one of the most famous images from the silent-film era: Lloyd clutching the hands of a large clock as he dangles from the outside of a skyscraper above moving traffic. The film was highly successful and critically hailed, and it cemented Lloyd's status as a major figure in early motion pictures. It is still popular at revivals, and it is viewed today as one of the great film comedies.\nThe film's title is a play on the common expression \"safety first\", which describes the adoption of safety measures as a means to avoid accidents, especially in workplaces. Lloyd performed some of the climbing stunts himself, despite having lost a thumb and forefinger four years earlier in a film accident.\nIn 1994, \"Safety Last!\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". It is one of many works from 1923 that notably entered the public domain in the United States in 2019, the first time any works had done so in 20 years.\nPlot.\nIn 1922, Harold Lloyd is behind bars. His mother and his girlfriend, Mildred, are consoling him as a somber official and priest show up. The three of them walk toward what looks like a noose. It then becomes obvious they are at a train station and the \"noose\" is actually a trackside pickup hoop used by train crews to receive orders without stopping, and the bars are merely the ticket barrier. He promises to send for his girlfriend so they can get married once he has \"made good\" in the big city. Then he is off.\nHe gets a job as a salesclerk at the De Vore Department Store, where he has to pull various stunts to get out of trouble with the picky and arrogantly self-important head floorwalker, Mr. Stubbs. He shares a rented room with his pal \"Limpy\" Bill, a construction worker.\nWhen Harold finishes his shift, he sees an old friend from his hometown who is now a policeman walking the beat. After he leaves, Bill shows up. Bragging to Bill about his supposed influence with the police department, he persuades Bill to knock the policeman backwards over him while the man is using a callbox, thinking that the cop is just his same buddy, and thus he will just take it in good humor. When Bill does so, he knocks over the wrong policeman. To escape, he climbs up the fa\u00e7ade of a building. The policeman tries to follow, but cannot get past the first floor; in frustration he shouts at Bill, \"You'll do time for this! The first time I lay eyes on you again, I'll pinch you!\"\nMeanwhile, Harold has been hiding his lack of success by sending his girlfriend expensive presents he cannot really afford. She mistakenly thinks he is successful enough to support a family and, with his mother's encouragement, takes a train to join him. In his embarrassment, he has to pretend to be the general manager, even succeeding in impersonating him to get back at Stubbs. While going to retrieve her purse (which Mildred left in the manager's office), he overhears the real general manager say he would give $1,000 to anyone who could attract people to the store. He remembers Bill's talent and pitches the idea of having a man climb the \"12-story Bolton building\", which De Vore's occupies. He gets Bill to agree to do it by offering him $500. The stunt is highly publicized and a large crowd gathers the next day.\nWhen a drunkard shows \"The Law\" (the policeman who was pushed over) a newspaper story about the event, the lawman suspects Bill is going to be the climber. He waits at the starting point despite Harold's frantic efforts to get him to leave. Finally, unable to wait any longer, Bill suggests Harold climb the first story himself and then switch his hat and coat with Bill, who will continue on from there. After Harold starts up, the policeman spots Bill and chases him into the building. Every time Harold tries to switch places with Bill, the policeman appears and chases Bill away. Each time, Bill tells his friend he will meet him on the next floor up.\nEventually, Harold reaches the top, despite his troubles with some hungry pigeons, a net, several cheering girls, an old lady, a construction duo, a clock, a rope, a dog, a mouse, a gun man, and a wind gauge, he finally kisses his girl. While they walk away, Harold accidentally steps in a tar pit and loses his boots and socks.\nProduction.\nLloyd hanging from a giant clock on the corner of a building was seen as an iconic image for him, though it was achieved through a certain degree of improvisation. Lloyd performed most of his own stuntwork, but a circus performer was used when The Boy hangs by a rope, and a stunt double \u2013 sometimes Bill Strother, who played \"Limpy\" Bill and was a steeplejack who inspired the sequence when Lloyd saw him climbing \u2013 was used in long shots. The giant clock scene was filmed on the roof of Broadway Leasehold Building, as was the final shot of the film.\nA number of buildings from 1st Street to 9th Street in downtown Los Angeles, all of different heights, were used, with sets built on their roofs to match the facade of the main building, the International Bank Building at Temple and Spring Streets. In this way, the illusion of Lloyd climbing higher and higher up the side of one building was created (although the streetscapes seen beyond the sets are noticeably different at different stages of the climb).\nStuntman Harvey Parry also appeared in the climactic sequence, a fact he revealed only after Lloyd's death. In the 1980 Thames Television series \"Hollywood\", he discussed at length how the stunts were achieved.\nReception.\n\"The New York Times\" gave \"Safety Last!\" a very positive review. A contemporary review in \"Photoplay\" predicted the film's future: \"This new Harold Lloyd farce will become a classic of its kind, or we will miss our guess. For it is the bespectacled comedian's best effort to date.\" \"This is easily one of the big comedies of the year. It is seven-reels in length\u2014but it speeds by with the rapidity of a corking two-reeler,\" the reviewer concluded.\nThe Library of Congress added \"Safety Last!\" to its National Film Registry in 1994. The American Film Institute nominated the film for both their 1998 and 2007 lists of \"AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies\". It was also nominated for \"AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs\". It placed #97 on \"AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills\".\nRotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 97% from 70 reviews, with the consensus: \"Persuasive enough to give audiences acrophobia when they aren't laughing at Harold Lloyd's antics, \"Safety Last!\" is a marvel of visual effects and slapstick comedy.\" \nHome video.\nThe film was released in multiple versions on home video, both on VHS and DVD. It was released via the Criterion Collection on DVD and Blu-ray on June 18, 2013.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nMetadata\nMedia"}
{"id": "76314", "revid": "3046099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76314", "title": "Salesman (1969 film)", "text": "1969 direct cinema documentary film\nSalesman is a 1969 direct cinema documentary film, directed by brothers Albert and David Maysles and Charlotte Zwerin, about door-to-door Bible salesmen.\nSynopsis.\nThe documentary follows four salesmen as they travel across New England and southeast Florida, trying to sell large, expensive Bibles door-to-door in low-income neighborhoods, and attend a sales meeting in Chicago. The film focuses in particular on salesman Paul Brennan, a middle-aged Irish-American Catholic from Jamaica Plain, Boston, who struggles to maintain his sales.\nProduction.\nThe Maysles brothers wanted to be the first to make a nonfiction feature film (which turned out to be \"Salesman\") after learning that Truman Capote had made the claim that his newly released book \"In Cold Blood\" was a nonfiction novel. The film was made on a low budget; just under seven minutes into the film, one of the two cameras used can be seen in the shot, which was not unusual for a documentary film. The handheld microphone used to record the film's sound is visible in other shots, also not unusual in a documentary setting.\nThe Maysles brothers self-funded \"Salesman\", costing approximately $100,000. The brothers paid each salesman $100, along with their expenses. During production, the crew consisted of Albert Maysles shooting and lighting and David Maysles doing sound. Albert Maysles never prompted anyone for the film, except when he asked Brennan to describe his fellow salesmen. In determining whom and what they would film, the Maysles brothers consulted the salesmen's schedules. Throughout production, the Maysles brothers sent footage to Zwerin, who viewed it and provided feedback. When post-production began, David Maysles and Zwerin tried to structure a story about the four salesmen, but found they did not have the material. Instead, they realized that they were dealing with a story about Brennan.\nThe Maysles brothers had themselves been door-to-door salesmen in the past, selling everything from cosmetics to encyclopedias. While filming, they became part of the pitch, telling those who let the salesmen and the camera crew into their homes that they were now part of \"a human interest story.\"\nElements of popular culture that appear as backdrops to the main story include the song \"If I Were a Rich Man\" from \"Fiddler on the Roof\"; a recorded orchestral performance of the Beatles' song \"Yesterday\"; \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\"; the theme music of the television series \"Ben Casey\"; and televised boxing matches.\nAs stated in the closing credits,\nThe filming team of Albert and David Maysles went home to Boston to take another look at the kind of people they grew up with. The idea for the film was researched and developed by David Maysles[,] who found the salesmen. The photography was by Albert Maysles. The film was edited by David Maysles and Charlotte Zwerin.\n\"Salesman\" was filmed in January 1967 (perhaps also late December 1966) and bears a copyright date of 1968.\nDistribution.\nThe Maysles brothers faced challenges in showing the completed film. As they tried to arrange distribution, they were told that the content was too depressing and realistic for the public. The brothers self-distributed through their production company, Maysles Films, and they booked theaters for screenings. The first theatrical screening occurred on April 17, 1969, at the 68th Street Playhouse in New York City. The brothers sold the film to National Talent Service for nontheatrical release.\nReception.\nAt the time of the documentary's initial release, the film critic for \"New York Times\", Vincent Canby, praised both its content and structure in his April 18, 1969 review:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Salesman\", which opened yesterday at the 68th Street Playhouse, is a documentary feature about four door-to-door Bible salesmen who move horizontally through the capitalistic dream. It's such a fine, pure picture of a small section of American life that I can't imagine its ever seeming irrelevant, either as a social document or as one of the best examples of what's called cinema v\u00e9rit\u00e9 or direct cinema... It is fact, photographed and recorded with extraordinarily mobile camera and sound equipment, and then edited and carefully shaped into a kind of cinematic mural of faces, words, motel rooms, parlors, kitchens, streets, television images, radio music\u2014even weather. Documentary filmmaker James Blue once said of Albert Maysles that \"his cinema is one in which ethics and aesthetics are interdependent, where beauty starts with honesty, where a cut or a change in camera angle can become not only a possible aesthetic error, but also a 'sin' against truth.\" Gene Siskel of the \"Chicago Tribune\" included \"Salesman\" on his list of the ten best films of 1970. In late 1970, however, Pauline Kael of \"The New Yorker\" expressed her problems with the film in her negative review of the Maysles' subsequent documentary \"Gimme Shelter\". She insists in that same review that \"Salesman\" is not truly direct cinema and alleges that the production was \"set up\" and that its principal characters are effectively acting. Kael even accuses the Maysles of \"recruit[ing] Paul Brennan, who was in the roofing and siding business, to play a bible salesman.\" In response, the Maysles threatened to sue \"The New Yorker\" for libel and rebutted Kael's claims in an open letter sent to the magazine. Since \"The New Yorker\"'s policy at the time prohibited the publication of such correspondence, the letter did not appear in print until 1996, when it was included in the appendix to the anthology \"Imagining Reality: The Faber Book of Documentary\". The letter, which is signed by all three of the film's credited directors, states in part:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Miss Kael seems to be implying that we, as filmmakers, are responsible for the events we film by suggesting that we set them up or helped to stage them. In referring to our previous film, \"Salesman\", Miss Kael says \"the Maysles brothers recruited Paul Brennan, who was in the roof-and-siding business, to play a Bible salesman.\" Paul Brennan had been selling Bibles for eight years prior to the making of our film and was selling Bibles when we met him. No actors were used in \"Salesman\". The men were asked to simply go on doing what they normally did while we filmed. ...\nWe don't know where Miss Kael got her facts. We do know that her researcher phoned Paul Brennan, one of the Bible salesmen, and told him that \"The New Yorker\" was interested in doing an article about him. He made it quite clear to her that he was a Bible salesman and not a roof-and-siding salesman when we made the film about him. Aside from his own statement, this could easily have been checked out by contacting his employers, the Mid-American Bible Company.\u2014\u200a\nLegacy.\nIn 1992, \"Salesman\" was selected for the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\" The film was preserved by the Academy Film Archive in 2018.\n\"Globesman\" (2016) was a parody of \"Salesman\" in the fourth episode of the second season of \"Documentary Now!\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76315", "revid": "5288432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76315", "title": "Salesman (1969)", "text": ""}
{"id": "76317", "revid": "7279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76317", "title": "Catherine deMedicis", "text": ""}
{"id": "76320", "revid": "16528233", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76320", "title": "Salom\u00e9 (1923 film)", "text": "1923 film starring Alla Nazimova by Charles Bryant\nSalom\u00e9 is a 1923 American silent drama film directed by Charles Bryant and Alla Nazimova, who also stars. It is an adaptation of the 1891 Oscar Wilde play of the same name. The play itself is a loose retelling of the biblical story of King Herod and his execution of John the Baptist (here, as in Wilde's play, called Jokanaan) at the request of Herod's stepdaughter, Salom\u00e9, whom he lusts after.\n\"Salom\u00e9\" is often called one of the first art films to be made in the United States. The highly stylized costumes, exaggerated acting, minimal sets, and absence of all but the most necessary props make for a screen image much more focused on atmosphere and on conveying a sense of the characters' individual heightened desires than on conventional plot development.\nPlot.\nThe film starts by giving context for the banquet that is about to unfold. The Tetrarch is said to have murdered his brother to obtain the throne and for access to his brother's (now his) wife and daughter. \nAt some point after this coup, Jokanaan arrived from the desert and prophesizes the coming birth of Christ. He reveals the infidelity of Herodias, the Tetrarch's wife. With his wife furious, the Tetrarch locks Jokanaan away to protect him from great mobs.\nSalom\u00e9, daughter of Herodias, is described as \"... An uncontaminated blossom in a wilderness of evil\", but despite this, is known as a girl who is unafraid to kill and does it as a form of affection\".\nA new scene opens at Herod's palace, where the Tetrarch displays his intense obsession with Salome, his stepdaughter and niece, thus angering Herodias. Salom\u00e9 leaves this and enters the courtyard from the banquet hall. She charms a young guard to allow her to see Jokanaan. \nHe is brought up from his prison below. Salom\u00e9 displays a deep obsession for the Prophet. After he ignores her affections, she expresses her intent to kiss him. The young guard Salom\u00e9 had previously charmed takes a blade to his own chest. Unmoved by this, Salom\u00e9 continues to pester Jokanaan, causing him to retreat back to his prison. This infuriates Salom\u00e9, and she waits just outside his cell door. Seeking his stepdaughter, the Tetrarch stumbles out into the courtyard and finds the body of the young guard. He is horrified, as he did not order for anyone to be killed. \nAfter the initial horror subsides, the Tetrarch orders the banquet to be served outside, so Salom\u00e9 is visible while he eats. He begs her to join and dance for him and his guests, promising anything she desires. Salom\u00e9 realizes she can use this to kill the man she loves, Jokanaan. She knows her stepfather would keep him removed in his cage otherwise, and her mother also despises him. \nSalom\u00e9 performs The Dance of the Seven Veils, which greatly pleases The Tetrarch. In return, Salom\u00e9 asks for Jokanaan's head to be delivered to her on a silver platter. The Tetrarch is horrified by this request and offers multiple alternatives. \nCheered on by her mother, Salom\u00e9 insists on the head of Jokanaan. When delivered the head, Salom\u00e9 hides it under her long train and kisses it, which she had desired from their first meeting. \nSeeing this, the Tetrarch orders the execution of Salom\u00e9. Guards rush her with spears. The final card shows the words \"THE MYSTERY OF LOVE IS GREATER THAN THE MYSTERY OF DEATH!\"\nProduction.\nDespite the film being only a little over an hour in length and having no real action to speak of, it cost over $350,000 to make. All the sets were constructed indoors to be able to have complete control over the lighting. The film was shot completely in black and white, matching the illustrations done by Aubrey Beardsley in the printed edition of Wilde's play. The costumes, designed by Natacha Rambova, used material only from Maison Lewis of Paris, such as the real silver lam\u00e9 loincloths worn by the guards.\nNo major studio would be associated with the film, and it was years after its completion before it was released, by a minor independent distributor. It was a complete failure at the time and marked the end of Nazimova's producing career.\nGay cast rumor.\nThere is a longstanding rumor, which seems to have started while the film was still in production and has been asserted by chronicler of Hollywood decadence Kenneth Anger, that the film's cast is composed entirely of gay or bisexual actors in an homage to Oscar Wilde, as per star and producer Nazimova's demand. \nIt is, of course, impossible to say, but one of the extras in \"Salom\u00e9\" reported that a number of the cast members\u2014both featured and extras\u2014were indeed gay, but not an unusual percentage of them, and certainly not all of them. What can be said is that Nazimova herself was usually thought of as a lesbian (despite occasional flings with men including Paul Ivano), the two guard characters (who, next to Salom\u00e9, have the most screen time) are at least played very stereotypically gay, and several of the female courtiers are men in drag.\nAccording to Vito Russo's \"The Celluloid Closet\", some scenes in which homosexuality was exposed more explicitly were cut out, including one showing the relationship between two Syrian soldiers.\nCritical reception and legacy.\nA reviewer for \"Screenland\" described \"Salom\u00e9\" as \"a painting deftly stroked upon the silversheet\" and that \"poets and dreamers will find imaginative delights in the weird settings and the still more weird acting, depressing at times to ordinary folks. And it is worth something to watch Nazimova balance her Christmas-tree headdress!\"\n\"Photoplay\" did not know quite what to make of the film. Calling Wilde's original story \"a hot-house orchid of decadent passion\", the review was skeptical of the film adaptation:\n\"We are not sure whether we like Madame Nazimova's idea of Salome as a petulant little princess with a Freudian complex and a headdress of glass bubbles. We rather believe such a Salome would not have stirred men so in those good old pagan days. You have our warning: this is bizarre stuff.\"\n\"Salom\u00e9\" was screened in 1989 at the New York International Festival of Lesbian and Gay films and in 1990 at the New York Gay Experimental Film Festival.\nIn 2000, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nIn 2003, \"Salom\u00e9\" became available on DVD as a double feature with the avant garde film \"Lot in Sodom\" (1933) by James Sibley Watson and Melville Webber.\nIn 2013 \"Salom\u00e9\" was screened at the Ojai Music Festival, where the Bad Plus performed a live improvised soundtrack.\nThe film was nominated in 2001 by the American Film Institute for AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76321", "revid": "1063872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76321", "title": "The River (1937)", "text": ""}
{"id": "76322", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76322", "title": "Salome (1923)", "text": ""}
{"id": "76323", "revid": "2885250", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76323", "title": "Line", "text": "Line most often refers to:\nLine, lines, The Line, or LINE may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "76325", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76325", "title": "Salt of the Earth (1954 film)", "text": "Film by Herbert Biberman\nSalt of the Earth is a 1954 American film drama written by Michael Wilson, directed by Herbert J. Biberman, and produced by Paul Jarrico. Because all three men were blacklisted by the Hollywood establishment due to their alleged involvement in communist politics, \"Salt of the Earth\" was one of the first fully independent films made outside of the Hollywood studio system.\nIt was also one of the first motion pictures to advance the feminist social and political point of view. Its plot centers on a long and difficult strike, based on the 1951 strike against the Empire Zinc Company in Grant County, New Mexico. The company is identified as \"Delaware Zinc\", and the setting is \"Zinc Town, New Mexico\". The film shows how the miners, the company, and the police react during the strike. Shot in a style influenced by Italian neorealism, and making atmospheric use of New Mexico's landscapes, \"Salt of the Earth\" employed mostly local miners and their families as actors.\nThe film was initially mired in Red Scare controversy and was suppressed. Eventually though, it was seen by more and more people until it came to be recognized as an important cultural, political and aesthetic work. In 1992, it was selected to the Library of Congress's National Film Registry of significant U.S. films.\nPlot.\nEsperanza Quintero is a miner's wife in Zinc Town, New Mexico, a community which is essentially run and owned by Delaware Zinc, Inc. Esperanza is thirty-five years old, pregnant with her third child and emotionally dominated by her husband, Ram\u00f3n Quintero. We know from her concern about her \"onom\u00e1sticos\" or \"d\u00eda de mi/su santo\" (a.k.a. Name Day) that it is 12 November as that is the \"onom\u00e1sticos\" of persons named Esperanza.\nThe majority of the miners are Mexican-Americans and want decent working conditions equal to those of white or \"Anglo\" miners. The unionized workers go on strike, but the company refuses to negotiate and the impasse continues for months. Esperanza gives birth and, simultaneously, Ram\u00f3n is beaten by police and jailed on bogus assault charges following an altercation with a union worker who betrayed his fellows. When Ram\u00f3n is released, Esperanza tells him that he's no good to her in jail. He counters that if the strike succeeds, they will not only get better conditions right now but also win hope for their children's futures.\nThe company presents a Taft-Hartley Act injunction to the union, meaning any miners who picket will be arrested. Taking advantage of a loophole, the wives picket in their husbands' places. Some men dislike this tactic, seeing it as improper and dangerous. At first, Ram\u00f3n forbids Esperanza from picketing, but she eventually joins the line while carrying her baby.\nThe sheriff, by company orders, arrests the leading women of the strike. Esperanza is among those taken to jail. The women are loud and unruly in jail and make it so unendurable for the sheriff, he releases them. When Esperanza returns home, Ram\u00f3n tells her the strike is hopeless, as the company will easily outlast the miners. She insists that the union is stronger than ever and asks Ram\u00f3n why he can't accept her as an equal in their marriage. Both angry, they sleep separately that night.\nThe next day the company evicts the Quintero family from their house. The union men and women arrive to protest the eviction. Ram\u00f3n tells Esperanza that they can all fight together. The mass of workers and their families prove successful in saving the Quinteros' home. The company admits defeat and plans to negotiate. Esperanza believes that the community has won something no company can ever take away and it will be inherited by her children.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;The Professional Cast\nThe Non-Professional Cast\nProduction.\nHerbert Biberman was one of the ten Hollywood screenwriters and directors who refused in 1947 to answer questions from the House Committee on Un-American Activities about their affiliations with the Communist Party USA. The \"Hollywood Ten\" were cited for contempt of Congress and jailed. Biberman was imprisoned in the Federal Correctional Institution at Texarkana for six months. After his release, and unable to obtain work in Hollywood, he met with fellow blacklistees about establishing their own production company and collaborating to make movies. In 1951, they formed the Independent Productions Corporation (IPC). \"Salt of the Earth\" was the sole production that IPC was able to finish. Other blacklistees who participated in the movie included Paul Jarrico, Will Geer, and Michael Wilson.\nBefore production commenced in Silver City, New Mexico, the mainstream press already labeled the film dangerous and subversive because it was known to be the creation of blacklisted professionals, and because the International Union of Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers (a.k.a. \"Mine Mill\") was helping to fund it. The Mine Mill union had been expelled from the CIO in 1950 for its unwillingness to purge suspected Communists from its leadership. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" warned readers that \"H'wood Reds are shooting a feature length anti-American racial issue propaganda movie.\" \"Newsweek\" headlined its attack on the film, \"Reds in the Desert\".\nAs Tom Miller notes in a \"Cin\u00e9aste\" article, the early negative publicity made it difficult to assemble a film crew: \"The International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees\u2014IATSE, an AFL affiliate\u2014refused to allow its members to work on \"Salt of the Earth\" because of the movie's politics. That the Hollywood unions wouldn't let their members work on such a pro-union film was bitter irony.\" As a consequence, IPC had to scramble to put together a makeshift crew.\nOnly five professional actors were cast. The rest were residents of Grant County, New Mexico, or members of Mine Mill, Local 890, many of whom took part in the strike that inspired the movie. Juan Chac\u00f3n was a real-life union local president. In the film he plays the protagonist who has trouble dealing with women as equals. The director was reluctant to cast him at first, thinking he was too \"gentle\", but both Revueltas and the director's sister-in-law, Sonja Dahl Biberman (wife of Biberman's brother Edward), urged him to cast Chac\u00f3n as Ram\u00f3n.\nAccording to one journalist's account, \"During the course of production in New Mexico in 1953, the trade press denounced it as a subversive plot, anti-Communist vigilantes fired rifle shots at the set, the film's leading lady Rosaura Revueltas was deported to Mexico, and from time to time a small airplane buzzed noisily overhead ... The film, edited in secret, was stored for safekeeping in an anonymous wooden shack in Los Angeles.\" After principal photography ended, laboratories wouldn't process the film, which delayed postproduction work for months. As producer Paul Jarrico recalled in a 1983 interview, \"I had to trot around the country with cans of film under my arms, putting the film through different labs under phony names. We had a lot of trouble, but we did complete the film, despite the obstacles.\"\nReception.\nCritical response.\nWith McCarthyism in full force at the time of release, the movie establishment did not embrace \"Salt of the Earth\". Pauline Kael, who reviewed it for \"Sight and Sound\", panned it as a simplistic left-wing \"morality play\" and said it was \"as clear a piece of Communist propaganda as we have had in many years.\" \"Variety\" praised several elements in the film but called it \"a propaganda picture which belongs in union halls rather than theatres.\"\nBosley Crowther, film critic for \"The New York Times\", reviewed the picture somewhat favorably, both for its direction and screenplay:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Salt of the Earth\" is, in substance, simply a strong pro-labor film with a particularly sympathetic interest in the Mexican-Americans with whom it deals...But the real dramatic crux of the picture is the stern and bitter conflict within the membership of the union. It is the issue of whether the women shall have equality of expression and of strike participation with the men. And it is along this line of contention that Michael Wilson's tautly muscled script develops considerable personal drama, raw emotion and power.\nAs anti-Communist fervor waned, the movie started to be judged on its merits. By 2021, the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 100% of critics (based on thirteen reviews) had given the movie a positive rating.\nSuppression.\nAlthough \"Salt of the Earth\" received limited distribution in Western and Eastern Europe in the 1950s and won awards there, it was nearly impossible to see it in the United States. After its opening night in New York City, it languished for a decade because only thirteen theaters in the country were willing to show it. Roy Brewer of the IATSE leveraged his ties with the projectionists' union to cancel numerous bookings. The American Legion threatened to picket any theater that exhibited the movie. \"Salt of the Earth\" was denounced by the U.S. House of Representatives for its communist sympathies, and the FBI investigated the film's financing, looking for evidence of foreign funds that could justify prosecution under the Foreign Agents Registration Act.\nIn 1959, officials from the United States Information Agency testified before a House Appropriations subcommittee that a handful of movies, including \"Salt of the Earth\", \"were giving the United States trouble overseas.\" Representative Frank T. Bow (R-OH) said, \"such films were painting a false picture abroad of the United States and that something should be done about it.\" It wasn't until 1965 that \"Salt of the Earth\" was re-released.\nLater history.\nThe story of the suppression of \"Salt of the Earth\", as well as the people and labor struggle it depicts, inspired an underground audience of unionists, feminists, Mexican-Americans, leftists, film historians, and labor scholars. The movie found a new life in the U.S. in the late 1960s and early '70s and reached larger audiences through union halls, college campuses, art houses, women's associations, and film schools, even though it was projected with a relatively poor 16mm stock.\nIn subsequent decades, the film was shown on public television and released on videocassette. In 1997, Turner Classic Movies screened \"Salt of the Earth\" which further raised its profile beyond the initial cult following. In the early 2000s, the film's 50th anniversary prompted a number of commemorative events, including a national conference hosted by the College of Santa Fe in which \"Salt of the Earth\" was called \"one of the most important and controversial films in American cinema history.\" In an interview, political commentator Noam Chomsky praised the film's portrayal of union activity: \"[T]he real work is being done by people who are not known, that's always been true in every popular movement in history ... I don't know how you get that across in a film. Actually, come to think of it, there are some films that have done it. I mean, I don't see a lot of visual stuff ... but I thought \"Salt of the Earth\" really did it. It was a long time ago, but at the time I thought that it was one of the really great movies\u2014and of course it was killed, I think it was almost never shown.\"\nThe \"Salt of the Earth Labor College\" located in Tucson, Arizona is named after the film. The pro-labor institution (not a college \"per se\") holds lectures and forums related to unionism and economic justice. The film is screened on a frequent basis.\nOther releases.\nIn 1987, a laserdisc version was released by the Voyager Company. On July 27, 1999, a digitally restored print of the film was released on DVD by Organa through Geneon (Pioneer), and packaged with the documentary \"The Hollywood Ten\", which reported on the ten filmmakers who were blacklisted for refusing to cooperate with the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC). In 2004, a budget edition DVD was released by Alpha Video.\nBecause the film's copyright was not renewed in 1982, \"Salt of the Earth\" is now in the public domain.\nAdaptations.\nThe film was adapted into a two-act opera called \"Esperanza\" (Hope). The labor movement in Wisconsin along with University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison opera professor Karlos Moser commissioned the production. The music was written by David Bishop and the libretto by Carlos Morton. The opera premiered in Madison, Wisconsin, on August 25, 2000, to positive reviews.\nPortrayals in media.\nJohn Sayles' \"Return of the Secaucus 7\" (1980) includes a wry homage to \"Salt of the Earth\". When the reunited baby boomer characters are briefly jailed, they reminisce about their radical college days when they were locked up in a Secaucus, New Jersey jail and chanted \"We want the formula! We want the formula!\" to bewildered guards. The guards didn't realize it was an allusion to a \"Salt of the Earth\" scene in which the picketing Mexican-American women are arrested and thrown in jail. Esperanza has her infant child with her, and all the women chant \"We want the formula!\" to pressure the sheriff to either bring formula for the hungry baby or let them out of jail. He opts for the latter.\nA documentary titled \"A Crime to Fit the Punishment\", about the making of the film, was released in 1982 and directed by Barbara Moss and Stephen Mack. The title comes from a Paul Jarrico quote regarding the blacklistees who formed Independent Productions Corporation: \"I have said that \"Salt of the Earth\" was our chance to really say something in film, because we had already been punished, we had already been blacklisted. I used the phrase, 'We wanted to commit a crime to fit the punishment.'\" The documentary premiered on May 1, 1982 in Silver City, New Mexico, with many of the surviving \"Salt of the Earth\" cast and crew members in attendance.\nA film drama, also based on the making of \"Salt of the Earth\", was chronicled in \"One of the Hollywood Ten\" (2000). It was produced and directed by Karl Francis, starred Jeff Goldblum and Greta Scacchi, and was released in European countries on September 29, 2000.\nA fictionalized account of the movie's production figured prominently in the Audible podcast series, \"The Big Lie\" (2022). Based on source material written by Paul Jarrico, the production features voice performances from Jon Hamm, Kate Mara, Ana de la Reguera, Bradley Whitford, John Slattery, Giancarlo Esposito, and David Strathairn, and was written by John Mankiewicz and Jamie Napoli.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76326", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76326", "title": "Aquatic ape theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "76331", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76331", "title": "Scarface (1932 film)", "text": "1932 film by Howard Hawks\nScarface (also known as Scarface: The Shame of the Nation and The Shame of a Nation) is a 1932 American pre-Code gangster film directed by Howard Hawks and produced by Hawks and Howard Hughes. The screenplay, by Ben Hecht, is based loosely on the novel first published in 1930 by Armitage Trail, which was inspired by Al Capone. The film stars Paul Muni as Italian immigrant gangster Antonio \"Tony\" Camonte who violently rises through the Chicago gangland, with a supporting cast that includes George Raft and Boris Karloff. Camonte's rise to power dovetails with his relentless pursuit of his boss's mistress while his sister pursues his best hitman. In an overt tie to the life of Capone, a version of the Saint Valentine's Day Massacre is depicted.\nAfter purchasing the rights to Trail's novel, Hughes quickly selected Hawks to direct and Hecht to write the film's screenplay. Beginning in January 1931, Hecht wrote the script in 11 days. \"Scarface\" was produced before the introduction of the Production Code in 1934, which enforced regulations on film content. However, the Hays Code, a more lenient precursor, called for significant alterations, including a prologue condemning gangsters, an alternate ending to more clearly reprehend Camonte, and the alternative title \"The Shame of a Nation\". The censors believed the film glorified violence and crime. These changes delayed the film a year, though some showings retained the original ending. Modern showings of the film have the original ending, though some DVD releases also include the alternate ending as a feature; these versions maintain the changes Hughes and Hawks were required to make for approval by the Hays Office. The film is currently rated PG by the Motion Picture Association (MPA). No completely unaltered version was known to exist until the limited-edition set of \"Scarface\" (1983) was released on October 15, 2019.\nAudience reception was positive, but censors banned the film in several cities and states, forcing Hughes to remove it from circulation and store it in his vault. The rights to the film were recovered after Hughes died in the 1970s. Alongside \"Little Caesar\" and \"The Public Enemy\" (both 1931), \"Scarface\" is regarded as one of the most significant and influential gangster films.\n\"Scarface\" was added to the National Film Registry in 1994 by the Library of Congress. In 2008, the American Film Institute listed \"Scarface\" as the sixth-best gangster film. It was remade as the 1983 film of the same title starring Al Pacino.\nPlot.\nIn 1920s Chicago, an Italian immigrant and ambitious low-level thug, Tony \"Scarface\" Camonte, works as a bodyguard for crime lord \"Big\" Louis Costillo. Tony guns down his boss with Costillo's disgruntled lieutenant, Johnny Lovo. Lovo takes over Costillo's territory in the South Side and has Tony and his associates, the dim-witted Angelo and the handsome playboy Guino \"Little Boy\" Rinaldo, supervise a lucrative bootlegging operation selling illegal beer to all of the bars there and forcing out rivals.\nTony urges Lovo to start moving in on the North Side, where the bootlegging is controlled by the Irish gangster O'Hara; Lovo refuses, ordering Tony to leave the North Side alone. Tony ignores these orders and removes O'Hara's men while expanding his rackets to the North. Before long, Lovo was only the nominal boss, while Tony became increasingly notorious and powerful, attracting the attention of other gangsters and the police.\nMeanwhile, Tony pursues Johnny's girlfriend, Poppy. At first, she is dismissive of him but pays him more attention as his status rises and he starts flaunting his wealth. She visits his \"gaudy\" apartment, where he shows her his window view of an electric billboard advertising Cook's Tours, which features the slogan that inspires him: \"The World Is Yours.\"\nTony finally gets rid of O'Hara. O'Hara's successor, Tom Gaffney, declares war on the South Side and attempts to kill Tony with tommy guns\u2014 with which an excited Tony quickly arms his men. The war results in Tony\u2019s victory while Gaffney is forced to go into hiding. A group of prominent citizens, including the police chief, vow to bring Tony down for all the carnage and bloodshed he has inflicted on the city.\nDuring a night out at the theatre, Tony learns that Gaffney and the remainder of his crew are at a nearby bowling alley. Leaving Angelo behind to watch the rest of the show and report back to him the outcome, Tony personally kills Gaffney. Lovo's anger at Tony finally boils over when Tony openly flirts and dances with Poppy in front of him at a nightclub. Tony sees his beloved sister Francesca \"Cesca\" dancing with a stranger at the club; obsessively protective over her, he becomes enraged and hits her. Later that night, some hired gunmen try to assassinate Tony, but he kills them.\nSuspecting Lovo's involvement, Tony goes to his office after bribing the local barber to call him and pretend to be part of the hit crew. When Lovo hangs up after claiming that he must have gotten the wrong number, Tony forces him to confess to the hit and then has Guino kill him. Tony, now the undisputed kingpin of the city's underworld, takes Poppy on an expensive vacation to Florida to escape the police and media attention. At the same time, Cesca secretly visits Guino at Tony's office and seduces him. The two began an affair.\n Returning home, Tony learns from his mother, who has often warned him of his bad behavior, that Cesca has moved in with another man and rushes over to find her with Guino. He kills his friend in a jealous rage, and Cesca runs away in tears after revealing that they had just gotten married and were planning to surprise him. The police issue a warrant for Tony's arrest; he barricades himself in his home while Angelo is killed trying to protect him in a shootout with the police.\nCesca slips inside, planning to kill her brother, but can't bring herself to do it. Tony and Cesca arm themselves, and Tony shoots at the police from the window with a Thompson submachine gun, laughing maniacally as he guns them down. Moments later, however, Cesca is killed by a stray bullet. Calling Cesca's name as the apartment fills with tear gas, Tony stumbles down the stairs just as the police break down his door. Tony pleads for his life, but instead of putting on the offered handcuffs, he tries to escape, resulting in him being shot. As Tony falls dead on the street, the electric billboard blazes \"The World Is Yours\" above him.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Paul Muni as Antonio \"Tony\" Camonte\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nBusiness tycoon Howard Hughes, then involved in film-making, wanted a box-office hit after the success of his 1931 film \"The Front Page\". Gangster films were topical in the early 1930s in the age of Prohibition. Hughes wanted to make a film based on the life of gangster Al Capone superior to all other films in the genre. He was advised against making the film, as the genre was crowded; \"Little Caesar\" starring Edward G. Robinson and \"The Public Enemy\" starring James Cagney were already box-office successes, and Warner Bros. claimed nothing new could be done with the gangster genre. Furthermore, industry censors such as the Hays Office were becoming concerned with the glamorization of crime in media.\nHughes bought the rights to Armitage Trail's novel \"Scarface\", inspired by the life of Capone. Trail wrote for many detective story magazines during the early 1920s, but died of a heart attack at the age of 28, shortly before the release of \"Scarface\". Hughes hired Fred Pasley, a New York reporter and authority on Capone, as a writer. Hughes asked Ben Hecht, who had won the first Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay in 1929 for his silent crime film \"Underworld\", to be head writer. Suspicious of Hughes as an employer, Hecht requested a daily salary of $1,000, to be paid every day at six o'clock. Hecht claimed he would only waste a day's labor if Hughes was a fraud.\nHughes wanted film director Howard Hawks to direct and co-produce. This surprised Hawks, as the two had never been friendly; Hughes had filed a lawsuit against Howard Hawks in July 1930, alleging that Hawks's film \"The Dawn Patrol\" had plagiarized his film \"Hell's Angels\". Over a game of golf, Hughes promised to drop the lawsuit (irrelevant as the judge had already dismissed it). By the 18th hole, Hawks had become interested in directing the film. He became more convinced when he discovered Hecht would be the head writer. Hecht and Hawks worked well together, intending to portray the Capone character as of the Borgia Family, including the suggestion of incest between the main character and his sister, present in Trail's novel.\nWriting.\nHecht wrote the screenplay in 11 days in January 1931, adapted from Trail's novel. Fred Pasley provided additional writing, as well as W. R. Burnett, author of the novel \"Little Caesar\". Pasley's contributions included elements of the book \"Al Capone: Biography of a Self-Made Man;\" the book contains a barbershop scene with Capone similar to the introduction of Tony Camonte in the film. Pasley was not credited for his work on the screenplay. John Lee Mahin and Seton I. Miller rewrote the script for continuity and dialogue.\nBecause there were five writers, it is difficult to distinguish which components were contributed by which writer; however, the ending of \"Scarface\" is similar to Hecht's first gangster film \"Underworld,\" in which gangster Bull Weed traps himself in his apartment with his lover and fires at the hordes of police outside, and thus was likely a Hecht contribution.\nThe film version of \"Scarface\" bears little resemblance to the novel. Though the film contains the same major characters, plot points, and incestual undertones, changes were made to reduce the length and the number of characters, and to satisfy the requests of censorship offices. To make gangsters appear less admirable, Tony's character was made to appear less intelligent and more brutish than in the novel. Similarly, the sibling relationship between Tony and the police officer was removed to avoid depicting police corruption.\nTies to Capone.\nThe film and novel are loosely based on the life of gangster Al Capone, whose nickname was \"Scarface\". The names of characters and locations were changed. Capone became Camonte, Torrio became Lovo, and Moran became Doran. In some early scripts, Colosimo was Colisimo and O'Bannion was Bannon, but the names were changed to Costillo and O'Hara, respectively. This and other alterations made to characters and identifying locations to maintain anonymity were due to censorship and Hawks's concern about the overuse of historical details.\nBen Hecht had met Capone and \"knew a lot about Chicago\", so he did no research for the script. According to Hecht, while working on the script, Capone sent two men to visit him in Hollywood to ensure the film was not based on his life. He told them the Scarface character was a parody of numerous people, and that the title was chosen as it was intriguing. The two left Hecht alone.\nThe references to Capone and actual events from the Chicago gang wars were obvious to audiences at the time. Muni's character had a scar similar to Capone's, received in similar fights. The police in the film mention Camonte is a member of the Five Points Gang in Brooklyn, of which Capone was a known member. Tony kills his boss \"Big Louis\" Costillo in the lobby of his club; Capone was involved in the murder of his first boss \"Big Jim\" Colosimo in 1920. Rival boss O'Hara is murdered in his flower shop; Capone's men murdered Dean O'Bannion in his flower shop in 1924. The assassination of seven men in a garage, with two of the gunmen costumed as police officers, mirrors the St. Valentine's Day Massacre of 1929. The leader of this rival gang narrowly escapes the shooting, as did gang leader Bugs Moran. The film opens at the intersection of 22nd Street and Wabash Avenue in the middle of Capone's South Side, the site of many of Capone's crimes.\nDespite the explicit references to Capone, it was rumored that he liked the film so much that he owned a print of it. However, this was likely an exaggerated claim by Hawks as Capone was imprisoned in Atlanta for tax evasion during the film's release.\nCasting.\nHawks and Hughes found casting difficult as most actors were under contract and studios were reluctant to allow their artists to freelance for independent producers. Producer Irving Thalberg suggested Clark Gable, but Hawks believed Gable was a personality, not an actor. After seeing Paul Muni on Broadway, talent agent Al Rosen suggested him for the lead role. Muni initially declined, feeling he was not physically suited for the role, but after reading the script, his wife, Bella, convinced him to take it. After a test run in New York, Hughes, Hawks, and Hecht approved Muni for the role.\nBoris Karloff was cast as Irish gangster Gaffney, listed on a theatrical release poster as \"Boris 'Frankenstein' Karloff\". Jack La Rue was cast as Tony Camonte's sidekick Guino Rinaldo (modeled after Al Capone's bodyguard Frank Rio). Still, as he was taller than Muni, Hawks worried he would overshadow Muni's tough Scarface persona. He was replaced with George Raft, a struggling actor, when Hawks encountered him at a prizefight. Raft had played an almost identical part the previous year as his feature film debut in \"Quick Millions\", a gangster film starring Spencer Tracy, but the \"Scarface\" role would catapult Raft to stardom.\nThough Karen Morley was under contract at MGM, Hawks was close with MGM studio executive Eddie Mannix, who loaned out Morley for the film. She was reportedly given the choice between the role of Poppy or Cesca. Though Cesca was the stronger role, she chose Poppy as she felt Cesca would be a better fit for her friend Ann Dvorak. She considered this \"probably the nicest thing [she] did in [her] life\". Morley invited 20-year-old Dvorak to a party at Hawks' house to introduce them. According to Hawks, at the party, Dvorak zeroed in on George Raft, who played her love interest. He initially declined her invitation to dance. She tried to dance in front of him to lure him; eventually, he gave in, and their dance together stopped the party. After this event, Hawks was interested in casting her but had reservations about her lack of experience. After a screen test, he gave her the part, and MGM was willing to release her from her contract as a chorus girl. Dvorak had to both receive permission from her mother Anna Lehr and to win a petition presented to the Superior Court to be able to sign on with Howard Hawks as a minor.\nFilming.\nFilming lasted six months, which was long for films made in the early 1930s. Howard Hughes remained off-set to avoid interfering with the filming of the movie. Hughes urged Hawks to make the film visually exciting by adding car chases, crashes, and machine-gun fire. Hawks shot the film at three different locations: Metropolitan Studios, Harold Lloyd Studios, and the Mayan Theater in Los Angeles. Filming took 3 months, with the cast and crew working 7 days a week. For the most violent scene of the film in the restaurant, Hawks cleared the set to avoid harming extras and had the set fired on by machine guns. The actors acted out the scene in front of a screen with the shooting projected in the back, so as everyone crowded under the tables in the restaurant, the room appeared to be simultaneously under fire.\nHawks and Hughes met with the Hays Office during filming to discuss revisions. Despite that, \"Scarface\" was filmed and put together quickly. In September 1931, a rough cut of the film was screened for the California Crime Commission and police officials, neither of whom thought the movie was a dangerous influence for audiences or would elicit a criminal response. Irving Thalberg was given an advanced screening and was impressed by the film. Despite the positive feedback the film was given, the Hays Office was insistent on changes before final approval.\nCensorship.\n\"Scarface\" was produced and filmed during the pre-Code era of Hollywood, which spanned from 1930 to 1934. The pre-Code era is characterized by its informal and haphazard screening and regulation of film content, before the establishment of the Production Code Administration (PCA) on July 1, 1934. Before the influence of the PCA, censorship was overseen by the Motion Pictures Producers and Distributors of America (MPPDA). In 1930, Will Hays, the chairman of the MPPDA, attempted to regulate the content of movies; the MPPDA became known as the Hays Office. The goal of the Hays Office was to censor nudity, sexuality, drug use, and crime. More specific to \"Scarface\", the Hays Office wanted to avoid the sympathetic portrayal of crime by either showing criminals recognizing the error of their ways or showing criminals getting punished. The Hays Office, however, did not have authority to remove material from a film until the MPPDA officially pledged to adhere to the Production Code in 1934, so they relied on delaying film release and lobbying to remove scenes or prevent movies from being produced. Films evaded the Hays Office by adding extremely suggestive scenes so they could remove them and satisfy the Hays Office enough that they would overlook the lesser immoralities that remained in the film.\nJ. E. Smyth described \"Scarface\" as \"one of the most highly censored films in Hollywood history\". Howard Hawks believed the Hays Office had personal vendettas against the movie, while Hughes believed the censorship was due to \"ulterior and political motives\" of corrupt politicians. However, James Wingate of the New York censor boards rebutted that Hughes was preoccupied with \"box-office publicity\" in producing the film. After repeated demands for a script rewrite from the Hays Office, Hughes ordered Hawks to shoot the film: \"Screw the Hays Office, make it as realistic, and grisly as possible.\" The Hays Office was outraged by \"Scarface\" when they screened it. According to the Hays Office, \"Scarface\" violated the Code because the film elicited sympathy for Muni's character, revealing to youth a successful method of crime. The Hays Office called for scenes to be deleted, scenes to be added to condemn gangsterism, and a different ending. They believed Tony's death at the film's end was too glorifying. In addition to the violence, the MPPDA felt that an inappropriate relationship between the main character and his sister was too overt, especially when he holds her in his arms after he slaps her and tears her dress; they ordered this scene to be deleted. Hughes, to receive the MPPDA's approval, deleted the more violent scenes, added a prologue to condemn gangsterism, and wrote a new ending.\nIn addition, a couple of scenes were added to overtly condemn gangsterism, such as a scene in which a newspaper publisher looks at the screen and directly admonishes the government and the public for their lack of action in fighting against mob violence and a scene in which the chief detective denounces the glorification of gangsters. Hawks refused to shoot the extra scenes and the alternate ending. They were directed by Richard Rosson, earning Rosson the title of \"co-director\". Hughes was instructed to change the title to \"The Menace\", \"Shame of the Nation\" or \"Yellow\" to clarify the subject of the film; after months of haggling, he compromised with the title \"Scarface: The Shame of the Nation\" and by adding a foreword condemning \"gangsters\" in a general sense. Hughes attempted to release the film under the title \"The Scar\" when the Hays office disallowed the original title. Besides the title, the term \"Scarface\" was removed from the film. In the scene where Tony kills Rinaldo, Cesca says the word \"murderer\", but she can be seen mouthing the word \"Scarface\".\nThe original script had Tony's mother loving her son unconditionally, praising his lifestyle, and even accepting his money and gifts. In addition, there was a politician who, despite campaigning against gangsters on the podium, is shown partying with them after hours. The script ends with Tony staying in the building, unaffected by tear gas and a multitude of bullets fired at him. After the building is set on fire, Tony is forced to exit, guns blazing. He is sprayed with police gunfire but appears unfazed. Upon noticing the police officer who had been arresting him throughout the film, he fires at him, only to hear a single \"click\" noise implying his gun is empty. He is killed after the police officer shoots him several times. A repeated clicking noise is heard on the soundtrack, implying he was attempting to fire while dying.\nAlternate ending.\nThe film's first version (Version A) was completed on September 8, 1931, but censors required the ending to be modified or they would refuse to grant \"Scarface\" a license. Paul Muni could not re-film the ending in 1931 due to his work on Broadway. Consequently, Hawks was forced to use a body double. The body double was mainly filmed through shadows and long shots to mask Muni's absence in these scenes. The alternate ending (Version B) differs from the original ending in the manner that Tony is caught and in which he dies. Unlike the original ending, where Tony tries to escape from the police and dies after being shot several times, in the alternate ending, Tony reluctantly hands himself over to the police. After the encounter, Tony's face is not shown. A scene follows where a judge is addressing Tony during sentencing. The next scene is the finale, in which Tony (seen from a bird's eye view) is brought to the gallows and hanged.\nHowever, Version B did not pass the New York and Chicago censors. Howard Hughes felt the Hays Office had suspicious intentions in rejecting the film because Hays was friends with Louis B. Mayer. Hughes believed censorship was to prevent wealthy, independent competitors from producing films. Confident his film could stand out among audiences more than Mayer's films, Hughes organized a press showing of the film in Hollywood and New York. The \"New York Herald Tribune\" praised Hughes for his courage in opposing the censors. Hughes disowned the censored film, and finally, in 1932, Version A with the added text introduction was released in states that lacked strict censors (Hughes attempted to take the New York censors to court). This 1932 release version led to bona fide box-office status and positive critical reviews. Hughes was successful in subsequent lawsuits against the boards that censored the film. Due to criticism from the press, Hays claimed the version shown in theaters was the censored film he had previously approved.\nMusic.\nDue to the film's urban setting, nondiegetic music (not visible on the screen or implied to be present in the story) was not used in the film. The only music that appears in the film is during the opening and closing credits and during scenes where music appears naturally in the film's action, such as in the nightclub. Adolf Tandler served as the film's musical director, while Gus Arnheim served as the orchestra's conductor. Gus Arnheim and his Cocoanut Grove Orchestra perform \"Saint Louis Blues\" by W.C. Handy and \"Some of These Days\" by Shelton Brooks in the nightclub. The tune Tony whistles in the film is the sextet from Gaetano Donizetti's opera \"Lucia di Lammermoor\". This tune is accompanied by words that translate to, \"What restrains me in such a moment?\", and this tune continues to appear during violent scenes in the movie. The song Cesca sings while playing the piano is \"Wreck of the Old 97\".\nCultural references.\nThe serious play Tony and his friends go to see, leaving at the end of Act 2, is John Colton and Clemence Randolph's \"Rain\", based on W. Somerset Maugham's story \"Miss Sadie Thompson\". The play opened on Broadway in 1922 and ran throughout the 1920s. (A film version of the play, also titled \"Rain\" and starring Joan Crawford, was released by United Artists the same year as \"Scarface\".) Though relatively inconspicuous in the film, and unnoticed by most viewers, the Camonte family was meant to be partially modeled after the Italo-Spanish Borgia family. This was most prominent through the subtle and arguably incestuous relationship Tony Camonte and his sister share. Camonte's excessive jealousy of his sister's affairs with other men hint at this relationship. Coincidentally, Donizetti wrote the opera for \"Lucrezia Borgia\", about the Borgia family, and \"Lucia di Lammermoor\" from where Tony Camonte's whistle tune comes.\nRelease.\nAfter battling with censorship offices, the film was released around a year later than \"The Public Enemy\" and \"Little Caesar\". \"Scarface\" was released in theaters on April 9, 1932. Hughes planned a grand premiere in New York, but the New York censor boards rejected the film's showing. State censorship boards in Ohio, Virginia, Maryland, and Kansas, and citywide censorship boards in Detroit, Seattle, Portland, and Chicago banned the film. Hughes threatened to sue censorship boards for preventing the release of his film, much to the approval of the \"New York Herald Tribune\". Each state had a different board of censors, which allowed Hughes to release the film in areas without strict censorship. At the request of Will Hays, Jason Joy convinced the strict censor boards to allow the release of \"Scarface\", because the Hays Office acknowledged and appreciated the changes Hughes made to the film. Joy visited state censor boards individually, stating that while the Hays Office was against the positive portrayal of crime, gang films were documentaries against gangster life. Joy was successful, and eventually all state and municipal censorship boards allowed \"Scarface\" to be released, accepting only the cut and censored version of \"Scarface\".\nReception.\nUpon release, audiences were generally positive. According to George Raft, who met Al Capone a few times at casinos, even Capone himself liked the film adding, \"you tell 'em that if any of my boys are tossin' coins, they'll be twenty-dollar gold pieces.\" \"Variety\" cited \"Scarface\" as having \"that powerful and gripping suspense which is in all gangster pictures is in this one in double doses and makes it compelling entertainment\", and that the actors play, \"as if they'd been doing nothing else all their lives\". The National Board of Review named \"Scarface\" as one of the best pictures of 1932. However, at the time of release in 1932, there was a general public outcry about this motion picture and the gangster genre in general, which negatively affected the film's box-office receipts. Jack Alicoate gave \"Scarface\" a scathing review in \"The Film Daily\", stating that the violence and subject matter of the film left him with, \"the distinct feeling of nausea\". He goes on to say the film \"should never have been made\" and showing the film would \"do more harm to the motion picture industry, and everyone connected with it, than any picture ever shown\". Although Ben Hecht was often critical of his work for Hollywood, he admitted that \"Scarface\" was \"the best-directed picture [he has] seen\". Hecht did, however, criticize Muni's performance. Having known Al Capone, Hecht claimed that Muni portrayed Capone as too \"silent\" and \"moody\", more similar to \"Hitler\". Some critics disagreed with the casting of British actor Boris Karloff, believing his accent was out of place in a gangster film; a \"New York Times\" article stated \"his British accent is hardly suitable to the role\". However, other critics considered him a high point. The film earned $600,000 at the box office, and while \"Scarface\" was more financially successful than Hughes's other films at the time, due to the significant cost of production, it is unlikely the film did better than break even.\nThe film initiated outrage among Italian organizations and individuals of Italian descent, remarking on a tendency of filmmakers to portray gangsters and bootleggers in their films as Italian. In the film, an Italian American makes a speech condemning gangster activities; this was added later in production to appease censors. This, however, did not prevent the Italian embassy from disapproving \"Scarface\". Believing the film to be offensive to the Italian community, the Order Sons of Italy in America formally denounced the film and other groups urged community members to boycott the film and other films derogatory towards Italians or Italian-Americans. Will Hays wrote to the ambassador in Italy, excusing himself from scrutiny by stating the film was an anachronism because it had been delayed in production for two years and was not representative of the current practice of censorship at the time. Nazi Germany permanently prohibited showings of the film. Some cities in England banned the film as well, believing the British Board of Film Censorship's policy on gangster films was too lax. The film had been banned in Ireland on August 19, 1932, and on August 29, 1941, (under the alternate title of 'Gang War'). The decisions were upheld by the Films Appeal Board each time. It was banned on April 24, 1953, (under its original title). No appeal was lodged. Various reasons include pandering to sensationalism, glamorizing the gangster lifestyle and implying an incestuous relationship between the protagonist and his sister.\nSeveral cities in the United States, including Chicago, and some states refused to show the film. The magazine \"Movie Classics\" ran an issue urging the people to demand to see the film at theaters despite the censorship bans. The film broke box-office records at the Woods Theatre in Chicago after premiering Thanksgiving Day, November 20, 1941, after having been banned from showing in Chicago by censors for nine years. Despite the favorable reception of the film among the public, the censorship battles and the unflattering reviews from some press contributed to the film's generally poor performance at the box-office. Upset at the inability to make money from \"Scarface\", Howard Hughes removed the film from circulation. The film remained unavailable until 1979 except for occasional release prints of suspect quality from questionable sources. Hughes had plans in 1933 to direct and produce a sequel to \"Scarface\", but due to stricter censorship rules, the film was never made.\nBased on a sampling of 46 reviews on Rotten Tomatoes, \"Scarface\" holds a 98% rating, with an average rating of 8.7/10. The critics' consensus reads: \"This \"Scarface\" foregoes his \"little friend\" and packs a different kind of heat, blending stylish visuals, thrilling violence, and an incredible cast.\" It holds a rating of 90 on Metacritic based on 12 reviews, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nIndustry reception.\nIn 1994, \"Scarface\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". The character of Tony Camonte ranked at number 47 on \"AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains\" list. The film was named the best American sound film by critic and director Jean-Luc Godard in \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\". In June 2008, the American Film Institute revealed its \"Ten Top Ten\"\u2014the best ten films in ten \"classic\" American film genres\u2014after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. \"Scarface\" was acknowledged as the sixth best in the gangster film genre. The 1983 version was placed 10th, making \"Scarface\" the only film to make the same \"10 Top 10\" list as its remake.\nAnalysis.\nScholars debate whether \"Scarface\" classifies as a film with historical significance or a Hollywood gangster-era motion picture. Its historical significance was augmented by the film's writing credits: W. R. Burnett, author of gangster novel \"Little Caesar\" from which the film of the same name was based on; Fred D. Pasley, a prominent Chicago gangland historian; and Ben Hecht, an ex-Chicago reporter. Events similar to the assassination of Jim Colismo and the St. Valentine's Day Massacre contribute to the film's realism and authenticity. Film critic Robert E. Sherwood stated that the film \"merits...as a sociological or historical document\", and \"an utterly inexcusable attempt has been made to suppress it\u2014not because it is obscene...but because...it comes too close to telling the truth.\"\nExcess.\nAccording to film studies professor Fran Mason, excess is a prominent theme in the film. The opening of the film sets the stage as Big Louie Costillo sits in the remnants of a wild party, convincing his friends his next party will be bigger, better, and have \"much more everything\". This indicates the excessive life of a gangster, whether in pleasure or violence. The death scene of Costillo sets the next tone of excess. In this scene, the audience sees only the shadow of Tony Camonte with a gun, hears the shots, and the sound of the body hitting the floor. The violent scenes become more severe as the film progresses. Most of the violence in the film is shown through montage, as scenes go by in sequence, showing the brutal murders that Tony and his gang commit, such as roughing up bar owners, participating in a drive-by bombing, and massacring 7 men against a wall. A scene shows a peel-off calendar rapidly changing dates while being shot by a machine gun, making the excessive violence clear. The violence is not only perpetrated by the gangsters. The police in the final scene with Tony and Cesca spare no effort to catch the notorious Camonte siblings, visible through the disproportionate number of police officers and cars surrounding the apartment complex to apprehend one man. Tony and the police's excessive use of violence throughout the film normalizes it. An element of parody underlies Tony's abnormal joy in using Tommy guns. In the scene in the restaurant in which men from the North Side gang attempt to shoot Tony with a Tommy, he obtains pleasure from the power. Rather than cowering beneath the tables, he tries to peek out to watch the guns in action, laughing maniacally from his excitement. He reacts jovially upon getting his first Tommy gun and enthusiastically leaves to \"write [his] name all over the town with it in big letters\".\nThe gangster's excessive consumption is comically represented through Tony's quest to obtain expensive goods and show them off. In Tony's first encounter with Poppy alone on the staircase, he boasts about his new suit, jewelry, and bulletproof car. Poppy largely dismisses his advances, calling his look \"kinda effeminate\". His feminine consumption and obsession with looks and clothes are juxtaposed by his masculine consumption, which is represented by his new car. Later, Tony shows Poppy a stack of new shirts, claiming he will wear each shirt only once. His awkwardness and ignorance of his exorbitance make this Gatsby-style scene more comical than serious. His consumption symbolizes the disintegration of values of modernity, represented explicitly by his poor taste and obsession with money and social status. Tony's excess transcends parody and becomes dangerous because he represents a complete lack of restraint that ultimately leads to his downfall.\nTony's excess is manifested in the gang wars in the city. He is instructed to leave O'Hara, Gaffney, and the rest of the North Side gang alone. He disobeys because he lusts for more power, violence, and territory. Not only does he threaten the external power structure of the gangs concerning physical territory, but he also disrupts the internal power structure of his gang by blatantly disobeying his boss, Johnny Lovo. Gaffney's physical position juxtaposes Tony's position. Throughout the film, Gaffney's movement is restricted by both the setting and the implication because of the crowded spaces he is shown onscreen and his troupe of henchmen, with whom he is constantly surrounded. Tony can move freely at the film's beginning, becoming progressively more crowded until he is as confined as Gaffney. Henchmen surround him and cannot move as freely throughout the city. This, however, is self-imposed by his excessive desire for territory and power.\nThe theme of excessiveness is further exemplified by Tony's incestuous desires for his sister, Cesca, whom he attempts to control and restrict. Their mother acts as the voice of reason, but Tony does not listen to her, subjecting his family to the excess and violence he brings upon himself. His lust for violence mirrors Cesca's lust for sexual freedom, symbolized by her seductive dance for Rinaldo at the club. Rinaldo is torn between his loyalty to Tony and his passion for Cesca, symbolizing the power struggle between the Camonte siblings. Rinaldo is a symbol of Tony's power and prominence; his murder signifies Tony's lack of control and downfall, which ends in Tony's death.\nAmerican Dream.\nCamonte's rise to prominence and success is modeled after the American Dream, but more overtly violent. As the film follows the rise and fall of an Italian gangster, Tony becomes increasingly more Americanized. When Tony appears under the towel at the barbershop, this is the first time the audience sees his face. He appears foreign with a noticeable Italian accent, slicked hair, and an almost Neanderthal appearance, evident by the scars on his cheek. As the movie progresses, he becomes more Americanized as he loses his accent and his suits change from gaudy to elegant. By the film's end, his accent is hardly noticeable. Upon the time of his death, he had accumulated many \"objects\" that portray the success suggested by the American Dream: his secretary, a girlfriend of significant social status (more important even is that she was the mistress of his old boss), as well as a fancy apartment, big cars, and nice clothes. Camonte exemplifies that one can succeed in America by following Camonte's motto: \"Do it first, do it yourself, and keep on doin' it.\" On the other hand, Camonte represents the American urge to reject modern life and society, rejecting Americanism. The gangster strives for the same American Dream as anyone else, but approaches it in a way at odds with modern societal values, through violence and illicit activity.\nGangster territory.\nControl of territory is a theme in the gangster film genre in a physical sense and on the movie screen. Tony works to control the city by getting rid of competing gangs and gaining physical control of the city, and he likewise gains control of the movie screen in his rise to power. This is most evident in scenes and interactions involving Tony, Johnny, and Poppy. In an early scene in the film, Tony comes to Johnny's apartment to receive his payment after killing Louie Costillo. Two rooms are visible in the shot: the main room, where Tony sits, and the room in the background where Poppy sits and where Johnny keeps his money. Lovo goes into the back room, but Tony does not, so this room represents Johnny's power and territory. The men sit across from each other in the scene, with Poppy in the middle of them in the background, representing the trophy they are both fighting for. However, they both appear equally in the shot, representing their equality of power. Later, in the nightclub scene, Tony sits between Poppy and Johnny, showing he is in control through his centrality in the shot. He has gained the most power and territory, as indicated by \"winning\" Poppy.\nFear of technology.\n\"Scarface\" represents the American fears and confusion that stemmed from the technological advancement of the time: whether technological advancement and mass production should be feared or celebrated. An overall anxiety post-World War I was whether new technology would cause ultimate destruction, or whether it would help make lives easier and bring happiness. In the film, Tony excitedly revels in the possibilities machine guns can bring by killing more people, more quickly, and from further away. This represents the question of whether or not mass production equals mass destruction or mass efficiency.\nObjects and gestures.\nThe use of playful motifs throughout the film showcased Howard Hawks's dark comedy, which he expressed through his directing. In the bowling alley scene, where rival gang leader Tom Gaffney was murdered, when Gaffney throws the ball, the shot remains on the last standing bowling pin, which falls to represent the death of kingpin Tom Gaffney. In the same scene, before the death of Gaffney, a shot shows an \"X\" on the scoreboard, foreshadowing Gaffney's death. Hawks used the \"X\" foreshadowing technique throughout the film (seen first in the opening credits) which were chiefly associated with death appearing many times (but not every scene) when a death is portrayed; the motif appears in numerous places, most prominently as Tony's \"X\" scar on his left cheek. The motifs mock the life of the gangster. The gangster's hat is a common theme throughout gangster films, specifically \"Scarface\", as representative of conspicuous consumption. Hawks included hand gestures, a common motif in his films. In \"Scarface\", George Raft was instructed to repetitively flip a coin, which he does throughout the film.\n\"The World Is Yours\".\nCamonte's apartment looks out on a neon, flashing sign that says \"The World Is Yours\". This sign represents the modern American city as a place of opportunity and individualism. As attractive as the slogan is, the message is impossible, yet Tony does not understand this. The view from his apartment represents the rise of the gangster. When Camonte is killed in the street outside his building, the camera pans up to show the billboard, representative of the societal paradox of the existence of opportunity, yet the inability to achieve it. According to Robert Warshow, the ending scene represents how the world is not ours, but not his either. The gangster's death momentarily releases us from the concept of success and the need to succeed. Regarding the theme of excess, the sign is a metaphor for the dividing desires created by modernity, seen through the lens of the excessive desires of the gangster persona.\nStyle.\n\"Sharp\" and \"hard-edged\", \"Scarface\" set the visual style for the gangster films of the 1930s. Hawks created a violent, gripping film by strongly contrasting black and white in his cinematography. For example, dark rooms, silhouettes of bodies against drawn shades, and pools of carefully placed light. Much of the film takes place at night. The tight grouping of subjects within the shot and stalking camera movement followed the course of action in the film. The cinematography is dynamic and characterized by highly varied camera placement and mobile framing.\nItalian-language versions.\nIn 1946, after World War II and softened relations between Italy and the United States, Titanus, an Italian film production company, was interested in translating \"Scarface\" into Italian. Initially, upon requesting approval from the Italian film office, the request was rejected due to censorship concerns regarding the portrayal of violence and crime throughout the film. There was no initial concern about the film's portrayal of Italians. Titanus appealed to the Italian film office, calling \"Scarface \"one of the most solid and constructive motion pictures ever produced overseas. They lobbied to bring in a foreign language film to help domestic film producers save money in the Italian economy, damaged by the recent war. After receiving approval at the end of 1946, Titanus translated a script for dubbing the film. One difference in the Italian script is that the characters' names were changed from Italian-sounding to more American-sounding. For example, Tony Camonte was changed to Tony Kermont, and Guino Rinaldo was changed to Guido Reynold. This and several other changes were made to remove references to Italians.\nAnother example is the difference in the scene in the restaurant with Tony and Johnny. In the American version, Tony makes a comical statement about the garlic in the pasta. In contrast, in the Italian translation, the food in question is a duck liver p\u00e2t\u00e9, a less overtly Italian reference to food. Moreover, in the American version, the gangsters are referred to as illegal immigrants by the outraged community; however, in the Italian dubbed version, the citizen status of the criminals are not mentioned, merely the concern of repeat offenders.\nThe film was redubbed into Italian in 1976 by the broadcasting company \"Radio Televisione Italiana\" (RAI). Franco Dal Cer translated the script, and the dub was directed by Giulio Panicali. Pino Locchi dubbed the voice of Tony Camonte for Paul Muni, and Pino Colizzi dubbed the voice of Gunio Rinaldo for George Raft. A difference between the 1947 and 1976 versions is that all of the Italian names and cultural references were untouched from the original American script. The 1976 version celebrates the Italian backgrounds of the characters, adding noticeably different Italian dialects to specific characters. This version of the dubbed film translates the opening and closing credit scenes as well as the newspaper clippings shown into Italian; however, the translation of the newspaper clippings was not done with particular aesthetic care.\nThe film was redubbed in the 1990s and released on Universal's digital edition. According to scholarly consensus, the 1990 dub combines re-voicing and reusing audio from the 1976 redub.\nLegacy.\nDespite being unsuccessful at the box office, \"Scarface\" was one of the most discussed films of 1932 due to its subject matter and its struggle and triumph over censor boards. \"Scarface\" is cited (often with \"Little Caesar\" and \"The Public Enemy\") as the archetype of the gangster film genre, because it set the early standard for the genre which continues to appear in Hollywood. However, \"Scarface\" was the last of the three big gangsters films of the early 1930s, as the outrage at the pre-Code violence caused by the three films, particularly \"Scarface\", sparked the creation of the Production Code Administration in 1934. Howard Hawks cited \"Scarface\" as one of his favorite works, and the film was a subject of pride for Howard Hughes. Hughes locked the film in his vaults a few years after release, refusing many profitable offers to distribute the film or to buy its rights. In 1979, three years after his death, Summa Corporation, which controlled his estate, sold the rights to \"Scarface\", along with seven other films to Universal Pictures, which sparked the 1983 remake starring Al Pacino. Though rare for a remake, the 1983 version was also critically acclaimed.\nPaul Muni's performance in \"Scarface\" as \"the quintessential gangster anti-hero\" contributed greatly to his rapid ascent into his acclaimed film career. Paul Muni received significant accolades for his performance as Tony Camonte. Critics praised Muni for his robust and fierce performance. Al Pacino stated Paul Muni greatly inspired him. Muni influenced his performance in the 1983 \"Scarface\" remake. However, despite the impressive portrayal of a rising gangster, critics claim the character minimally resembled Al Capone. Unlike Camonte, Capone avoided grunt work and typically employed others to do his dirty work for him. Moreover, Muni's Scarface at the end revealed the Capone character to be a coward as he pleaded for mercy and tried to escape before getting shot in the street. Capone was not known for his cowardice and did not die in battle.\n\"Scarface\" was Ann Dvorak's best-known film. The film launched Raft's lengthy career as a leading man. In the film's second lead, Raft had learned to flip a coin without looking at it, a character trait, and he made a strong impression in the comparatively sympathetic but colorful role. Howard Hawks told Raft to use this in the film to camouflage his lack of acting experience. A reference is made in Raft's later role as gangster Spats Columbo in \"Some Like It Hot\" (1959), wherein he asks a fellow gangster (who is flipping a coin) \"Where did you pick up that cheap trick?\"\n\"Scarface\" may have influenced gangster life 4 years after the film was released. In 1936, Jack McGurn, who was thought to be responsible for the St. Valentine's Massacre depicted in the film, was murdered by rivals in a bowling alley.\nHome media.\nThe film was one of the first films released on video by MCA Videocassette in May 1980. The film was released on DVD on May 22, 2007, and was rereleased on August 28, 2012, in celebration of the 100th anniversary of Universal Studios, by Universal Pictures Home Entertainment. Both DVD versions include an introduction by \"Turner Classic Movies\" host and film historian Robert Osborne and the film's alternate ending. On video and on television, the film maintains Hawks's original ending but still contains the other alterations he was required to make during filming. A completely unaltered and uncensored version of the film was not known to exist until the limited-edition set of \"Scarface\" (1983) was released on October 15, 2019. In 2024, a new 4K restoration was created from a 35mm duplicate negative, and given a 4K/Blu-ray release by The Criterion Collection on November 12, 2024.\nRelated films.\nAfter the rights for \"Scarface\" were obtained after the death of Howard Hughes, Brian de Palma released a remake of the film in 1983 featuring Al Pacino as Scarface. The film was set in contemporary 1980s Miami in the Hispanic underworld and is known for its inclusion of graphic violence and obscene language, considered \"as violent and obscene for the 1980s\" as the original film was considered for 1930s cinema. The 2003 DVD \"Anniversary Edition\" limited-edition box set of the 1983 film includes its 1932 counterpart. At the end of the 1983 film, a title reading \"This film is dedicated to Howard Hawks and Ben Hecht\" appears over the final shot.\nUniversal announced in 2011 that the studio has been developing a new version of \"Scarface\" in multiple starts and stops. The studio claims the new film is neither a sequel nor a remake, but will take elements from both the 1932 and the 1983 version, including the basic premise of a man who becomes a kingpin in his quest for the American Dream. In 2016, Antoine Fuqua was in talks to direct the remake, but left the project the following year in February, with the Coen brothers rewriting the script. Universal later hired David Ayer to direct and contracted Diego Luna to star, but dismissed Ayer because his script was too violent. In 2018, Fuqua was back on the project, but left again in May 2020. Instead, Luca Guadagnino has signed to direct the film, with the script from Coen brothers.\n\"Scarface\" is often associated with other pre-code crime films released in the early 1930s such as \"The Doorway to Hell\" (1930), \"Little Caesar\" (1931) and \"The Public Enemy\" (1931). According to Fran Mason of the University of Winchester, \"Scarface\" is more similar to the film \"The Roaring Twenties\" than its early 1930s gangster film contemporaries because of its excess.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76332", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76332", "title": "Image processing", "text": ""}
{"id": "76333", "revid": "203230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76333", "title": "Scarface (1932)", "text": ""}
{"id": "76335", "revid": "12472594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76335", "title": "The Searchers", "text": "1956 film by John Ford\nThe Searchers is a 1956 American epic Western film directed by John Ford and written by Frank S. Nugent, based on the 1954 novel by Alan Le May. It is set during the Texas\u2013Indian wars, and stars John Wayne as a middle-aged Civil War veteran who, accompanied by his adopted nephew (Jeffrey Hunter), spends years looking for his abducted niece (Natalie Wood). It was shot in VistaVision on Eastmancolor negative with processing and prints by Technicolor.\nThe film was a critical and commercial success. Since its release, it has come to be considered a masterpiece and one of the greatest and most influential films ever made. It was named the greatest American Western by the American Film Institute in 2008, and it placed 12th on the same organization's 2007 list of the 100 greatest American movies of all time. \"Entertainment Weekly\" also named it the best Western. The British Film Institute's \"Sight and Sound\" magazine ranked it as the seventh-best film of all time based on a 2012 international survey of film critics and in 2008, the French magazine \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\" ranked \"The Searchers\" number 10 in their list of the 100 best films ever made.\nIn 1989, \"The Searchers\" was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the United States Library of Congress, and selected for preservation in its National Film Registry; it was one of the first 25 films selected for the registry.\n\"The Searchers\" was the first major film to have a purpose-filmed making-of, requested by John Ford. It deals with most aspects of making the film, including preparation of the site, construction of props, and filming techniques.\nPlot.\nIn 1868, Ethan Edwards returns after an eight-year absence to the home of his brother Aaron in West Texas. Ethan fought in the Civil War on the side of the Confederacy, and in the three years since that war ended, he also apparently fought in the Second Franco\u2013Mexican War. He has in his possession a lot of gold coins of uncertain origin, and a medal from the Mexican campaign that he gives to his eight-year-old niece, Debbie. As a former Confederate soldier, when he is asked to take an oath of allegiance to the Texas Rangers, he refuses.\nShortly after Ethan's arrival, cattle belonging to his neighbor Lars Jorgensen are stolen, and Rev. Captain Samuel Clayton leads Ethan and a group of Rangers to recover them. After discovering that the theft was a Comanche ploy to draw the men away from their families, they return and find the Edwards homestead in flames. Aaron, his wife Martha, and their son Ben are dead, while Debbie and her older sister Lucy have been abducted.\nAfter a brief funeral, the men set out in pursuit. When they find the Comanche camp, Ethan recommends a frontal attack, but Clayton insists on a stealth approach to avoid killing the hostages. The camp turns out to be deserted, and further along the trail, the men ride into an ambush. Despite fending off the attack, the Rangers are left with too few men to fight the Comanche effectively. They return home, leaving Ethan to continue his search for the girls with only Lucy's fianc\u00e9, Brad Jorgensen, and Debbie's adopted brother, Martin Pawley. Ethan finds Lucy murdered (and, it is implied, raped) in a canyon near the Comanche camp. In a blind rage, Brad rides directly into the camp and is killed.\nWhen winter arrives, Ethan and Martin lose the trail and return to the Jorgensen ranch. Martin is enthusiastically welcomed by the Jorgensens' daughter Laurie, and Ethan finds a letter waiting for him from a trader named Futterman, who claims to have information about Debbie. Ethan, who would rather travel alone, leaves without Martin the next morning, but Laurie reluctantly provides Martin with a horse to catch up. At Futterman's trading post, Ethan and Martin learn that Debbie has been taken by Scar, the chief of the Nawyecka band of Comanches. A year or more later, Laurie receives a letter from Martin describing the ongoing search. Reading the letter aloud, Laurie narrates the next few scenes, in which Ethan kills Futterman for trying to steal his money, and Martin accidentally buys a Comanche wife who runs away when she hears Scar's name; later, she is among the dead when the two men find a portion of Scar's band killed by soldiers.\nIn New Mexico Territory, they find Debbie after five years, now an adolescent, living as one of Scar's wives. She says that she has become a Comanche and wishes to remain with them. Ethan would rather see her dead than living as a Native American, and tries to shoot her, but Martin shields her with his body and a Comanche wounds Ethan with an arrow as they escape. Although Martin tends to Ethan's wound, he is furious with him for attempting to kill Debbie. Later, they return home.\nMeanwhile, Charlie McCorry has been courting Laurie in Martin's absence. Ethan and Martin arrive home just as Charlie and Laurie's wedding is about to begin. After a fistfight between Martin and Charlie, a nervous Yankee soldier, Lieutenant Greenhill, brings news that Ethan's friend Mose Harper has located Scar. Clayton leads his men to the Comanche camp, this time for a direct attack, but Martin is allowed to sneak in ahead of the assault to find Debbie, who welcomes him. Martin kills Scar to save Debbie. Ethan, finding Scar's body, scalps him for revenge. Ethan then finds Debbie, and pursues her on horseback. Martin chases them desperately, fearing that Ethan will shoot her. Instead, Ethan sweeps her up into his arms and takes her to the Jorgensen ranch, where Martin reunites with Laurie. While everyone else enters the house, Ethan watches, then walks away.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nProducers and film crew.\n\"The Searchers\" was the first production from \"distinguished turfman\" C.V. Whitney; it was directed by John Ford and distributed by Warner Bros. Behind the camera film crew included cinematographer Winton C. Hoch and editor Jack Murray.\n\"The Searchers\" is the first of only three films produced by Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney's C.V. Whitney Pictures; the second was \"The Missouri Traveler\" in 1958 with Brandon deWilde and Lee Marvin, and the last was \"The Young Land\" in 1959 with Wayne's son Patrick Wayne and Dennis Hopper.\nFilming locations.\nWhile the film was primarily set in the staked plains (Llano Estacado) of northwestern Texas, it was actually filmed in Monument Valley, Arizona/Utah. Additional scenes were filmed in Mexican Hat, Utah, in Bronson Canyon in Griffith Park, Los Angeles, and in Elk Island National Park. The film was shot in the VistaVision widescreen process. Ford originally wanted to cast Fess Parker, whose as Davy Crockett on television had helped spark a national craze, for the Martin Pawley role, but Walt Disney, to whom Parker was under contract, refused to allow it and did not tell Parker about the offer, according to Parker's videotaped interview for the Archive of American Television. Parker has said retrospectively that this was easily his worst career reversal.\nPromotion.\nAs part of its promotion of \"The Searchers\" in 1956, Warner Bros. produced and broadcast one of the first behind-the-scenes, \"making-of\" programs in movie history, which aired in 1956 as an episode of its \"Warner Bros. Presents\" TV series.\nHistorical background.\nAuthor Alan Le May's surviving research notes indicate that the two characters who go in search of a missing girl were inspired by Britton Johnson, an African American teamster who ransomed his captured wife and children from the Comanches in 1865. Afterward, Johnson made at least three trips to Indian Territory and Kansas, relentlessly searching for another kidnapped girl, Millie Durgan (or Durkin), until Kiowa raiders killed him in 1871.\nSeveral film critics have suggested that \"The Searchers\" was inspired by the 1836 kidnapping of nine-year-old Cynthia Ann Parker by Comanche warriors, who raided her family's home at Fort Parker, Texas. She spent 24 years with the Comanches, married a war chief, and had three children (one of whom was the famous Comanche Chief Quanah Parker), only to be rescued against her will by Texas Rangers. James W. Parker, Cynthia Ann's uncle, spent much of his life and fortune in what became an obsessive search for his niece, much like Ethan Edwards in the film.\nIn addition, the rescue of Cynthia Ann, during a Texas Ranger attack known as the Battle of Pease River, resembles the rescue of Debbie Edwards when the Texas Rangers attack Scar's village. Parker's story was only one of 64 real-life cases of 19th-century child abductions in Texas that author Alan Le May studied while researching the novel on which the film was based.\nThe ending of Le May's novel contrasts to the film's, with Debbie running from the white men and the Native Americans. Marty, in one final leg of his search, finds her days later, only after she has fainted from exhaustion.\nIn the film, Scar's Comanche group is referred to as the Nawyecka, correctly the \"Noy\u0289hka\" or \"Nokoni\", the same band that kidnapped Cynthia Ann Parker. Some film critics have speculated that the historical model for the cavalry attack on a Comanche village, resulting in Look's death and the taking of Comanche prisoners to a military post, was the well-known Battle of the Washita River, November 27, 1868, when Lt. Col. George Armstrong Custer's 7th U.S. Cavalry attacked Black Kettle's Cheyenne camp on the Washita River (near present-day Cheyenne, Oklahoma). The sequence also resembles the 1872 Battle of the North Fork of the Red River, in which the 4th Cavalry captured 124 Comanche women and children and imprisoned them at Fort Concho.\nReception.\nContemporaneous reviews.\nUpon the film's release, Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" called it a \"ripsnorting Western\" (in spite of the \"excessive language in its ads\"); he credits Ford's \"familiar corps of actors, writers, etc., [who help] to give the gusto to this film. From Frank S. Nugent, whose screenplay from the novel of Alan LeMay is a pungent thing, right on through the cast and technicians, it is the honest achievement of a well-knit team.\" Crowther noted \"two faults of minor moment\":\n\"Variety\" called it \"handsomely mounted and in the tradition of \"Shane\"\", yet \"somewhat disappointing\" due to its length and repetitiveness; \"The John Ford directorial stamp is unmistakable. It concentrates on the characters and establishes a definite mood. It's not sufficient, however, to overcome many of the weaknesses of the story.\"\nThe \"New York Herald Tribune\" termed the movie \"distinguished\"; \"Newsweek\" deemed it \"remarkable\". \"Look\" described \"The Searchers\" as a \"Homeric odyssey\". \"The New York Times\" praised Wayne's performance as \"uncommonly commanding\". \"The Monthly Film Bulletin\" wrote, \"Though it does not consistently achieve the highest Ford standards, \"The Searchers\" is surely the best Western since \"Shane\".\"\nThe film earned rentals of $4.8 million in the US and Canada during its first year of release.\nThe film helped revive the career of Jeffrey Hunter.\nLater assessments.\nCritic Roger Ebert found Wayne's character, Ethan Edwards, \"one of the most compelling characters Ford and Wayne ever created\". Ebert writes: \"\"The Searchers\" indeed seems to be two films. The Ethan Edwards story is stark and lonely, a portrait of obsession, and in it we can see Schrader's inspiration for Travis Bickle of \"Taxi Driver\". [...] The film within this film involves the silly romantic subplot and characters hauled in for comic relief, including the Swedish neighbor Lars Jorgensen (John Qualen), who uses a vaudeville accent, and Mose Harper (Hank Worden), a half-wit treated like a mascot. [...] This second strand is without interest, and those who value \"The Searchers\" filter it out, patiently waiting for a return to the main story line.\"\n\"The Searchers\" has been cited as one of the greatest films of all time, such as in the BFI's decennial \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls. In 1972, \"The Searchers\" was ranked 18th; in 1992, 5th; in 2002, 11th; in 2012, 7th. In a 1959 \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\" essay, Jean-Luc Godard compared the movie's ending to the reuniting of Odysseus with Telemachus in Homer's \"Odyssey\" and wrote: How can I hate [\u2026] John Wayne, who supports Goldwater, and love him tenderly when he suddenly takes Natalie Wood in his arms in the penultimate reel of The Searchers?In 1963, he ranked \"The Searchers\" as the fourth-greatest American movie of the sound era, after \"Scarface\" (1932), \"The Great Dictator\" (1940), and \"Vertigo\" (1958). The 1998 American Film Institute 100 greatest American films list ranked \"The Searchers\" in 96th place, and the 2007 iteration of the list ranked it in 12th place. In 1998, \"TV Guide\" ranked it 18th. In 2008, the American Film Institute named \"The Searchers\" as the greatest Western of all time. In 2010, Richard Corliss noted the film was \"now widely regarded as the greatest Western of the 1950s, the genre's greatest decade\" and characterized it as a \"darkly profound study of obsession, racism, and heroic solitude\".\nThe film currently maintains an 87% rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes based on 98 reviews, with an average rating of 9.1/10. The site's critics' consensus reads: \"\"The Searchers\" is an epic John Wayne Western that introduces dark ambivalence to the genre that remains fashionable today.\" On Metacritic, the film has a score of 94 out of 100 based on reviews from 15 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nThe film has been recognized multiple times by the American Film Institute:\nOn \"They Shoot Pictures Don't They\", a site which numerically calculates critical reception for any given film, \"The Searchers\" has been recognized as the ninth-most acclaimed movie ever made. Members of the Western Writers of America chose its title song as one of the top 100 Western songs of all time.\nScott McGee stated, \"... more than just making a social statement like other Westerns of the period were apt to do, Ford instills in \"The Searchers\" a visual poetry and a sense of melancholy that is rare in American films and rarer still to Westerns.\"\nGlenn Frankel's 2013 study of the film calls it \"the greatest Hollywood film that few people have seen\".\nCritical interpretations.\nRace relations.\nA major theme of the film is the historical attitude of white settlers toward Native Americans. Ford was not the first to attempt this examination cinematically, but his depiction of harshness toward Native Americans was startling, particularly to later generations of viewers; Roger Ebert wrote, \"I think Ford was trying, imperfectly, even nervously, to depict racism that justified genocide.\" At the heart of \"The Searchers\" is Wayne's performance as the angry, vengeful Ethan Edwards. From the beginning of his quest, he is quite clearly less interested in rescuing Debbie than in wreaking vengeance on the Comanches for the slaughter of his brother's family.\nIn a 1964 interview with \"Cosmopolitan\", Ford said,&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There's some merit to the charge that the Indian hasn't been portrayed accurately or fairly in the Western, but again, this charge has been a broad generalization and often unfair. The Indian didn't welcome the white man... and he wasn't diplomatic... If he has been treated unfairly by whites in films, that, unfortunately, was often the case in real life. There was much racial prejudice in the West. Film scholar Ed Lowry writes, \"[W]hile the Comanches are depicted as utterly ruthless, Ford ascribes motivations for their actions, and lends them a dignity befitting a proud civilization. Never do we see the Indian commit atrocities more appalling than those perpetrated by the white man. \"Wayne is plainly Ahab\", wrote cultural critic Greil Marcus. \"He is the good American hero driving himself past all known limits and into madness, his commitment to honor and decency burned down to a core of vengeance.\" For Brenton Priestley, Ford indicates that Scar's cruelty is also motivated by revenge (\"Two sons killed by white men. For each son, I take many... scalps.\")\nMiscegenation.\nThe theme of miscegenation also runs through the film. Many critical analyses of \"The Searchers\" highlight Ethan's view of Debbie as having been \"contaminated\" through her abduction and implied rape.\nThe rape of captive white women by the Comanche is an unspoken theme. No actual rape scene is depicted, but Alexandra Heller-Nicholas in her study of \"Rape-Revenge Films\" says, \"the abduction, captivity, and implied rape of Debbie (Natalie Wood)... drives the narrative\"; and Edward Buscombe points out a scene in which\n\"[Ethan] turns off the trail to penetrate a narrow crevice in the rocks, and when he emerges, his savage stabbing with his knife seems to mimic a violent sexual act, drawing us 'a picture' of the act of rape which obsesses him.\" Glenn Frankel writes that in real life, \"Rape was a fact of life for many captives, although it was seldom discussed by those women who escaped or were ransomed back to the white world.\"\nEarly on, Martin earns a sour look from Ethan when he admits to being one-eighth Cherokee. Ethan says repeatedly that he will kill his niece rather than have her live \"with a buck\", that \"living with the Comanche ain't living\". Even one of the film's gentler characters, Vera Miles's Laurie, tells Martin when he explains he must protect his adoptive sister, \"Ethan will put a bullet in her brain. I tell you Martha would want him to.\" This outburst makes it clear that even the supposedly gentler characters hold the same fear of miscegenation.\nRandy Roberts and James Olson write that Ethan Edwards:\n\"...is also an obsessed maniac. White settlers are not simply the advanced vanguard of civilization; they are racists. Indians are not just noble savages; they are savage killers. The frontier is not a place of opportunity; it is a wasteland... In the character of Ethan Edwards, John Wayne had extended the Western hero to the border of evil.\nEthan and Martha.\nAn important plot undercurrent is the obvious mutual attraction between Ethan Edwards and his brother's wife, Martha. Although no dialogue alludes to it, many visual references to their relationship are seen throughout the film. Some critics have suggested that this unspoken passion implies that Debbie\u2014who is specifically described as eight years old, as Ethan returns from an eight-year absence\u2014may be Ethan's daughter. Such a situation would add further layers of nuance to Ethan's obsessive search for Debbie, his revulsion at the thought that she might be living as a Native American, and his ultimate decision to bring her home\u2014and then walk away. Beyond the ostensible motivations, it might depict a guilt-ridden father's need to save the daughter he made by cuckolding his brother, then abandoned.\nInfluence.\n\"The Searchers\" has influenced many films. David Lean watched the film repeatedly while preparing for \"Lawrence of Arabia\" to help him get a sense of how to shoot a landscape. The entrance of Ethan Edwards in \"The Searchers\", across a vast prairie, is echoed in the across-the-desert entrance of Sherif Ali in \"Lawrence of Arabia\". Sam Peckinpah referenced the aftermath of the massacre and the funeral scene in \"Major Dundee\" (1965), and according to a 1974 review by Jay Cocks, Peckinpah's \"Bring Me the Head of Alfredo Garcia\" contains dialogue with \"direct tributes to such classics as John Huston's \"The Treasure of the Sierra Madre\" and John Ford's \"The Searchers\".\"\nMartin Scorsese's 1967 film \"Who's That Knocking at My Door\" features a sequence in which the two primary characters discuss \"The Searchers\", and in his 1973 film \"Mean Streets\", three characters attend a screening of \"The Searchers\". In 2012, in a \"Sight &amp; Sound\" poll, Scorsese listed \"The Searchers\" as one of his all-time favorite films.\nScott McGee, writing for Turner Classic Movies, notes \"Steven Spielberg, Martin Scorsese, John Milius, Paul Schrader, Wim Wenders, Jean-Luc Godard, and George Lucas have all been influenced and paid some form of homage to \"The Searchers\" in their work.\" Wenders' Palme d'Or-winning 1984 film \"Paris, Texas\" in particular has been cited for similarities.\nThe film influenced several aspects of George Lucas' film saga \"Star Wars\". The scene in which Ethan Edwards discovers the flaming wreckage of his family homestead is reflected in 1977's \"Star Wars\", wherein the character Luke Skywalker finds that his homestead has been burned and destroyed by Imperial Stormtroopers. \"The Searchers\" was also an influence on the 2002 prequel film in the series, '. In the film, Anakin Skywalker learns that one of his family members has been abducted by a group of Tusken Raiders (though the character's mother is kidnapped, rather than a niece). Anakin massacres the kidnappers in vengeance, much like \"The Searchers climactic battle in the Comanche camp. The opening scenes of \"Rogue One\" mirror those of \"The Searchers\": the pig-tailed character of Jyn is hidden by her parents when their homestead is attacked in the same way little Debbie is saved by her parents when they are attacked by the Comanches.\nDouglas Gordon's 1995 artwork, \"5 Year Drive-By\", stretches out \"The Searchers\" from the original 113-minute runtime to five years (reflecting the events of the movie taking place over a timespan of five years), playing at a speed of one frame every 24 minutes.\nThe 2007 film \"Searchers 2.0\" by Alex Cox includes many discussions of \"The Searchers\" as well as other revenge films. In the film, the characters attend a screening of a remake of \"The Searchers\" directed by Ted Post and starring James Mitchum as Ethan Edwards and Telly Savalas as Chief Cicatriz (Scar), though no such remake was ever made in reality (Ted Post had actually directed a remake of John Ford's \"Stagecoach\").\n\"Breaking Bad\" creator Vince Gilligan stated that the ending to the show's final episode, \"Felina\", was influenced by the film.\nThe 2016 Canadian film \"Searchers\" is a partial remake of the film, in which an Inuk man in 1913 finds his wife and daughter have been kidnapped. However, co-director Zacharias Kunuk discarded the original's plot about conflicts between white people and indigenous peoples, instead using only Inuit characters. Kunuk explained racism was not an intended theme of his film. Kunuk said he watched Western films in the Igloolik community hall as a boy, and declared \"The Searchers\" star John Wayne \"was our hero\".\nJohn Wayne's repeatedly used line \"that'll be the day\" inspired Buddy Holly to write the song \"That'll Be the Day\" after seeing the film in a theater in Lubbock, Texas.\nThe title of the novel \"The Searcher\" by Tana French is an allusion to the film.\nHome media.\n\"The Searchers\" was first released on home video on VHS and Betamax in 1980, followed by releases on LaserDisc in 1984 and DVD in 1997. It was released by the Warner Archive Collection on Blu-ray, HD DVD and a remastered DVD in 2006 for the film's 50th anniversary. The film was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray and a remastered Blu-ray on December 17, 2024, by the Warner Archive Collection as the label's first 4K release, featuring a remaster from its original VistaVision camera negative.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76336", "revid": "20444050", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76336", "title": "Serene Velocity", "text": "Serene Velocity is a 1970 American experimental short film directed by Ernie Gehr. Gehr filmed it in the basement hallway of a Binghamton University academic building, using a static camera position and changing only the focal length of the camera. It is recognized as a key work of structural filmmaking and has been inducted into the U.S. National Film Registry.\nDescription.\n\"Serene Velocity\" lasts twenty-three minutes and is silent. To make the film, Gehr locked his camera down in the center of a hallway, shooting several individual frames at a time. After each set of exposures, he changed the focal length on the lens, zooming in and then out in increasing increments. What begins as a small difference in apparent distance several frames at a time expands to extreme closeups and wide shots jumping back and forth. By the end of the film, the zoom into the end of the hallway reveals a set of double doors with daylight filtering through.\nProduction.\nIn early 1970 Gehr was at SUNY Binghamton while Larry Gottheim was beginning to form a film department. Gottheim was impressed with Gehr's earlier short films \"Morning\" and \"Wait\", and the two became acquainted when Gottheim replaced a damaged print of one of Gehr's works. With the encouragement of Gottheim and Ken Jacobs, Gehr taught two courses there during the summer session. He had been interested in making a film that explored \"the intervals between frames\u2013activating the screen plane from frame to frame more dynamically\". One day during the session, Gehr was on his way to the film department's editing rooms in a basement and thought of the hallway as an ideal place to film. A long, plain area appealed to him as a good space to \"maximize the tension between representation and abstraction\".\nGehr began shooting test footage in the basement hallway. He tested mid-range and extreme focal lengths in \"bars\" of 1, 2, 4, 6, and 8 frames. He decided to use bars of 4 frames, projected at 16 frames per second. This would have been roughly equivalent to 6 frames at 24 frames per second, but Gehr chose a lower frame rate so that each frame would remain on screen longer, accentuating the optical effects. He was surprised by the physical effect of watching the footage and felt nauseated afterward.\nThe footage for \"Serene Velocity\" was shot over the course of one night. Gehr began filming once it was dark outside, planning to take a break for several hours and finish filming during sunrise. He started by alternating between focal lengths of 50\u00a0mm and 55\u00a0mm. After roughly of film, he moved each of the lengths apart by 5\u00a0mm, to 45\u00a0mm and 60\u00a0mm, then 40\u00a0mm and 65\u00a0mm, and so on. He marked off lengths in intervals of 5\u00a0mm on a piece of tape and gradually moved the lengths farther apart throughout filming. He manually recorded each frame, and without the use of a cable release his fingers became swollen from holding the shutter button. The process took longer than he had expected; he took only one break to use a restroom and held his head under water to keep awake.\nAnalysis and interpretations.\nWatching \"Serene Velocity\" produces the appearance of motion and other optical effects, positioning it as a cinematic version of op art. Gehr has noted that the effects of watching the film vary significantly based on which part of the screen the viewer focuses on. The composition of the screen is divided into five sections: the ceiling's fluorescent lights and exit signs; the doors, water fountains, and ashtrays on the left and right walls; the reflections on the floor; and the doors in the center of the frame. The perspective lines point to the center of the frame, which would normally be the center of interest, but the motion along the margins of the frame draws attention away. Viewing the images as flat, two-dimensional spaces transforms the work into an abstract, flashing sign. Focusing on individual features of the successive images produces the illusion of motion. The illusion of depth perception can transform the image into an upright pyramid pointing into or out of the screen. Ken Jacobs emphasized this sense of thrusting and described \"Serene Velocity\" as a \"sexual metaphor, or sex-become cinema\", and J. Hoberman described it as a \"piston-powered mandala\".\nCritics have often evaluated \"Serene Velocity\" as a metacinematic work. No\u00ebl Carroll pointed to the simplified procedure with which it was photographed as an example of minimalist cinema. Carroll wrote that the film, with its lack of movement, is an argument for \"the impression of movement\" as the essential characteristic of cinema. Critics have drawn parallels with Andy Warhol's 1964 film \"Empire\", an extended, continuous shot of the Empire State Building. Both films advance a philosophical argument with a lack of movement and an emphasis on the recording process.\nGilberto Perez characterized the building's design as a descendant of Bauhaus architecture, calling it \"barren and dehumanizing\". He interpreted \"Serene Velocity\" as \"neither a celebration\u2013nor exactly a condemnation\" of Bauhaus minimalism.\nReception and legacy.\n\"Serene Velocity\" received a positive reaction from many of Gehr's contemporaries, including Ken Jacobs, Michael Snow, Hollis Frampton, Richard Foreman, Steve Reich, and Andrew Noren. However, the film received little coverage from the press upon its 1970 release, save for a mention by Jonas Mekas. In 1972, Bob Cowan wrote in his column for \"Take One\" that \"Serene Velocity\" was \"one of the few really unique films I have seen during the last few years\u2026It is rare that a film, which on the surface seems to be only a technical tour-de-force, can lift one to such emotional heights as it develops from surprise to surprise.\" \"Serene Velocity\" cemented Gehr's reputation as a structural filmmaker. He demurred to the term, stating \"I don't know what that word really means\u2013[Labels] stop people from actually seeing, actually experiencing the work.\"\n\"Serene Velocity\" is part of Anthology Film Archives' Essential Cinema Repertory collection. In 2001, the United States Library of Congress named the film \"culturally significant\" and entered it into the National Film Registry. The film was preserved in 2006 by The Museum of Modern Art, which enlarged the original 16 mm print to 35 mm.\nDirector Laura Poitras began making films while taking a course that Gehr taught at the San Francisco Art Institute. The first film Gehr screened was \"Serene Velocity\", and Poitras has identified it as an influence on her work. For their 2008 short film \"Lossless #4\", Rebecca Baron and Douglas Goodwin used a digital reproduction of \"Serene Velocity\" as source material. They fed it through a motion estimation algorithm to create a vector representation of the apparent motion in the film. In the 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" Poll of the Greatest Films of All Time, No\u00ebl Carroll listed \"Serene Velocity\" in his submission.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76337", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76337", "title": "DeForest Kelley", "text": "American actor (1920\u20131999)\nJackson DeForest Kelley (January 20, 1920 \u2013 June 11, 1999) was an American actor, screenwriter, poet, and singer. He was known for his roles in film and television Westerns and achieved international fame as Dr. Leonard \"Bones\" McCoy of the in the television and film series \"\" (1966\u20131991).\nEarly life.\nKelley was born in Atlanta, Georgia. His mother was Clora (n\u00e9e Casey) and his father was Ernest David Kelley, a Baptist minister of Irish ancestry. Kelley was named after pioneering electronics engineer Lee de Forest. He later named his \"Star Trek\" character's father \"David\" after his own father. Kelley had an older brother, Ernest Casey Kelley. Kelley was immersed in his father's mission at his father's church in Conyers, Georgia.\nBefore the end of his first year at Conyers, Kelley was regularly putting to use his musical talents, and often sang solo in morning church services. Kelley wanted to become a doctor like his uncle, but his family could not afford to send him to medical school. He began singing on local radio shows, including an appearance on WSB AM in Atlanta. As a result of Kelley's radio work, he won an engagement with Lou Forbes and his orchestra at the Paramount Theater.\nIn 1934, the family left Conyers for Decatur, Georgia. He attended the Decatur Boys High School, where he played on the Decatur Bantams baseball team. Kelley also played football and other sports. Before his graduation in 1938, Kelley got a job as a drugstore car hop. He spent his weekends working in the local theaters.\nHe made his film debut in the chorus of \"New Moon\" (1940), and nearly secured the lead role in \"This Gun for Hire\" (1942), but Alan Ladd was chosen instead.\nDuring World War II, Kelley served as an enlisted man in the United States Army Air Forces from March 10, 1943, to January 28, 1946, assigned to the First Motion Picture Unit with the rank of private first class. After an extended stay in Long Beach, California, Kelley decided to pursue an acting career and relocate to Southern California permanently, living for a time with his uncle Casey. He worked as an usher in a local theater to earn enough money for the move. Kelley's mother encouraged her son in his new career goal, but his father disliked the idea. While in California, Kelley was spotted by a Paramount Pictures scout while appearing in a United States Navy training film.\nIn 1945, Kelley married Carolyn Charlotte Meagher Dowling.\nCareer.\nEarly roles.\nKelley's acting career began with the feature film \"Fear in the Night\" in 1947. The low-budget movie was a hit, bringing him to the attention of a national audience and giving Kelley reason to believe he would soon become a star. His next role, in \"Variety Girl\", established him as a leading actor and resulted in the founding of his first fan club. Kelley did not become a leading man, however, and his wife Carolyn and he decided to move to New York City. He found work on stage and on live television, but after three years in New York, the Kelleys returned to Hollywood.\nIn California, he received a role in an installment of \"You Are There,\" anchored by Walter Cronkite. He played ranch owner Bob Kitteridge in the 1949 episode \"Legion of Old Timers\" of the television series \"The Lone Ranger\". This led to an appearance in \"Gunfight at the O.K. Corral\" as Morgan Earp (brother to Burt Lancaster's Wyatt Earp), which in turn led to three movie offers, including \"Warlock\" with Henry Fonda and Anthony Quinn.\nDeForest Kelley appeared in three episodes of the television series \"Science Fiction Theatre\". In 1957, he had a small role as a Southern officer in \"Raintree County\", a Civil War film directed by Edward Dmytryk, alongside Elizabeth Taylor, Montgomery Clift, and Lee Marvin. He also appeared in leading roles as a U.S. Navy submarine captain in the World War II-set television series, \"The Silent Service\". He appeared in season one, episode five, \"The Spearfish Delivers\", as Commander Dempsey, and in the first episode of season two, \"The Archerfish Spits Straight\", as Lieutenant Commander Enright. His future \"\" co-star Leonard Nimoy also appeared in two different episodes of the series around the same time.\nKelley appeared three times in various portrayals of the gunfight at the O.K. Corral; the first was in 1955, as Ike Clanton in the television series \"You Are There\". Two years later, in the 1957 film \"Gunfight at the O.K. Corral\", he played Morgan Earp. His third appearance was in a third-season \"Star Trek\" episode (broadcast originally on October 25, 1968), titled \"Spectre of the Gun\", this time portraying Tom McLaury.\nKelley, known to colleagues as \"Dee\", also appeared in episodes of \"The Donna Reed Show\", \"Perry Mason\", \"Tales of Wells Fargo\", \"\", \"Boots and Saddles\", \"Dick Powell's Zane Grey Theatre\", \"Death Valley Days\", \"Riverboat\", \"The Fugitive\", \"Lawman\", \"Bat Masterson\", \"Gunsmoke\", \"Have Gun \u2013 Will Travel\", \"The Millionaire\", \"Rawhide\", and \"Laredo\". He appeared in the 1962 episode of \"Route 66\", \"1800 Days to Justice\" and \"The Clover Throne\" as Willis. He had a small role in the movie \"The View from Pompey's Head\".\nFor nine years, Kelley primarily played villains. He built up an extensive list of credits, alternating between television and motion pictures. He was afraid of typecasting, though, so he broke away from villains by starring in \"Where Love Has Gone\" and a television pilot called \"333 Montgomery\". The pilot was written by an ex-policeman named Gene Roddenberry, and a few years later, Kelley appeared in another Roddenberry pilot, \"Police Story\" (1967), that was again not developed into a series.\nKelley also appeared in at least one radio drama, the 1957 episode of \"Suspense\" entitled \"Flesh Peddler\", in which series producer William M. Robson introduced him as \"a bright new luminary in the Hollywood firmament\".\nKelley played a doctor several times before he did so in \"Star Trek\". In 1956, nine years before being cast as Dr. McCoy, Kelley played a small supporting role as a medic in \"The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit\", in which he utters the diagnosis \"This man's dead, Captain\" and \"That man is dead\" to Gregory Peck. In 1962, he appeared in the \"Bonanza\" episode titled \"The Decision\", as a doctor sentenced to hang for the murder of a journalist. (The judge in this episode was portrayed by John Hoyt, who later portrayed Dr. Phillip John Boyce, one of Leonard McCoy's predecessors, on the \"Star Trek\" pilot \"\".) In 1963, he appeared in \"The Virginian\" episode \"Man of Violence\" as a \"drinking\" cavalry doctor with Leonard Nimoy as his patient. (That episode was written by John D. F. Black, who went on to become a writer-producer on \"Star Trek\".) Just before \"Star Trek\" began filming, Kelley appeared as a doctor again, in the \"Laredo\" episode \"The Sound of Terror\".\n\"Star Trek\".\nKelley played Dr. Leonard \"Bones\" McCoy from 1966 to 1969 in ' (Gene Roddenberry had offered Kelley the role of Spock in 1964, but he refused it). He reprised the character in a voice-over role in (1973\u201374), and the first six \"Star Trek\" motion pictures (1979 to 1991). In 1987, he also had a cameo in \"Encounter at Farpoint\", the first episode of ', as Admiral Leonard McCoy, Starfleet Surgeon General Emeritus. Several aspects of Kelley's background became part of McCoy's characterization, including his pronunciation of \"nuclear\" as \"nucular\".\nKelley became a good friend of \"Star Trek\" castmates William Shatner and Leonard Nimoy, from their first meeting in 1964. During \"Trek\"'s first season, Kelley's name was listed in the end credits along with the rest of the cast. Only Shatner and Nimoy were listed in the opening credits. As Kelley's role grew in importance during the first season, he received a pay raise to about $2,500 per episode and received third billing starting in the second season after Nimoy. Despite the show's recognition of Kelley as one of its stars, he was frustrated by the greater attention that Shatner received as its lead actor and that Nimoy received because of \"Spockamania\" among fans.Shy by his own admission, Kelley was the only cast member of the original \"Star Trek\" series program never to have written or published an autobiography; the authorized biography \"From Sawdust to Stardust\" (2005) was written posthumously by Terry Lee Rioux of Lamar University in Beaumont, Texas. Kelley regarded \"The Empath\" as his favorite \"Star Trek\" television episode.\nLater career.\nAfter \"Star Trek\" was canceled in 1969, Kelley found himself a victim of the very typecasting he had so feared. In 1972, he was cast in the horror film \"Night of the Lepus\". After that, Kelley made occasional appearances on television and in film, but essentially went into \"de facto\" retirement, other than playing McCoy in the \"Star Trek\" film series. By 1978, he was earning up to $50,000 ($ today) annually from appearances at \"Star Trek\" conventions. Like other \"Star Trek\" actors, Kelley received little of the enormous profits that the franchise generated for Paramount, until Nimoy, as executive producer, helped arrange for Kelley to be paid $1 million for \"\" (1991), which was his final live-action film appearance. In 1987, he appeared in the first \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\" episode, \"Encounter at Farpoint\", in which he portrayed a 137-year-old Dr. McCoy. For his final film, Kelley provided the voice of Viking 1 in \"The Brave Little Toaster Goes to Mars\". Later in life, Kelley developed an interest in poetry, eventually publishing the first of two books in an unfinished series, \"The Big Bird's Dream\" and \"The Dream Goes On\".\nIn 1971, he appeared in \"Room 222\" as Matt Silverton, a student's father.\nIn a TLC interview done in the late 1990s, Kelley joked that one of his biggest fears was that the words etched on his gravestone would be \"He's dead, Jim\". Kelley's obituary in \"Newsweek\" began: \"We're not even going to try to resist: He's dead, Jim\". He stated the year before his death that his legacy would be the many people McCoy had inspired to become doctors; \"That's something that very few people can say they've done. I'm proud to say that I have\". In 1991, Kelley received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. In 1999, shortly before he died, he was awarded a Golden Boot award for his contribution to the genre of Western television and movies.\nPersonal life.\nKelley married former actress Carolyn Charlotte Meagher Dowling in 1945, exchanging two 25-cent Indian rings. They met in 1942 when both were actors in a play and remained married for nearly 55 years until Kelley's death, living in a humble one-story ranch house in Sherman Oaks, California. The couple, who had no children, \"were the most loving couple you've ever seen in your life,\" said Star Trek's Majel Barrett.\nHealth and death.\nKelley was diagnosed with stomach cancer in 1997, from which he died on June 11, 1999 at the age of 79 attended by his wife at the Motion Picture and Television Country House and Hospital in Woodland Hills, Los Angeles. His remains were cremated and the ashes were spread over the Pacific Ocean.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76339", "revid": "3848144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76339", "title": "Shadow of a Doubt", "text": "1943 film by Alfred Hitchcock\nShadow of a Doubt is a 1943 American psychological thriller film noir directed by Alfred Hitchcock, and starring Teresa Wright and Joseph Cotten. Written by Thornton Wilder, Sally Benson, and Alma Reville, the film was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Story for Gordon McDonell.\nThe story follows Charlotte \"Charlie\" Newton and her family who live in very quiet Santa Rosa, California. An unexpected visit by Charles Oakley, her charming and sophisticated Uncle Charlie, brings much excitement to the family and the small town. That excitement turns to fear as young Charlie slowly begins to suspect that her uncle may be concealing a dark secret.\nIn 1991, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress, being deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". Hitchcock's favorite of all his films, \"Shadow of a Doubt\" was also the one he enjoyed making the most.\nPlot.\nCharles Oakley spots two detectives outside his Newark, New Jersey hotel room and gives them the slip. He telegraphs his sister Emma Newton in Santa Rosa, California to let her know he will visit. His niece Charlotte \"Charlie\" Newton is bored with her family's routine and visits the telegraph office to invite Uncle Charlie to visit. While there she learns he has already sent a telegram announcing his visit.\nUncle Charlie arrives bearing extravagant gifts for everyone: a watch for his brother-in-law, a fur for his sister, and an emerald ring for his niece. Young Charlie notices the ring is engraved with someone else's initials.\nTwo men appear at the Newton home pretending to survey a typical American family. They go to great lengths to take Uncle Charlie's picture. Young Charlie guesses they are undercover detectives. They explain that her uncle is one of two suspects in a nationwide manhunt. Charlie refuses to believe it at first, but she learns that the initials engraved inside her emerald ring match one of the victims of the Merry Widow Murderer. She eyes her uncle with growing suspicion and dread.\nDuring dinner one night, Uncle Charlie rants about rich widows, describing them as \"fat, wheezing animals.\" Horrified, young Charlie runs out of the house. Uncle Charlie follows her and takes her to a seedy bar. He admits he is one of the two murder suspects and begs her for help. She reluctantly agrees not to say anything since she wants to avoid a disgrace that would destroy her mother, who adores her younger brother.\nThe two detectives confide in young Charlie that the picture they took of her uncle has been sent east for identification by a witness. News breaks that the other Merry Widow suspect was killed while being chased by police. Everyone assumes he was the actual murderer. Uncle Charlie is delighted to be cleared, but young Charlie still suspects him. Later she falls down the back porch stairs, which she discovers were deliberately sabotaged.\nUncle Charlie reveals he wants to settle down in Santa Rosa. Young Charlie is appalled, but he reminds her there is no proof that he is a killer since he has taken back the emerald ring with the initials. Young Charlie says she will kill him if he stays. Later that night, Uncle Charlie leaves the car idling in the garage and traps Young Charlie inside with the car belching exhaust fumes. A neighbor hears her struggling and alerts the Newtons. Uncle Charlie makes a show of saving her.\nYoung Charlie finds the emerald ring in her uncle's room and puts it on. When Uncle Charlie sees it on her finger, he abruptly announces he is leaving for San Francisco\u2014coincidentally on the same train as Mrs. Porter, a rich widow. At the station, Uncle Charlie invites his niece on board to see his compartment. When the train starts to move, he stops her from leaving and explains he has to kill her because she knows too much. He tries to throw young Charlie from a train door, but she manages to change positions with him. Uncle Charlie then tells her to wait for the train to speed up and she pushes him into the path of an oncoming train, killing him.\nAt his funeral, Uncle Charlie is honored by the townspeople, who are unaware of his crimes. Young Charlie laments to one of the detectives that she knows he was the Merry Widow Murderer, but they resolve to keep Uncle Charlie's crimes a secret.\nCast.\nUncredited cast.\nHitchcock's cameo.\nAlfred Hitchcock appears about 16 minutes into the film, on the train to Santa Rosa, playing bridge with Doctor and Mrs. Harry. Charlie is traveling on the train under the assumed name of Otis, and is lying down due to a migraine. Mrs. Harry is eager to help him, but her husband is not interested and keeps playing bridge. Doctor Harry replies to Hitchcock that he does not look well while Hitchcock is holding a full suit of spades, the best hand for bridge.\nProduction.\nThe project began when the head of David Selznick's story department, Margaret McDonell, told Hitchcock that her husband Gordon had an interesting idea for a novel that she thought would make a good movie. His idea, called \"Uncle Charlie\", was based on the true story of Earle Nelson, a serial killer of the late 1920s known as \"the Gorilla Man\".\n\"Shadow of a Doubt\" was both filmed and set in Santa Rosa, California, which was portrayed as a paragon of a supposedly peaceful, small American city. Although the film, made in 1943, alludes to World War II (with a headline featuring Admiral Tojo and a bar with a crowd of servicemen), the mood is that of a peaceful prewar American town. Since Thornton Wilder wrote the original script, the story is set in a small American town, a popular setting of Wilder's, but with an added Hitchcock touch to it. The director specifically wanted Wilder to work on McDonell's nine-page treatment because he admired \"Our Town\". In Patrick McGilligan's biography of Hitchcock, he said the film was perhaps the most American film that Hitchcock had made up to that time.\nThe opening scenes take place in the East Ward (aka the \"Ironbound\"/\"Down Neck\" section of Newark, New Jersey). The city skyline and landmarks such as the Pulaski Skyway are featured in the opening shot. The location shots were used to comply with the wartime War Production Board restrictions of a maximum cost of $5,000 for set construction.\nAn Italianate-style house, built in 1872, was used for exterior shots of the Newton family home. As of 2024, it is still standing, located at 904 McDonald Avenue in Santa Rosa.\nThe stone railway station in the film was built in 1904 for the Northwestern Pacific Railroad and is one of the few commercial buildings in central Santa Rosa to survive the earthquake of April 18, 1906. The station is currently a visitor center and passenger service is provided by the Sonoma\u2013Marin Area Rail Transit system. The library was a Carnegie Library which was demolished in 1964 due to seismic concerns. Some of the buildings in the center of Santa Rosa that are seen in the film were damaged or destroyed by earthquakes in 1969; much of the area was cleared of debris and largely rebuilt.\nThe film was scored by Dimitri Tiomkin, his first collaboration with Hitchcock (the others being \"Strangers on a Train\", \"I Confess\" and \"Dial M for Murder\"). In his score, Tiomkin quotes the \"Merry Widow Waltz\" of Franz Leh\u00e1r, often in somewhat distorted forms, as a leitmotif for Uncle Charlie and his serial murders. During the opening credits, the waltz theme is heard along with a prolonged shot of couples dancing. The image recurs frequently throughout the film, and Leh\u00e1r's melody is an earworm for several characters. When Young Charlie is on the verge of identifying it at the dinner table, Uncle Charlie distracts her.\nCinematography.\nCinematographer Joseph A. Valentine described his work on the film: \"Our Santa Rosa location was chosen because it seemed to be typical of the average American small city, and offered, as well, the physical facilities the script demanded. There was a public square, around which much of the city's life resolves. There was an indefinable blending of small town and city, and of old and new, which made the town a much more typical background of an average American town than anything that could have been deliberately designed. The Santa Rosans were very cooperative, and most of our problems in these scenes were the ordinary ones of rigging scrims and placing reflectors or booster lights where they were needed.\"\n\"The most spectacular part of our work was naturally the making of the night exterior sequences. We had with us two generator sets, ten 150-ampere arc spotlights, and the usual assortment of incandescent lights...making a total of 3,000 ampere maximum electrical capacity. With this we lit up an expanse of four city blocks for our night-effect long shots!...Oddly enough, one of our less spectacular night scenes proved really the harder problem. This was a sequence played around the city's public library. This building is a lovely Gothic structure, almost completely clothed in ivy. I think all of us were surprised at the way those dark green ivy leaves drank up the light. Actually, on our long shots of that single building we used every unit of lighting equipment we had with us\u2014and we could very conveniently have used more if we had had them!...Frequently people who have seen these night scenes of ours have jumped to the conclusion that with such an area to illuminate we must have filmed them by day with Infra-Red film rather than actually by night. If only they'd seen how we worked to finish our night scenes before the Pacific Coast's \"dim-out\" order [of WWII] went into effect, they'd change their minds. All of our night scenes were filmed actually at night\u2014and we just got under the wire, finishing the last one scarcely a matter of hours before the dim-out became effective.\"\nReception.\nUpon release, the film received unanimously positive reviews. Bosley Crowther, critic for \"The New York Times\", loved the film, stating that \"Hitchcock could raise more goose pimples to the square inch of a customer's flesh than any other director in Hollywood\". \"Time\" called the film \"superb\", while \"Variety\" stated that \"Hitchcock deftly etches his small-town characters and homey surroundings\". The entertainment trade paper \"The Film Daily\" was yet another reviewer in 1943 that praised every aspect of the production. The publication predicted big box office for theaters presenting Hitchcock's latest work:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Of all the startling feature films directed by Alfred Hitchcock\u2014superman of suspense and wizard of mystery\u2014this one is geared most highly to thrill American audiences and to pour coin into the coffers of U.S. theaters...There are no red herrings yanked across the trail in this attraction, as was the case in his recent hit, \"Suspense\" [\"sic\"]. The story moves inflexibly toward an ending which the onlooker more or less clearly expects, but which elicits the periodic hope that the worst fears of Teresa Wright will not be realized.\n...Production values under Jack H. Skirball are first-rate, as is Joseph Valentine\u2019s photography. There is not a shadow of a doubt about this picture\u2019s success.\nIn a 1964 interview on \"Telescope\" with host Fletcher Markle, Markle noted, \"Mr. Hitchcock, most critics have always considered \"Shadow of a Doubt\", which you made in 1943, as your finest film.\" Hitchcock replied immediately, \"Me too.\" Markle then asked, \"That is your opinion of it still?\" Hitchcock replied, \"Oh, no question.\" At the time, Hitchcock's most recent work was \"Marnie\". When later interviewed by Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut, Hitchcock denied the suggestion that \"Shadow of a Doubt\" was his \"favourite\". But in the audio interview with Truffaut, Hitchcock confirmed it was his favourite film, and later reiterated that \"Shadow of a Doubt\" was his favorite film in his interview with Mike Douglas in 1969 and in his interview with Dick Cavett in 1972. Hitchcock's daughter Pat Hitchcock also said that her father's favorite film was \"Shadow of a Doubt\". Hitchcock also enjoyed making \"Shadow of a Doubt\" the most, due to his \"pleasant memories of working on it with Thornton Wilder\" according to his conversation with Truffaut. \nToday, the film is still regarded as a major work of Hitchcock's. Contemporary critic Dave Kehr called it Hitchcock's \"first indisputable masterpiece.\" In 2005 film critic David Denby of \"The New Yorker\" called it Hitchcock's most \"intimate and heart-wrenching\" film. Based on 48 reviews on the website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has received a 100% approval rating, with a weighted average of 9.20/10. The site's consensus reads: \"Alfred Hitchcock's earliest classic\u00a0\u2014 and his own personal favorite\u00a0\u2014 deals its flesh-crawling thrills as deftly as its finely shaded characters\". On\u00a0Metacritic\u00a0it has a score of 94 out of 100, based on reviews from 15 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\". When asked by critics as to an overarching theme for the film Hitchcock responded: \"Love and good order is no defense against evil\". In his book \"Bambi vs. Godzilla\", David Mamet calls it Hitchcock's finest film. In his 2011 review of the film, film critic Roger Ebert gave the film four stars out of four and included it in his Great Movies list. In 2022, \"Time Out\" magazine ranked the film at No. 41 on their list of \"The 100 best thriller films of all time\".\nAdaptations and remakes.\nRadio.\nThe film was adapted for Cecil B. DeMille's \"Lux Radio Theater\" aired on January 3, 1944, with its original leading actress Teresa Wright and William Powell as Uncle Charlie (Patrick McGilligan said Hitchcock had originally wanted Powell to play Uncle Charlie, but MGM refused to lend the actor for the film). In 1950, \"Shadow of a Doubt\" was featured as a radio-play on \"Screen Directors Playhouse\". It starred Cary Grant as Uncle Charlie and Betsy Drake as the young Charlie. It was also adapted to the Ford Theater (February 18, 1949) with Ray Milland and Ann Blyth. \"The Screen Guild Theater\" adapted the film twice with Joseph Cotten, the first with Vanessa Brown as young Charlie, and the second with Deanna Durbin in the role. The \"Academy Award Theater\" production of \"Shadow of a Doubt\" was aired on September 11, 1946.\nFilm.\nThe film has been remade twice: in 1958 as \"Step Down to Terror\", and again (under the original title) as a 1991 TV movie in which Mark Harmon portrayed Uncle Charlie.\n\"Shadow of a Doubt\" influenced the beginning of Park Chan-wook's 2013 film \"Stoker\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76340", "revid": "50958079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76340", "title": "Principal component analysis", "text": "Method of data analysis\nPrincipal component analysis (PCA) is a linear dimensionality reduction technique with applications in exploratory data analysis, visualization and data preprocessing.\nThe data are linearly transformed onto a new coordinate system such that the directions (principal components) capturing the largest variation in the data can be easily identified.\nThe principal components of a collection of points in a real coordinate space are a sequence of formula_1 unit vectors, where the formula_2-th vector is the direction of a line that best fits the data while being orthogonal to the first formula_3 vectors. Here, a best-fitting line is defined as one that minimizes the average squared perpendicular distance from the points to the line. These directions (i.e., principal components) constitute an orthonormal basis in which different individual dimensions of the data are linearly uncorrelated. Many studies use the first two principal components in order to plot the data in two dimensions and to visually identify clusters of closely related data points.\nPrincipal component analysis has applications in many fields such as population genetics, microbiome studies, and atmospheric science.\nOverview.\nWhen performing PCA, the first principal component of a set of formula_1 variables is the derived variable formed as a linear combination of the original variables that explains the most variance. The second principal component explains the most variance in what is left once the effect of the first component is removed, and we may proceed through formula_1 iterations until all the variance is explained. PCA is most commonly used when many of the variables are highly correlated with each other and it is desirable to reduce their number to an independent set.\nThe first principal component can equivalently be defined as a direction that maximizes the variance of the projected data. The formula_2-th principal component can be taken as a direction orthogonal to the first formula_3 principal components that maximizes the variance of the projected data.\nFor either objective, it can be shown that the principal components are eigenvectors of the data's covariance matrix. Thus, the principal components are often computed by eigendecomposition of the data covariance matrix or singular value decomposition of the data matrix. PCA is the simplest of the true eigenvector-based multivariate analyses and is closely related to factor analysis. Factor analysis typically incorporates more domain-specific assumptions about the underlying structure and solves eigenvectors of a slightly different matrix. PCA is also related to canonical correlation analysis (CCA). CCA defines coordinate systems that optimally describe the cross-covariance between two datasets while PCA defines a new orthogonal coordinate system that optimally describes variance in a single dataset. Robust and L1-norm-based variants of standard PCA have also been proposed.\nHistory.\nPCA was invented in 1901 by Karl Pearson, as an analogue of the principal axis theorem in mechanics; it was later independently developed and named by Harold Hotelling in the 1930s. Depending on the field of application, it is also named the discrete Karhunen\u2013Lo\u00e8ve transform (KLT) in signal processing, the Hotelling transform in multivariate quality control, proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) in mechanical engineering, singular value decomposition (SVD) of X (invented in the last quarter of the 19th century), eigenvalue decomposition (EVD) of XTX in linear algebra, factor analysis (for a discussion of the differences between PCA and factor analysis see Ch.\u00a07 of Jolliffe's \"Principal Component Analysis\"), Eckart\u2013Young theorem (Harman, 1960), or empirical orthogonal functions (EOF) in meteorological science (Lorenz, 1956), empirical eigenfunction decomposition (Sirovich, 1987), quasiharmonic modes (Brooks et al., 1988), spectral decomposition in noise and vibration, and empirical modal analysis in structural dynamics.\nIntuition.\nPCA can be thought of as fitting a \"p\"-dimensional ellipsoid to the data, where each axis of the ellipsoid represents a principal component. If some axis of the ellipsoid is small, then the variance along that axis is also small.\nTo find the axes of the ellipsoid, we must first center the values of each variable in the dataset on 0 by subtracting the mean of the variable's observed values from each of those values. These transformed values are used instead of the original observed values for each of the variables. Then, we compute the covariance matrix of the data and calculate the eigenvalues and corresponding eigenvectors of this covariance matrix. Then we must normalize each of the orthogonal eigenvectors to turn them into unit vectors. Once this is done, each of the mutually-orthogonal unit eigenvectors can be interpreted as an axis of the ellipsoid fitted to the data. This choice of basis will transform the covariance matrix into a diagonalized form, in which the diagonal elements represent the variance of each axis. The proportion of the variance that each eigenvector represents can be calculated by dividing the eigenvalue corresponding to that eigenvector by the sum of all eigenvalues.\nBiplots and scree plots (degree of explained variance) are used to interpret findings of the PCA.\nDetails.\nPCA is defined as an orthogonal linear transformation on a real inner product space that transforms the data to a new coordinate system such that the greatest variance by some scalar projection of the data comes to lie on the first coordinate (called the first principal component), the second greatest variance on the second coordinate, and so on.\nConsider an formula_8 data matrix, X, with column-wise zero empirical mean (the sample mean of each column has been shifted to zero), where each of the \"n\" rows represents a different repetition of the experiment, and each of the \"p\" columns gives a particular kind of feature (say, the results from a particular sensor).\nMathematically, the transformation is defined by a set of size formula_9 (where formula_9 is usually selected to be strictly less than formula_1 to reduce dimensionality) of formula_1-dimensional vectors of weights or coefficients formula_13 that map each row vector formula_14 of X to a new vector of principal component \"scores\" formula_15, given by\nformula_16\nin such a way that the individual variables formula_17 of t considered over the data set successively inherit the maximum possible variance from X, with each coefficient vector w constrained to be a unit vector.\nThe above may equivalently be written in matrix form as \nformula_18\nwhere\nformula_19,\nformula_20, and\nformula_21.\nFirst component.\nIn order to maximize variance, the first weight vector w(1) thus has to satisfy\nformula_22\nEquivalently, writing this in matrix form gives\nformula_23\nSince w(1) has been defined to be a unit vector, it equivalently also satisfies\nformula_24\nThe quantity to be maximised can be recognised as a Rayleigh quotient. A standard result for a positive semidefinite matrix such as XTX is that the quotient's maximum possible value is the largest eigenvalue of the matrix, which occurs when w is the corresponding eigenvector.\nWith w(1) found, the first principal component of a data vector x(\"i\") can then be given as a score \"t\"1(\"i\") = x(\"i\") \u22c5 w(1) in the transformed co-ordinates, or as the corresponding vector in the original variables, {x(\"i\") \u22c5 w(1)} w(1).\nFurther components.\nThe \"k\"-th component can be found by subtracting the first \"k\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 principal components from X:\nformula_25\nand then finding the weight vector which extracts the maximum variance from this new data matrix\nformula_26\nIt turns out that this gives the remaining eigenvectors of XTX, with the maximum values for the quantity in brackets given by their corresponding eigenvalues. Thus the weight vectors are eigenvectors of XTX.\nThe \"k\"-th principal component of a data vector x(\"i\") can therefore be given as a score \"t\"\"k\"(\"i\") = x(\"i\") \u22c5 w(\"k\") in the transformed coordinates, or as the corresponding vector in the space of the original variables, {x(\"i\") \u22c5 w(\"k\")} w(\"k\"), where w(\"k\") is the \"k\"th eigenvector of XTX.\nThe full principal components decomposition of X can therefore be given as\nformula_18\nwhere W is a \"p\"-by-\"p\" matrix of weights whose columns are the eigenvectors of XTX. The transpose of W is sometimes called the whitening or sphering transformation. Columns of W multiplied by the square root of corresponding eigenvalues, that is, eigenvectors scaled up by the variances, are called \"loadings\" in PCA or in Factor analysis.\nCovariances.\nXTX itself can be recognized as proportional to the empirical sample covariance matrix of the dataset XT.\nThe sample covariance \"Q\" between two of the different principal components over the dataset is given by:\nformula_28\nwhere the eigenvalue property of w(\"k\") has been used to move from line 2 to line 3. However eigenvectors w(\"j\") and w(\"k\") corresponding to eigenvalues of a symmetric matrix are orthogonal (if the eigenvalues are different), or can be orthogonalised (if the vectors happen to share an equal repeated value). The product in the final line is therefore zero; there is no sample covariance between different principal components over the dataset.\nAnother way to characterise the principal components transformation is therefore as the transformation to coordinates which diagonalise the empirical sample covariance matrix.\nIn matrix form, the empirical covariance matrix for the original variables can be written\nformula_29\nThe empirical covariance matrix between the principal components becomes\nformula_30\nwhere \u039b is the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues \"\u03bb\"(\"k\") of XTX. \"\u03bb\"(\"k\") is equal to the sum of the squares over the dataset associated with each component \"k\", that is, \"\u03bb\"(\"k\") = \u03a3\"i\" \"t\"\"k\"2(\"i\") = \u03a3\"i\" (x(\"i\") \u22c5 w(\"k\"))2.\nDimensionality reduction.\nThe transformation P = X W maps a data vector x(\"i\") from an original space of \"x\" variables to a new space of \"p\" variables which are uncorrelated over the dataset.\nTo non-dimensionalize the centered data, let \"Xc\" represent the characteristic values of data vectors \"Xi\", given by:\nfor a dataset of size \"n\". These norms are used to transform the original space of variables \"x, y\" to a new space of uncorrelated variables \"p, q\" (given \"Yc\" with same meaning), such that formula_34;\nand the new variables are linearly related as: formula_35.\nTo find the optimal linear relationship, we minimize the total squared reconstruction error:\nformula_36; such that setting the derivative of the error function to zero formula_37 yields:formula_38 whereformula_39.\nSuch dimensionality reduction can be a very useful step for visualising and processing high-dimensional datasets, while still retaining as much of the variance in the dataset as possible. For example, selecting \"L\"\u00a0=\u00a02 and keeping only the first two principal components finds the two-dimensional plane through the high-dimensional dataset in which the data are most spread out, so if the data contains clusters these too may be most spread out, and therefore most visible to be plotted out in a two-dimensional diagram; whereas if two directions through the data (or two of the original variables) are chosen at random, the clusters may be much less spread apart from each other, and may in fact be much more likely to substantially overlay each other, making them indistinguishable.\nSimilarly, in regression analysis, the larger the number of explanatory variables allowed, the greater is the chance of overfitting the model, producing conclusions that fail to generalise to other datasets. One approach, especially when there are strong correlations between different possible explanatory variables, is to reduce them to a few principal components and then run the regression against them, a method called principal component regression.\nDimensionality reduction may also be appropriate when the variables in a dataset are noisy. If each column of the dataset contains independent identically distributed Gaussian noise, then the columns of T will also contain similarly identically distributed Gaussian noise (such a distribution is invariant under the effects of the matrix W, which can be thought of as a high-dimensional rotation of the co-ordinate axes). However, with more of the total variance concentrated in the first few principal components compared to the same noise variance, the proportionate effect of the noise is less\u2014the first few components achieve a higher signal-to-noise ratio. PCA thus can have the effect of concentrating much of the signal into the first few principal components, which can usefully be captured by dimensionality reduction; while the later principal components may be dominated by noise, and so disposed of without great loss. If the dataset is not too large, the significance of the principal components can be tested using parametric bootstrap, as an aid in determining how many principal components to retain.\nSingular value decomposition.\nThe principal components transformation can also be associated with another matrix factorization, the singular value decomposition (SVD) of X,\nformula_40\nHere \u03a3 is an \"n\"-by-\"p\" rectangular diagonal matrix of positive numbers \"\u03c3\"(\"k\"), called the singular values of X; U is an \"n\"-by-\"n\" matrix, the columns of which are orthogonal unit vectors of length \"n\" called the left singular vectors of X; and W is a \"p\"-by-\"p\" matrix whose columns are orthogonal unit vectors of length \"p\" and called the right singular vectors of X.\nIn terms of this factorization, the matrix XTX can be written\nformula_41\nwhere formula_42 is the square diagonal matrix with the singular values of X and the excess zeros chopped off that satisfies formula_43. Comparison with the eigenvector factorization of XTX establishes that the right singular vectors W of X are equivalent to the eigenvectors of XTX, while the singular values \"\u03c3\"(\"k\") of formula_44 are equal to the square-root of the eigenvalues \"\u03bb\"(\"k\") of XTX.\nUsing the singular value decomposition the score matrix T can be written\nformula_45\nso each column of T is given by one of the left singular vectors of X multiplied by the corresponding singular value. This form is also the polar decomposition of T.\nEfficient algorithms exist to calculate the SVD of X without having to form the matrix XTX, so computing the SVD is now the standard way to calculate a principal components analysis from a data matrix, unless only a handful of components are required.\nAs with the eigen-decomposition, a truncated \"n\" \u00d7 \"L\" score matrix TL can be obtained by considering only the first L largest singular values and their singular vectors:\nformula_46\nThe truncation of a matrix M or T using a truncated singular value decomposition in this way produces a truncated matrix that is the nearest possible matrix of rank \"L\" to the original matrix, in the sense of the difference between the two having the smallest possible Frobenius norm, a result known as the Eckart\u2013Young theorem [1936].\nTheorem (Optimal k\u2011dimensional fit). \nLet P be an n\u00d7m data matrix whose columns have been mean\u2011centered and scaled, and let \nformula_47 \nbe its singular value decomposition. Then the best rank\u2011k approximation to P in the least\u2011squares (Frobenius\u2011norm) sense is \nformula_48, \nwhere Vk consists of the first k columns of V. Moreover, the relative residual variance is \nformula_49.\nFurther considerations.\nThe singular values (in \u03a3) are the square roots of the eigenvalues of the matrix XTX. Each eigenvalue is proportional to the portion of the \"variance\" (more correctly of the sum of the squared distances of the points from their multidimensional mean) that is associated with each eigenvector. The sum of all the eigenvalues is equal to the sum of the squared distances of the points from their multidimensional mean. PCA essentially rotates the set of points around their mean in order to align with the principal components. This moves as much of the variance as possible (using an orthogonal transformation) into the first few dimensions. The values in the remaining dimensions, therefore, tend to be small and may be dropped with minimal loss of information (see below). PCA is often used in this manner for dimensionality reduction. PCA has the distinction of being the optimal orthogonal transformation for keeping the subspace that has largest \"variance\" (as defined above). This advantage, however, comes at the price of greater computational requirements if compared, for example, and when applicable, to the discrete cosine transform, and in particular to the DCT-II which is simply known as the \"DCT\". Nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques tend to be more computationally demanding than PCA.\nPCA is sensitive to the scaling of the variables. Mathematically this sensitivity comes from the way a rescaling changes the sample\u2011covariance matrix that PCA diagonalises.\nLet formula_50 be the *centered* data matrix (\"n\" rows, \"p\" columns) and define the covariance\nformula_51\nIf the formula_52\u2011th variable is multiplied by a factor formula_53 we obtain \nformula_54 \nHence the new covariance is \nformula_55\nBecause the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of formula_56 are those of formula_57 scaled by formula_58, the principal axes rotate toward any column whose variance has been inflated, exactly as the 2\u2011D example below illustrates.\nIf we have just two variables and they have the same sample variance and are completely correlated, then the PCA will entail a rotation by 45\u00b0 and the \"weights\" (they are the cosines of rotation) for the two variables with respect to the principal component will be equal. But if we multiply all values of the first variable by 100, then the first principal component will be almost the same as that variable, with a small contribution from the other variable, whereas the second component will be almost aligned with the second original variable. This means that whenever the different variables have different units (like temperature and mass), PCA is a somewhat arbitrary method of analysis. (Different results would be obtained if one used Fahrenheit rather than Celsius for example.) Pearson's original paper was entitled \"On Lines and Planes of Closest Fit to Systems of Points in Space\" \u2013 \"in space\" implies physical Euclidean space where such concerns do not arise. One way of making the PCA less arbitrary is to use variables scaled so as to have unit variance, by standardizing the data and hence use the autocorrelation matrix instead of the autocovariance matrix as a basis for PCA. However, this compresses (or expands) the fluctuations in all dimensions of the signal space to unit variance.\nClassical PCA assumes the cloud of points has already been translated so its centroid is at the origin.\nWrite each observation as \nformula_59\nWithout subtracting formula_60 we are in effect diagonalising\nformula_61\nwhere formula_62 is the centered matrix. \nThe rank\u2011one term formula_63 often dominates, forcing the leading eigenvector to point almost exactly toward the mean and obliterating any structure in the centred part formula_62. \nAfter mean subtraction that term vanishes and the principal axes align with the true directions of maximal variance.\nMean-centering is unnecessary if performing a principal components analysis on a correlation matrix, as the data are already centered after calculating correlations. Correlations are derived from the cross-product of two standard scores (Z-scores) or statistical moments (hence the name: \"Pearson Product-Moment Correlation\"). Also see the article by Kromrey &amp; Foster-Johnson (1998) on \"Mean-centering in Moderated Regression: Much Ado About Nothing\". Since covariances are correlations of normalized variables (Z- or standard-scores) a PCA based on the correlation matrix of X is equal to a PCA based on the covariance matrix of Z, the standardized version of X.\nPCA is a popular primary technique in pattern recognition. It is not, however, optimized for class separability. However, it has been used to quantify the distance between two or more classes by calculating center of mass for each class in principal component space and reporting Euclidean distance between center of mass of two or more classes. The linear discriminant analysis is an alternative which is optimized for class separability.\nProperties and limitations.\nProperties.\nSome properties of PCA include:\n\"Property 1\": For any integer \"q\", 1 \u2264 \"q\" \u2264 \"p\", consider the orthogonal linear transformation\nformula_65\nwhere formula_66 is a \"q-element\" vector and formula_67 is a (\"q\" \u00d7 \"p\") matrix, and let formula_68 be the variance-covariance matrix for formula_66. Then the trace of formula_70, denoted formula_71, is maximized by taking formula_72, where formula_73 consists of the first \"q\" columns of formula_74 formula_75 is the transpose of formula_76. (formula_74 is not defined here)\n\"Property 2\": Consider again the orthonormal transformation\nformula_78\nwith formula_79 and formula_70 defined as before. Then formula_81 is minimized by taking formula_82 where formula_83 consists of the last \"q\" columns of formula_74.\nThe statistical implication of this property is that the last few PCs are not simply unstructured left-overs after removing the important PCs. Because these last PCs have variances as small as possible they are useful in their own right. They can help to detect unsuspected near-constant linear relationships between the elements of x, and they may also be useful in regression, in selecting a subset of variables from x, and in outlier detection.\n\"Property 3\": (Spectral decomposition of \u03a3)\nformula_85\nBefore we look at its usage, we first look at diagonal elements,\nformula_86\nThen, perhaps the main statistical implication of the result is that not only can we decompose the combined variances of all the elements of x into decreasing contributions due to each PC, but we can also decompose the whole covariance matrix into contributions formula_87 from each PC. Although not strictly decreasing, the elements of formula_87 will tend to become smaller as formula_89 increases, as formula_87 is nonincreasing for increasing formula_89, whereas the elements of formula_92 tend to stay about the same size because of the normalization constraints: formula_93.\nLimitations.\nAs noted above, the results of PCA depend on the scaling of the variables. This can be cured by scaling each feature by its standard deviation, so that one ends up with dimensionless features with unital variance.\nThe applicability of PCA as described above is limited by certain (tacit) assumptions made in its derivation. In particular, PCA can capture linear correlations between the features but fails when this assumption is violated (see Figure 6a in the reference). In some cases, coordinate transformations can restore the linearity assumption and PCA can then be applied (see kernel PCA).\nAnother limitation is the mean-removal process before constructing the covariance matrix for PCA. In fields such as astronomy, all the signals are non-negative, and the mean-removal process will force the mean of some astrophysical exposures to be zero, which consequently creates unphysical negative fluxes, and forward modeling has to be performed to recover the true magnitude of the signals. As an alternative method, non-negative matrix factorization focusing only on the non-negative elements in the matrices is well-suited for astrophysical observations. See more at the relation between PCA and non-negative matrix factorization.\nPCA is at a disadvantage if the data has not been standardized before applying the algorithm to it. PCA transforms the original data into data that is relevant to the principal components of that data, which means that the new data variables cannot be interpreted in the same ways that the originals were. They are linear interpretations of the original variables. Also, if PCA is not performed properly, there is a high likelihood of information loss.\nPCA relies on a linear model. If a dataset has a pattern hidden inside it that is nonlinear, then PCA can actually steer the analysis in the complete opposite direction of progress. Researchers at Kansas State University discovered that the sampling error in their experiments impacted the bias of PCA results. \"If the number of subjects or blocks is smaller than 30, and/or the researcher is interested in PC's beyond the first, it may be better to first correct for the serial correlation, before PCA is conducted\". The researchers at Kansas State also found that PCA could be \"seriously biased if the autocorrelation structure of the data are not correctly handled\".\nPCA and information theory.\nDimensionality reduction results in a loss of information, in general. PCA-based dimensionality reduction tends to minimize that information loss, under certain signal and noise models.\nUnder the assumption that\nformula_94\nthat is, that the data vector formula_95 is the sum of the desired information-bearing signal formula_96 and a noise signal formula_97 one can show that PCA can be optimal for dimensionality reduction, from an information-theoretic point-of-view.\nIn particular, Linsker showed that if formula_96 is Gaussian and formula_97 is Gaussian noise with a covariance matrix proportional to the identity matrix, the PCA maximizes the mutual information formula_100 between the desired information formula_96 and the dimensionality-reduced output formula_102.\nIf the noise is still Gaussian and has a covariance matrix proportional to the identity matrix (that is, the components of the vector formula_97 are iid), but the information-bearing signal formula_96 is non-Gaussian (which is a common scenario), PCA at least minimizes an upper bound on the \"information loss\", which is defined as\nformula_105\nThe optimality of PCA is also preserved if the noise formula_97 is iid and at least more Gaussian (in terms of the Kullback\u2013Leibler divergence) than the information-bearing signal formula_96. In general, even if the above signal model holds, PCA loses its information-theoretic optimality as soon as the noise formula_97 becomes dependent.\nComputation using the covariance method.\nThe following is a detailed description of PCA using the covariance method as opposed to the correlation method.\nThe goal is to transform a given data set X of dimension \"p\" to an alternative data set Y of smaller dimension \"L\". Equivalently, we are seeking to find the matrix Y, where Y is the Karhunen\u2013Lo\u00e8ve transform (KLT) of matrix X:\nformula_109\nDerivation using the covariance method.\nLet X be a \"d\"-dimensional random vector expressed as column vector. Without loss of generality, assume X has zero mean.\nWe want to find formula_110 a \"d\" \u00d7 \"d\" orthonormal transformation matrix P so that PX has a diagonal covariance matrix (that is, PX is a random vector with all its distinct components pairwise uncorrelated).\nA quick computation assuming formula_111 were unitary yields:\nformula_112\nHence formula_110 holds if and only if formula_114 were diagonalisable by formula_111.\nThis is very constructive, as cov(X) is guaranteed to be a non-negative definite matrix and thus is guaranteed to be diagonalisable by some unitary matrix.\nCovariance-free computation.\nIn practical implementations, especially with high dimensional data (large p), the naive covariance method is rarely used because it is not efficient due to high computational and memory costs of explicitly determining the covariance matrix. The covariance-free approach avoids the \"np\"2 operations of explicitly calculating and storing the covariance matrix XTX, instead utilizing one of matrix-free methods, for example, based on the function evaluating the product XT(X r) at the cost of 2\"np\" operations.\nIterative computation.\nOne way to compute the first principal component efficiently is shown in the following pseudo-code, for a data matrix X with zero mean, without ever computing its covariance matrix.\n r = a random vector of length p\n r = r / norm(r)\n do c times:\n s = 0 (a vector of length p)\n for each row x in X\n s = s + (x \u22c5 r) x\n \u03bb = rTs // \u03bb is the eigenvalue\n error = |\u03bb \u22c5 r \u2212 s|\n r = s / norm(s)\n exit if error &lt; tolerance\n return \u03bb, r\nThis power iteration algorithm simply calculates the vector XT(X r), normalizes, and places the result back in r. The eigenvalue is approximated by rT (XTX) r, which is the Rayleigh quotient on the unit vector r for the covariance matrix XTX . If the largest singular value is well separated from the next largest one, the vector r gets close to the first principal component of X within the number of iterations c, which is small relative to p, at the total cost \"2cnp\". The power iteration convergence can be accelerated without noticeably sacrificing the small cost per iteration using more advanced matrix-free methods, such as the Lanczos algorithm or the Locally Optimal Block Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient (LOBPCG) method.\nSubsequent principal components can be computed one-by-one via deflation or simultaneously as a block. In the former approach, imprecisions in already computed approximate principal components additively affect the accuracy of the subsequently computed principal components, thus increasing the error with every new computation. The latter approach in the block power method replaces single-vectors r and s with block-vectors, matrices R and S. Every column of R approximates one of the leading principal components, while all columns are iterated simultaneously. The main calculation is evaluation of the product XT(X R). Implemented, for example, in LOBPCG, efficient blocking eliminates the accumulation of the errors, allows using high-level BLAS matrix-matrix product functions, and typically leads to faster convergence, compared to the single-vector one-by-one technique.\nThe NIPALS method.\n\"Non-linear iterative partial least squares (NIPALS)\" is a variant the classical power iteration with matrix deflation by subtraction implemented for computing the first few components in a principal component or partial least squares analysis. For very-high-dimensional datasets, such as those generated in the *omics sciences (for example, genomics, metabolomics) it is usually only necessary to compute the first few PCs. The non-linear iterative partial least squares (NIPALS) algorithm updates iterative approximations to the leading scores and loadings t1 and r1T by the power iteration multiplying on every iteration by X on the left and on the right, that is, calculation of the covariance matrix is avoided, just as in the matrix-free implementation of the power iterations to XTX, based on the function evaluating the product XT(X r) = ((X r)TX)T.\nThe matrix deflation by subtraction is performed by subtracting the outer product, t1r1T from X leaving the deflated residual matrix used to calculate the subsequent leading PCs.\nFor large data matrices, or matrices that have a high degree of column collinearity, NIPALS suffers from loss of orthogonality of PCs due to machine precision round-off errors accumulated in each iteration and matrix deflation by subtraction. A Gram\u2013Schmidt re-orthogonalization algorithm is applied to both the scores and the loadings at each iteration step to eliminate this loss of orthogonality. NIPALS reliance on single-vector multiplications cannot take advantage of high-level BLAS and results in slow convergence for clustered leading singular values\u2014both these deficiencies are resolved in more sophisticated matrix-free block solvers, such as the Locally Optimal Block Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient (LOBPCG) method.\nOnline/sequential estimation.\nIn an \"online\" or \"streaming\" situation with data arriving piece by piece rather than being stored in a single batch, it is useful to make an estimate of the PCA projection that can be updated sequentially. This can be done efficiently, but requires different algorithms.\nQualitative variables.\nIn PCA, it is common that we want to introduce qualitative variables as supplementary elements. For example, many quantitative variables have been measured on plants. For these plants, some qualitative variables are available as, for example, the species to which the plant belongs. These data were subjected to PCA for quantitative variables. When analyzing the results, it is natural to connect the principal components to the qualitative variable \"species\".\nFor this, the following results are produced.\nThese results are what is called \"introducing a qualitative variable as supplementary element\". This procedure is detailed in and Husson, L\u00ea, &amp; Pag\u00e8s (2009) and Pag\u00e8s (2013).\nFew software offer this option in an \"automatic\" way. This is the case of http:// that historically, following the work of Ludovic Lebart, was the first to propose this option, and the R package http://.\nApplications.\nIntelligence.\nThe earliest application of factor analysis was in locating and measuring components of human intelligence. It was believed that intelligence had various uncorrelated components such as spatial intelligence, verbal intelligence, induction, deduction etc and that scores on these could be adduced by factor analysis from results on various tests, to give a single index known as the Intelligence Quotient (IQ). The pioneering statistical psychologist Spearman actually developed factor analysis in 1904 for his two-factor theory of intelligence, adding a formal technique to the science of psychometrics. In 1924 Thurstone looked for 56 factors of intelligence, developing the notion of Mental Age. Standard IQ tests today are based on this early work.\nResidential differentiation.\nIn 1949, Shevky and Williams introduced the theory of factorial ecology, which dominated studies of residential differentiation from the 1950s to the 1970s. Neighbourhoods in a city were recognizable or could be distinguished from one another by various characteristics which could be reduced to three by factor analysis. These were known as 'social rank' (an index of occupational status), 'familism' or family size, and 'ethnicity'; Cluster analysis could then be applied to divide the city into clusters or precincts according to values of the three key factor variables. An extensive literature developed around factorial ecology in urban geography, but the approach went out of fashion after 1980 as being methodologically primitive and having little place in postmodern geographical paradigms.\nOne of the problems with factor analysis has always been finding convincing names for the various artificial factors. In 2000, Flood revived the factorial ecology approach to show that principal components analysis actually gave meaningful answers directly, without resorting to factor rotation. The principal components were actually dual variables or shadow prices of 'forces' pushing people together or apart in cities. The first component was 'accessibility', the classic trade-off between demand for travel and demand for space, around which classical urban economics is based. The next two components were 'disadvantage', which keeps people of similar status in separate neighbourhoods (mediated by planning), and ethnicity, where people of similar ethnic backgrounds try to co-locate.\nAbout the same time, the Australian Bureau of Statistics defined distinct indexes of advantage and disadvantage taking the first principal component of sets of key variables that were thought to be important. These SEIFA indexes are regularly published for various jurisdictions, and are used frequently in spatial analysis.\nDevelopment indexes.\nPCA can be used as a formal method for the development of indexes. As an alternative confirmatory composite analysis has been proposed to develop and assess indexes.\nThe City Development Index was developed by PCA from about 200 indicators of city outcomes in a 1996 survey of 254 global cities. The first principal component was subject to iterative regression, adding the original variables singly until about 90% of its variation was accounted for. The index ultimately used about 15 indicators but was a good predictor of many more variables. Its comparative value agreed very well with a subjective assessment of the condition of each city. The coefficients on items of infrastructure were roughly proportional to the average costs of providing the underlying services, suggesting the Index was actually a measure of effective physical and social investment in the city.\nThe country-level Human Development Index (HDI) from UNDP, which has been published since 1990 and is very extensively used in development studies, has very similar coefficients on similar indicators, strongly suggesting it was originally constructed using PCA.\nPopulation genetics.\nIn 1978 Cavalli-Sforza and others pioneered the use of principal components analysis (PCA) to summarise data on variation in human gene frequencies across regions. The components showed distinctive patterns, including gradients and sinusoidal waves. They interpreted these patterns as resulting from specific ancient migration events.\nSince then, PCA has been ubiquitous in population genetics, with thousands of papers using PCA as a display mechanism. Genetics varies largely according to proximity, so the first two principal components actually show spatial distribution and may be used to map the relative geographical location of different population groups, thereby showing individuals who have wandered from their original locations.\nPCA in genetics has been technically controversial, in that the technique has been performed on discrete non-normal variables and often on binary allele markers. The lack of any measures of standard error in PCA are also an impediment to more consistent usage. In August 2022, the molecular biologist Eran Elhaik published a theoretical paper in Scientific Reports analyzing 12 PCA applications. He concluded that it was easy to manipulate the method, which, in his view, generated results that were 'erroneous, contradictory, and absurd.' Specifically, he argued, the results achieved in population genetics were characterized by cherry-picking and circular reasoning.\nMarket research and indexes of attitude.\nMarket research has been an extensive user of PCA. It is used to develop customer satisfaction or customer loyalty scores for products, and with clustering, to develop market segments that may be targeted with advertising campaigns, in much the same way as factorial ecology will locate geographical areas with similar characteristics.\nPCA rapidly transforms large amounts of data into smaller, easier-to-digest variables that can be more rapidly and readily analyzed. In any consumer questionnaire, there are series of questions designed to elicit consumer attitudes, and principal components seek out latent variables underlying these attitudes. For example, the Oxford Internet Survey in 2013 asked 2000 people about their attitudes and beliefs, and from these analysts extracted four principal component dimensions, which they identified as 'escape', 'social networking', 'efficiency', and 'problem creating'.\nAnother example from Joe Flood in 2008 extracted an attitudinal index toward housing from 28 attitude questions in a national survey of 2697 households in Australia. The first principal component represented a general attitude toward property and home ownership. The index, or the attitude questions it embodied, could be fed into a General Linear Model of tenure choice. The strongest determinant of private renting by far was the attitude index, rather than income, marital status or household type.\nQuantitative finance.\nIn quantitative finance, PCA is used\nin financial risk management, and has been applied to other problems such as portfolio optimization.\nPCA is commonly used in problems involving fixed income securities and portfolios, and interest rate derivatives. \nValuations here depend on the entire yield curve, comprising numerous highly correlated instruments, and PCA is used to define a set of components or factors that explain rate movements,\nthereby facilitating the modelling.\nOne common risk management application is to calculating value at risk, VaR, applying PCA to the Monte Carlo simulation.\nHere, for each simulation-sample, the components are stressed, and rates, and in turn option values, are then reconstructed; \nwith VaR calculated, finally, over the entire run. \nPCA is also used in hedging exposure to interest rate risk, given partial durations and other sensitivities.\nUnder both, the first three, typically, principal components of the system are of interest (representing \"shift\", \"twist\", and \"curvature\").\nThese principal components are derived from an eigen-decomposition of the covariance matrix of yield at predefined maturities; \nand where the variance of each component is its eigenvalue (and as the components are orthogonal, no correlation need be incorporated in subsequent modelling).\nFor equity, an optimal portfolio is one where the expected return is maximized for a given level of risk, or alternatively, where risk is minimized for a given return; see Markowitz model for discussion.\nThus, one approach is to reduce portfolio risk, where allocation strategies are applied to the \"principal portfolios\" instead of the underlying stocks.\nA second approach is to enhance portfolio return, using the principal components to select companies' stocks with upside potential.\nPCA has also been used to understand relationships between international equity markets, and within markets between groups of companies in industries or sectors.\nPCA may also be applied to stress testing, essentially an analysis of a bank's ability to endure a hypothetical adverse economic scenario. Its utility is in \"distilling the information contained in [several] macroeconomic variables into a more manageable data set, which can then [be used] for analysis.\" Here, the resulting factors are linked to e.g. interest rates \u2013 based on the largest elements of the factor's eigenvector \u2013 and it is then observed how a \"shock\" to each of the factors affects the implied assets of each of the banks.\nNeuroscience.\nA variant of principal components analysis is used in neuroscience to identify the specific properties of a stimulus that increases a neuron's probability of generating an action potential. This technique is known as spike-triggered covariance analysis. In a typical application an experimenter presents a white noise process as a stimulus (usually either as a sensory input to a test subject, or as a current injected directly into the neuron) and records a train of action potentials, or spikes, produced by the neuron as a result. Presumably, certain features of the stimulus make the neuron more likely to spike. In order to extract these features, the experimenter calculates the covariance matrix of the \"spike-triggered ensemble\", the set of all stimuli (defined and discretized over a finite time window, typically on the order of 100 ms) that immediately preceded a spike. The eigenvectors of the difference between the spike-triggered covariance matrix and the covariance matrix of the \"prior stimulus ensemble\" (the set of all stimuli, defined over the same length time window) then indicate the directions in the space of stimuli along which the variance of the spike-triggered ensemble differed the most from that of the prior stimulus ensemble. Specifically, the eigenvectors with the largest positive eigenvalues correspond to the directions along which the variance of the spike-triggered ensemble showed the largest positive change compared to the variance of the prior. Since these were the directions in which varying the stimulus led to a spike, they are often good approximations of the sought after relevant stimulus features.\nIn neuroscience, PCA is also used to discern the identity of a neuron from the shape of its action potential. Spike sorting is an important procedure because extracellular recording techniques often pick up signals from more than one neuron. In spike sorting, one first uses PCA to reduce the dimensionality of the space of action potential waveforms, and then performs clustering analysis to associate specific action potentials with individual neurons.\nPCA as a dimension reduction technique is particularly suited to detect coordinated activities of large neuronal ensembles. It has been used in determining collective variables, that is, order parameters, during phase transitions in the brain.\nRelation with other methods.\nCorrespondence analysis.\nCorrespondence analysis (CA)\nwas developed by Jean-Paul Benz\u00e9cri\nand is conceptually similar to PCA, but scales the data (which should be non-negative) so that rows and columns are treated equivalently. It is traditionally applied to contingency tables.\nCA decomposes the chi-squared statistic associated to this table into orthogonal factors.\nBecause CA is a descriptive technique, it can be applied to tables for which the chi-squared statistic is appropriate or not.\nSeveral variants of CA are available including detrended correspondence analysis and canonical correspondence analysis. One special extension is multiple correspondence analysis, which may be seen as the counterpart of principal component analysis for categorical data.\nFactor analysis.\nPrincipal component analysis creates variables that are linear combinations of the original variables. The new variables have the property that the variables are all orthogonal. The PCA transformation can be helpful as a pre-processing step before clustering. PCA is a variance-focused approach seeking to reproduce the total variable variance, in which components reflect both common and unique variance of the variable. PCA is generally preferred for purposes of data reduction (that is, translating variable space into optimal factor space) but not when the goal is to detect the latent construct or factors.\nFactor analysis is similar to principal component analysis, in that factor analysis also involves linear combinations of variables. Different from PCA, factor analysis is a correlation-focused approach seeking to reproduce the inter-correlations among variables, in which the factors \"represent the common variance of variables, excluding unique variance\". In terms of the correlation matrix, this corresponds with focusing on explaining the off-diagonal terms (that is, shared co-variance), while PCA focuses on explaining the terms that sit on the diagonal. However, as a side result, when trying to reproduce the on-diagonal terms, PCA also tends to fit relatively well the off-diagonal correlations. Results given by PCA and factor analysis are very similar in most situations, but this is not always the case, and there are some problems where the results are significantly different. Factor analysis is generally used when the research purpose is detecting data structure (that is, latent constructs or factors) or causal modeling. If the factor model is incorrectly formulated or the assumptions are not met, then factor analysis will give erroneous results.\nK-means clustering.\nIt has been asserted that the relaxed solution of k-means clustering, specified by the cluster indicators, is given by the principal components, and the PCA subspace spanned by the principal directions is identical to the cluster centroid subspace. However, that PCA is a useful relaxation of k-means clustering was not a new result, and it is straightforward to uncover counterexamples to the statement that the cluster centroid subspace is spanned by the principal directions.\nNon-negative matrix factorization.\n Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) is a dimension reduction method where only non-negative elements in the matrices are used, which is therefore a promising method in astronomy, in the sense that astrophysical signals are non-negative. The PCA components are orthogonal to each other, while the NMF components are all non-negative and therefore constructs a non-orthogonal basis.\nIn PCA, the contribution of each component is ranked based on the magnitude of its corresponding eigenvalue, which is equivalent to the fractional residual variance (FRV) in analyzing empirical data. For NMF, its components are ranked based only on the empirical FRV curves. The residual fractional eigenvalue plots, that is, formula_116 as a function of component number formula_89 given a total of formula_118 components, for PCA have a flat plateau, where no data are captured to remove the quasi-static noise, then the curves drop quickly as an indication of over-fitting (random noise). The FRV curves for NMF is decreasing continuously when the NMF components are constructed sequentially, indicating the continuous capturing of quasi-static noise; then converge to higher levels than PCA, indicating the less over-fitting property of NMF.\nIconography of correlations.\nIt is often difficult to interpret the principal components when the data include many variables of various origins, or when some variables are qualitative. This leads the PCA user to a delicate elimination of several variables. If observations or variables have an excessive impact on the direction of the axes, they should be removed and then projected as supplementary elements. In addition, it is necessary to avoid interpreting the proximities between the points close to the center of the factorial plane.\nThe iconography of correlations, on the contrary, which is not a projection on a system of axes, does not have these drawbacks. We can therefore keep all the variables.\nThe principle of the diagram is to underline the \"remarkable\" correlations of the correlation matrix, by a solid line (positive correlation) or dotted line (negative correlation).\nA strong correlation is not \"remarkable\" if it is not direct, but caused by the effect of a third variable. Conversely, weak correlations can be \"remarkable\". For example, if a variable Y depends on several independent variables, the correlations of Y with each of them are weak and yet \"remarkable\".\nGeneralizations.\nSparse PCA.\nA particular disadvantage of PCA is that the principal components are usually linear combinations of all input variables. Sparse PCA overcomes this disadvantage by finding linear combinations that contain just a few input variables. It extends the classic method of principal component analysis (PCA) for the reduction of dimensionality of data by adding sparsity constraint on the input variables.\nSeveral approaches have been proposed, including\nThe methodological and theoretical developments of Sparse PCA as well as its applications in scientific studies were recently reviewed in a survey paper.\nNonlinear PCA.\nMost of the modern methods for nonlinear dimensionality reduction find their theoretical and algorithmic roots in PCA or K-means. Pearson's original idea was to take a straight line (or plane) which will be \"the best fit\" to a set of data points. Trevor Hastie expanded on this concept by proposing Principal curves as the natural extension for the geometric interpretation of PCA, which explicitly constructs a manifold for data approximation followed by projecting the points onto it. See also the elastic map algorithm and principal geodesic analysis. Another popular generalization is kernel PCA, which corresponds to PCA performed in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space associated with a positive definite kernel.\nIn multilinear subspace learning, PCA is generalized to multilinear PCA (MPCA) that extracts features directly from tensor representations. MPCA is solved by performing PCA in each mode of the tensor iteratively. MPCA has been applied to face recognition, gait recognition, etc. MPCA is further extended to uncorrelated MPCA, non-negative MPCA and robust MPCA.\n\"N\"-way principal component analysis may be performed with models such as Tucker decomposition, PARAFAC, multiple factor analysis, co-inertia analysis, STATIS, and DISTATIS.\nRobust PCA.\nWhile PCA finds the mathematically optimal method (as in minimizing the squared error), it is still sensitive to outliers in the data that produce large errors, something that the method tries to avoid in the first place. It is therefore common practice to remove outliers before computing PCA. However, in some contexts, outliers can be difficult to identify.\nFor example, in data mining algorithms like correlation clustering, the assignment of points to clusters and outliers is not known beforehand.\nA recently proposed generalization of PCA based on a weighted PCA increases robustness by assigning different weights to data objects based on their estimated relevancy.\nOutlier-resistant variants of PCA have also been proposed, based on L1-norm formulations (L1-PCA).\nRobust principal component analysis (RPCA) via decomposition in low-rank and sparse matrices is a modification of PCA that works well with respect to grossly corrupted observations.\nSimilar techniques.\nIndependent component analysis.\nIndependent component analysis (ICA) is directed to similar problems as principal component analysis, but finds additively separable components rather than successive approximations.\nNetwork component analysis.\nGiven a matrix formula_119, it tries to decompose it into two matrices such that formula_120. A key difference from techniques such as PCA and ICA is that some of the entries of formula_121 are constrained to be 0. Here formula_111 is termed the regulatory layer. While in general such a decomposition can have multiple solutions, they prove that if the following conditions are satisfied :\nthen the decomposition is unique up to multiplication by a scalar.\nDiscriminant analysis of principal components.\nDiscriminant analysis of principal components (DAPC) is a multivariate method used to identify and describe clusters of genetically related individuals. Genetic variation is partitioned into two components: variation between groups and within groups, and it maximizes the former. Linear discriminants are linear combinations of alleles which best separate the clusters. Alleles that most contribute to this discrimination are therefore those that are the most markedly different across groups. The contributions of alleles to the groupings identified by DAPC can allow identifying regions of the genome driving the genetic divergence among groups\nIn DAPC, data are first transformed using a principal components analysis (PCA) and subsequently clusters are identified using discriminant analysis (DA).\nA DAPC can be realized on R using the package Adegenet. (more info: https://)\nDirectional component analysis.\nDirectional component analysis (DCA) is a method used in the atmospheric sciences for analysing multivariate datasets.\nLike PCA, it allows for dimension reduction, improved visualization and improved interpretability of large data-sets.\nAlso like PCA, it is based on a covariance matrix derived from the input dataset.\nThe difference between PCA and DCA is that DCA additionally requires the input of a vector direction, referred to as the impact. \nWhereas PCA maximises explained variance, DCA maximises probability density given impact.\nThe motivation for DCA is to find components of a multivariate dataset that are both likely (measured using probability density) and important (measured using the impact).\nDCA has been used to find the most likely and most serious heat-wave patterns in weather prediction ensembles\n, and the most likely and most impactful changes in rainfall due to climate change\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76341", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76341", "title": "Shadows (1958 film)", "text": "1958 film by John Cassavetes\nShadows is a 1958 American independent drama film directed by John Cassavetes about race relations during the Beat Generation years in New York City. The film stars Ben Carruthers, Lelia Goldoni, and Hugh Hurd as three black siblings, though only one of them is dark-skinned enough to be considered African American. The film was initially shot in 1957 and shown in 1958, but a poor reception prompted Cassavetes to rework it in 1959. Promoted as a completely improvisational film, it was intensively rehearsed in 1957, and in 1959 it was fully scripted.\nThe film depicts two weeks in the lives of three siblings on the margins of society: two brothers who are struggling jazz musicians and their light-skinned younger sister who goes through three relationships, one with an older white writer, one with a shallow white lover, and finally one with a gentle young black admirer.\nFilm scholars consider \"Shadows\" a milestone of American independent cinema. In 1960, the film won the Critics Award at the Venice Film Festival.\nIn 1993, \"Shadows\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nLight-skinned Ben, diffident and awkward, wants to be a jazz trumpeter, but spends most of his time drinking in Manhattan bars and trying to pick up girls with two fellow idlers, Dennis and Tom. He is supported by his darker-skinned brother Hugh, a jazz singer who is unable to find much work because of his old-fashioned vocal style. Hugh's career is managed by Rupert.\nBen and Hugh live with their fair-skinned younger sister Lelia, who wants to be an artist. Recently, she has been under the wing of an older boyfriend, the intellectual David, who encourages her to write and attempts to be helpfully critical of her efforts. At a party, Lelia abandons David for a younger man, Tony, who coaxes her back to his apartment. Tony professes his love for Lelia, and, despite her apparent apprehension, he takes her virginity. Afterward, she is filled with ambivalence and regret about Tony and about her first sexual encounter, but they agree to continue dating. Seeing her home, he is shocked to discover that her family is black. Sensing his racial animosity, Hugh kicks Tony out of the apartment, as he does not want his sister dating a perceived bigot.\nHugh has some guests over, and a friend urges Lelia to flirt with a gentlemanly black man named Davey. She is distant and contrary, but she and Davey arrange to go on a date. When Davey comes to pick Lelia up, she makes him wait for hours while she gets ready. As they are walking out the door, Tony arrives. He is disappointed to see her already dating another man, and she exits past him without a word. Hugh and Tony nearly come to blows, but Ben intervenes and listens to an apologetic message that he promises to relay to Lelia, though, after Tony leaves, Ben laughs at Tony with Hugh and Rupert. Lelia and Davey go dancing, and she continues to be rude, but softens after Davey asserts himself.\nAt the train station, Rupert informs Hugh that one of the two bookings of Hugh's upcoming tour has been canceled. He vents his frustration about their state of affairs, and, for once, it is Hugh who says some encouraging words to lift Rupert's spirits, instead of the other way around. Smiling, the friends get on the train for a week's billing in Chicago.\nBen, Dennis, and Tom drunkenly clown around with some girls in a bar. When the girls' tough male dates come out of the bathroom, tensions flare, and the two sides take their argument outside, where Ben, Dennis and Tom are badly beaten up. Over a drink, Ben tells his friends that he is tired of their way of living. Tom heads home, and, while Dennis goes to buy some cigarettes, Ben wanders off alone down the nighttime New York City streets.\nProduction.\nThe idea for the film came from a classroom exercise. With acting coach Burt Lane (later the father of Diane Lane), Cassavetes was conducting classes for aspiring actors at the off-Broadway Variety Arts Theatre in Manhattan's Union Square neighborhood. The classes, listed as \"The Cassavetes-Lane Drama Workshop\", were Cassavetes' attempt to counter method acting, which was ascendant in New York theatre and film. A particular exercise became the core of the film: A young African-American woman who was very light-skinned dated a young white man, but he was repulsed when he discovered she had a black brother. Cassavetes determined to put the scene on film, so he began looking for funding. While ostensibly promoting the film \"Edge of the City\" on Jean Shepherd's \"Night People\" radio show on WOR in February 1957, Cassavetes said he could make a better film than could director Martin Ritt. He pitched the drama workshop idea to Shepherd's radio audience. Cassavetes was surprised when listeners sent about $2,000 to start the project. Money also came from Cassavetes' friends, including Hedda Hopper, William Wyler, Joshua Logan, Robert Rossen, Jos\u00e9 Quintero, and Cassavetes' agent Charlie Feldman. Cassavetes hired German cinematographer Erich Kollmar as cameraman, the only crew member except Cassavetes with any experience in film.\nUsing student actors from the Cassavetes-Lane Drama Workshop, shooting started in February 1957 in a largely improvised form. Cassavetes composed an outline for the film, but not a script. Cassavetes and assistant director/producer Maurice McEndree gave detailed instructions to the actors, constraining the situation to guide the story, with the words and the movements improvised by the actors. Cassavetes intended the story to evolve from the characters rather than vice versa. Three initial weeks of work was thrown out, the first week because of technical problems with quality, and the next two weeks because Cassavetes felt that the actors were talking too much. After they had developed their characters to the point at which they could portray emotion in silence, the actors improvised with more clarity and with a level of truth that Cassavetes found revealing. He was a demanding director who required a critical romantic scene to be performed more than 50 times before he was satisfied with the results. About 30 hours of film was exposed during several months of off-and-on shooting.\nFilming took place in various locations, including inside the apartment that Cassavetes shared with his wife Gena Rowlands, and on the streets of New York. Using a 16\u00a0mm camera borrowed from Shirley Clarke, and monochrome film stock, Kollmar was forced to shoot scenes in which the actors could move in any direction they wished, making for unpredictable zoom and focus requirements. No filming permits were obtained, so the cast and crew were necessarily ready to pack quickly and leave a location. The lighting was a general wash rather than specific effects. The microphone was placed by Jay Crecco (who was also an actor in the film), and dialogue was recorded to tape with street noises intruding. Even though Cassavetes said \"print it!\" after he was satisfied with a scene, there was nobody on the crew keeping track of the film takes, so all of the exposed film had to be printed. The editing of the film was made much more difficult by the lack of notes taken during shooting, and by the sound recorded \"wild\" on tape, not synchronized with the film. The microphone failed to pick up some of the dialogue, requiring lip-readers to watch the footage and write down what had been said so that the actors could re-record their dialogue. Editors Len Appelson, Maurice McEndree and Wray Bevins began work while shooting was still under way, editing the film in an office next door to the Variety Arts Theatre, the office that is seen hosting a rock 'n roll party in the film. Primary photography was finished by mid-May 1957, with of film exposed, but the editing took more than a year. Cassavetes was not available during much of this time; starting in June, he was on location working as an actor first in \"Saddle the Wind\", then in \"Virgin Island\" (both 1958). At the end of 1957, the editors moved to a professional editing suite to complete the task.\nCassavetes intended to have the jazz music of Charles Mingus on the soundtrack, but Mingus composed a number of songs that could stand on their own rather than impressionistic film music to follow the story. Three hours of Mingus and his band were recorded, and much of this material was placed in the first version of \"Shadows\", screened in 1958, but almost all of it was removed during the 1959 reworking of the film. Two of Mingus' compositions for the film were subsequently included on the 1959 album \"\".\n1958 screening.\nThe film was finished late in 1958, printed onto 16\u00a0mm stock, and three free screenings were announced by Shepherd on his radio show. Cassavetes overestimated the audience; only about 100 people showed up for each of the midnight showings at Manhattan's Paris Theater, which could hold almost 600 people. At the first showing, there were initial problems with the sound, which were remedied. Some of the audience members were friends and colleagues of Cassavetes; he later said that 90% of them disliked the film. A number of people walked out before the film ended, including Burt Lane, who had coached most of the cast. Assistant cameraman Al Ruban told Cassavetes that the film was \"okay in a kind of naive way\". Cassavetes' father told him it was a \"pure\" film, not a good film. Cassavetes thought it was \"totally intellectual\" and thus \"less than human\". The poor reception made him decide that the film should be radically reworked.\nHowever, avant-garde film critic Jonas Mekas highly praised the film, writing in the January 1959 issue of \"Film Culture\" that \"Shadows\" \"presents contemporary reality in a fresh and unconventional manner... The improvisation, spontaneity, and free inspiration that are almost entirely lost in most films from an excess of professionalism are fully used in this film.\" The magazine, founded by Mekas and his brother, bestowed upon \"Shadows\" its first \"Independent Film Award\". Mekas then arranged to have the film shown six more times at the Young Men's Hebrew Association.\n1959 reworking.\nCassavetes shot new scenes in 1959 using a script that he co-wrote with Robert Alan Aurthur. The racial prejudice angle was reduced, and the three main characters were given more complications, as well as more time exploring their connectedness. With financing from Nikos Papatakis and others, Cassavetes reassembled the required members of the cast and crew. Half to two-thirds of the original footage was replaced, which angered those whose work was diminished. A 16\u00a0mm print was struck, and the new version was shown on November 11, 1959, at Amos Vogel's avant-garde Cinema 16, on a double bill with the 30-minute beat poetry film \"Pull My Daisy\".\nThe first version was an ensemble performance, while the second version put more emphasis on Lelia. The revelation that she was African-American came much earlier in the second version. The first version had more of a conventional narrative, but its pace was slow in sections. It also contained a number of technical flaws, such as lip-sync errors. Lelia's date with Tony was greatly altered: in the first version, she only talks with him, but in the second version, she loses her virginity to him. The first version had more scenes of Ben and his friends hanging around Times Square. Actor Anthony Ray, the son of famous director Nicholas Ray, had top billing in the first version, playing the part of Lelia's date Tony, but in the second version, this billing was reduced to reflect his diminished screen time. His character was given greater dignity in the second version.\nA major difference between the two versions was that Mingus' music was featured more in the first version, but the music was incongruously paired with the visuals, according to film critic Jonathan Rosenbaum. For the second version, Cassavetes replaced almost all of the Mingus recordings. For example, he removed a section in which a muted trumpet replaces the speech of character Tony on the phone, the sound mocking him. Another removed part involves the Mingus band shouting out a snatch of the gospel song \"Leaning on the Everlasting Arms\" during a scene in which Ben and his friends are recovering from a brutal fight. The first version also uses two Frank Sinatra songs that are not in the second version because Cassavetes could not obtain the rights. Mingus's saxophonist Shafi Hadi, previously known as Curtis Porter, provided most of the second version's soundtrack, expanding on a short passage that Mingus had written. Hadi was directed in his improvisation by Cassavetes, who acted out all the parts for him in the recording studio.\nAnother difference between the versions is that Ben's statement \"I've learned a lesson\" comes at the end of the second version, conveying to the viewer that Ben will improve himself after receiving such a cruel beating. This brings a sense of moral closure to the film. In the first version, the fight and Ben's statement appear halfway through the film, following which he is shown doing the same things again, having failed to learn his lesson. Thus, Ben is portrayed as unlikely ever to change his ways in the first version.\nReception.\nIn his December 1959 manifesto \"A Call for a New Generation of Film Makers\", Mekas said that \"Shadows\" was the start of a new movement that would inspire independent filmmakers, energize the flagging avant-garde film scene, and triumph over the commercial Hollywood film industry. Even so, he was upset that the film had been reworked. In January 1960, he wrote in his movie-review column in \"The Village Voice\" that the 1959 version was commercialized, \"just another Hollywood film\", and that everything he had praised in the first version had been \"completely destroyed\". Later in his life, he said that the first version should have never been remade, but that the second version was a better indication of the direction in which Cassavetes was going as a filmmaker.\nWhen the film was first released it was generally thought of as a vehicle for group improvisations. \n\"Shadows\" was given the Critics Award at the Venice Film Festival. Cassavetes obtained distribution through British Lion's Lion International Films in 1961.\nLegacy.\nThe film was shocking to American audiences in the late 1950s and early 1960s because it turned the \"concept of race upside down\". Two of the principal actors portraying African-Americans were not actually black: Goldoni was born in the U.S. to Sicilian parents, fully European in heritage, and Carruthers was only one-sixteenth black. Carruthers used a sunlamp to darken his skin during the 1957 shooting of the film, but in 1959 for the new scenes, he abandoned this effort. Carruthers and Goldoni were married in 1960, but quickly divorced.\nAfter \"Shadows\" was honored by the Venice Film Festival, the international publicity helped it become the first American film to see success outside of the Hollywood system. It joined \"Pull My Daisy\" and Shirley Clarke's \"The Connection\" to establish a new wave of American independent films.\nIn 1994, film critic Leonard Maltin said the film \"was considered a watershed in the birth of American independent cinema\".\n2003 rediscovery.\nThe second version of the film, the result of the reshooting and reworking Cassavetes did in 1959, is the one that Cassavetes considered to be the final product, and he refused to show the 1958 version. In time, he lost track of the first version's only print, and for decades it was believed to have been lost or destroyed. In the 1980s, Cassavetes said he may have donated the film to a school far away. In fact, the 16\u00a0mm print of the first version had been left on a New York City subway train, taken to the subway's lost-and-found department, and then purchased by a second-hand-goods shop owner as part of a box of unclaimed items. The shop owner saw \"Shadows\" scratched into the leader on the first reel, but he did not recognize the film's name. The shop eventually went out of business, and the owner retired. The reels of film were stored in an attic in Florida, and, in November 2003, they were given by the shop owner's daughter to film professor Ray Carney, who had been searching for the print of the first version of \"Shadows\" since the 1980s. A digital copy was shown at the International Film Festival Rotterdam in late January 2004. Since then, few people have seen this version, as Rowlands and the Cassavetes estate have been involved in a legal dispute regarding Carney's use of the film.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "76342", "revid": "15968414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76342", "title": "Independent components analysis", "text": ""}
{"id": "76345", "revid": "10372248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76345", "title": "Shaft (1971 film)", "text": "American blaxploitation crime action thriller film\nShaft is a 1971 American blaxploitation crime action thriller film directed by Gordon Parks and written by Ernest Tidyman and John D. F. Black. It is an adaptation of Tidyman's novel of the same name and is the first entry in the \"Shaft\" franchise. The plot revolves around a private detective named John Shaft who is hired by a Harlem mobster to rescue his daughter from the Italian mobsters who kidnapped her. The film stars Richard Roundtree as Shaft, alongside Moses Gunn, Charles Cioffi, Christopher St. John, and Lawrence Pressman.\nThe film explores themes including masculinity and sexuality, with a specific emphasis on Black Power. It was filmed in Harlem, Greenwich Village, and Times Square within the Manhattan borough of New York City. The \"Shaft\" soundtrack album, recorded by Isaac Hayes, was also a success, winning a Grammy Award for Best Original Score Written for a Motion Picture and a second Grammy (shared with Johnny Allen) for Best Instrumental Arrangement. The \"Theme from \"Shaft\"\" won the Academy Award for Best Original Song, making Hayes the first Black man to win the award for that category. The song has appeared on multiple Top 100 lists, including AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs.\nA prime example of the blaxploitation genre, it was selected in 2000 for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\" \"Shaft\" initially had two sequels called \"Shaft's Big Score!\" (1972) and \"Shaft in Africa\" (1973), though neither enjoyed the critical success of the original.\nPlot.\nIn January 1971, private detective John Shaft is informed that some gangsters are looking for him. He spots one of the men waiting for him in his office building and ambushes him. At gunpoint, he brings him to his office, where the second gangster is already waiting. During a short fight, Shaft dodges one of them, who falls out of a window. The other one reveals that Bumpy Jonas, the leader of a Harlem-based organized crime family, wants Shaft brought uptown to Harlem for a meeting. At the police station, Lieutenant Vic Androzzi and a detective question Shaft about the gangster's death, which Shaft calls an \"accident\". Androzzi allows Shaft to return to the streets for 48 hours to gather more information. Shaft meets with Bumpy, who tearfully reveals that his daughter has been kidnapped. Shaft is at first dismissive, accusing her of being a runaway or on drugs, until Jonas says she was on her way to college when she got abducted. He asks Shaft to ensure her safe return, and Shaft agrees to help. Bumpy advises that Shaft should seek out Ben Buford, a black militant leader.\nShaft tracks down Buford, and a shootout ensues with an unknown assailant. Afterward, Shaft is told by Androzzi that Shaft, not Ben, was the target, and that tensions brewing between the uptown hoods belonging to Bumpy Jonas and the downtown Mafiosi have culminated in other murders. Androzzi laments that the issue is seen as black-against-white to the general public and worries about the escalation into a full-blown race war. He also shows Shaft some pictures of Mafia men who just arrived in New York. Shaft and Ben meet with Bumpy and accuse him of setting up the shootout. After Bumpy agrees to pay $10,000 for each of Ben's men who died, Ben and Shaft join forces to find Bumpy's daughter.\nLater, Shaft surmises that mobsters are watching his apartment from a local bar. Shaft pretends to be a bartender and calls Androzzi to have the mobsters arrested. Shaft then confronts the arrested mobsters about Bumpy's daughter, and he sets up a meeting. When he gets home, Vic arrives and tells Shaft that the room at the station house was bugged and his superior wants to bring Shaft in for questioning regarding the kidnapping. Instead of taking him in, Androzzi leaves. Shaft is escorted by a Mafia member to the apartment where Marcy Jonas is being held, and Ben and two of his men tail them. Once there, a shootout ensues: two Mafia men are killed, and Shaft takes a bullet in the shoulder. After receiving medical attention, Shaft tells Ben to round up his men and meet him at the hotel where Marcy has been taken. He calls Bumpy to tell him his daughter is fine, but that he needs taxicabs at the hotel for the getaway.\nAt the hotel, Shaft, Ben, and Ben's men dress as hotel workers and slowly infiltrate the hotel. Shaft gets to the roof of the hotel, and swings into the room where Marcy is kept. He kills the gangster guarding her and brings her outside. Meanwhile, Ben and his men kill the gangsters in the surrounding rooms, and exit. After the taxicabs take Marcy, Ben, and Ben's men away, Shaft calls Androzzi from a phone booth, telling him that his case has just busted open. When Androzzi asks him to close it, Shaft tells him to close it himself, hangs up the phone, and walks away laughing.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Richard Roundtree as John Shaft\nBackground.\n\"Shaft\" was adapted from Ernest Tidyman's novels by Tidyman and screenwriter John D. F. Black. Joel Freeman and executive producers Stirling Silliphant and Roger Lewis produced the film.\nThe screen detective genre in the late 1960s had been dominant in major movies with big stars attached. Paul Newman had established his Harper in 1966, (he reprised the character in 1975, in \"The Drowning Pool\"). Soon following, Frank Sinatra's \"Tony Rome\" (1967), \"The Detective\" (1968), and \"Lady in Cement\" (1968) further set the quality. Industry knowledge suggested that the first of the Clint Eastwood \"Dirty Harry\" productions was also slated for a 1971 release.\nSeeing that his directorial debut of a major entertainment production was set to be compared to these previous productions, Gordon Parks realized that a bold casting choice was necessary for Shaft.\nAlthough black in the source novel, Tidyman's original draft screenplay had Shaft as white. However, [Gordon] Parks cast African American actor Richard Roundtree as the eponymous hero. The entire dynamic of the film, its later success, and the future of blaxploitation films were all greatly impacted by Parks' decision. This film was created less to impact black consciousness and more to simply to show a \"'fun film', which people could attend on Saturday night and see a black guy winning.\" Nevertheless, Parks said in the documentary about his work, \"Half Past Autumn\" (2000), that he had hoped the film would inspire young African Americans by presenting them with \"a hero they hadn't had before.\" \"Shaft\" was intentionally created to \"appeal to a black urban audience, along with contiguous white youths.\"\nAfter production, in an effort to entice a large black audience to see the film, MGM hired UniWorld, a black advertising firm, who \"popularized \"Shaft\" by using the rhetoric of black power.\" Although this film was notable for its crossover success with both white and black audiences, UniWorld focused largely on attracting members of the African-American community. \"For example, \"Variety\" reported UniWorld's advertisement description of the protagonist John Shaft as, 'A lone, black Superspade\u2014a man of flair and flamboyance who has fun at the expense of the (white) establishment.'\" They also promoted \"'the behind-the-camera participation of blacks', thereby appealing to blacks who would appreciate the film as a black production or could fantasize that blacks had somehow beat the Hollywood system and taken over Metro-Goldwyn Mayer studios.\"\nRoundtree's view about being in the film.\nWhen asked at the 2014 Virginia Film Festival how it felt to be cast as Shaft, Richard Roundtree responded that he had been extremely excited about the part at the time. He had previously been cast mostly in commercials, and this role, his first in a feature film, was a big break for him.\nProduction.\nMelvin Van Peebles claimed that the success of his film \"Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song\" caused \"Shaft\" to be changed from a \"white movie\" into a \"black one\". In fact, filming of \"Shaft\" began in January 1971, several months before the release of Van Peebles' film, with Roundtree already confirmed in the lead role. The story is set in the same month, as shown by a calendar on Shaft's office wall.\nTidyman, who is white, was an editor at \"The New York Times\" prior to becoming a novelist. He sold the movie rights to \"Shaft\" by showing the galley proofs to the studio (the novel had not yet been published). Tidyman was honored by the NAACP for his work on the \"Shaft\" movies and books.\nThemes.\nPortrayal of race.\n\"Shaft\" played a crucial part in the development of African-American advancement in Hollywood.\nIn the creation of \"Shaft\", there was a significant African-American presence, with director Parks, editor Hugh A. Robertson, and composer Isaac Hayes playing crucial roles. On the other hand, white men controlled the other important aspects of \"Shaft\"'s production. Scenarist and writer Tidyman, writer Black, producer Freeman, and executive producers Silliphant and Lewis were all white men who heavily influenced the making of \"Shaft\". In an analysis of \"Shaft\", Stanly Corkin stated, \"Further, the reception of the idea of blackness also becomes various, defined by any number of subject positions, and again, those cannot be fixed to any particular racially defined place of origin.\" In other words, the perception of race depends on the viewer and thus differs between individuals. Since different representations of race appeal to different people, the film's white creators fabricated its representation of blackness in order to appeal to African American and white audiences alike. MGM was struggling financially during the making of this film, so making a profitable film was a necessity. \"Under the devious guise of providing the Black American with a new and positive image of his/her life, these films confer upon the viewer, Black or White, little more than a pretended glamour and sophistication, the empty, repetitive wasteland of ancient Hollywood traditionalism.\"\nParks' decision to cast Roundtree rather than a white actor, for whom the role was written, instantly altered the presentation of race in the film. Critics, however, believed the plot was not altered enough to accommodate the change in racial dynamics. \"Mark Reid, for example, argues that Shaft is a product of the (white) studio imagination and merely a 'black-skinned replica' of the white action hero commonly found in the detective genre.\"\nOne way that Shaft's blackness was showcased was through his attire. Shaft was \"stylistically racialized: [He] wears clothes and affects manners that are associated with being black\". Shaft was known for his elegant garb, as he was frequently draped in leather coats and turtlenecks throughout the film. Although his smooth, classy look evoked a greater interest from viewers, it in no way represented fashion typical of the black community in that era.\nFurther, Shaft relies upon a group of militant black nationalists in helping him complete his mission to save Bumpy's daughter. The inclusion of a group so strongly identified with the Black Power movement was clearly an effort to appeal to black audience members. However, the film presented the black nationalists as a group that failed to further the black cause, raised no awareness of the black struggle, and displayed them simply as a hired team of assailants to assist Shaft on his mission.\nThe filming of \"Shaft\" partly in the neighborhood of Harlem also allowed the black viewer to have a deeper connection to this film. The writers portrayed Shaft as a man who clearly had a good relationship with this neighborhood, yet rejected it once he became wealthy, moving to the predominantly white area of Greenwich Village. Traditional black thought in this era was that African Americans who had been prosperous financially should invest in and give back to the communities from which they came. Instead, \"the implication is that the wise black (Shaft) will want to sever ties with the people of Harlem and find a place among whites.\" This point further indicates the false portrayal of race in \"Shaft\", as a true black action hero of his time period would have been more loyal to his neighborhood.\nThe result of this inauthentic portrayal of blackness in early 1970s blaxploitation films like \"Shaft\" had an effect on black audiences viewing them. Instead of the collective nature of the Civil Rights Movement and Black Power movement in the 1960s, these films helped to usher in a decade of self-indulgence, material gain, and drug consumption. \"Equally important, Riley points out that the narratives about, and images of, blacks in these new films are no more than thematic templates reworked with black casts and updated stereotypes that reconfirm white expectations of blacks and serve to repress and delay the awakening of any real political consciousness.\"\nBlack power through masculinity.\nAlthough \"Shaft\" was a depiction of Blackness by white creators, the movie touched on several themes that reflected the ideals of the Black Power movement. Some of the actions taken by Shaft highlighted the positive aspects of this movement, while others brought out some of its less progressive facets.\nA noticeable quality of Roundtree's character was his commanding presence and the control that he displayed in almost every situation he faced throughout the film. In the Black Power movement, leaders ardently fought to gain greater presence and control for their people, because even after desegregation, African Americans were still greatly excluded from the economic, political, and cultural systems engrained in white American society. Shaft was depicted as a character that had achieved a high level of personal freedom, confidence, and control in his life, which was exciting for African American viewers. At the beginning of the film, Shaft was approached by two police officers seeking information. As the officers were depending upon his information, Shaft dictated the conversation from a position of power. Spatially, he also was much taller than the officers, further boosting his position of control. Shaft's economic independence was a crucial part of his persona. Once bankrolled by Bumpy, Shaft was often seen giving money to others, which showed that he had substantial financial security. He also had a beautiful apartment located in Greenwich Village, where rent would have been expensive. The Black Power movement frequently stressed the importance of upward social mobility.\nAnother prominent characteristic of this movement was its strong focus on masculinity. This emphasis on the male effort to improve black life was accompanied by sexist beliefs by many leading activists. Their sexist views were felt to be a reaction to the hierarchical power structure already prevalent in society. Having been subjugated by white people for years, African-American men in turn treated women as beneath them. \"Robyn Wiegman argues that the members of the Black Power Movement defined the politics of race within 'a metaphorics of phallic power,' which developed out of male activists' desire to counter cultural articulations of black male inferiority, and that this perspective is readily seen in the writings of influential figures such as Malcolm X, Huey Newton, Eldridge Cleaver, and Amiri Baraka.\"\nShaft directly embodied this ideal of extreme black masculinity through displays of hypersexuality and misogyny. \"Although Shaft lacked power in the racial sphere, by virtue of being a heterosexual male in a patriarchal system, he still maintains a semblance of power in relation to women.\" From the very beginning of the film, Shaft's sexuality was highlighted as an important characteristic of his persona. In this scene, Shaft was parting ways with two white officers and one asks him, \"Where are you going?\" \"To get laid\", Shaft replied. Shaft was described as a legendary \"sex machine\", and this dominance over females was presented as an instrument of power. Shaft not only has ample sexual relationships with women, but he treats them with little respect. \"While he ha[d] a black girlfriend, which would satisfy the expectations of cultural nationalism, he is not above sleeping around and having random sex with attractive white women.\" In one scene, Shaft's girlfriend told him that she loves him, and Shaft memorably responded with \"Yeah, I know.\" Also, after a white woman slept with Shaft, she told him, \"You're pretty good in the sack, but you're pretty shitty afterwards. You know that?\" This statement further highlights both Shaft's sexual prowess and his misogynist actions.\nContext.\nThe fifth blaxploitation film released, \"Shaft\" is one of the most popular films of the genre. Commenting on the film shortly after its release, \"New York Times\" movie critic Vincent Canby accurately predicted the wave of blaxploitation films to follow: \"How audiences react, however, has a great deal to do with the kind of movies that do get made, and having watched the extraordinary receptions given to both \"Sweet Sweetback\" and \"Shaft\" I'm led to wonder if, perhaps, the existence of what seems to be a large, hungry, Black movie audience\u2014an audience whose experiences and interests are treated mostly in token fashion by TV\u2014might not be one of the more healthy and exciting developments on the current movie scene.\" \"Shaft\" greatly impacted future blaxploitation films which \"crudely tried to emulate the success of \"Shaft\" and \"Sweetback\", repeated, filled in, or exaggerated the ingredients of the Blaxploitation formula, which usually consisted of a pimp, gangster, or their baleful female counterparts, violently acting out a revenge or retribution motif against corrupt whites in the romanticized confines of the ghetto or inner city.\"\nCultural impact.\nConsidered as \"the first Black action hero\", Roundtree is credited with having an impact on the rise of African American leading actors in Hollywood projects, thanks to his successful performances in the Shaft franchise.\nThe way Richard Roundtree portrayed Shaft created a Black male style that was so distinct and pervasive it became known as \u201cswag\u201d. After Shaft the representation of Black masculinity in American films was dramatically changed. It became the norm to see black men in roles that before would have been filled by white men.\nReception.\nBox office performance.\nThe film was one of only three profitable movies that year for MGM, grossing what \"Time\" magazine called an \"astonishing\" $13\u00a0million on a budget of $500,000.\nThe \"Los Angeles Times\" said the film cost $1\u00a0million after advertising and other costs and grossed $4.5\u00a0million. According to \"Variety\" by 1976 it earned $7.656\u00a0million in theatrical rentals.\nIt not only spawned several years of \"blaxploitation\" action films, it earned enough money to save then-struggling MGM from bankruptcy.\nPublic reception.\n\"Shaft\" was extremely successful in theaters, which was a huge accomplishment for the then-struggling MGM studios. It was produced at a cost of $1.2\u00a0million while earning $10.8\u00a0million in its first year of distribution, $7\u00a0million in the U.S. alone.\nCritical reception.\nThe critical reception of \"Shaft\" was mixed. In general, the film was applauded for its innovation, success, and its lasting effect on the film industry. \"Because of the film's positioning securely within the parameters of industry standards, \"Shaft\" was generally applauded by the critics both black and white, as being a breakthrough production in terms of expanding black representation in commercial cinema.\"\nRoger Ebert gave the film two-and-a-half stars out of four and wrote, \"The strength of Parks's movie is his willingness to let his hero fully inhabit the private-eye genre, with all of its obligatory violence, blood, obscenity, and plot gimmicks. The weakness of \"Shaft\", I suspect, is that Parks is not very eager to inhabit that world along with his hero.\" Gene Siskel awarded two stars out of four and wrote that the film \"offers little more than a rousing opening fight and a chance to see Roundtree glower while he models some fancy leather outfits.\" \"Variety\" wrote that the film was \"directed by Gordon Parks with a subtle feel for both the grit and the humanity of the script. Excellent cast, headed by newcomer Richard Roundtree, may shock some audiences with a heavy dose of candid dialog and situation.\" Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" called it \"the first good Saturday night movie I've seen in years ... 'Shaft' is not a great film, but it's very entertaining.\" In a review for \"The Monthly Film Bulletin\", Nigel Andrews called it \"in the main a highly workmanlike and enjoyable thriller.\" Gary Arnold of \"The Washington Post\" called it \"a diverting commercial thriller, inconsequential but slick and casually enjoyable.\"\nOther critics like Clayton Riley mainly found fault in the films' failure to \"deal with Black life in serious terms,\" writing that \"Sam Spade is all right for the field hands because the White folks don't want to carry that weight any more. But how seriously would 'Five Easy Pieces' have been taken with a Black pianist as the weary protagonist?\" Riley also harshly stated, \"Mediocre is the only word to describe the work of Gordon Parks, the director of this nonsense, inept is the kindest thing to say about the performances of Richard Roundtree as John Shaft, a Black private eye on the prowl for kicks in the Big Apple underworld.\" Parks responded to Riley's social criticisms with a letter to the editor in \"The New York Times\", stating that \"Riley seems sadly alone among blacks in this reaction. Most black critics have lauded the film for its portrayal of Shaft as a strong black hero ... I share Riley's desire to see black actors playing roles now assumed by actors such as Jack Nicholson or Dustin Hoffman, but I don't think the choice for black people is limited to either 'Five Easy Pieces' or Stepin Fetchit.\"\nRotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 88% based on 49 reviews from critics, with an average rating of 7.5/10. The website's \"Critics Consensus\" quotes the movie's opening song: \"This is the man that would risk his neck for his brother, man. Can you dig it?\"\nAwards and nominations.\nIn 2000, \"Shaft\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nIn 2003, \"Shaft\" was chosen as one of \"The 1000 Best Movies Ever Made\" by \"The New York Times\".\nSoundtrack.\nOne of the greatest factors contributing to \"Shaft\"'s wild success and lasting appeal is its memorable musical score, \"a revolutionary funk/soul masterpiece\". Hayes auditioned for the role of Shaft but was asked to compose the musical score instead. \"Vulgar, shallow, and crudely done, \"Shaft\" distinguished itself mainly by having the best musical score of the year. Isaac Hayes's sensual, moody background music added to the texture of the film\u2026\"\nHayes' soundtrack was recognized for its unique and catchy sound. \"Instead of laying out a series of lengthy, chilled-out raps and jams, the episodic nature of a movie structure obliged him to focus on shorter instrumentals, featuring laid-back, jazz-infused riffs and solos.\" For example, from the 'Theme from Shaft,' \"The instrumental section, played by the Bar Kays and Movement, deploys pulsating bass, stuttering wah-wah guitar, Hayes's own distinctive piano playing, a descending four-note horn motif, ascending flute runs and the now famous Pearl and Dean-style blasts of brass and strings.\" \"Thirty five years on, \"Shaft\" may sound dated, but it's a sound that inspired a generation of soul musicians. Hayes' laid back vocal delivery and the gorgeous arrangements by Johnny Allen are still breathtaking, and the album remains a quintessential slice of '70s soul.\"\nThe soundtrack received praise and awards. Only a few weeks after the release of the film, the soundtrack album had earned $2\u00a0million and had gone platinum. \"The \"Shaft\" theme became so popular that it was heard everywhere, from nightclubs to halftime at football games.\" (Guerrero 1993) Hayes was also nominated for two Academy Awards for Best Original Dramatic Score and for Best Original Song with the 'Theme from Shaft.'. When he won for Best Original Song, it was the first time an African American composer had won an Academy Award. \"The 45-single release of the record topped the US charts, hit number 4 in the UK and is still popular today, enjoying a new lease of life as a cellphone ring tone.\"\nHome media.\n\"Shaft\" was released on VHS, followed by a DVD release in June 2000, and a Blu-ray release in 2012. The Criterion Collection released the film on Blu-ray and Ultra HD Blu-ray in June 2022, featuring a 4K restoration.\nSequels.\n\"Shaft\" initially had two sequels called \"Shaft's Big Score!\" (1972) and \"Shaft in Africa\" (1973), with \"neither capturing the soul of the original\", according to author Howard Hughes. An additional sequel, and part remake, was released in 2000, also called \"Shaft\", starring Samuel L. Jackson as the title character, and Roundtree appearing as his \"Uncle\" John Shaft. The earlier sequels were followed by a short-lived 1973\u20131974 television series titled \"Shaft\" on CBS. Richard Roundtree was the only person to ever play John Shaft, appearing in all four films and the television series.\nErnest Tidyman wrote six \"Shaft\" novel sequels, including \"Goodbye, Mr Shaft\" and \"Shaft's Carnival of Killers\".\nIn February 2015, TheWrap reported that \"Shaft\" would be rebooted by New Line Cinema with John Davis producing the new film. In July 2015, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" reported that Kenya Barris and Alex Barnow would be writing the script, Davis and Ira Napoliello would be producing, and Richard Brener and Samuel J. Brown would direct. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" wrote that the film \"will have a comedic tone but will retain its action roots\". When he was asked about that characterization of the film, Davis said \"It's drama, but it's going to be drama with a lot of fun moments. A lot of lighter moments.\" In January 2017, Deadline reports that Tim Story will direct the film, a sequel, which will follows the son of John Shaft. In August 2017, it was revealed that Richard Roundtree and Samuel L. Jackson would reprise their roles from the 2000 film, and Jessie T. Usher would portray J. J. Shaft, the son of Jackson's character. Roundtree's character would no longer be the uncle, but Jackson's character's father John Shaft Sr. In November 2017, the film was revealed to be entitled \"Shaft\" and was released on June 14, 2019.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76346", "revid": "49829305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76346", "title": "Sherlock Jr.", "text": "1924 American film\nSherlock Jr. is a 1924 American silent comedy film starring and directed by Buster Keaton and written by Clyde Bruckman, Jean Havez, and Joseph A. Mitchell. It features Kathryn McGuire, Joe Keaton, and Ward Crane.\nIn 1991, \"Sherlock Jr.\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". In 2000, the American Film Institute, as part of its AFI 100 Years... series, ranked the film #62 in its AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs. David Thomson calls it \"a breakthrough. It is as if a filmmaker had at last learned the point of the whole thing.\"\nThe title references the fictional Sherlock Holmes.\nPlot.\nBuster Keaton stars as Projectionist, who moonlights as an amateur detective. When the cinema is empty, he reads the book \"How to be a Detective.\" He is in love with The Girl (Kathryn McGuire) but has a rival, \"The Local Sheik\" (Ward Crane). Neither has much money. He finds a dollar note in the garbage he swept up in the lobby. He takes it and adds it to the $2 he has. A woman comes and says that she lost a dollar. He gives it back. But then a sad old woman also says that she lost a dollar, so he gives that also, leaving himself with $1. A man comes and searches the garbage and finds a wallet full of money. Projectionist buys a $1 box of chocolates, all he can afford, and changes the price to $4 before giving it to the woman he loves at her house. He later gives her a ring.\nThe Sheik comes into the house and steals the pocket watch of the Girl's Father (Joe Keaton) and pawns it for $4. With the money, he buys a $3 box of chocolates for the Girl. When the Father notices that his watch is missing, the Sheik slips the pawn ticket into the Projectionist's pocket unnoticed. The Projectionist offers to solve the crime, but when the pawn ticket is found in his pocket, he is banished from the house. When the Sheik leaves, the Projectionist shadows his every movement. The Sheik loses him by shutting him in a train car. Later, the Girl takes the pawn ticket to the pawnbroker and asks him to describe who pawned it. He points to the Sheik, standing outside.\nWhile showing a film (advertised in the lobby as \"Hearts and Pearls\") about the theft of a pearl necklace, the Projectionist falls asleep and dreams that he enters the movie as a detective, Sherlock Jr. The other actors are replaced by the Projectionist's acquaintances, with the Sheik taking the role of the Villain. The dream begins with the theft being committed by the Villain with the aid of the Butler. The Girl's Father calls for the world's greatest detective and Sherlock Jr. arrives.\nFearing that they will be caught, the Villain and the Butler attempt to kill Sherlock Jr. through several traps, poison, and an elaborate pool game with an exploding 13 ball. When these fail, the Villain and Butler try to escape. Sherlock Jr. tracks them down to a warehouse but is outnumbered by the gang to which the villain was selling the necklace. During the confrontation, Sherlock Jr. discovers that they have kidnapped the Girl. With the help of his assistant, Gillette, Sherlock Jr. manages to save the woman, and after a car chase, manages to defeat the gang.\nWhen he awakens, the Girl shows up to tell him that she and her father learned the identity of the real thief after she went to the pawn shop to see who actually pawned the pocket watch. As a reconciliation scene happens to be playing on the screen, the Projectionist mimics the actor's romantic behavior.\nProduction.\nOriginally titled \"The Misfit\", production began in January 1924 in Los Angeles. Keaton later said that his character walking onto the screen and into a film was \"the reason for making the whole picture\u00a0... Just that one situation.\" Having cast her in \"Three Ages\", Keaton cast Marion Harlan as the lead actress, but she became sick and was replaced by up-and-coming Keystone Studios actress Kathryn McGuire, who had previously starred in \"The Silent Call\" and was a WAMPAS Baby Star of 1923.\nKeaton initially hired Roscoe \"Fatty\" Arbuckle as his co-director for the film. Keaton had been discovered by Arbuckle, whose career was at a standstill after being accused of raping Virginia Rappe in 1921. During the scandal and court case, Arbuckle had lost his mansion and cars and was in debt for $750,000. Keaton wanted to help his old friend and hired Arbuckle under the pseudonym \"William Goodrich\". It is believed that the idea for the film was a tribute to Oscar Heinrich, the forensic scientist involved in the rape trial against Arbuckle. Filming began well and Arbuckle was happy to be back on set, but after Keaton corrected a mistake that Arbuckle had made, his attitude changed dramatically.\nArbuckle became angry and abusive on set, yelling at actors and according to Keaton becoming \"flushed and mad\u00a0... [the scandal] just changed his disposition.\" In his autobiography, Keaton claimed that Arbuckle was difficult to work with and he arranged for him to direct \"The Red Mill\" instead so that Keaton could complete the film alone. \"The Red Mill\" did not begin production until 1927. Arbuckle's second wife Doris Deane later claimed that Arbuckle had directed the entire film and had come up with all of the ideas for the film.\nThe production included one of Keaton's most famous on-set accidents. In a scene where Keaton grabs a water spout while walking on a moving boxcar train, the water unexpectedly flooded down on Keaton much harder than anticipated, throwing him to the ground. The back of Keaton's neck slammed against a steel rail on the ground and caused him to black out. The pain was so intense that Keaton had to stop shooting later that day and he had \"blinding headaches\" for weeks afterwards, but continued working, having a well-known high threshold for physical pain.\nIt was not until 1935 that a doctor spotted a callus over a fracture in Keaton's top vertebra in an X-ray. The doctor informed Keaton that he had broken his neck during the accident nine years earlier and not realized it. Keaton famously always performed his own stunts, and this was not the only accident on set. In another scene, the motorcycle Keaton was riding skidded and smashed into two cameras, knocking over Eddie Cline and throwing Keaton onto a nearby car.\n\"Sherlock Jr.\" was also Keaton's most complicated film for special optical effects and in-camera tricks. The film's most famous trick shot involves Keaton jumping into a small suitcase and disappearing. Keaton later said that it was an old vaudeville trick that his father had invented, and he later performed it on the \"Ed Sullivan Show\" in 1957, but never publicly revealed how he did it. The trick was accomplished with a trap door behind the suitcase and an actor lying horizontally with long clothes hiding his absent bottom torso, which then allowed the actor to smoothly fall forward and walk as though he had always been standing vertically.\nKeaton later said that they \"spent an awful lot of time getting those scenes\". Filming took four months, while typically it took Keaton two months to finish a feature film. The editing was also difficult and took longer than a typical Keaton film. Keaton later told film historian Kevin Brownlow \"every cameraman in the business went to see that picture more than once trying to figure out how the hell we did some of that.\"\nKeaton depicted an early example of a film within a film in the dream sequence. Keaton's character leaves the projection room and goes down into the theater, then walks into the film being screened on the stage. Keaton later explained that this stunt was achieved through the use of lighting: \"We built a stage with a big black cut-out screen. Then we built the front-row seats and orchestra pit. ... We lit the stage so it looked like a motion picture being projected on to a screen\".\nKeaton's character is kicked out of the film a few times but finally manages to stay in, and is depicted in a series of different scenes including a park, a lake and a desert, through a series of cuts. This was unique at the time because there was a continuity to the scenes and this strategy had rarely been used by filmmakers before. Keaton and his cameraman were able to do this by using surveyor's instruments to position Keaton and the camera at exactly the right distances and positions to support the illusion of continuity.\nMusic.\nIn 1997, Australian ensemble Blue Grassy Knoll who specialise in scoring for Keaton's films, wrote a score for Sherlock Jr which premiered at the Melbourne International Film Festival. They have since performed the score around the world, including the New Victory Theatre in New York, the Edinburgh Fringe Festival, and most recently an outdoor screening in Federation Square, Melbourne.\nIn 2014, the Dallas Chamber Symphony commissioned Craig Marks to write an original musical score for Sherlock Jr. It premiered during a concert screening at Moody Performance Hall on February 25, 2014, with Richard McKay conducting.\nReception.\nRelease and critical response.\nKeaton first previewed the film in Long Beach, California. Although audience members gasped at some of the special effects, there were very few laughs, and Keaton began re-editing the film to make it funnier. However, the second preview screening was more disappointing than the first, and Keaton continued cutting the film down to a very short 5-reel film. Producer Joseph Schenck wanted Keaton to add another 1,000 feet of film (approximately 11 minutes), but Keaton refused.\nThe film was retitled \"Sherlock Jr.\" and released on April 21, 1924. It made $448,337, slightly less than \"Three Ages\". Keaton considered the film \"alright [but] not one of the big ones\", possibly due to the fact that it was his first real failure after a 25-year career on stage and screen.\n\"Sherlock Jr.\" received mixed critical reviews. It received good reviews from \"The New York Times\", which called it \"one of the best screen tricks ever incorporated in a comedy\", and \"Photoplay\", which called it \"rare and refreshing\". Other positive notices came from \"The Los Angeles Times\", \"The Washington Post\", and \"The Atlanta Constitution\". Negative reviews included \"Picture Play\", which wrote that it was devoid of \"ingenuity and originality\". \"Variety\" wrote it was as funny as \"a hospital operating room\". Edmund Wilson of \"The New Republic\" criticized Keaton's performance for not having enough character development and the film for having too much \"machinery and stunts\". \nIn \"The Nation\" in 1946, critic James Agee wrote, \"\"Sherlock, Jr.\" is not one of Buster Keaton's funniest\u2014none of his full-length films were\u2014but it is about a hundred times as funny as anything made today. Some of the houses, yards, and streets are even more beautifully photographed than was usual in the old comedies. And one chase gag, involving a motorcycle and a long line of ditch-diggers, is hair-raising both in its mechanical perfection and as a piece of better-than-conscious surrealism.\"\nLegacy.\nDwight Macdonald, in his book \"On Movies\", notes the sophistication of the premise: the second half of \"Sherlock Junior\" cuts free across magical territory. By a great stroke of invention, the lovesick Buster is a movie projectionist, so that the medium becomes the artist's material, an advanced approach Buster had never heard of\u00a0... He falls asleep in the projection booth, dreaming about his girl and his frustrated love. His \"doppelganger\" extracts itself from his sleeping body\u00a0... and walks down the aisle of the darkened theatre to climb up on the stage and into the society-crook melodrama being projected on the screen\u00a0... There's no explanation for this or any other \"lapsus naturalis\" in this 1924 film which makes later efforts by Dal\u00ed, Bu\u00f1uel and Cocteau look pedestrian and a bit timid. They felt obliged to clarify matters by a symbolistic apparatus. Keaton never rose\u2014or sunk\u2014to that.\nIn 2005, \"Time\" named \"Sherlock Jr.\" as one of the All-Time 100 Movies, writing \"The impeccable comedian directs himself in an impeccable silent comedy\u00a0... Is this, as some critics have argued, an example of primitive American surrealism? Sure. But let's not get fancy about it. It is more significantly, a great example of American minimalism\u2014simple objects and movement manipulated in casually complex ways to generate a steadily rising gale of laughter. The whole thing is only 45 minutes long, not a second of which is wasted. In an age when most comedies are all windup and no punch, this is the most treasurable of virtues.\"\nDennis Schwartz wrote that \"Sherlock Jr.\" is \"one of Buster's superior silent comedies that's noted for his usual deadpan humor, frolicsome slapstick, the number of very funny sight gags, the many innovative technical accomplishments and that he did his own stunts (including the dangerous one where he was hanging off a ladder connected to a huge water basin as the water poured out and washed him onto the railroad track, fracturing his neck nearly to the point of breaking it. Keaton suffered from severe migraines for years after making this movie).\" David Thomson calls \"Sherlock Jr.\" Keaton's \"masterpiece\" and \"the most philosophically eloquent of silent comedies\".\nRotten Tomatoes reports an 88% approval from 41 critics, with an average rating of 9.8/10.\n\"Sherlock Jr.\" was a major influence on Woody Allen's \"The Purple Rose of Cairo\" (1985), in which a character walks out of a movie and into real life. Forty minutes into the film, Buster jams on the brakes of the car he is driving, causing the chassis to stop and the body to keep going, a gag reused in the James Bond film \"The Living Daylights\" (1987). In 2012, it was ranked number 61 in a list of the best-edited films of all time as selected by the members of the Motion Picture Editors Guild. In the 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls, it was ranked the 59th-greatest film ever made in the critics' poll. In 2015, \"Sherlock Jr.\" ranked 44th on BBC's \"100 Greatest American Films\" list, voted on by film critics from around the world. On January 5, 2023, Richard Brody included it on his list of \"Thirty-four Movies That Celebrate the Movies\".\nOn January 1, 2020, the film entered into the public domain in the United States.\nA clip from the film was included in the \"\" episode \"Forget Me Not\". https://\nAccolades.\nIn 1991, \"Sherlock Jr.\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nThe film was ranked 62nd on the American Film Institute's list AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs (2000).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76347", "revid": "41888491", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76347", "title": "Hernia", "text": "Abnormal exit of tissues or organs from the cavity they usually reside in\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nA hernia (pl.: hernias or herniae, from Latin, meaning 'rupture') is the abnormal exit of tissue or an organ, such as the bowel, through the wall of the cavity in which it normally resides. The term is also used for the normal development of the intestinal tract, referring to the retraction of the intestine from the extra-embryonal navel coelom into the abdomen in the healthy embryo at about 7&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 weeks.\nVarious types of hernias can occur, most commonly involving the abdomen, and specifically the groin. Groin hernias are most commonly inguinal hernias but may also be femoral hernias. Other types of hernias include hiatus, incisional, and umbilical hernias. Symptoms are present in about 66% of people with groin hernias. This may include pain or discomfort in the lower abdomen, especially with coughing, exercise, or urinating or defecating. Often, it gets worse throughout the day and improves when lying down. A bulge may appear at the site of hernia, that becomes larger when bending down.\nGroin hernias occur more often on the right than left side. The main concern is bowel strangulation, where the blood supply to part of the bowel is blocked. This usually produces severe pain and tenderness in the area. Hiatus, or hiatal hernias often result in heartburn but may also cause chest pain or pain while eating.\nRisk factors for the development of a hernia include smoking, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, obesity, pregnancy, peritoneal dialysis, collagen vascular disease and previous open appendectomy, among others. Predisposition to hernias is genetic and occur more often in certain families. Deleterious mutations causing predisposition to hernias seem to have dominant inheritance (especially for men). It is unclear if groin hernias are associated with heavy lifting. Hernias can often be diagnosed based on signs and symptoms. Occasionally, medical imaging is used to confirm the diagnosis or rule out other possible causes. The diagnosis of hiatus hernias is often done by endoscopy.\nGroin hernias that do not cause symptoms in males do not need immediate surgical repair, a practice referred to as \"watchful waiting\". However most men tend to eventually undergo groin hernia surgery due to the development of pain. For women, however, repair is generally recommended due to the higher rate of femoral hernias, which have more complications. If strangulation occurs, immediate surgery is required. Repair may be done by open surgery, laparoscopic surgery, or robotic-assisted surgery. Open surgery has the benefit of possibly being done under local anesthesia rather than general anesthesia. Laparoscopic surgery generally has less pain following the procedure. A hiatus hernia may be treated with lifestyle changes such as raising the head of the bed, weight loss and adjusting eating habits. The medications H2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors may help. If the symptoms do not improve with medications, a surgery known as laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication may be an option.\nGlobally in 2019, there were 32.53 million prevalent cases of inguinal, femoral, and abdominal hernias, with a 95% uncertainty interval ranging from 27.71 to 37.79 million. Additionally, there were 13.02 million incident cases, with an uncertainty interval of 10.68 to 15.49 million. These figures reflect a 36.00% increase in prevalent cases and a 63.67% increase in incident cases compared to the numbers reported in 1990. About 27% of males and 3% of females develop a groin hernia at some point in their lives. Inguinal, femoral and abdominal hernias were present in 18.5 million people and resulted in 59,800 deaths in 2015. Groin hernias occur most often before the age of 1 and after the age of 50. It is not known how commonly hiatus hernias occur, with estimates in North America varying from 10% to 80%. The first known description of a hernia dates back to at least 1550 BC, in the Ebers Papyrus from Egypt.\nPathogenesis.\nMost hernias happen when the muscles and tendons in the belly weaken or get damaged, which makes it hard for them to keep the insides in place and support the body properly. The belly and pelvis act like a container made of muscles, tendons and bones. When pressure builds up inside this container, the muscles push back to keep everything in place. If the pressure gets too high, it may cause the belly's wall to break, leading to a hernia. Once a hernia starts, it keeps enlarging, because the tension on the wall there increases.\nEpidemiology.\nAbout 27% of males and 3% of females develop a groin hernia at some time in their lives. In 2013 about 25 million people had a hernia. Inguinal, femoral and abdominal hernias resulted in 32,500 deaths globally in 2013 and 50,500 in 1990. Healthcare costs associated with abdominal wall hernias account for an annual expenditure of approximately 2.5 to 3 billion dollars.\nSigns and symptoms.\nSymptoms and signs vary depending on the type of hernia. By far the most common hernias develop in the abdomen when a weakness in the abdominal wall evolves into a localized hole, or \"defect\", through which adipose tissue, or abdominal organs covered with peritoneum, may protrude. Another common hernia involves the spinal discs and causes \"sciatica\". A hiatus hernia occurs when the stomach protrudes into the \"mediastinum\" through the esophageal opening in the diaphragm.\nHernias might manifest with pain in the area, a noticeable lump, or less specific symptoms caused by pressure on an organ stuck within the hernia, potentially leading to organ dysfunction. Typically, fatty tissue is the initial entrant into a hernia, but it might also involve an organ. Hernias are caused by a disruption or opening in the fascia, or fibrous tissue, which forms the abdominal wall. It is possible for the bulge associated with a hernia to come and go, but the defect in the tissue will persist.\nSymptoms may or may not be present in some inguinal hernias. In the case of reducible hernias, a bulge in the groin or in another abdominal area can often be seen and felt. When standing, such a bulge becomes more obvious. Besides the bulge, other symptoms include pain in the groin that may also include a heavy or dragging sensation, and in men, there is sometimes pain and swelling in the scrotum around the testicular area.\nIrreducible abdominal hernias or incarcerated hernias may be painful, but their most relevant symptom is that they cannot return to the abdominal cavity when pushed in. They may be chronic, although painless, and can lead to strangulation (loss of blood supply), obstruction (kinking of intestine), or both. Strangulated hernias are always painful and pain is followed by tenderness. Nausea, vomiting, or fever may occur in these cases due to bowel obstruction. Also, the hernia bulge, in this case, may turn red, purple or dark and pink.\nIn the diagnosis of abdominal hernias, imaging is the principal means of detecting internal diaphragmatic and other nonpalpable or unsuspected hernias. Multidetector CT (MDCT) can show with precision the anatomic site of the hernia sac, the contents of the sac, and any complications. MDCT also offers clear detail of the abdominal wall allowing wall hernias to be identified accurately.\nComplications.\nUntreated hernia may be complicated by:\nCauses.\nCauses of hiatus hernia vary depending on each individual. Among the multiple causes, however, are the mechanical causes which include: improper heavy weight lifting, hard coughing bouts, sharp blows to the abdomen, and incorrect posture. \nFurthermore, conditions that increase the pressure of the abdominal cavity may also cause hernias or worsen the existing ones. Some examples would be: obesity, straining during a bowel movement or urination (constipation, enlarged prostate), chronic lung disease, and also, fluid in the abdominal cavity (ascites).\nAlso, if muscles are weakened due to poor nutrition, smoking, and overexertion, hernias are more likely to occur.\nThe physiological school of thought contends that in the case of inguinal hernia, the above-mentioned are only an anatomical symptom of the underlying physiological cause. They contend that the risk of hernia is due to a physiological difference between patients who have hernia and those who do not, namely the presence of aponeurotic extensions from the transversus abdominis aponeurotic arch. There isn't any proof that being physically active will cause a hernia to get stuck or make an existing hernia worse.\nAbdominal wall hernia may occur due to trauma. If this type of hernia is due to blunt trauma it is an emergency condition and could be associated with various solid organs and hollow viscus injuries.\nDiagnosis.\nInguinal.\nBy far, the most common hernias (up to 75% of all abdominal hernias) are inguinal hernias, which are further divided into the more common indirect inguinal hernia (2/3, depicted here), in which the inguinal canal is entered via a congenital weakness at its entrance (the internal inguinal ring), and the direct inguinal hernia type (1/3), where the hernia contents push through a weak spot in the back wall of the inguinal canal. An indirect inguinal hernia and a direct inguinal hernia can be distinguished by their positioning in relation to the inferior epigastric vessels: an indirect hernia is situated laterally to these vessels, whereas a direct hernia is positioned medially to them. Inguinal hernias are the most common type of hernia in both men and women. In some selected cases, they may require surgery.\nThere are special cases where a direct and indirect hernia appear together. A pantaloon hernia (or saddlebag hernia) is a combined direct and indirect hernia when the hernial sac protrudes on either side of the inferior epigastric vessels.\nAdditionally, though very rare, two or more indirect hernias may appear together such as in a double indirect hernia.\nFemoral.\nFemoral hernias occur just below the inguinal ligament, when abdominal contents pass into the weak area at the posterior wall of the femoral canal. They can be hard to distinguish from the inguinal type (especially when ascending cephalad): however, they generally appear more rounded, and, in contrast to inguinal hernias, there is a strong female preponderance in femoral hernias. The incidence of strangulation in femoral hernias is high. Repair techniques are similar for femoral and inguinal hernia.\nA \"Cooper's hernia\" is a femoral hernia with two sacs, the first being in the femoral canal, and the second passing through a defect in the superficial fascia and appearing almost immediately beneath the skin.\nUmbilical.\nThey involve protrusion of intra-abdominal contents through a weakness at the site of passage of the umbilical cord through the abdominal wall. \nUmbilical hernias in adults are largely acquired, and are more frequent in obese or pregnant women. Abnormal decussation of fibers at the linea alba may be a contributing factor.\nIncisional.\nAn incisional hernia occurs when the defect is the result of an incompletely healed surgical wound. When these occur in median laparotomy incisions in the linea alba, they are termed ventral hernias. These occur in about 13% of people at 2 years following surgery.\nDiaphragmatic.\nHigher in the abdomen, an (internal) \"diaphragmatic hernia\" results when part of the stomach or intestine protrudes into the chest cavity through a defect in the diaphragm.\nA hiatus hernia is a particular variant of this type, in which the normal passageway through which the esophagus meets the stomach (esophageal hiatus) serves as a functional \"defect\", allowing part of the stomach to periodically \"herniate\" into the chest. Hiatus hernias may be either \"sliding\", in which the gastroesophageal junction itself slides through the defect into the chest, or non-sliding (also known as \"para-esophageal\"), in which case the junction remains fixed while another portion of the stomach moves up through the defect. Non-sliding or para-esophageal hernias can be dangerous as they may allow the stomach to rotate and obstruct. Repair is usually advised.\nA congenital diaphragmatic hernia is a distinct problem, occurring in up to 1 in 2000 births, and requiring pediatric surgery. Intestinal organs may herniate through several parts of the diaphragm, posterolateral (in Bochdalek's triangle (lumbocostal triangle), resulting in a Bochdalek hernia), or anteromedial-retrosternal (in the cleft of foramina of Morgagni (sternocostal triangle), resulting in a Morgagni's hernia).\nOther hernias.\nSince many organs or parts of organs can herniate through many orifices, it is very difficult to give an exhaustive list of hernias, with all synonyms and eponyms. The above article deals mostly with \"visceral hernias\", where the herniating tissue arises within the abdominal cavity. Other hernia types and unusual types of visceral hernias are listed below, in alphabetical order:\nTreatment.\nTruss.\nThe benefits of the use of an external device to maintain reduction of the hernia without repairing the underlying defect (such as hernia trusses, trunks, belts, etc.) are unclear.\nSurgery.\nSurgery is recommended for some types of hernias to prevent complications such as obstruction of the bowel or strangulation of the tissue, although umbilical hernias and hiatus hernias may be watched, or are treated with medication. Most abdominal hernias can be surgically repaired, but surgery has complications. Prior to surgery patients should be medically optimized receive guidance about changing factors that can be controlled, such as quitting smoking, managing medical conditions like diabetes effectively, and working on losing weight.\nThree primary methods can be utilized: open surgery, laparoscopy, or robotic techniques. Fixing an inguinal hernia using laparoscopy causes less pain, speeds up recovery, and shows similar low rates of the hernia coming back compared to the traditional open repair method. However, open surgery can be done sometimes without general anesthesia. Using local anesthesia for open groin hernia repair, particularly in patients with additional health issues, leads to fewer complications and reduced costs. Studies show that compared to regional or general anesthesia, local anesthesia results in less postoperative pain, shorter recovery times, and decreased unplanned overnight stays. However, it might not be enough for repairing large hernias or in patients with abdominal domain loss, where general anesthesia is preferred.\nRobot-assisted hernia surgery has also recently gained popularity as safe alternatives to open surgery. Robotic surgery for inguinal hernia repair shows outcomes comparable to laparoscopic surgery. The rates of overall complications, long-lasting postoperative pain, urinary retention, and 30-day re-admission are very similar between these two methods. Just like in other areas of general surgery, it has been noted that robotic surgery for inguinal hernia repair takes more time in the operating room compared to the laparoscopic approach.\nUncomplicated hernias are principally repaired by pushing back, or \"reducing\", the herniated tissue, and then mending the weakness in muscle tissue (an operation called herniorrhaphy). If complications have occurred, the surgeon will check the viability of the herniated organ and remove part of it if necessary.\nMuscle reinforcement techniques often involve synthetic materials (a mesh prosthesis). The mesh is placed either over the defect (anterior repair) or under the defect (posterior repair). At times staples are used to keep the mesh in place. These mesh repair methods are often called \"tension free\" repairs because, unlike some suture methods (e.g., Shouldice), muscle is not pulled together under tension. However, this widely used terminology is misleading, as there are many tension-free suture methods that do not use mesh (e.g., Desarda, Guarnieri, Lipton-Estrin, etc.).\nEvidence suggests that tension-free methods (with or without mesh) often have lower percentage of recurrences and the fastest recovery period compared to tension suture methods. However, the use of prosthetic mesh appears to have a higher likelihood of causing long-term pain and can also lead to infections. Cell-based adjuncts remain under investigation and may alleviate some of these complications. \nThe frequency of surgical correction ranges from 10 per 100,000 (U.K.) to 28 per 100,000 (U.S.). After elective surgery, the 30-day mortality rate for inguinal or femoral hernia repair stands at 0.1 percent, but it increases to 2.8 to 3.1 percent after urgent surgery. When a bowel resection is part of the hernia repair, the mortality rate is even higher. Older age, femoral hernias, female sex, and urgent repair are identified as other factors linked to a higher risk of mortality.\nPost-Operative Complications\nSome complications from surgery in order of prevalence include a seroma/hematoma formation, urinary retention, neuralgias, testicular pain/swelling, mesh infection/wound infection, and recurrence. A seroma is often seen after an indirect hernia repair and resolves spontaneously over 4\u20136 weeks. To prevent a seroma it's important to reduce the amount of cutting around the hernia sac where it's connected to the cord structures. Additionally, securely attaching the hernia sac to the pubic bone and creating small openings in the tissue around a direct hernia can help. In cases of heavy bleeding or extensive cutting, certain surgeons may opt to insert a drain. Urinary retention is often seen in elderly patients, these patients can be catheterized prior to surgery if there is a risk. Other complications may arise post-operatively, including rejection of the mesh that is used to repair the hernia. In the event of a mesh rejection, the mesh will very likely need to be removed. Mesh rejection can be detected by obvious, sometimes localized swelling and pain around the mesh area. Continuous discharge from the scar is likely for a while after the mesh has been removed. A surgically treated hernia can lead to complications such as inguinodynia.\nRecovery.\nMany patients are managed through day surgery centers and are able to return to work within a week or two, though intense activities are prohibited for a longer period. People who have their hernias repaired with mesh often recover within a month, but pain can last longer. Surgical complications may include pain that lasts more than three months, surgical site infections, nerve and blood vessel injuries, injury to nearby organs, and hernia recurrence. Pain that lasts more than three months occurs in about 10% of people following hernia repair.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76348", "revid": "3046099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76348", "title": "Sherman's March (1986 film)", "text": "1986 film by Ross McElwee\nSherman's March: A Meditation on the Possibility of Romantic Love In the South During an Era of Nuclear Weapons Proliferation is a 1986 cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9 documentary film written and directed by Ross McElwee. It was awarded a Grand Jury prize at the 1987 Sundance Film Festival, and was selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry in 2000.\nBackground.\nMcElwee initially planned to make a film about the effects of General William Tecumseh Sherman's Civil War campaign through Georgia and the Carolinas, the Georgia portion of which is commonly called his \"March to the Sea\". A romantic breakup that the director experienced before filming made it difficult for him to separate personal from professional concerns, however, shifting his focus to create a more personal story about the women in his life, romance, and religion. Other themes include the threat of nuclear war amidst the Cold War and the legacy and complexity of Sherman's own life.\nThe film follows a repetitive narrative pattern: McElwee becomes enamored with various women, eventually developing feelings for each of his subjects, only to have his romantic hopes dashed. McElwee stated it\u2019s a personal essay blending fiction and nonfiction.\nProduction.\nMcElwee called his previous film \"Backyard\" \"a sketch for \"Sherman's March\", an experiment in how I could approach the bigger film\". He called the former film \"cruder\" because I was just learning to shoot as a one-person crew. I was just getting over that odd sense of camera shyness in reverse. It takes a while to summon the gumption to shoot people you know well, to be able to face them and talk to them as you're filming. Also, I was using a Nagra 4, a very large tape recorder: it weighs 20 pounds and I carried it slung over my shoulder. For \"Sherman's March,\" I used a miniature Nagra SN, a very highly developed piece of recording equipment that could fit on my belt. This technological improvement made shooting much easier.\nInitially, McElwee thought the film would be a \"synthesis of \"Backyard\" and \"Space Coast\",\" but the day after filming the Scottish games, his sister said\u2014somewhat seriously, somewhat joking\u2014'You should use the camera as a way to meet women.' She's sincerely upset about my having ended my relationship with my girlfriend, and she's looking for ways to get me back on my feet. ...[A]t the point when she gave me her advice about how to use the camera, I experienced a minor epiphany.\nMcElwee set out to film \"Sherman's March\" with just a $9,000 grant (), and began conducting mostly impromptu interviews. \"Pretty much I always walked in on them,\" he said, characterizing his methods. \"I guess what my conversations have that conventional interviews don't is a serendipitous quality, and emotional charge that has something to do with the personal connection between the subject and the film-maker. I never came with a list of questions.\" The film ultimately cost $75,000 () to complete.\nPrincipal photography lasted about five months, and McElwee estimated that he shot about 25 hours of footage: I was almost always ready to shoot. I kept the camera within reaching distance, sometimes balanced on my shoulder ... Even between major portraits, when I was on the road, I was totally open to filming whatever might happen in a gas station or in a restaurant, or wherever. So in one sense you can count all that time as 'filming time.'\nReception.\nIn 1985, Jay Carr of \"The Boston Globe\" called McElwee a \"Tarheel Woody Allen\" and the film \"like a series of variations on loneliness, funny and sad\" but \"never self-pitying,\" \"sustain[ing] its loopy absurdist tone, reveling in the post-Civil War ironies of the misunderstood Sherman, identifying with them.\"\nIn a \"New York Times\" \"Critics' Pick\" review of the documentary, Vincent Canby called McElwee a \"film maker-anthropologist with a rare appreciation for the eccentric details of our edgy civilization,\" and the film both \"a timely memoir of the 80's\" and \"a very cheerful recollection of the kind of self-searching, home-movie documentaries that Jim McBride, the director, and L. M. Kit Carson, the writer and actor, satirized so brilliantly in their fiction film, \"David Holzman's Diary\".\nIn 1994, McElwee told \"MovieMaker Magazine's\" Paula Hunt:\nThe distributor of First Run Features saw \"Sherman's March\" at the IFP (the \"Independent Feature Project\") in New York and immediately said he'd take it. I wanted to shop around a bit, because it's a very small company and I wanted to see what else was available. I got turned down by every other middle-range distributor. I didn't even bother to go to the studios or the major distribution outlets. First Run Features was the only company willing to take a chance on it and, in fact, it did terrifically well. According to their statistics, until \"Strangers in Good Company\" came along it was their top-grossing film. It's supposed to be the tenth-highest grossing feature documentary of all time. Isn't that incredible? I could never have imagined it being that kind of a film.\nScott MacDonald wrote in his introduction to a summer 1988 \"Film Quarterly\" interview with McElwee:\nWe get to know McElwee's (or McElwee's filmic persona's) hopes, concerns, nightmares; and we are behind the camera with McElwee as he uses the film-making process to forge new relationships and to revise previously important relationships. As is true in many literary first-person narratives, McElwee's approach in \"Sherman's March\" is simultaneously very revealing and somewhat mysterious: the candidness of the scenes is frequently startling, but the more the film \u2014 and McElwee-as-narrator \u2014 reveals, the more we realize that there are many aspects of the relationships he is recording that we are not privy to. We cannot help but wonder about the narrator as we experience things with him.\nPaul Attanasio wrote that the \"richness of \"Sherman's March\" comes from the way McElwee, in his roundabout way, completes the portrait of Sherman he originally set out to achieve\", but considered it too long, especially given its poor technical quality.\nAccolades.\n\"Sherman's March\" was awarded the Grand Jury prize in the documentary category at the 1987 Sundance Film Festival. In 2000, the Library of Congress deemed the film \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry, calling it a \"hilarious, one-of-a-kind romantic exploration of the South.\"\nLegacy.\nA 1998 review in \"The Austin Chronicle\" proclaims McElwee \"a modern master of cin\u00e9ma v\u00e9rit\u00e9 \u2014 rough, real-life documentary filmmaking that seeks to expose a subject's soul through its very lack of polish. In McElwee's case, that subject is almost always himself. Insistently personal, always autobiographical, occasionally exploitative, watching McElwee is like watching someone's (well-financed) home videos.\"\nIn April 2004, \"Slant\" magazine, reviewing the film's then-newly released DVD, gave it three stars out of five, saying that it \"looks and sounds like its [\"sic\"] from 1986, but no amount of dirt and noise (and there's some here and there) can diffuse any of the film's magic.\"\n\"Sherman's March\" influenced the 2022 film \"Everything Everywhere All At Once\" by Daniels, particularly its exploration of the concept of modal realism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76349", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76349", "title": "Shock Corridor", "text": "1963 film by Samuel Fuller\nShock Corridor is a 1963 American psychological thriller film starring Peter Breck, Constance Towers, and Gene Evans. Written, directed and produced by Samuel Fuller, it tells the story of a journalist who gets himself intentionally committed to a mental hospital to solve a murder committed within the institution.\nIn 1996, \"Shock Corridor\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nBent on winning a Pulitzer Prize, ambitious journalist Johnny Barrett hopes to uncover the facts behind the unsolved murder of Sloan, an inmate at a psychiatric hospital. He convinces an expert psychiatrist, Dr. Fong, to coach him to appear insane when it involves relating imaginary accounts of incest with his \"sister\", who is impersonated by his exotic-dancer girlfriend, Cathy; though against her wishes, she is talked into assisting him by filing a police complaint, and his performance during the investigation convinces the authorities to incarcerate him in the institution where the murder took place. Johnny is quickly disturbed by the behavior of his fellow inmates, and on one occasion is mauled by a group of female nymphomaniacs who assault him in their ward.\nJohnny learns the murder had three witnesses, each driven insane by a particular stress (each witness represents one of the obsessions of Americans at that time; war, racism, fear of nuclear annihilation) but capable of occasional, brief periods of sanity. The first witness, Stuart, is the son of a Southern sharecropper who was taught bigotry and hatred as a child. He was captured in the Korean War and was brainwashed into becoming a Communist. Stuart was ordered to indoctrinate a fellow prisoner, but instead the prisoner's unwavering patriotism reformed him. Stuart's captors pronounced him insane and he was returned to the United States in a prisoner exchange, after which he received a dishonorable discharge and was publicly reviled as a traitor. Stuart now imagines himself to be Confederate States of America General J.E.B. Stuart. Through conversation with Stuart, Johnny discerns that the killer was likely a hospital staff member, as Stuart recalled the assailant was dressed in white.\nThe second witness to Sloan's murder, Trent, was one of the first black students to integrate a segregated Southern university. Psychologically traumatized by the abuses he suffered there, he now imagines himself a member of the Ku Klux Klan, and stirs up the patients with white nationalist dogma. The third and final witness is Boden, an atomic scientist scarred by the knowledge of the devastating power of intercontinental ballistic missiles. He has regressed to the mentality of a six-year-old child.\nAfter a hospital riot, Johnny is straitjacketed and subjected to shock treatment, and comes to believe Cathy is truly his sister, rejecting her when she visits. He experiences many other symptoms of mental breakdown while he learns the identity of the killer - Wilkes, a hospital attendant who committed the murder to cover up his sexual liaisons with numerous female patients. Johnny confronts Wilkes in the hydrotherapy room, and begins a violent altercation with him, eventually extracting a confession in front of witnesses.\nWilkes is apprehended, and Johnny is finally able to write his story on Sloan's murder, but the ordeal leaves him with a shattered psyche, and he is diagnosed with schizophrenia. Some time later, Cathy visits Johnny in the hospital. She laments to a psychologist about Johnny's mental decline, as Johnny sits idly in a catatonic state.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;*Peter Breck as Johnny Barrett\nProduction.\nFuller originally wrote the film under the title \"Straitjacket\" for Fritz Lang in the late 1940s, but Lang wanted to change the lead character to a woman, so Joan Bennett could play the role.\nThe film was shot on a ten-day shooting schedule with scarce resources.\nConstance Towers was asked by Fuller to be in the film during dinner at Fuller's house.\nRelease.\nIt has been released by the Criterion Collection on different formats, starting with LaserDisc.\nReception.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 94% based on 17 reviews, with a weighted average rating of 7.86/10. \nAuthor and film critic Leonard Maltin awarded the film three out of a possible four stars, calling it a \"[p]owerful melodrama with raw, emotional impact.\" Andrew Sarris praised the film as \"...an allegory of America today, not so much surreal as subreal in its hallucinatory view of history which can only be perceived beneath a littered surface of plot intrigue... a distinguished addition to that art form in which Hollywood has always excelled: the Baroque B-picture.\"\nIn 1996, \"Shock Corridor\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nMartin Scorsese's 2010 film \"Shutter Island\" is said to be influenced by this film.\nNovelization.\nConcurrent with the release of the film in 1963, Belmont Books released a novelization of the screenplay, written by one of the era's most popular and distinctive paperback pulpsmiths, Michael Avallone. Fuller wanted to stop Avallone's book for plagiarism, but both writers were credited when it was released.\nLegacy.\nA Melbourne based band took influence from the film now going by the same name, see Shock Corridor (Band)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76350", "revid": "1187538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76350", "title": "Marguerite (given name)", "text": "Marguerite is a French female given name, from which the English name Margaret is derived. Marguerite derives via Latin and Greek \u03bc\u03b1\u03c1\u03b3\u03b1\u03c1\u03af\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 \"(margar\u00edt\u0113s)\", meaning \"pearl\". It is also a French name for the ox-eye daisy flower. Those with the name include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "76351", "revid": "50901447", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76351", "title": "Shane (film)", "text": "1953 film by George Stevens\nShane is a 1953 American Western film directed and produced by George Stevens and starring Alan Ladd, Jean Arthur, Van Heflin, Brandon deWilde and Jack Palance. The screenplay, written by A. B. Guthrie Jr. (with contributions from Jack Sher), is based on the 1949 novel of the same name by Jack Schaefer. Set in the Wyoming Territory in 1889, the film follows the titular character, seemingly a drifter with a mysterious past (who turns out to be a gunfighter) who becomes embroiled in a conflict between poor homesteaders and wealthy ranchers. The novel and film were both inspired by the Johnson County War (1889\u20131893).\nThe film was released by Paramount Pictures on April 23, 1953. It was both a critical and commercial success, and was noted at the time for its Technicolor landscape cinematography, editing, performances, and contributions to the genre. It was also the last feature film and the only color film of Arthur's career.\n\"Shane\" was nominated for five Academy Awards, including Best Director, winning for Best Cinematography \u2013 Color (Loyal Griggs). It was listed as number 45 in the 2007 edition of AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies list, and number three on AFI's 10 Top 10 in the Western category. In 1993, the film was selected for preservation in the United States' National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nShane, a laconic but skilled gunfighter with a mysterious past, rides into an isolated valley in the sparsely settled Wyoming Territory in 1889. A drifter, he is hired as a farmhand by hardscrabble rancher Joe Starrett, who is homesteading with his wife, Marian, and their young son, Joey. Starrett tells Shane that a war of intimidation is being waged on the valley's settlers. Though they have claimed their land legally under the Homestead Acts, a ruthless cattle baron, Rufus Ryker, has hired various rogues and henchmen to harass them and force them out of the valley. \nShane goes to town alone to buy supplies at Grafton's, a general store with an adjacent saloon. Shane enters the saloon, where Ryker's men are drinking, and orders a soda pop for Joey. Chris Calloway, one of Ryker's men, ridicules and taunts Shane by throwing his drink on him, but Shane ignores him and leaves. On Shane's next trip to town with the Starretts and other homesteaders, he fights and defeats Calloway, and then he and Starrett win a bar room brawl against most of Ryker's other men. Ryker promises the next fight will be with guns. Ryker hires Jack Wilson, an unscrupulous and notoriously skilled gunfighter. Joey admires Shane, much to his mother's chagrin, after Shane demonstrates his shooting skills.\nFrank \"Stonewall\" Torrey, a hot-tempered ex-Confederate homesteader, is taunted into drawing his gun by Wilson, who then shoots Torrey dead outside the saloon. At Torrey's funeral, the settlers discuss abandoning their struggle and leaving the valley, but after witnessing one of their homesteads being destroyed in a fire set by Ryker's men, they find new resolve to continue the fight. Ryker concludes Starrett is primarily responsible for their resolve.\nWith the purpose of killing him, Ryker invites Starrett to a meeting at the saloon, ostensibly to negotiate a settlement. Calloway, no longer loyal to Ryker, warns Shane of the double cross. Resolved to protect Starrett from an ambush, Shane intervenes, even knocking Starrett unconscious to save him. Shane rides to town with Joey following on foot to watch the fight. Shane kills Wilson, Ryker, and Ryker's brother, but is injured. Outside, Shane sees Joey, who notices that Shane is bleeding. Shane bids farewell and rides out of the valley, ignoring Joey's desperate cries of \"Shane! Come back!\"\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Alan Ladd as Shane\nProduction.\n\"Shane\" was expensive for a Western movie at the time with a cost of $3.1\u00a0million. It was the first film to be projected in a \"flat\" widescreen 1.66:1 ratio, a format that Paramount invented to offer audiences a wider panorama than television could provide.\nAlthough never explicitly stated, the basic plot elements of \"Shane\" were derived from the 1892 Johnson County War in Wyoming, the archetypal cattlemen/homesteaders conflict, which also served as the background for \"The Virginian\" and \"Heaven's Gate\". The physical setting is the high plains near Jackson, Wyoming, and many shots feature the Grand Teton massif looming in the near distance. The fictional town and Starrett homestead were constructed for the film near Kelly, in the Jackson Hole valley, and demolished after filming was completed. One vintage structure that appeared briefly in the film, the Ernie Wright Cabin (now popularly referred to by locals as the \"Shane Cabin\") still stands, but is steadily deteriorating due to its classification as \"ruins\" by the National Park Service.\nAlan Ladd disliked and was uncomfortable with guns; Shane's shooting demonstration for Joey required 116 takes. A careful review of Shane's gun-skill demonstration to Joey shows Alan Ladd firing with his eyes closed. Later, in the saloon battle, Ladd's pistol is pointed well away from the man he shoots, especially the final scene\u2014where he kills Ryker's brother. Jack Palance was nervous around horses, and had great difficulty with mounting and dismounting. After very many attempts, he finally executed a flawless dismount, which Stevens then used for all of the Wilson character's dismounts and\u2014run in reverse\u2014his mounts as well. Palance looked so awkward on horseback that Stevens was forced to replace Wilson's introductory ride into town astride his galloping horse with Palance riding at walking pace. Stevens later noted that the change actually made Wilson's entrance more dramatic and menacing.\nThe final scene, in which the wounded Shane explains to a distraught Joey why he has to leave (\"There's no living with a killing\"), was a moving moment for the entire cast and crew, except Brandon deWilde. \"Every time Ladd spoke his lines of farewell, deWilde crossed his eyes and stuck out his tongue, making Ladd laugh. Finally, Ladd called to the boy's father, 'Make the kid stop or I'll beat him over the head.' DeWilde behaved.\"\nCasting.\nDirector George Stevens originally wanted Montgomery Clift and William Holden for the Shane and Starrett roles; when both proved unavailable, Stevens asked Paramount executive Y. Frank Freeman for a list of available actors with current contracts; within three minutes, he chose Alan Ladd, Van Heflin, and Jean Arthur. \"Shane\" was Arthur's first cinematic role in five years, and her last, at the age of 50, though she later appeared in theater, and a short-lived television series. She accepted the part at the request of Stevens, who had directed her in \"The Talk of the Town\" (1942) with Cary Grant and Ronald Colman, and \"The More the Merrier\" (1943) for which she received her only Oscar nomination.\nWhen asked if he enjoyed the movie, the author of \"Shane\", Jack Schaefer, replied, \"Yeah, I did, all except for that runt\", referring to the Ladd. In 1989, Schaefer told the Oberlin alumni magazine that his \"Shane\" character was supposed to be a \"dark, deadly person\" whom he had hoped would be played by George Raft.\nTechnical details.\nAlthough the film was shot using the standard 1.37:1 Academy ratio, Paramount picked \"Shane\" to debut its wide-screen system because it was composed largely of long and medium shots that would not be compromised by cropping the image. Using a newly cut aperture plate in the movie projector, and a wider-angle lens, the film was exhibited in first-run venues at an aspect ratio of 1.66:1. For its premiere, the studio replaced the 34-by-25-foot screen in Radio City Music Hall with one measuring 50 feet wide by 30 feet high. Paramount produced all of its subsequent films at that ratio until 1954, when it switched to 1.85:1. \"Shane\" was originally released in April 1953 with a conventional optical soundtrack, but as its popularity grew, a new three-track, stereophonic soundtrack was recorded and played on an interlocking 35\u00a0mm magnetic reel in the projection booth.\nStevens wanted to demonstrate to audiences \"the horrors of violence\". To emphasize the terrible power of gunshots, he created a cannon-like sound effect by firing a large-caliber weapon into a garbage can. In addition, he had the two principal shooting victims\u2014Palance and Elisha Cook Jr.\u2014rigged with hidden wires that jerked them violently backward when shot. These innovations, according to film historian Jay Hyams, marked the beginning of graphic violence in Western movies. He quotes Sam Peckinpah: \"When Jack Palance shot Elisha Cook Jr. in \"Shane\", things started to change.\"\nReception.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThat's just what I need \u2013 to get advice from a guy who never saw \"Shane\".\n\u2014Henry Winkler as Arthur Fonzarelli, \"Happy Days\" \n\"Shane\" premiered in New York City at Radio City Music Hall on April 23, 1953, and grossed $114,000 in its four weeks there. In all, the film earned about $9 million in theater rentals from the United States and Canada. By one estimate, that translates into about $20 million in actual box-office receipts.\nBosley Crowther called the film a \"rich and dramatic mobile painting of the American frontier\". He continued:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Shane\" contains something more than the beauty and the grandeur of the mountains and plains, drenched by the brilliant Western sunshine and the violent, torrential, black-browed rains. It contains a tremendous comprehension of the bitterness and passion of the feuds that existed between the new homesteaders and the cattlemen on the open range. It contains a disturbing revelation of the savagery that prevailed in the hearts of the old gunfighters, who were simply legal killers under the frontier code. And it also contains a very wonderful understanding of the spirit of a little boy amid all the tensions and excitements and adventures of a frontier home.\nCrowther called \"the concept and the presence\" of Joey, the little boy played by Brandon deWilde, \"key to permit[ting] a refreshing viewpoint on material that's not exactly new. For it's this youngster's frank enthusiasms and naive reactions that are made the solvent of all the crashing drama in A. B. Guthrie Jr.'s script.\"\nWoody Allen has called \"Shane\" \"George Stevens' masterpiece\", on his 2001 list of great American films, along with \"The Treasure of the Sierra Madre\", \"White Heat\", \"Double Indemnity\", \"The Informer\", and \"The Hill\". \"Shane\", he wrote, \"is a great movie and can hold its own with any film, whether it's a Western or not.\"\nOn review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, \"Shane\" has a 97% critical approval rating, based on 39 reviews.\nLegacy.\nThe 1966 TV series \"Shane\" starring David Carradine was directly based on the film.\nThe 1980 Japanese film features a similar plot.\nThe 1971 Indian film Door Ka Raahi was also based and adapted from this film. Famous playback singer Kishore Kumar directed this film, and he was heavily influenced from this film.\nIn 1981, British singer Kim Wilde released the song \"Shane\" as the B-side to her single \"Chequered Love\". The lyrics, written by Wilde's brother Ricky and her father Marty, deal with the impressions of the movie\nThe 1982 Italian comic book \"Ken Parker 53 - I Pionieri\", published by Sergio Bonelli Editore draws inspiration from this movie. It reimagines the story of Shane, with Ken Parker as a lone hero protecting a broken settler family in the American West.\nThe 1984 song by Roger Waters, \"The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking\", includes the lyric \"Do you remember Shane?\" and the recording features interspersed audio from the film.\nThe 1985 song by Haustor, \"\u0160ejn\" from their album \"Bolero\" is named after the film.\nThe 1987 postapocalyptic movie, \"Steel Dawn,\" closely follows the plot of \"Shane\", according to Walter Goodman of \"The New York Times.\"\nIn his 1997 album \"Arizona Bay\", Bill Hicks parodies Jack Palance's role in Shane with track 8, \"Bullies of the World\", likening an unspecified \"we\", the arms-producing countries, to Jack Wilson taunting the farmer to \"pick up the gun\".\nIn the 1998 action thriller film \"The Negotiator\", the two leading characters have a discussion about Western genre films, \"Shane\" in particular. Arguing about the ending, Chris Sabian says Shane died, and Danny Roman says \"he's slumped 'cause he's shot. Slumped don't mean dead.\"\n\"Shane\" was the first film comedian Billy Crystal saw in theaters. In his autobiography and stage show \"700 Sundays\", he describes the experience of seeing the film with family friend and babysitter Billie Holiday, and having an emotional reaction to the final scene. Crystal later starred alongside Palance in \"City Slickers\".\nIn the 2013 Hallmark series \"Signed, Sealed, Delivered,\" \"Shane, come back\", was referenced.\nThe 2017 superhero film \"Logan\" features characters watching scenes from the film, with lines from the film directly quoted.\nCopyright status in Japan.\nIn 2006, \"Shane\" was the subject of litigation in Japan involving its copyright status in that country. Two Japanese companies began selling budget-priced copies of \"Shane\" in 2003, based on a Japanese copyright law that at the time protected cinematographic works for 50 years from the year of their release. After the Japanese legislature amended the law in 2004 to extend the duration of motion picture copyrights from 50 to 70 years, Paramount and its Japanese distributor filed suit against the two companies. A Japanese court ruled that the amendment was not retroactive, so any film released during or prior to 1953 remained in the public domain in Japan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76353", "revid": "50360501", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76353", "title": "The Shop Around the Corner", "text": "1940 film by Ernst Lubitsch\nThe Shop Around the Corner is a 1940 American romantic comedy-drama film produced and directed by Ernst Lubitsch starring Margaret Sullavan, James Stewart, Frank Morgan, and Joseph Schildkraut. The screenplay by Samson Raphaelson is based on the 1937 Hungarian play \"Parfumerie\" by Mikl\u00f3s L\u00e1szl\u00f3. The film is about two employees at a leather goods shop in pre-war Budapest who can barely stand each other, not realizing they are falling in love as anonymous correspondents through their letters. It follows social themes associated with the lives of the middle class. Though the film did not do well in the box office, it was met with generally positive reviews from film critics. It has since been adapted into three productions. In 1999 \"The Shop Around the Corner\" was selected with 24 other films to be included in the National Film Registry. It is also included in the top 100 movies selected by \"Time\" magazine.\nPlot.\nDuring the Great Depression, Alfred Kralik is the top salesman at Matuschek and Company, a leathergoods shop in Budapest owned by the high-strung Mr. Hugo Matuschek. Kralik's co-workers include his friend, Pirovitch, a kindly family man; Ferencz Vadas, a two-faced womanizer; saleswoman Ilona Novotny; clerk Flora Kaczek; and Pepi Katona, an ambitious, precocious delivery boy. One morning, Kralik reveals to Pirovitch that he has been corresponding anonymously with an intelligent and cultured woman whose ad he came across in the newspaper. Kralik responded to the ad, wanting to increase his knowledge about culture. As they correspond, they agree to withhold details about their personal lives.\nKralik is Mr. Matuschek's oldest and most trusted employee, but tension starts arising between the two. They get into an argument over Mr. Matuschek's idea to sell a cigarette box that plays \"Ochi Ch\u00ebrnye\" when opened. After their exchange, Klara Novak enters the gift shop looking for a job. Kralik and Mr. Matuschek tell her there are no openings, but when she is able to sell one of the cigarette boxes as a candy box, Mr. Matuschek hires her. However, she and Kralik do not get along. Mr. Matuschek is becoming irritable because he suspects his wife is having an affair, as she stays out late and requests money from him.\nSix months later, as Christmas approaches, Kralik is preparing to meet his mystery correspondent (Novak) for a dinner date. On that day, Mr. Matuschek suddenly demands that everyone stay after work to decorate the shop. Kralik asks to speak with Matuschek in his office and requests the night off. Mr. Matuschek becomes angry, and Kralik implies that he is willing to leave his job. Novak also asks to have the night off, which further infuriates Matuschek. Now, Mr. Matuschek calls Kralik to his office and fires him, giving him one month's pay and a letter of recommendation. Matuschek obviously carefully thought out firing Kralik. No one in the shop understands Mr. Matuschek's actions are related to his suspicions that Kralik is having an affair with his wife. Later, Mr. Matuschek meets with a private investigator who informs him that his wife is having an affair with Vadas, not Kralik. Shocked, Matuschek says, almost to himself, that he was married for 22 years to his wife and proud of her, but \"I guess she didn't want to grow old with me.\" Later, Pepi returns to the shop just in time to prevent Mr. Matuschek from committing suicide by shooting himself.\nMeanwhile, Kralik arrives at the Cafe Nizza, where he discovers that his mystery woman is Novak. Despite his disappointment, Kralik goes in and talks with her, pretending he is there to meet Pirovitch. In his mind, Kralik tries to reconcile the cultured woman of his letters with his annoying co-worker, secretly hoping that things might work out with her. Concerned that Kralik's presence will spoil her first meeting with her mystery correspondent, she conducts a continuously abrasive conversation with Kralik, finally calling him a \"little insignificant clerk.\" Deeply insulted, Kralik leaves.\nLater that night, Kralik goes to the hospital to visit Mr. Matuschek, who apologizes for suspecting him of having an affair with his wife before offering him a job as manager of Matuschek and Company. Grateful to Pepi for saving his life, Mr. Matuschek promotes him to clerk. The next day, Novak calls in sick after her mystery man failed to show, and at Mr. Matuschek's behest, Kralik fires Vadas. That night, when Kralik visits Novak at her apartment, she receives a letter from her correspondent and reads it in front of Kralik, who wrote the letter.\nTwo weeks later, on Christmas Eve, Matuschek and Company achieves record sales. Kralik and Novak, alone in the shop as they close up, discuss their planned dates for the evening. Novak reveals that she had a crush on Kralik when they first met. She explains that she was initially irritable with him in an effort to pique his interest in her. After pretending to have met Novak's mystery man, Kralik describes him in unflattering terms. When Novak expresses her disappointment, Kralik quotes one of her letters and places a red carnation in his lapel, revealing to her that he is her mystery correspondent. They embrace and kiss.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Margaret Sullavan as Klara Novak\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nErnst Lubitsch purchased the rights to Mikl\u00f3s L\u00e1szl\u00f3's play \"Parfumerie\" in 1938. According to \"Variety\", Lubitsch initially planned to create a film adaptation of the play working with Myron Selznick. After Steffie Trondle translated the play into English, Lubitsch worked with screenwriter Samson Raphaelson to write the script from 1938 to 1939. Lubitsch considered it \u201cthe best script I have had in a long time in my hands\u201d. Selznick proved unable to fund the production, so the filmmakers turned to other methods. Lubitsch and Selznick pitched the film to Paramount, among other studios, but none were interested in producing it. At the time Hollywood was still hesitant to produce films about the middle class. Studios were also not interested in working with Lubitsch. When Lubitsch's plan did not come to fruition, he decided to work on it after joining MGM. Before he joined MGM, the studio had purchased the rights to the film from him for $62,500. MGM wanted him to produce and direct \"Ninotchka,\" to which he agreed on the condition that he also produce and direct \"The Shop Around the Corner\". The studio agreed on the condition that \"Ninotchka\" be produced first and assigned a low production budget to \"The Shop Around the Corner\", which meant that the film's screenwriter Samson Raphaelson received a lower salary than usual. In an interview Raphaelson commented that the story was substantially dialogue-based but felt that it did not threaten the film's overall quality. He also claimed that, while the film was based on the play, it was vastly different. In his own words, Lubitsch felt that none of his preceding films had \"atmosphere and...characters [that] were truer than in this picture\".\nCasting and production.\nDolly Haas and Janet Gaynor were each at one point attached to the film before Margaret Sullavan was cast in the lead role alongside James Stewart; neither was available at the time that production was originally set to begin, so Lubitsch decided to postpone the start date. Sullavan and Stewart had worked together before in leading roles. Lubitsch chose to cast Sullavan because he decided the plotline was too risky to use an actress who was less-known. His worries stemmed from thinking audiences might not find the plot interesting enough to watch it. Years later Lubitsch remarked that Sullavan and Stewart worked well together and did not try to out-do each other in their acting. Lubitsch called Sullavan \"a tonic for the cast\" because of her playfulness between scenes. Raphaelson commented that Stewart's portrayal of Kralik \"is one of the great performances in film history\". Stewart remarked, \"It was wonderful to work with [Lubitsch]. He had such great style and an inspiring sort of comic touch.\"\nSeveral weeks before filming began, Henry Nordlinger researched leather goods shops so the one in the film could be an accurate portrayal. Lubitsch decided the studio should use \"real snow\" for the Christmas Eve scenes instead of using fake snow. As a result, thirty tons of ice were shaved to create the effect. Filming began on November 2, 1939, the day after James Stewart completed work on \"Destry Rides Again\". The scenes were shot in the order as they appear. In total, filming took about a month. The final cost was $474,000.\nRelease and box office.\nThe release trailer features Morgan as Matuschek introducing the other characters and who plays them. At the end he introduces Lubitsch\".\" Film historian Joseph McBride suggests that this connects the film to Lubitsch's early roots as an actor who appeared in films as a shop assistant. \"The Shop Around the Corner\" was released on January 12, 1940 and premiered in the Radio City Musical Hall on January 25. Upon its release it performed poorly and consequently box office rates were low. At the same time, it received more box office success than Lubitsch's previous film \"Ninotschka\". \"The Shop Around the Corner\" earned a profit of $380,000 and has grossed $1.3 million worldwide.\nReception.\nContemporary.\n\"The Shop Around the Corner\" received generally positive reviews when it was released. Critics praised the actors for their performance. \"Photoplay\" remarked that \"Morgan\u2026offers a truly sterling performance, as do Joseph Schildkraut and all the others\u201d. \"Newsweek\" also praised Morgan for his performance as Matuschek, commenting that he \"handles deftly one of his rare opportunities to play a straight dramatic role\u201d. It also wrote that \"James Stewart and Maragaret Sullavan are perfectly cast as the youngsters\u201d. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" claimed it would \"win new audiences for pictures and return many of the old customers who have deserted\u201d. It also called William Daniels' camera work \"top class\". \"Variety\" praised the film's \"vivaciousness and piquant humor\" and remarked that the \"production background and settings\u2014although unpretentious\u2014are excellent, with photography\u2026of top calibre\". William R. Weaver of \"Motion Picture Herald\" wrote that it \"succeeds in being pleasantly entertaining\" and that it \"seemed to satisfy generally\" at a preview showing. According to film historian Thomas Doherty, some critics praised the film for not having as many sexual undertones as Lubitsch's other films. Other audience members were hesitant about its European setting because of World War II, while others felt that Stewart's portrayal of his character was not European enough.\nRecent.\n\"The Shop Around the Corner\" continues to receive critical attention. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 96 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.6/10. The website's consensus reads: \"Deftly directed by Ernst Lubitsch from a smart, funny script by Samson Raphaelson, \"The Shop Around the Corner\" is a romantic comedy in the finest sense of the term.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 96 out of 100, based on 15 critics, indicating . It ranked as #202 in the British Film Institute's 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" critics' poll of the greatest films ever made, having garnered eight critics' votes. The work was also 58th in BBC's 2015 poll of the best American films. According to author Scott Eyman, the film was shown in Paris for a span of 66 weeks in 1986-1987, \u201cmaking it the most successful reissue ever in France\u201d. In June 2017, \"The Shop Around the Corner\" was featured in the film series \"The Lubitsch Touch\" hosted by Film Forum. \nDave Kehr argues Lubitsch makes \"brilliant deployment of point of view, allowing the audience to enter the perceptions of each character at exactly the right moment to develop maximum sympathy and suspense.\" Film historian David Thomson considers it to be \"Among the greatest of all films...[The movie] is a treasury of hopes and anxieties...It is a comedy so good it frightens us for them. The caf\u00e9 conversation may be the best meeting in American film.\" David Mermelstein of \"The Wall Street Journal\" says the film \"remains irresistible thanks to an outstanding cast and Lubitsch\u2019s gossamer touch\u201d. Kevin Bahr adds, \"By returning to a simple European shop around the corner, Lubitsch was finally able to express on film what was most important to him in life: Friendship, work, and love.\u201d Ty Burr feels that \"what makes \"Shop\" timeless\u2026is the specificity of its setting\".\nAdaptations and remakes.\nAdaptations and awards.\n\"The Shop Around the Corner\" was dramatized in two half-hour broadcasts of \"The Screen Guild Theater.\" The first aired on September 29, 1940, and starred Sullavan, Stewart, and Morgan in their respective roles; in this version the adultery aspect was removed. The performance was held to benefit the Motion Picture Relief Fund. The second broadcast aired on February 26, 1945, with Van Johnson and Phyllis Thaxter. It was also dramatized as a one-hour program on \"Lux Radio Theater\"'s June 23, 1941, broadcast with Claudette Colbert and Don Ameche as Novak and Kralik, along with Cecil B. DeMille as narrator. Both radio adaptations were included with the Warner Archive Blu-ray edition of the film.\n\"The Shop Around the Corner\" is ranked number 28 on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions and is listed in \"Time\"'s All-Time 100 Movies. In 1999, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". Sullavan, Stewart, and Morgan were awarded \"Best Performances of the Month\" in \"Photoplay\" magazine. It was also named one of the \"Best Pictures of the Month\".\nRemakes.\nThe film has spawned numerous remakes, among which include:\n\u2022 2025 Prime Video film \"Maintenance Required\" is the most recent modern retelling of the classic 1940 movie The Shop Around the Corner\nThemes.\n\"The Shop Around the Corner\" has different social themes than Lubitsch's previous films. According to David Sanjek, \"The Shop Around the Corner\" differs from Lubitsch's other films because it focuses on community rather than the individual. Lubitsch was beginning to focus more on the middle class in his films. In 1939 he remarked, \u201cWe must show people living in the real world. No one used to care how characters made their living if the picture was amusing. Now they do care. They want their stories tied up to life.\u201d \"The Shop Around the Corner\" steps away from \"sophisticated comedy\", which focuses on people belonging to the upper class. William Paul, professor of Film and Media Studies, claims that because it instead focuses on the middle class, it is \"more thoroughly political than any of Lubitsch's historical dramas\".\nAuthor Scott Eyman describes it as \"a film\u2026about men and women who are happy to be middle class and trying to stay that way\". He further argues that the film highlights \"the extraordinary qualities\" of average middle-class people. Of the characters, Vadas lives beyond his social class, as manifest by his affair with Mrs. Matuschek. Paul explains that the difference between Vadas, Kralik, and Novak, is that Vadas attempts to live his desire for a higher-class life, while Kralik and Novak keep their desires more private. Author Leland Poague sees Vadas as being symbolic of less desirable qualities in the middle class and his being fired as symbolic of the other characters getting rid of those qualities. He also views the film as highlighting the emotions of middle class people. In her analysis of the film, film critic and author Ivana Novak calls Kralik and Klara Novak \"two awkward and shallow phonys\" because they are two average people pretending to be cultured. They seek to appear cultured in their letters because they are afraid of being perceived as insignificant. Both Kralik and Novak believe their letters are sincere and accurately reflect who they are. Their in-person interactions versus their correspondence reveal a rift between their realities and what they desire. Poague argues that, because Kralik and Novak are not satisfied with their lives, they do not accept that other people are as passionate as themselves. Initially, Kralik hesitates to reveal his identity to Novak because he comes to recognize that his letters do not accurately reflect who he is. Actor and author George Toles suggests that Kralik and Novak are spared from living outside of their realities once they accept that they are ordinary.\nWilliam Paul and author Jonathan Coe point out that money concerns play a large role in the plot. Much of the dialogue is about money, and Kralik will only consider marriage if he receives a pay raise. There are also concerns of hierarchy. The characters believe that their positions within the shop will reflect how they are seen by society, which motivates Pepi's drive to become a clerk. Both Novak and Kralik have connected their identities to their positions of power within the shop, believing that it affects how they are seen by others.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nStreaming audio"}
{"id": "76355", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76355", "title": "Show Boat (film)", "text": ""}
{"id": "76356", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76356", "title": "Sky High (1922 film)", "text": "American silent Western film\nSky High is a 1922 American silent Western film written and directed by Lynn Reynolds and starring Tom Mix, J. Farrell MacDonald, Eva Novak and Sid Jordan. The action in \"Sky High\" takes place in 1922 and while the characters ride horses and fight in saloons, they also use telephones, automobiles and even an aircraft.\nIn 1998, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlot.\nGrant Newbury (Tom Mix), Deputy Inspector of Immigration at the US/Mexico border is asked by his boss to infiltrate a gang smuggling Chinese workers through the border at Calexico, in order to identify and arrest their ringleader. Meanwhile, in Chicago, Estelle Halloway (Eva Novak) is disappointed because her guardian wrote that she would not be able to spend her holidays with him in Calexico as planned. When she wires him that she will come nevertheless with her roommate Marguerite (Adele Warner) and her brother (William Buckley), he tells her that they will meet instead near the Grand Canyon as it is too warm in Calexico.\nIn Calexico, Grant finds out that the ringleader is none other than Jim Frazer (J. Farrell MacDonald), Estelle's guardian. He becomes part of the gang and is requested to go and help taking of the Chinese now hidden in a camp in Grand Canyon. After having left discreetly the camp to fetch the police, he sees Estelle on the point of drowning in a river and saves her. He is caught by the bandit who have learned that he is a government agent but manages to escape first on horseback then in a motor car and reaches the little town of Williams where he gets the help of the police.\nWhile the police drives to the hidden camp in motor cars, Grant borrows an aircraft and flies into the Grand Canyon, where he jumps in a river and manages to free Estelle. Jim Frazer is identified as the ringleader and arrested, but to protect Estelle, Grant accepts that he lets her believe that he is leaving for a long trip. Frazer asks Grant whether he would help take care of Estelle while he is in jail, and Grant answers: \"I'll look after her the rest of her life if she'll let me.\"\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nPrincipal photography for \"Sky High\" took place at the Fox Films studio in Los Angeles and on location at the Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona, Williams, Arizona, and the El Tovar Hotel, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona. While Tom Mix rarely used doubles, Bud Creeth was hired as a \"stunt pilot\", flying with Dick Grace to film the dangerous stunt of hanging from a rope over the Grand Canyon.\nReception.\nIn a modern reappraisal of \"Sky High\", reviewer Hans J. Wollstein described the film, \"Diehard Western fans decried the lack of realism, but audiences flocked to see this film which, more than perhaps any other, changed Mix from a popular Western star into an internationally recognized showman.\"\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76357", "revid": "6653047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76357", "title": "Snow-White (1933 film)", "text": "Snow-White (also known as Betty Boop in Snow-White) is a 1933 American animated short in the \"Betty Boop\" series from Max Fleischer's Fleischer Studios. Dave Fleischer was credited as director, although virtually all the animation was done by Roland Crandall, who received the opportunity to make \"Snow-White\" on his own as a reward for his several years of devotion to the Fleischer studio. The resulting film, which took six months to complete, is considered both Crandall's masterwork and an important milestone of the Golden age of American animation.\nSynopsis.\nA magic mirror resembling Cab Calloway proclaims Betty Boop to be \"the fairest in the land\", much to the anger of the Queen. The Queen orders her guards Bimbo and Koko to execute Betty. With tears in their eyes, they take Betty into the forest; as they prepare to execute her, they spare her by destroying their weapons, but fall into a pit before they can free her. Betty escapes into a frozen river, which encloses her in a coffin of ice. This block slips downhill to the home of the seven dwarfs, who carry the frozen Betty into an enchanted cave, running into Koko and Bimbo. The evil Queen, now transformed into a witch, turns Koko into a ghost as he sings \"St. James Infirmary Blues\". With her rivals disposed of, the Queen again asks the magic mirror who the fairest in the land is, but the mirror explodes in a puff of magic smoke that returns Betty and Koko to their normal states and changes the Queen into a hideous and mysterious dragon-like monster. The dragon-like monster chases the protagonists until Bimbo grabs its tongue and yanks it, turning the creature inside out and causing it to flee away. Betty, Koko, and Bimbo dance around in a circle of victory as the film ends.\nLegacy.\nKoko's dancing (including some moves that look like the much later \"moonwalk\" and \"dab\") during the \"St. James\" number is rotoscoped from footage of Cab Calloway.\nThe film was deemed \"culturally significant\" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry in 1994. The same year, it was voted #19 of the 50 Greatest Cartoons of all time by members of the animation field. The film is copyrighted by Paramount due to its copyright being renewed in 1961.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76359", "revid": "197953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76359", "title": "Phantom of the Opera (1925)", "text": ""}
{"id": "76360", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76360", "title": "Planet of the Apes (1968)", "text": ""}
{"id": "76361", "revid": "49785274", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76361", "title": "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)", "text": "1937 American animated musical fantasy film\nSnow White and the Seven Dwarfs is a 1937 American animated musical fantasy film produced by Walt Disney and released by RKO Radio Pictures, based on the 1812 German fairy tale \"Snow White\" by the Brothers Grimm. The film was supervised by David Hand and a team of five sequence directors: Perce Pearce, William Cottrell, Larry Morey, Wilfred Jackson, and Ben Sharpsteen. It is the first animated feature film produced in the United States and the first cel animated feature film.\n\"Snow White\" premiered at the Carthay Circle Theatre in Los Angeles, California, on December 21, 1937, and went into general release in the United States on February 4, 1938. Despite initial doubts from the film industry, it was a critical and commercial success, with international earnings of more than $8 million during its initial release against a $1.5 million production cost, becoming the highest-grossing film of 1938, and briefly holding the record of the highest-grossing sound film of all time. It was also the highest-grossing animated film for 55 years. The popularity of the film has led to its being re-released theatrically many times, until its home video release in the 1990s. Adjusted for inflation, it is one of the top-ten performers at the North American box office and is still the highest-grossing animated film with an adjusted gross of $. Worldwide, its inflation-adjusted earnings top the animation list. \"Snow White\" was nominated for Best Musical Score at the Academy Awards in 1938, and the next year, producer Walt Disney was awarded an honorary Oscar for the film. This award was unique, consisting of one normal-sized, plus seven miniature Oscar statuettes. They were presented to Disney by Shirley Temple.\n\"Snow White\" was a landmark release in the early animation industry, and it is widely regarded as one of the greatest films ever made, credited with ushering in the golden age of animation. Disney's take on the fairy tale has had a significant cultural impact, resulting in popular theme park attractions, a video game, a Broadway musical, and a 2025 live-action film remake. In 1989, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" and selected it as one of the first 25 films for preservation in the National Film Registry. The American Film Institute ranked it among the 100 greatest American films, and also named the film as the greatest American animated film of all time in 2008.\nPlot.\nHaving lost both of her parents at a young age, Snow White is a princess living with her wicked and cold-hearted stepmother, the Queen. Fearing that Snow White's beauty will outshine her own, the Queen forces her to work as a scullery maid and asks her Magic Mirror daily \"who is the fairest one of all.\" For years, the mirror always answers that the Queen is, pleasing her.\nOne day, Snow White meets and falls in love with a prince who overhears her singing. That same day, the Magic Mirror deems Snow White as the fairest. The Queen orders her Huntsman to take Snow White into the forest, kill her, and bring back her heart in a jeweled box as proof. The Huntsman cannot bring himself to kill Snow White and warns her of the Queen's intentions. At his urging, Snow White flees deep into the forest.\nLost and frightened, Snow White is befriended by woodland animals, who lead her to a hidden woodland cottage. Finding seven small chairs in the cottage's dining room, Snow White assumes the cottage is the untidy home of seven orphaned children. With the animals' help, she proceeds to clean the place and cook a meal. Snow White soon learns that the cottage is the home of seven dwarfs named Doc, Grumpy, Happy, Sleepy, Bashful, Sneezy, and Dopey, who work in a nearby mine. Returning home, they are alarmed to find their cottage clean and suspect that an intruder has invaded their home. Snow White introduces herself, and the dwarfs welcome her after she offers to clean and cook for them. Snow White keeps house for the dwarfs while they mine for jewels during the day, and at night, they all sing, play music, and dance.\nBack at the castle, the Magic Mirror reveals that Snow White is still living, and with the dwarfs. Enraged that the Huntsman gave her a pig's heart, the Queen uses a potion to disguise herself as an old peddler and then creates a poisoned apple that will put whoever eats it into Sleeping Death. She learns the curse can be broken by \"love's first kiss,\" but is certain Snow White will be buried alive before this can happen. The Queen goes to the cottage while the dwarfs are away. The animals see through the disguise but are unable to warn Snow White; they rush off to find the dwarfs. The Queen fools Snow White into biting into the apple, and she falls into a death-like slumber.\nThe dwarfs return with the animals as the Queen leaves the cottage and give chase, trapping her on a cliff. She tries to roll a boulder onto them, but lightning strikes the cliff before she can do so, causing her to fall to her death. In their cottage, the dwarfs find Snow White asleep from the poison. Unwilling to bury her, they instead place her in a glass coffin in the forest. Together with the animals, they keep watch over her.\nThe following spring, the prince learns of Snow White's eternal sleep and visits the coffin. Saddened by her apparent death, he kisses her, breaking the spell and awakening her. The dwarfs and animals rejoice as the prince takes Snow White to his castle.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nWalt Disney conceived the idea of making his first feature-length film in 1933, when his animation studio was focusing on production of animated short films, such as the \"Silly Symphonies\" series. Although they were popular with the audience, Disney believed that the shorts did not bring enough profit for the further growth of the studio; he also saw the full-length film as a way to expand his \"storytelling possibilities\", allowing for elaborate plots and character development. By late March 1933, he was approached by Mary Pickford (co-founder of United Artists that was distributing Disney's works at the time) with a proposal for a feature-length animated/live-action version of Lewis Carroll's novel \"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland\" (1865); however, the project was soon scrapped when Paramount Pictures began production of their own film version. Disney then considered using the same concept for a film adaptation of Washington Irving's short story \"Rip Van Winkle\" (1819) starring Will Rogers, but it did not work out either due to Paramount, which held the rights to the story, refusing to give permission.\nAfter the successful release of the \"Silly Symphony\" short \"Three Little Pigs\" in May 1933, Disney was strengthened in his decision to make a feature film and began introducing the idea to his staff through a \"slow infiltration\"\u00a0\u2013 sharing it with everyone individually during casual conversations. He entered into negotiations with Merian C. Cooper to produce a full-length animated version of Victor Herbert's 1903 operetta \"Babes in Toyland\" in Technicolor; the project was offered to RKO Radio Pictures, which owned the rights to the play, but RKO executives rejected it. In July 1933, Disney first revealed his plans on making a feature film to \"The Film Daily\" (although he had not yet managed to receive a response from the United Artists executives), and around the same time, he was approached with an offer for an animated version of Felix Salten's 1923 novel \"Bambi, a Life in the Woods\" in alliance with Sidney Franklin. Disney eventually rejected the idea, feeling that his studio was not ready for the technical challenges that \"Bambi\" would have presented. Homer's poems \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\", as well as Jonathan Swift's 1726 book \"Gulliver's Travels\", were also suggested to Disney at the time.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n I don't know why I picked \"Snow White\". It's a thing I remembered as a kid. I saw Marguerite Clark in it in Kansas City one time when I was a newsboy. They had a big showing for all the newsboys. And I went and saw \"Snow White\". It was probably one of my first big feature pictures I'd ever seen. That was back in 1916 or something. Somewhere way back. But anyways, to me I thought it was a perfect story. I had the sympathetic dwarfs and things. I had the prince and the girl. The romance. I had the heavy. I just thought it was a perfect story.\n Walt Disney, on choosing \"Snow White\" for his first feature film\nDisney settled on the Brothers Grimm's 1812 fairy tale \"Snow White\" in the spring of 1934. He had been familiar with the story since he was a teenager, having seen the 1916 silent film version, which he later cited as the primary reason for choosing \"Snow White\" for his first feature production. Disney had originally planned to produce \"Snow White\" as a \"Silly Symphony\" short, but reconsidered, believing that the story had enough potential for a feature film adaptation. He formally announced his plans on \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" to \"The New York Times\" in June 1934, estimating that the film could be produced for a budget of $250,000, which was roughly ten times the budget of an average \"Silly Symphony\". The project (then known as the \"Feature Symphony\") was initially developed by a small unit of writers that Disney personally supervised, before it was introduced to the studio staff at large on October 30, 1934, when the basic story outline was completed. As some animators later recalled, Disney assembled them on the sound stage in the evening and acted out the entire story of \"Snow White\" for three hours, concluding with announcement of their first feature film.\nAlthough the studio staff were excited about the project, they were unsure that the full-length cartoon would sustain an audience's attention. Ward Kimball said that they were told by Hollywood moguls (such as W. C. Fields) that \"it was OK, six-seven minutes, like the shorts, but an hour and a half, no way! Big reason was that you run out of funny things to do, you had to have a laugh-a-minute. And the bright colors would hurt your eyes, everybody would get up and walk out\u00a0... Walt, of course, plugged ahead, he didn't believe that. He felt that if you had a solid story, not only laughs in it, but tragedy, it would go.\" Both Disney's wife Lillian and his brother Roy (who was also his business partner) attempted unsuccessfully to talk him out of it, and movie-industry insiders derisively referred to the film as \"Disney's Folly\" while it was in production.\nEarly writing.\nThe earliest known story outline\u00a0\u2013 titled \"Manuscript\"\u00a0\u2013 was compiled by staff writer Richard Creedon on August 9, 1934, featuring twenty-one pages of suggestions for characters, scenes, and songs (including \"Some Day My Prince Will Come\"). At the time, Disney adopted a \"wide-ranging approach\", remaining open to any idea that could be proposed; notably, one of the suggestions included Snow White traveling through a series of enchanted sites\u00a0\u2013 such as the Sleepy Valley, the Morass of Monsters, and the Valley of the Dragons\u00a0\u2013 before arriving at the dwarfs' cottage. Snow White was originally envisioned to be more tomboyish, with the Queen described as \"stately, beautiful in the way of a Benda mask\u00a0... a cool serene character who demonstrates her fury only in moments of great passion.\" One of the potential storylines developed for \"Manuscript\" involved the Queen imprisoning the Prince in her dungeon, after seeing his affection for Snow White, with the Prince later fighting his way out of her castle with \"tricks that Doug Fairbanks would like to have thought.\" Other story suggestions included the Queen having a collection of her former enemies reduced to a few inches in size; a Gilbert and Sullivan-style musical number for the scene where the Queen orders the Huntsman to kill Snow White; and the sequence of the Queen trying to break the mirror upon learning that Snow White has survived, with the mirror detaching itself from the wall and smashing against the Queen after chasing her around the chamber. Disney also decided from the beginning that each of the Seven Dwarfs\u00a0\u2013 whom he considered the \"strongest lure\" of the story because of their comedic potential\u00a0\u2013 should have a distinctive personality, identified by a respective name; a pool of over fifty possibilities was compiled for \"Manuscript\" (with names such as Sleepy, Hoppy, Bashful, Happy, Sneezy-Wheezy, Biggo-Ego, and Awful as the top contenders).\nIn October 1934, Disney began holding weekly story meetings with a small unit of writers, which included Creedon, Larry Morey, Ted Sears, Albert Hurter, and Pinto Colvig. During the first meeting on October 3, several scenes were proposed: the \"Soup Eating\" (where Snow White has dinner with dwarfs) and \"Bed Building\" (where the dwarfs build a bed for Snow White) sequences; Snow White teaching the dwarfs to pray; and the climactic scene of the dwarfs chasing the disguised Queen, followed by her death from falling off a cliff. For the next meeting, held on October 9, a typed sheet was complied, featuring a redefined selection of names for the dwarfs\u00a0\u2013 Wheezy, Jumpy, Baldy, Grumpy, Happy, Doc, and Sleepy\u00a0\u2013 and their respective characteristics; several alternatives were also suggested, including Hickey, Sniffy, Stuffy, Shorty, Burpy, Tubby, Dizzy, and Dopey. From the outset, Disney decided to discard the part from the Grimms' original story where the Queen tries to kill Snow White with a tightly laced bodice, but considered retaining the other two attempts (with a poisoned comb and a poisoned apple), both of which were discussed at the meeting. The storyline of the Prince's imprisonment by the Queen, first introduced in \"Manuscript\", was also elaborated: after failing to kill Snow White with the comb, the Queen would throw the Prince into a dungeon and use magic to make the skeletons of her previous victims dance for him (identifying one skeleton as \"Prince Oswald\"). When the disguised Queen would have left for the dwarfs' cottage with the poisoned apple, Snow White's bird friends were to help the Prince escape from the dungeon, fight the Queen's guards, and find his horse; the Prince would then go after the Queen, taking the wrong road in the process. Other discussions included the dwarfs' discovery of Snow White in their cottage; two disguises for the Queen\u00a0\u2013 a \"fat, bulgy\" peddler and a \"thin, hawk-faced\" witch\u00a0\u2013 for each of her attempts to kill Snow White; and the scene of Snow White kissing the dwarfs goodbye before they leave for work. At the meeting, Disney also insisted that the writers refer to the dwarfs as \"seven little men\", which was maintained for the rest of the production.\nOther examples of the more comical nature of the story at this point included suggestions for a \"fat, batty, cartoon type, self-satisfied\" Queen. The Prince was also more of a clown and was to serenade Snow White in a more comical fashion. Walt Disney encouraged all staff at the studio to contribute to the story, offering five dollars for every 'gag'; such gags included the dwarfs' noses popping over the foot of the bed when they first meet Snow White.\nDisney became concerned that such a comical approach would lessen the plausibility of the characters and, sensing that more time was needed for the development of the Queen, advised in an outline circulated on November 6 that attention be paid exclusively to \"scenes in which only Snow White, the Dwarfs, and their bird and animal friends appear\". The names and personalities of the dwarfs, however, were still \"open to change\". A meeting on November 16 resulted in another outline entitled 'Dwarfs Discover Snowwhite', which introduced the character of Dopey, who would ultimately prove to be the most successful of the dwarf characterizations. In the original storyboard, Dopey was very talkative, but no suitable voice actors could be found. Mel Blanc was given a try without success. It was suggested to make him mute instead. For the rest of 1934, Disney further developed the story by himself, finding a dilemma in the characterization of the Queen, who he felt could no longer be \"fat\" and \"batty\", but a \"stately beautiful type\", a possibility already brought up in previous story meetings.\nReworking.\nDisney did not focus on the project again until the autumn of 1935. It was believed that the \"Silly Symphony\" short \"The Goddess of Spring\" (1934) may have placed doubt in his studio's abilities to animate a realistic girl. Apparently, a three-month trip to Europe that summer restored his confidence. At this point, Disney and his writers focused on the scenes in which Snow White and the dwarfs are introduced to the audience and each other. He laid out the likely assignments for everyone working on the film in a memorandum on November 25, 1935 and decided on the personalities of the individual dwarfs.\nIt had first been thought that the dwarfs would be the main focus of the story, and many sequences were written for the seven characters. However, at a certain point, it was decided that the main thrust of the story would be provided by the relationship between the Queen and Snow White. For this reason, several sequences featuring the dwarfs were cut from the film. The first, which was animated in its entirety before being cut, showed Doc and Grumpy arguing about whether Snow White should stay with them. Another, also completely animated, showed the dwarfs eating soup noisily and messily; Snow White unsuccessfully attempts to teach them how to eat 'like gentlemen'. A partially-animated sequence involved the dwarfs holding a \"lodge meeting\" in which they try to think of a gift for Snow White; this was to be followed by the elaborate 'bed-building sequence', in which the dwarfs and the forest animals construct and carve a bed for the princess. This was also cut, as it was thought to slow down the movement of the story. The soup-eating and bed-building sequences were animated by Ward Kimball, who was sufficiently discouraged by their removal to consider leaving the studio; Disney, however, persuaded him to stay by promoting Kimball to be the supervising animator of Jiminy Cricket in Disney\u2019s next feature, \"Pinocchio\" (1940).\nCasting.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI wanted to get a voice for Snow White that would be kind of away from every day. You know kind of off in another world. And I was hunting for a certain quality voice. So I had a boy searching for voices. He went everywhere. I wanted someone who could sing, too, because I was going to use a lot of songs. So he kept bringing these people in\u00a0... So one day he came in with a voice. I listened to it. I said \"That's perfect.\" I said \"She sounds to me like a 14-year-old girl.\" And he said \"Well, she's 18. You know?\" But that was it. It was a little girl called Adriana Caselotti and she came from an opera family\u00a0... She could do all this beautiful birdlike stuff. So I signed her.\n \u2014Walt Disney, on casting Adriana Caselotti as Snow White\nAdriana Caselotti was the first audition for the role of Snow White in September 1934. She was invited to audition after Disney's casting director Roy Scott telephoned her father (who was a vocal coach in Los Angeles) in search for voice talents, and Caselotti, overhearing their conversation, recommended herself for the part. Although Walt Disney was impressed with her voice, he auditioned about 150 other actresses and singers; these included Deanna Durbin, whom Disney rejected because he thought she sounded too mature. Virginia Davis was nearly hired to provide the speaking voice of Snow White (as well as the live-action reference for the character), but eventually dropped out due to finding the contract unacceptable, although some of Davis' miscellaneous vocal tracks were used in the final film. Caselotti was cast as Snow White in September 1935, exactly one year after her first audition, and recorded her first tracks on January 20, 1936. She was called in for forty-four days of recording sessions within two years, receiving $20 for each day (in total, Caselotti was paid $970). Thelma Hubbard provided Snow White's screams in the forest flight scene and later voiced the character in the film's 1938 Spanish dub and Lux Radio Theatre adaptation.\nThe studio auditioned over a dozen actresses for the role of the Queen before Lucille La Verne was chosen, although several members of Disney's staff contended that she sounded a \"little old\" for the part. Having portrayed similar characters in \"Orphans of the Storm\" (1921) and \"A Tale of Two Cities\" (1935), La Verne also tried out for the role of the Witch, and the animators initially felt that her voice was \"too smooth and not rough enough\" until she removed her false teeth. \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" marks La Verne's final film performance before her death in 1942. Kenny Baker was temporarily considered for the role of the Prince, with several other actors tested, before Harry Stockwell was cast in 1936. Reginald Barlow and Cy Kendall recorded the preliminary dialogue for the Huntsman, but both were deemed unsatisfactory for the final cut; the role was eventually given to Stuart Buchanan (who was hired by the studio as casting director and dialogue coach in 1936).\nStory meeting notes from October 9, 1934 indicate that Eddie Holden and Billy Bletcher were initially considered for the role of Doc until Atwell was cast in early 1936. Radio actor John Gibson initially auditioned for the part of Sleepy and recorded some dialogue at a pre-recording session in February 1936. After reading about the casting in a \"Variety\" article, Gilbert, who was known for his signature sneeze, telephoned Disney to try out for the role. Disney agreed to audition him and, upon witnessing Gilbert's \"sneezing routine\", hired him on the spot.\nAnimation.\nArt direction.\n\"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" features contributions from three European artists who came to work at Walt Disney Studios in the 1930s. By 1936, Albert Hurter was assigned to supervise the film's art direction; all the designs used in the film, from character costume designs to layouts and backgrounds, had to meet his approval before being finalized. Having had academic art training, Hurter was instrumental in devising the film's overall Germanic look, incorporating European illustrations and painting techniques into the animation. Ferdinand Horvath, who had been working at the studio since 1934, was also hired as the film's inspirational sketch artist, providing a number of dark concepts for the film. Many of his other designs were ultimately rejected since they were less easily translated into animation than Hurter's, and Hovarth didn't receive a credit for the film. By the spring of 1936, as the animation process had begun, with Hurter and Hovarth being joined by Gustaf Tenggren. Tenggren was a color stylist determined the staging and atmosphere of many of the scenes in the film, with his style borrowing from the likes of Arthur Rackham and John Bauer and thus possessing the European illustration quality that Disney sought. He also designed the posters for the film and illustrated the press book. Other artists to work on the film included Joe Grant, whose most significant contribution was the design for the Queen's Witch form.\nCharacter animation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Don Graham really knew what he was teaching, and he \"showed\" you how to do something\u00a0\u2013 he didn't just talk. He taught us things that were very important for animation. How to simplify our drawings\u00a0\u2013 how to cut out all the unnecessary hen scratching amateurs have a habit of using. He showed us how to make a drawing look solid. He taught us about tension points\u00a0\u2013 like a bent knee, and how the pant leg comes down from that knee and how important the wrinkles from it are to describe form. I learned a hell of a lot from him!\n Art Babbitt\nArt Babbitt, an animator who joined the Disney studio in 1932, invited seven of his colleagues (who worked in the same room as him) to come with him to an art class that he himself had set up at his home in the Hollywood Hills. Though there was no teacher, Babbitt had recruited a model to pose for him and his fellow animators as they drew. These \"classes\" were held weekly; each week, more animators would come. After three weeks, Walt Disney called Babbit to his office and offered to provide the supplies, working space and models required if the sessions were moved to the studio. Babbitt ran the sessions for a month until animator Hardie Gramatky suggested that they recruit Don Graham, an art teacher from the Chouinard Institute. Graham taught his first class at the studio on November 15, 1932, and was joined by Philip L. Dike a few weeks later. These classes were principally concerned with human anatomy and movement, though instruction later included action analysis, animal anatomy and acting.\nThough the classes were originally described as a \"brutal battle\", with neither instructor nor students well-versed in the other's craft, the enthusiasm and energy of both parties made the classes stimulating and beneficial for all involved. Graham often screened Disney shorts and, along with the animators, provided critique featuring both strengths and weaknesses. For example, Graham criticised Babbitt's animation of Abner the mouse in \"The Country Cousin\" as \"taking a few of the obvious actions of a drunk without coordinating the rest of the body\", while praising it for maintaining its humour without getting \"dirty or mean or vulgar. The country mouse is always having a good time\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe first duty of the cartoon is not to picture or duplicate real action or things as they actually happen\u2014but to give a caricature of life and action\u2014to picture on the screen things that have run thru the imagination of the audience to bring to life dream-fantasies and imaginative fancies that we have all thought of during our lives or have had pictured to us in various forms during our lives [...] I definitely feel that we cannot do the fantastic things, based on the real, unless we first know the real. This point should be brought out very clearly to all new men, and even the older men.\n Walt Disney in 1935\nVery few of the animators at the Disney studio had had artistic training (most had been newspaper cartoonists); among the few who did were Grim Natwick, who had trained in Europe. The animator's success in designing and animating Betty Boop for Fleischer Studios showed an understanding of human female anatomy and, when Walt Disney hired Natwick, he was given female characters to animate almost exclusively. Attempts to animate Persephone, the female lead of \"The Goddess of Spring\", had proved largely unsuccessful; Natwick's animation of the heroine in \"Cookie Carnival\" showed greater promise, and the animator was eventually given the task of animating Snow White herself. Though live action footage of Snow White, with the Prince and the Queen being shot as reference for the animators, the artists' animators disapproved of rotoscoping, considering it to hinder the production of effective caricature. Nevertheless, all of the above-mentioned characters were fully rotoscoped and utilized by their respective artists, some more, some less. Despite Graham and Natwick's objections, however, some scenes of Snow White and the Prince were directly traced from the live-action footage.\nIt proved difficult to add color to Snow White's and the Queen's faces. Eventually, they found a red dye that worked and which was added with a small piece of cotton wrapped around a tipple pencil on each individual cel. Helen Ogger, an employee at the ink department, was also an animator and decided to use the same system used in animation. The method was so time-consuming that it was never used again on the same scale. It was also used to a smaller degree in \"Pinocchio\" and \"Fantasia\" but, after Ogger left the studio in 1941, there was no one else with the same expertise who could replace her.\nMusic and records.\nThe songs in \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" were composed by Frank Churchill and Larry Morey. Paul J. Smith and Leigh Harline composed the incidental music score. Songs from the film include \"Heigh-Ho\", \"Someday My Prince Will Come\", and \"Whistle While You Work\". Since Disney did not have its own music publishing company at the time, the publishing rights for the music and songs were administered through Bourne Co. Music Publishers, which continues to hold these rights. In later years, the studio was able to acquire back the music rights from many of their other films, but not \"Snow White\", \"Pinocchio\", \"Dumbo\" or most \"Silly Symphony\" cartoons. \"Snow White\" became the first American film to have a soundtrack album, released in conjunction with the feature film.\nCinematic influences.\nAt this time, Disney also encouraged his staff to see a variety of films. These ranged from the mainstream, such as MGM's \"Romeo and Juliet\" (1936)\u2014to which Disney made a direct reference in a story meeting pertaining to the scene in which Snow White lies in her glass coffin\u2014to the more obscure, including European silent cinema. \"Romeo and Juliet\" also inspired the balcony scene between Snow White and Prince Charming.\n\"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\", as well as the two Disney films to follow it, were influenced by such German expressionist films as \"Nosferatu\" (1922) and \"The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari\" (1920), both of which were recommended by Disney to his staff. This influence is particularly evident in the scenes of Snow White fleeing through the forest and the Queen's transformation into the Witch. The latter scene was also inspired by \"Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\" (1931), to which Disney made specific reference in story meetings.\nFinancial issues.\nDisney had to mortgage his house to help finance the film's production, which ran up a total cost of $1,488,422.74, a massive sum for a feature film in 1937. Midway through, Disney needed a $250,000 loan to finish the film. Disney ran a rough cut for Joseph Rosenberg of Bank of America, who sat impassively during the showing. Then Rosenberg turned to the worried Disney and said, \"Walt, that thing is going to make a hatful of money\" and approved the loan.\nRelease.\nOriginal theatrical run.\n\"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" premiered at the Carthay Circle Theatre on December 21, 1937. The film received a standing ovation at its completion from an audience that included Judy Garland, Marlene Dietrich and Charles Laughton. Six days later, Walt Disney and the seven dwarfs appeared on the cover of \"Time\" magazine. Three weeks later, it opened at the Radio City Music Hall in New York City and a theater in Miami in January 1938, in which the strong box office sales encouraged RKO Radio Pictures to place the film into general release on February 4. It became a major box-office success, becoming the most successful sound film of all time, in which it displaced Al Jolson's \"The Singing Fool\" (1928). \"Snow White\" would soon be displaced from this position by \"Gone with the Wind\" in 1939.\n\"Snow White\" proved equally popular with foreign audiences. It premiered in London on February 24, 1938, ironically the same night as Charles Laughton's first film as a producer, \"Vessel of Wrath\", leading to a poor turnout for the latter. In September 1938, \"Variety\" reported that the film was having a remarkably long box-office run at theaters in Sydney, Australia. In that city, it noted, \"Walt Disney's 'Snow White' (RKO) experienced no difficulty at hitting 11 weeks, with more ahead.\" \"Variety\" reported as well that \"Snow White\" was having even longer runs in other cities overseas, such as in London, where the film had generated greater box-office receipts than during its exclusive New York screenings at Radio City Music Hall:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'Snow White' (RKO) is in its 27th week at the New Gallery, London, and will continue to be shown through the regular London release dates, Sept. 19 for North London, and Sept. 26 for South London. There is a likelihood that the New Gallery first-run will run until Christmas. Picture reported to have exceeded $500,000, passing Radio City's five-week mark, which just fell short of the $500,000 mark.\nAccording to RKO, \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" had earned $7,846,000 in international box office receipts by the end of its original theatrical run. This earned RKO a profit of $380,000.\nRe-releases.\n\"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" was first re-released in 1944, to raise revenue for the Disney studio during the World War II period. This re-release set a tradition of re-releasing Disney animated features every few years, and \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" was re-released to theaters in 1952, 1958, 1967, 1975, 1983, 1987 and 1993. Coinciding with the 50th-anniversary release in 1987, Disney released one of many authorized novelizations of the story, this one written by children's author Suzanne Weyn.\nIn 1993, \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" became the first film to be entirely scanned to digital files, manipulated, and recorded back to film. The restoration project was carried out entirely at 4K resolution and 10-bit color depth using the Cineon system (10 bits each of red, green and blue\u201430 in total) to digitally remove dirt and scratches.\n\"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" has had a lifetime gross of $418 million across its original release and several reissues. Adjusted for inflation, and incorporating subsequent releases, the film remains one of the top-10 American film moneymakers of all time and is the highest-grossing animated film.\nAs part of Disney's 100th anniversary, the film was re-released in cinemas across the UK on August 4, 2023, for one week.\nCritical reception.\nThe film was a tremendous critical success, with many reviewers hailing it as a genuine work of art, recommended for both children and adults. Although film histories often state that the animation of the human characters was criticized, more recent scholarship found that contemporary reviewers praised the realistic style of the human animation, with several stating that audiences had forgotten that they were watching animated humans rather than real ones. Frank S. Nugent of \"The New York Times\" felt that \"Mr. Disney and his technical crew have outdone themselves. The picture more than matches expectations. It is a classic, as importantly cinematically as \"The Birth of a Nation\" or the birth of Mickey Mouse. Nothing quite like it has been done before; and already we have gone impolite enough to clamor for an encore.\" \"Variety\" observed that \"[so] perfect is the illusion, so tender the romance and fantasy, so emotional are certain portions when the acting of the characters strikes a depth comparable to the sincerity of human players, that the film approaches real greatness.\" \"Harrison's Reports\" wrote \"Snow White\" was \"entertainment that should be enjoyed by every one. Intelligent adults will marvel at the mechanical ingenuity that went into the making of it; and it is something to marvel at, for at times the characters seem lifelike. That is brought about by the expert synchronization of the action with the music and the dialogue.\"\nAt the 11th Academy Awards, the film won an Academy Honorary Award for Walt Disney \"as a significant screen innovation which has charmed millions and pioneered a great new entertainment field\". Disney received a full-size Oscar statuette and seven miniature ones, presented to him by 10-year-old child actress Shirley Temple. The film was also nominated for Best Musical Score. \"Some Day My Prince Will Come\" has become a jazz standard that has been performed by numerous artists, including Buddy Rich, Lee Wiley, Oscar Peterson, Frank Churchill, and Oliver Jones; it was also the title for albums by Miles Davis, Wynton Kelly, and Alexis Cole.\nNoted filmmakers such as Sergei Eisenstein and Charlie Chaplin praised \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" as a notable achievement in cinema; Eisenstein went so far as to call it the greatest film ever made. The film inspired Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to produce its own fantasy film, \"The Wizard of Oz\", in 1939.\nCritical re-evaluation and industry recognition.\n\"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" is referred by many critics as one of the greatest animated films in history. \"Rolling Stone\" ranked it fourth on its list of the greatest animated films of all time, calling it the one that \"changed the future of animation.\" \"Time\" magazine ranked the film as the 13th best animated film of all time. \"Harper's Bazaar\" listed the film as the number one animated film of all time, crediting it as the one that started it all. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of . The website's consensus reads: \"With its involving story and characters, vibrant art, and memorable songs, \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" set the animation standard for decades to come.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 96 out of 100, based on 15 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nIn 1987, Snow White was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame, making her the only Disney Princess to do so.\nThe American Film Institute (AFI), an independent non-profit organization created in the United States by the National Endowment for the Arts, releases a variety of annual awards and film lists recognizing excellence in filmmaking. The AFI 100 Years... series, which ran from 1998 to 2008, created categorized lists of America's best movies as selected by juries composed from among over 1,500 artists, scholars, critics, and historians. A film's inclusion in one of these lists was based on the film's popularity over time, historical significance and cultural impact. \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" was selected by juries for inclusion on many AFI lists, including the following:\nHome media.\nOn October 28, 1994, the film was released in the United States for the first time on home video on VHS and LaserDisc as the first release in the Walt Disney Masterpiece Collection. Two versions were available in each format, including a deluxe edition. The deluxe edition contained the film along with several bonus material such as a making-of documentary, an archival interview of Walt Disney, deleted scenes, a hardcover book and lithographs of the original theater posters. By 1995, the film had sold 24million home video units and grossed $. As of 2002, the film had sold 25.1million home video units in the United States.\n\"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" was released on DVD on October 9, 2001, the first in Disney's Platinum Editions, and featured across two discs the digitally restored film, a making-of documentary narrated by Angela Lansbury, an audio commentary by John Canemaker and, via archived audio clips, Walt Disney. That release was also THX certified and included games, a sing-along, and other bonus features. It sold a record 1 million copies in 24 hours. A VHS release followed on November 27, 2001. Both versions were returned to the Disney Vault on January 31, 2002. As of 2001, the film grossed a combined $ from box office and home video revenue.\n\"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" was released on Blu-ray on October 6, 2009, the first of Disney's Diamond Editions, and a new DVD edition was released on November 24, 2009. The Blu-ray release includes a high-definition version of the movie sourced from a new restoration by Lowry Digital, a DVD copy of the film, and several bonus features not included on the 2001 DVD. This set returned to the Disney Vault on April 30, 2011.\nWalt Disney Studios Home Entertainment re-released \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" on Blu-ray and DVD on February 2, 2016, as the first of the Walt Disney Signature Collection line. It was released on Digital HD on January 19, 2016, with bonus material.\nIn 2023, in celebration of the 100th anniversary of The Walt Disney Company, a new 4K restoration of the film was produced and released on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray on October 10 as part of the Disney100 promotion, making it the oldest feature-length animated film ever to be released in the format. The new remaster was scanned from the original 35mm Technicolor negative through a multi-year effort by Disney's Restoration and Preservation team and key members of Walt Disney Animation Studios, including Eric Goldberg, Michael Giaimo, Dorothy McKim, and Bob Bagley, all of whom also worked on the 4K remaster of \"Cinderella\" (1950). On the process, Goldberg remarked \"The opportunity to help restore \"Snow White\" was both an honor and a challenge ... we owed a debt to history to get it looking as beautiful and as accurate to the original colors as we could.\" This version also began streaming on Disney+ on October 16, 2023.\nLegacy.\nFollowing the film's release, a number of \"Snow White\" themed merchandise were sold, including hats, dolls, garden seeds, and glasses. The film's merchandise generated sales of $, equivalent to over $ adjusted for inflation. The film's intellectual property has been franchised across a diverse range of mediums, including a Broadway musical, video games, and theme park rides.\n\"Snow White's\" success led to Disney moving ahead with more feature-film productions. Walt Disney used much of the profits from \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" to finance a new $4.5 million studio in Burbank\u00a0\u2013 the site of Walt Disney Studios to this day. Within two years, the studio completed \"Pinocchio\" and \"Fantasia\" and had begun production on features such as \"Dumbo\", \"Bambi\", \"Alice in Wonderland\" and \"Peter Pan\".\nAs of March 2025, it is the oldest film to have joined the \"One Million Watched Club\" on Letterboxd, surpassing previous record-holder \"The Wizard of Oz\".\nThe film's copyright was renewed in 1965, and as a published work from 1937, it will enter the American public domain on January 1, 2033.\nComics adaptations.\nThe \"Silly Symphony\" Sunday comic strip ran a four-month-long adaptation of \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" from December 12, 1937, to April 24, 1938. The comic was written by Merrill De Maris, and drawn by Hank Porter and Bob Grant. This adaptation was republished several times as a comic book, most recently in 1995.\nMondadori, the official Italian publisher of Disney comics, produced several comic book sequels of the 1937 film. The first story was published in 1939.\nTheme parks.\nSnow White's Enchanted Wish (named Snow White's Scary Adventures until 2020) is a popular theme park ride at Disneyland (an opening day attraction dating from 1955), Tokyo Disneyland, and Disneyland Paris. Fantasyland at Walt Disney World's Magic Kingdom underwent an expansion from 2012 to 2014. The Snow White's Scary Adventures ride was replaced with Princess Fairytale Hall, where Snow White and other princesses are located for a meet and greet. Included in the 2013 expansion of Fantasyland is the Seven Dwarfs Mine Train roller coaster.\nVideo games.\n\"Walt Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" was released for the Game Boy Color system in 2001. Snow White also makes an appearance in the PlayStation 2 game \"Kingdom Hearts\" as one of the seven fabled Princesses of Heart. A world based on the movie, \"Dwarf Woodlands\", appears in \"\" for the PSP. In 2013's free-to-play mobile game \"Snow White: Queen's Return\" (also known as \"Seven Dwarfs: The Queen's Return\"), an uncanonical continuation of the film, the Queen has survived the fall at the climax of the film and then reverted to her youthful form to cast a curse on Snow White and the dwarfs and their entire forest. The world builder video game \"Disney Magic Kingdoms\" includes Snow White, all seven dwarfs, the Queen and Prince Charming as playable characters, as well as attractions such as Magic Mirror on the Wall, Seven Dwarfs' Cottage, Seven Dwarfs Mine Train, and Snow White's Scary Adventures.\nRadio City Music Hall Stage musical.\n\"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" was the first Disney-produced musical on the New York stage. Unknown Mary Jo Salerno played Snow White in the Disney-produced \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" (televised as \"Snow White Live!\") at the Radio City Music Hall. Music and lyrics for four new songs were created by Jay Blackton and Joe Cook, respectively; titles included \"Welcome to the Kingdom of Once Upon a Time\" and \"Will I Ever See Her Again?\". It ran from October 18 to November 18, 1979, and January 11 to March 9, 1980, a total of 106 performances. A cast album was issued by Buena Vista Records.https://\nCanceled prequel.\nIn the 2000s, DisneyToon Studios began development on a computer-animated prequel to \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\", titled \"The Seven Dwarfs\". Director Mike Disa and screenwriter Evan Spiliotopoulos pitched a story explaining how the Dwarfs met, and how the Evil Queen killed Snow White's father and took the throne. According to Disa, DisneyToon management changed the prequel's plot to center around how Dopey lost his voice upon witnessing the death of his mother. After Disney purchased Pixar in 2006, John Lasseter, DisneyToons' new Chief Creative Officer, canceled \"The Seven Dwarfs\".\nExhibition.\nA behind-the-scenes exhibition titled \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs: The Creation of a Classic\" took place at The Walt Disney Family Museum from November 15, 2012, to April 14, 2013. The event celebrated the film's 75th anniversary by displaying more than 200 pieces of rare concept art and animation. It also detailed the entire story of the film's production, its release and the worldwide recognition it has earned through the years.\nTwo extensive companion books, \"The Fairest One of All: The Making of Walt Disney\u2019s Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" and \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs: The Art and Creation of Walt Disney\u2019s Classic Animated Film\" were written by J.B. Kaufman and published by Weldon Owen on October 16, 2012.\nLive-action adaptation.\nAn live action movie was released on March 21, 2025. Directed by Marc Webb, written by Erin Cressida Wilson with rewrites done by Greta Gerwig had worked on the most recent draft on the film's script and new music by Benj Pasek and Justin Paul and stars Rachel Zegler as cast as Snow White, Gal Gadot as the Evil Queen, Andrew Burnap as Jonathan, Martin Klebba, Jeremy Swift, George Salazar, Andy Grotelueschen, Tituss Burgess, Jason Kravits and Andrew Barth Feldman as the Seven Dwarfs: Grumpy, Doc, Happy, Sleepy, Bashful, Sneezy and Dopey, and Patrick Page as the Magic Mirror.\nOther appearances.\nThe Seven Dwarfs made several appearances in shorts, and despite their popularity they were too numerous to animate efficiently. Commissioned shorts \"The Standard Parade\" (1939), \"The Seven Wise Dwarfs\" (1941, using mostly recycled footage), \"All Together\" (1942) and \"The Winged Scourge\" (1943) all include appearances.\nThe 1984 film \"Gremlins\" featured the cartoon in the theater scenes.\nAt the end of the 2022 Marvel Cinematic Universe film \"Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness\", Wanda Maximoff's sons can be seen watching \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" on the television in the living room. A clip of the Queen as the Witch appears in the credits sequence of the 2024 MCU television series \"Agatha All Along\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nStreaming audio"}
{"id": "76362", "revid": "50628529", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76362", "title": "Davis\u2013Monthan Air Force Base", "text": "US Air Force base in Arizona, United States\nDavis\u2013Monthan Air Force Base (DM AFB) () is a United States Air Force base southeast of downtown Tucson, Arizona. It was established in 1925 as Davis\u2013Monthan Landing Field. The host unit for Davis\u2013Monthan AFB is the 355th Wing (355 WG) assigned to Twelfth Air Force (12AF), part of Air Combat Command (ACC). The base is best known as the location of the Air Force Materiel Command's 309th Aerospace Maintenance and Regeneration Group (309 AMARG), the aircraft boneyard for all excess military and U.S. government aircraft and aerospace vehicles.\nDavis\u2013Monthan Air Force Base is a key ACC installation. The 355th Wing (355 WG) provides A-10 Thunderbolt II close air support and OA-10 forward air controllers to ground forces worldwide. The 355 WG is the host unit, providing medical, logistical, mission, and operational support to assigned units. The 355 WG is the sole formal training unit for the A-10 aircraft, providing initial and recurrent training to all U.S. Air Force A-10 and OA-10 pilots, to include those in the Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC) and the Air National Guard (ANG). The 355th is ACC's executive agent for INF and START treaty compliance. In October 2018, the 563rd Rescue Group, previously a geographically separated unit of the 23rd Wing at Moody AFB, Georgia, was transferred to the 355th Wing, along with its HC-130J COMBAT KING II and HH-60G Pave Hawk aircraft.\nOne of the wing's tenant units, the 55th Electronic Combat Group (55 ECG), is a geographically separated unit (GSU) of the 55th Wing (55 WG) at Offutt AFB, Nebraska. Tasked to provide offensive counter-information and electronic attack capabilities in support of U.S. and coalition tactical air, surface, and special operations forces, the 55 ECG unit employs its Lockheed EC-130H Compass Call aircraft worldwide in tactical air operations in war and other contingencies. It also provides initial and recurrent training to all EC-130H Compass Call pilots, navigators, electronic warfare officers, and aircrew.\nTwo other major tenant units are assigned to the AFRC. The 943rd Rescue Group (structured as a GSU under AFRC's 920th Rescue Wing at Patrick Space Force Base is equipped with HH-60G Pave Hawk helicopters and Guardian Angel personnel. The 943 RQG is tasked to provide combat search-and-rescue and personnel recovery support worldwide.\nPerhaps the most prominent tenant is the 309th Aerospace Maintenance and Regeneration Group (309 AMARG) of the Air Force Materiel Command (AFMC). As the main location for the 309 AMARG, Davis\u2013Monthan AFB is the sole aircraft boneyard for excess military and U.S. government aircraft and other aerospace vehicles such as ballistic missiles. Tucson's dry climate and alkaline soil make it an ideal location to store and preserve aircraft; more than 4,000 military aircraft are parked on the base.\nHistory.\nNamesakes.\nThe base was named in honor of World War I pilots Lieutenants Samuel H. Davis (1896\u20131921) and Chief Engineer Oscar Monthan (1885\u20131924), both Tucson natives. Monthan enlisted in the Army as a private in 1917, was commissioned as a ground officer in 1918, and later became a pilot; he was killed in the crash of a Martin B2 bomber in Hawaii on March 27, 1924.\nFirst Lieutenant Samuel Howard Davis (November 20, 1896 \u2013 December 28, 1921) was a pilot and United States Army Air Service officer. Born to Sam and Effie Davis in 1896 in Dyer County, Tennessee, Davis was known by his middle name, Howard. He attended public schools in Tucson. As a young man, his hobbies included horseback riding and shooting; he was a good marksman.\nDavis enrolled at A&amp;M College of Texas in 1915 as a student of mechanical engineering, having previously attended the University of Arizona in Tucson. After enlisting in the military in 1917, he was briefly assigned to Fort Hauchuca in Arizona before being transferred to College Station, Texas, to complete his academic studies. He returned to the military after graduation in 1918, assembling airplanes at Kelly Field in San Antonio, Texas. He trained pilots during the first World War, including some pilots who took down German planes. He reached the rank of second lieutenant. Davis was honorably discharged from the military about 1919 with the rank of First Lieutenant in the reserve corps. For a time he worked commercial aviation as a manager with the Arizona Aviation Company, where he piloted Orioles and standard-manufacture airplanes. Davis married Marjorie Cameron of San Antonio in 1920.\nDavis returned to the Army Air Service in August 1921. He died in a military aircraft accident completing a training mission on December 28, 1921, while a passenger in a Curtiss JN-6HG at Carlstrom Field, near Arcadia, Florida. One other person, William C. Sinclair, was also killed. They were hunting ducks at the time; Sinclair was piloting and Davis was shooting. After a funeral at the home of his parents, Davis was buried at Evergreen Cemetery in Tucson. He was survived by his widow, his parents, and a brother, Wilton.\nDavis's father was in attendance at the 1925 dedication of the base, as was Governor G.W.P. Hunt, who spoke at the dedication.\nOrigins.\nIn 1919, the Tucson Chamber of Commerce aviation committee established the nation's first municipally owned airfield at the current site of the Tucson Rodeo Grounds. The rapid increase in aviation activities meant a move in 1927 to the site which is now Davis\u2013Monthan Air Force Base. The City of Tucson acquired land southeast of town for a runway and dedicated the field in 1925. Charles Lindbergh, fresh from his nonstop crossing of the Atlantic Ocean, flew his \"Spirit of St. Louis\" to Tucson in 1927 to dedicate the airport at Davis\u2013Monthan Field, then the largest municipal airport in the United States.\nMilitary presence at the field began when Sergeant Simpson relocated his fuel and service operation to the site on 6 October 1927. He kept a log containing names of the field's customers, including Lindbergh, Amelia Earhart, Benjamin Foulois, and Jimmy Doolittle. Doolittle, awarded the Medal of Honor for his 1942 Tokyo raid, was the first military customer at the field on 9 October 1927. The combination of civil and military operations worked well until the early 1940s, when military requirements began to require the relocation of civil-aviation activities.\nWorld War II.\nDavis\u2013Monthan Airport became Tucson Army Air Field in 1940, as the United States prepared for World War II. The first assigned U.S. Army Air Corps units were the 1st Bomb Wing, 41st Bomb Group, and 31st Air Base Group, activating on 30 April 1941 with Lieutenant Colonel Ames S. Albro Sr. as commanding officer. In its military role, the base became known as Davis\u2013Monthan Army Air Field on 3 December 1941. U.S. Army Air Forces leaders then used the airfield for heavy bomber operation, sending Douglas B-18 Bolo, Consolidated B-24 Liberator, and Boeing B-29 Superfortress bombers, for training and observation missions.\nAmong the bombardment groups trained at the base during the war were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTraining at the airfield came to a halt on 14 August 1945, when the Japanese surrendered. Davis\u2013Monthan played a postwar role by housing German prisoners of war from June 1945 to March 1946. It also served as a separation center, which brought the base populace to a high of 11,614 in September 1945.\nWith the end of the war, operations at the base came to a virtual standstill. Then, the base was selected as a storage site for hundreds of decommissioned aircraft, with the activation of the 4105th Army Air Force Unit, which oversaw the storage of excess B-29s and C-47 \"Gooney Birds\". Tucson's low humidity and alkaline soil made it an ideal location for aircraft storage and preservation, awaiting cannibalization or possible reuse\u2014a mission that has continued to this day.\nStrategic Air Command.\nThe Cold War era was ushered in at Davis\u2013Monthan on 21 March 1946, with the installation placed under the claimancy of the recently established Strategic Air Command (SAC), whose presence at the base began in the form of the 40th and 444th Bombardment Groups, both equipped with B-29s. As part of the postwar austerity, these groups were later inactivated, with the personnel and equipment being consolidated into the 43d Bombardment Group in October. On 11 January 1948, with the establishment of the United States Air Force as independent service four months earlier, the facility was renamed Davis\u2013Monthan Air Force Base. On 30 June 1948, the Air Force activated the 43rd Air Refueling Squadron, whose KB-29Ms were newly equipped with aerial refueling equipment purchased from the British firm FRL. The 43rd ARS, along with the 509th ARS at Walker AFB, New Mexico, was the first dedicated air refueling unit in history.\nOn 2 March 1949, the \"Lucky Lady II\", a B-50A of the 43d Bombardment Wing, completed the first nonstop round-the-world flight, having covered in 94 hours and 1 minute (249.45\u00a0mph). \"Lucky Lady II\" was refueled four times in the air by KB-29 tankers of the 43d Air Refueling Squadron, which had made only one operational air refueling contact before the mission. For this outstanding flight, the \"Lucky Lady II\"'s crew received the Mackay Trophy, given annually by the National Aeronautic Association for the outstanding flight of the year, and the Air Age Trophy, an Air Force Association award, given each year in recognition of significant contributions to the public understanding of the air age.\nIn 1953, the jet age came to Davis\u2013Monthan when SAC units on the base converted to the new Boeing B-47 Stratojet. The 303d Bombardment Wing, Medium, was initially established on 27 August 1951, and activated at Davis\u2013Monthan AFB on 4 September 1951. The wing operated B-29s until January 1952, when it was equipped with KB-29s. On 20 January 1953, the 303d transitioned to the Boeing B-47 Stratojet for its three bomb squadrons, while an additional air refueling squadron equipped with KC-97s was assigned to the wing between 18 February 1953, and 1 February 1956. A standard SAC Alert Area ramp was constructed in the southeast corner of the base adjacent to the runway and the 303d assumed nuclear alert responsibilities when final conversion and checkout in the B-47 was complete.\nIn April 1953, the Air Defense Command's 15th Fighter-Interceptor Squadron was activated with F-86A Sabres. A year later, the unit transitioned into F-86Ds followed by a transition to F-86Ls in the fall of 1957. In the spring of 1959, the unit received Northrop F-89J interceptors which it flew for only a year when it transitioned into McDonnell F-101Bs. On 24 December 1964, the 15th FIS was inactivated.\nIn 1962, SAC's 390th Strategic Missile Wing (390 SMW) and its 18 Titan II ICBM sites around Tucson were activated. The 390 SMW was one of only three Titan II missile wings in SAC and represented the heaviest land-based missile and the largest single warhead ever fielded by U.S. strategic deterrent forces.\nIn July 1963, the 4028th Strategic Reconnaissance Weather Wing, equipped with U-2 strategic reconnaissance aircraft, began flying global missions from Davis\u2013Monthan. Following the Cuban missile crisis in 1963, the 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing at Laughlin AFB, Texas, relocated to the base and assumed responsibility for all U-2 operations, emphasizing long-range strategic reconnaissance and intelligence collection. As a SAC unit, the 4080th was later redesignated the 100th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing and also acquired Lockheed DC-130 Hercules aircraft for launch and control of Firebee reconnaissance drones that were the precursors of contemporary unmanned aerial systems. The DC-130s and U-2s remained at the Davis\u2013Monthan until 1976, when the 100 SRW was inactivated, its DC-130s transferred to Tactical Air Command's 432d Tactical Drone Group, and its U-2s transferred to SAC's 9th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing at Beale Air Force Base, California, where U-2 Dragon Lady operations were consolidated with SR-71 Blackbird operations.\nOn 15 June 1964, Davis\u2013Monthan's 303d Bombardment Wing was inactivated as part of the retirement of the B-47 Stratojet from active service. The year 1964 brought back the combat crew training mission of the World War II years with the 4453d Combat Crew Training Wing of the Tactical Air Command (TAC) equipped with the Air Force's newest and most sophisticated fighter, the McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II. In July 1971, the 355th Tactical Fighter Wing, flying the A-7 Corsair II aircraft, was activated at the base and the previously assigned F-4s were moved to Luke AFB, near Phoenix, Arizona.\nTactical Air Command.\nOn 1 October 1976, the base was transferred to TAC after 30 years under SAC, with SAC's 390th Strategic Missile Wing becoming a tenant command of the base. Also that year, the 355th Tactical Fighter Wing accepted the first A-10 Thunderbolt II. Since 1979, D\u2013M has been the training location for pilots in the A-10; the base was redesignated the 355th Tactical Training Wing on 1 September 1979. The organization was later redesignated the 355th Fighter Wing since it includes operational, deployable A-10 squadrons in addition to its CONUS training mission\nThe 1980s brought several diverse missions to D\u2013M. The headquarters charged with overseeing them was now the 836th Air Division, which was activated 1 January 1981. The AD advised Air Force component commanders and land forces on A-10 aircraft tactics, training, employment and readiness, and subordinate units participated in exercises such as Red Flag and Celtic Echo.\nThe 41st Electronic Combat Squadron equipped with the EC-130H Compass Call aircraft, arrived on 1 July 1980, and reported to the 552d Airborne Warning and Control Wing. In 1981 D\u2013M welcomed the 868th Tactical Missile Training Group (866 TMTG). The 868th was the only U.S.-based Ground Launched Cruise Missile (GLCM) unit and the source of the crews that staffed the forward deployed GLCM wings in NATO in 1982.\nOn 1 September 1982, the headquarters of the 602d Tactical Air Control Wing and its subordinate 23rd Tactical Air Support Squadron (TASS), a unit responsible for the Air Force's tactical air control system west of the Mississippi River transferred from Bergstrom Air Force Base, Texas, and stood up at D\u2013M, bringing 16 OA-37B aircraft and numerous new personnel to the base. The 23rd TASS became the Air Force's first O/A-10 squadron in 1988, providing heavily armed airborne forward-air-control capability for the first time. Unlike all other D\u2013M aircraft at the time, the 23rd TASS fleet's tail flash read \"NF\", for \"Nail FAC\"; the squadron's radio call sign was \"Nail\".\nIn 1984, as a result of the first series of Strategic Arms Reduction Treaties START I between the United States and the Soviet Union, SAC began to decommission its Titan II missile system. In 1982, the 390 SMW began removing its 18 missiles and inactivating the associated sites in preparation for eventual demolition.\nIn October 1981, President Ronald Reagan announced that as part of the strategic modernization program, Titan II systems were to be retired by 1 October 1987. Deactivation began at Davis\u2013Monthan on 1 October 1982. During the operation, titled \"Rivet Cap\", the missiles were removed and shipped to Norton AFB, California, for refurbishment and storage. Explosive demolition began at the headworks of missile complex 570\u20137 on 30 November 1983. In May 1984, the 390 SMW's last Titan II at Davis\u2013Monthan came off alert status. SAC subsequently inactivated the 390th Strategic Missile Wing on 30 June 1984.\nOne site under the 390 SMW, known both as Titan II Site 571-7 and as Air Force Facility Missile Site 8, was initially decommissioned in 1982. Located about south of Tucson in Sahuarita, Arizona, it was saved from demolition and turned over to the Arizona Aerospace Foundation, a nonprofit organization that also administers the Pima Air and Space Museum immediately south of Davis\u2013Monthan AFB. With a variety of items on loan from the National Museum of the United States Air Force, including an inert Titan II missile, Site 571-7 is now known as the Titan Missile Museum and is one of two remaining examples of a Titan II missile site in existence (the other being located at Vandenberg Space Force Base, California, site 395-C). In 1994, the site was declared a National Historic Landmark.\nIn 1987, the 71st Special Operations Squadron, an Air Force Reserve unit flying HH-3 Jolly Green Giants, was activated at the base. While it served after the invasion of Kuwait in Desert Shield/Storm, it did not survive the end of the Cold War drawdown, and disbanded in 1992.\nAfter the Cold War era.\nIn the 1990s, the 355 TTW continued to train A-10 crews for assignments to units in the United States, England, and Korea. During this period, the 602nd Tactical Air Control Wing deployed airborne forward air controllers in their OA-10 aircraft to Operation Desert Storm, providing nearly 100% of this capability to the war.\nOn 1 October 1991, the 355 TTW was redesignated as the 355th Fighter Wing (355 FW) in tune with the Air Force's Objective Wing philosophy. The 355 FW was composed of the 355th Operations Group, the 355th Maintenance Group, the 355th Medical Group, and the 355th Mission Support Group.\nIn May 1992, the 41st and 43d Electronic Combat Squadrons, flying the EC-130H Hercules Compass Call arrived. The aircraft carried an airborne battlefield command and control center capsule that provides continuous control of tactical air operations in the forward battle area and behind enemy lines. This capability added yet more strength to the wing's combat capability. The 43rd Electronic Combat Squadron \"Bats\" are part of the 55th Wing at Offutt AFB, Nebraska, but operate out of Davis\u2013Monthan. In addition, the 42d Airborne Command and Control Squadron arrived from Keesler AFB, Mississippi, on 19 July 1994.\nOn 1 May 1992, senior Air Force leaders implemented the policy of one base, one wing, one boss. The 836 AD and 602 TAIRCW inactivated (the later on 15 June 1992), while the 41 ECS and 43 ECS came under control of the 355 FW. With the mission diversified, the 355th FW was redesignated as the 355th Wing (355 WG).\nAir Combat Command.\nOn 1 June 1992, Tactical Air Command was inactivated and all aircraft, personnel, and installations previously under TAC were transferred to the newly established Air Combat Command on the same date. Following Operation Desert Storm, the 355 WG supported Operation Southern Watch during deployments to Al Jaber, Kuwait, in 1997 by deploying 24 A-10s, in 1998 by deploying 16 A-10s, and in 1999 by deploying 14 A-10s\u2014all to ensure compliance of the 33rd parallel southern no-fly zone. The flight and mysterious crash of Captain Craig D. Button took off from Davis\u2013Monthan Air Force Base on 12 April 1997.\nGlobal War on Terrorism, 2001\u20132007.\nThe attacks on 11 September 2001, led to the initiation of three ongoing missions: Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF), Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), and Operation Noble Eagle (ONE). After Operation Enduring Freedom, eight A-10s from the 355 WG were called to Bagram Airfield, Afghanistan, to fly close air support missions supporting multinational ground forces.\nIn September 2002, the 48th, 55th, and the 79th Rescue Squadron's (RQS) transferred under control of the 355 WG, equipped with HC-130 aircraft and HH-60 helicopters. At the same time, the 41st and 43d Electronic Combat Squadrons were realigned under the control of the 55th Electronic Combat Group (55 ECG). While personnel and aircraft remained on Davis\u2013Monthan AFB, operational control of the 55 ECG was assumed by the 55th Wing at Offutt AFB, Nebraska. Another major wing realignment occurred on 1 October 2003, with the activation of the 563rd Rescue Group (563 RQG) on Davis\u2013Monthan AFB. Control of the 48th, 55th, and 79th RQSs was passed to the new group with the 23rd Wing at Moody Air Force Base, Georgia, assuming operational command of the unit.\nIn 2003 and 2005, the 354th Fighter Squadron (354 FS) \"Bulldogs\" deployed on five-month deployments to Bagram Airfield in Afghanistan. During these deployments, they provided 24-hour presence to reassure the Afghan population as it struggled with its emergent democracy, and provided key support during national elections. While the 2003 deployment saw limited action, the Bulldogs employed over 22,000 rounds of 30\u00a0mm during 130 troops-in-contact situations during the 2005 deployment. Returning to Afghanistan in April 2007 for another six-month deployment, the 345th again provided 24-hour presence and Close Air Support expertise to coalition forces in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. During this period, insurgent activity level was the highest recorded to date in OEF. The Bulldogs employed an unprecedented number of munitions during this deployment\u2014over 150,000 rounds of 30\u00a0mm in support of over 400 troops-in-contact situations.\n2007\u2013present.\nOn 26 April 2007, the 355th Wing was redesignated as the 355th Fighter Wing (355 FW) with only A-10 fighter aircraft assigned. Also in 2007, the 214th Reconnaissance Group (214 RG), an Arizona Air National Guard unit, was activated. As of October 2020, the 355 FW is composed of four groups, the 355th Operations Group (355 OG), the 355th Maintenance Group (355 MG), the 355th Mission Support Group (355 MSG), and the 355th Medical Group (355 MDG). Along with their tenant organizations, they make up the 6,100 airmen and 1,700 civilian personnel at Davis\u2013Monthan AFB. The 355th Fighter Wing was re-designated 355th Wing on January 2, 2019. On 20 August 2020, the 355th Wing again realigned and now falls under the 15th Air Force Headquarters at Shaw AFB, SC.\nThe 924 Fighter Group of the Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC) was reactivated in 2011 and initially assigned to Davis\u2013Monthan AFB as an \"associate\" unit to the 355 FW flying the A-10 aircraft. As part of the Air Force Reserve Command, it is also a geographically separated unit (GSU) of AFRC's 944th Fighter Wing (944 FW) at Luke AFB, Arizona. Like the 355 FW, the 924 FG currently flies the same Fairchild Republic A-10 Thunderbolt II close air support aircraft. The 924 FG consists of the 47th Fighter Squadron (A-10C), 924th Maintenance Squadron, 924th Operational Support Flight.\nBetween October 2013 and March 2014, the 924 FG transitioned from being a \"classic\" associate unit when it gained 28 A-10 aircraft of its own from Barksdale AFB, Louisiana. The 924th is now part of the Total Force Enterprise, and is the only unit-equipped both active and classic associate fighter group in Air Force Reserve Command's inventory. With oversight of the 47th Fighter Squadron, 924th MS, and 924th OSF, the group is charged with working with the Regular Air Force's 355th Fighter Wing to functionally integrate with the 355th Operations Group and 355th Maintenance Group to conduct A-10 pilot training at Davis\u2013Monthan AFB. The group was inactivated on 6 September 2025 as part of the wider drawdown of the USAF's A-10 fleet.\nOn 1 October 2021, the 418th Test and Evaluation Squadron was activated at David-Monthan to provide test and evaluation of new tactics, techniques and procedures for the EC-130H Compass Call and HC-130J Combat King II.\nRole and operations.\n355th Wing.\nThe host wing at Davis\u2013Monthan is the 355th Wing, which includes:\nThe 355 OG consists of six squadrons and over 450 personnel employing A-10 aircraft and an AN/TPS-75 radar system. It provides war-fighters with forces for close air support (CAS), air interdiction (AI), forward air control (FAC), combat search and rescue (CSAR), ground-based tactical air control, and airbase operations. It also conducts all formal course directed aircraft initial qualification/ re-qualification training. All active duty aircraft assigned to Davis\u2013Monthan Air Force Base carry the tail code \"DM\".\n563rd Rescue Group.\nThe 563rd Rescue Group is part of the 355th Wing. It includes the following squadrons:\nTenant units.\nTwelfth Air Force.\nDavis\u2013Monthan is headquarters of Air Combat Command's Twelfth Air Force and the 612th Air and Space Operations Center which operates AFSOUTH's Combined Air and Space Operations Center (CAOC). Other Direct Report Units include the 612th Air Communications Squadron.\n55th Electronic Combat Group\n309th Aerospace Maintenance and Regeneration Group (AMARG).\nThe 309th Aerospace Maintenance and Regeneration Group (AMARG) is part of Air Force Materiel Command and is responsible for the base's aircraft \"graveyard\", the largest in terms of number of planes in the world, where old military and other aircraft are stationed either to be stored indefinitely, demilitarized for museum or monument display, stripped and pulped/recycled, or restored for service.\n943rd Rescue Group\nArizona Air National Guard.\nThe base provides additional active duty support to the 162d Fighter Wing (162 FW) of the Arizona Air National Guard and the Air National Guard Air Force Reserve Command Test Center, both located at Tucson Air National Guard Base at nearby Tucson International Airport, and both of which fly the F-16C and F-16D Fighting Falcon, with the latter also operating an A-10 Thunderbolt II detachment in concert with the 355 FW at Davis\u2013Monthan AFB.\nThe 214th Attack Group (214 RG) of the Arizona Air National Guard previously operated the MQ-1 Predator and currently flies the MQ-9 Reaper in a split operation, with remote piloting/command &amp; control activities at Davis-Monthan AFB and aircraft launch, recovery and maintenance activities taking place at Libby Army Airfield.\nOther activities.\nAlso located on base is the 25th Operational Weather Squadron 25 OWS. The squadron produces forecasts for the Western United States and is part of the 1st Weather Group (1 WXG) headquartered at Offutt Air Force Base, Neb. The squadron also serves as a training hub for new weather professionals\u2014both enlisted and officers.\nOther military activities and federal agencies using the base include the Navy Operational Support Center Tucson, a detachment of the Naval Air Systems Command, the Federal Aviation Administration, the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Air and Marine Operations Tucson Air Branch, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.\nBased units.\nFlying and notable non-flying units based at Davis\u2013Monthan Air Force Base.\nUnits marked GSU are Geographically Separate Units, which although based at Davis\u2013Monthan, are subordinate to a parent unit based at another location.\nUnited States Air Force.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMajor units assigned.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76364", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76364", "title": "B-29", "text": ""}
{"id": "76365", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76365", "title": "B-17", "text": ""}
{"id": "76366", "revid": "36112485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76366", "title": "Some Like It Hot", "text": "1959 film\nSome Like It Hot is a 1959 American crime comedy film produced, co-written and directed by Billy Wilder. It stars Marilyn Monroe, Tony Curtis and Jack Lemmon, with George Raft, Pat O'Brien, Joe E. Brown, Joan Shawlee and Nehemiah Persoff in supporting roles. The screenplay by Wilder and I. A. L. Diamond is based on a screenplay by Robert Thoeren and Michael Logan from the 1935 French film \"Fanfare of Love\". Set in the Prohibition era, the film is about two musicians (Curtis and Lemmon) who disguise themselves as women to escape Chicago mobsters they witnessed commit murder.\n\"Some Like It Hot\" opened to critical and commercial success and is considered to be one of the greatest films of all time. The film received six Academy Award nominations, including Best Actor, Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay, winning for Best Costume Design. In 1989, the Library of Congress selected it as one of the first 25 films for preservation in the United States National Film Registry for being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nThe Production Code had been gradually weakening in its scope since the early 1950s, owing to greater social tolerance for taboo topics in film, but it was enforced until the mid-1960s. The overwhelming success of \"Some Like It Hot\" is considered one of the reasons behind the retirement of the code.\nPlot.\nIn Prohibition-era Chicago, Joe is a jazz saxophone player and an irresponsible, impulsive gambler and ladies' man; Jerry, his anxious friend, is a jazz double bass player. They work in a speakeasy owned by local Mafia boss \"Spats\" Colombo. Tipped off by informant \"Toothpick\" Charlie, the police raid the joint. Joe and Jerry escape, but accidentally witness Spats and his henchmen gunning down Toothpick and his gang in revenge (an incident inspired by the Saint Valentine's Day Massacre). Spats and his gang see them as they flee. Broke, terrified, and desperate to leave Chicago, Joe and Jerry disguise themselves as women named Josephine and Daphne so they can join Sweet Sue and her Society Syncopators, an all-female band headed to Miami by train. On the train, they befriend Sugar Kane, the band's vocalist and ukulele player.\nThe two musicians become obsessed with Sugar and compete for her affections while maintaining their disguises. Sugar confides to Josephine that she has sworn off saxophone players, who have taken advantage of her in the past, and hopes to find a gentle, bespectacled millionaire in Florida. Josephine and Daphne become close friends with Sugar during a late-night party on the train, and struggle to remember that flirting with her would compromise their cover.\nAfter arriving in Miami, Joe woos Sugar by posing as Junior, heir to the Shell Oil fortune, affecting a Cary Grant-esque accent while feigning indifference to her. Aging, multi-divorcee Osgood Fielding III \u2013 an actual millionaire \u2013 persistently pursues Daphne, whose refusals only fuel his desire. After Osgood invites Daphne to dinner on his yacht, Josephine convinces her to keep him occupied onshore, so that Junior can pass it off as his own and entertain Sugar. He tells Sugar that psychological trauma from the death of a former lover has left him impotent, but that he would immediately marry anyone who could cure him. Sugar tries to arouse him, with considerable success. Meanwhile, Daphne and Osgood dance until dawn. Back at the hotel, Daphne announces that she has accepted Osgood's proposal of marriage \u2013 anticipating a divorce and cash settlement when the ruse is revealed \u2013 but Josephine convinces her not to go through with it.\nThe hotel hosts a conference for the Friends of Italian Opera Society, a front for a national Mafia meeting, presided over by Little Bonaparte - who already has a grudge against Spats over the murder of Toothpick. Spats and his men arrive, and this time recognize Josephine and Daphne as the witnesses they'd been looking for. Fearing for their lives, the pair decide to cut and run. Junior breaks up with Sugar over the telephone, telling her that he must marry a woman of his father's choosing and move to Venezuela, leaving her heartbroken. As the two try to leave the hotel in male disguises, they accidentally witness Little Bonaparte's execution of Spats and his gang for bungling the situation in Chicago, and revert to women's clothing to evade capture. On the way out, Josephine sees Sugar onstage singing a lament to lost love, kisses her, then rejoins Daphne in their flight. Sugar realizes that Josephine and Junior are the same person, and follows them.\nDaphne persuades Osgood to take her and Josephine away on his yacht, and Sugar unexpectedly joins them on his launch just as it leaves the dock. Removing his disguise, Joe confesses to Sugar and tells her that she deserves better, but she wants him anyway, realizing he is the first man to genuinely care for her. Meanwhile, Daphne tries to get out of her engagement, offering escalating half-true reasons why she and Osgood cannot marry, none of which dissuade him. Exasperated, Jerry rips off his wig and says \"I'm a man!\" in his normal voice. Still smiling, Osgood replies \"Well, nobody's perfect!\" confounding Jerry and leaving him speechless.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Tony Curtis as Joe/Josephine/Shell Oil Junior, a saxophone player\nSoundtrack.\nThe soundtrack features four songs performed by Marilyn Monroe, nine songs composed by Adolph Deutsch, and two songs performed by jazz artist Matty Malneck.\nProduction.\nPre-production.\nBilly Wilder wrote the script for the film with writer I. A. L. Diamond. The plot was based on a screenplay by Robert Thoeren and Michael Logan for the 1935 French film \"Fanfare of Love\". The original script for \"Fanfare of Love\" was untraceable, so Walter Mirisch found a copy of the 1951 German remake, \"Fanfares of Love\". He bought the rights to that script, and Wilder worked with this to produce a new story. Both films follow the story of two musicians in search of work, but Wilder created the gangster subplot.\nThe studio hired female impersonator Barbette to coach Lemmon and Curtis. Monroe worked for 10 percent of the gross in excess of $4 million, Curtis for 5 percent of the gross over $2 million, and Wilder for 17.5 percent of the first million after break-even and 20 percent thereafter.\nCasting.\nBilly Wilder spotted Tony Curtis while he was making the film \"Houdini\" (1953). Wilder thought that Curtis would be perfect for the role of Joe: \"I was sure Tony was right for it\", said Wilder, \"because he was quite handsome, and when he tells Marilyn that he is one of the Shell Oil family, she has to be able to believe it\". Wilder's first idea for the role of Jerry was Frank Sinatra, but he later thought that he would be too difficult. Jerry Lewis and Danny Kaye were also considered for the role of Jerry. Lewis was offered the role, but he declined, as he didn't want to do drag, a decision that he later would regret. Finally, Wilder saw Lemmon in the comedy \"Operation Mad Ball\" and selected him for the part. Wilder and Lemmon would go on to make numerous films together, including \"The Apartment\" and several films that also included Walter Matthau.\nAccording to York Film Notes, Wilder and Diamond did not expect a star as big as Marilyn Monroe to take the part of Sugar. \"Mitzi Gaynor was who we had in mind\", Wilder said. \"The word came that Marilyn wanted the part and then we had to have Marilyn.\" Monroe considered the role of Sugar Kane another \"dumb blonde\", but she accepted it due to her husband Arthur Miller's encouragement and the offer of 10% of the film's profits on top of her standard pay. Curtis stated that everyone told Wilder not to cast Monroe as she was too difficult to work with. Wilder and Monroe had previously worked together on \"The Seven Year Itch\" in 1955.\nIt was George Raft's first \"A\" picture in a number of years.\nFilming.\nThe film was made in California during the summer and autumn of 1958. AFI reported the production dates between early August and November 12, 1958, at Samuel Goldwyn Studios. Many scenes were shot at the Hotel del Coronado in Coronado, California, which appeared as the \"Seminole Ritz Hotel\" in Miami in the film, as it fit into the era of the 1920s and was near Hollywood. The Mirisch Company was the film's presenter, and producer Walter Mirisch employed several crew members from his home base, the Allied Artists studio.\nThe film's difficult production has since become \"legendary\". Monroe demanded dozens of retakes, and did not remember her lines or act as directed\u2014Curtis famously said that kissing her was \"like kissing Hitler\" due to the number of retakes. The line \"It's me, Sugar\" took 47 takes to get correct because Monroe kept getting the word order wrong, saying either \"Sugar, it's me\" or \"It's Sugar, me\". Curtis and Lemmon made bets during the filming on how many takes she would need to get it right. Monroe privately likened the production to a sinking ship and commented on her co-stars and director saying \"[but] why should I worry, I have no phallic symbol to lose.\" Many of the problems stemmed from her and Wilder\u2014who also had a reputation for being difficult\u2014disagreeing on how she should play the role. She angered him by asking to alter many of her scenes, which in turn made her stage fright worse, and it is suggested that she deliberately ruined several scenes to act them her way. Three days were scheduled for shooting the scene with Shell Jr. and Sugar at the beach, as Monroe had many complicated lines, but the scene was finished in only 20 minutes. Monroe's acting coach Paula Strasberg and Monroe's husband Arthur Miller both tried to influence the production, which Wilder and other crew members found annoying.\nWilder spoke in 1959 about making another film with Monroe: \"I have discussed this with my doctor and my psychiatrist and they tell me I'm too old and too rich to go through this again.\" But Wilder also admitted: \"My Aunt Minnie would always be punctual and never hold up production, but who would pay to see my Aunt Minnie?\" He also stated that Monroe played her part wonderfully. Years later, Wilder noted \"I think there are more books on Marilyn Monroe than there are on World War 2, and there's a great similarity.\"\nThe film's closing line, \"Well, nobody's perfect\", is ranked 78th on \"The Hollywood Reporter\" list of Hollywood's 100 Favorite Movie Lines, but it was never supposed to be in the final cut. Diamond and Wilder put it in the script as a \"placeholder\" until they could come up with something better, but they never did. Wilder's tombstone pays homage to the line by reading, \"I'm a writer, but then, nobody's perfect\". In 2000, \"The Guardian\" ranked the closing scene at No. 10 on their list of \"The top 100 film moments\".\nStyle.\nWith regard to sound design, there is a \"strong musical element\" in the film, with the soundtrack created by Adolph Deutsch. It has an authentic 1920s jazz feel using sharp, brassy strings to create tension in certain moments, for example whenever Spats's gangsters appear. In terms of cinematography and aesthetics, Wilder chose to shoot the film in black and white as Lemmon and Curtis in full drag costume and make-up looked \"unacceptably grotesque\" in early color tests. Despite Monroe's contract requiring the film to be in color, she agreed to it being filmed in black and white after seeing that Curtis and Lemmon's makeup gave them a \"ghoulish\" appearance on color film. Orry-Kelly created the costumes for Monroe as well as Lemmon and Curtis, after the stock costumes the studio provided for the male leads fit poorly.\nReception.\nBox office.\nBy 1962, \"Some Like It Hot\" had grossed $14 million in the US. According to The Numbers, the film ultimately grossed $25 million domestically. Box Office Mojo reported that its re-releases outside North America had grossed over $83.2 million internationally.\nThe film opened in the week ended March 24, 1959, in several cities in the United States; the highest grossing of which were in Chicago, where it grossed $45,000 at the United Artists Theatre with Monroe making an appearance, and in Washington, D.C., where it grossed $40,000 at the Capitol Theatre. With results from just six key cities, \"Variety\" listed it as the third highest-grossing film in the United States for the week.\nThe film then expanded to 100 theatres around the country for the Easter holiday, including at the newly renovated State Theatre in New York City on Sunday, March 29, 1959, and became number one in the country and remained there for three weeks before being knocked off the top by \"Imitation of Life\". \"Imitation of Life\" was top for two weeks before being replaced again by \"Some Like It Hot\", which remained there for another four weeks before being replaced by \"Pork Chop Hill\". In its first month, the film grossed $2,585,120 from 96 engagements.\nRetrospective appraisal.\n\"Some Like It Hot\" received widespread acclaim from critics and is considered among the best films of all time. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, 95% of 73 critics have given the film a positive review, with an average rating of 9.1/10. The website's critical consensus calls it \"a spry, quick-witted farce that never drags.\" According to Metacritic, another review aggregator which calculated a weighted average score of 98 out of 100 based on 19 critics, the film received \"universal acclaim\". The \"Chicago Sun-Times\"'s Roger Ebert wrote: \"Wilder's 1959 comedy is one of the enduring treasures of the movies, a film of inspiration and meticulous craft.\" Ebert gave the film four stars out of four and included it in his Great Movies list. John McCarten of \"The New Yorker\" referred to the film as \"a jolly, carefree enterprise\". Richard Roud, writing for \"The Guardian\" in 1967, called it \"close to perfection\".\nIn 1989, the film became one of the first 25 inducted into the United States National Film Registry. In 1998, the film was ranked at No. 7 in \"Time Out\"'s poll of Top 100 Films. In 1999, \"Entertainment Weekly\" voted it at No. 9 on their list of \"100 Greatest Movies of All Time\".\n\"Some Like It Hot\" was voted as the top American comedy film by the American Film Institute on their list on AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs poll in 2000, and was selected as the best comedy of all time in a poll of 253 film critics from 52 countries conducted by the BBC in 2017. In 2005, the British Film Institute included this film on its list of \"Top fifty films for children up to the age of 14\". The 2022 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" critics' poll ranked it as the 38th greatest film of all time, tied with \"Rear Window\" and \"a bout de souffle\". The 2022 Sight &amp; Sound directors' poll ranked it 62nd, tied with nine other films. In the earlier 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls, it was ranked the 42nd-greatest film ever made in the critics' poll and 37th in the directors' poll. The 2002 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls the film ranked 37th among critics and 24th among directors. In 2010, \"The Guardian\" considered it the third-best comedy film of all time. In 2015, the film ranked 30th on BBC's \"100 Greatest American Films\" list, voted on by film critics from around the world. It was included in \"The New York Times\"'s \"The Best 1,000 Movies Ever Made\" list in 2002. In 2005, it was included on \"Time\"'s All-Time 100 best movies list. The film was voted at No. 52 on the list of \"100 Greatest Films\" by the French film magazine \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\" in 2008. In July 2018, it was screened in the Venice Classics section at the 75th Venice International Film Festival.\nAccording to film historian Foster Hirsch, during a screening of the film at Grauman's Chinese Theatre in March 1959, \"Joe E. Brown's nonchalant delivery of the final line elicited the loudest, deepest, heartiest laughter I have ever heard in a theater...recognizing a perfectly timed one-liner for the ages, a thousand spectators roared in unified delight.\"\nAwards and nominations.\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nThe film was inducted in 1989 into the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress. The Writers Guild of America ranked the film's screenplay the ninth greatest ever written.\nAdaptations.\nAn unsold television pilot was filmed by Mirisch Productions in 1961 featuring Vic Damone and Tina Louise. As a favor to the production company, Jack Lemmon and Tony Curtis agreed to film cameo appearances, returning as their original characters, Daphne and Josephine, at the beginning of the pilot. Their appearance sees them in a hospital where Jerry (Lemmon) is being treated for his impacted back tooth and Joe (Curtis) is the same O blood type.\nIn 1975, a Bollywood remake was released as \"Rafoo Chakkar\".\nA 1984 stage production at the Claridge Hotel &amp; Casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey, starred Joe Namath as Joe.\nA 1991 stage production of this show in London featured Tommy Steele and retained the film's title.\nTony Curtis, then in his late 70s, performed in a 2002 stage production of the film, this time cast as Osgood Fielding III, the character originally played by Joe E. Brown.\nBroadway.\nThe 1972 musical \"Sugar\", based on the film screenplay, opened on Broadway starring Elaine Joyce, Robert Morse, Tony Roberts, and Cyril Ritchard, with book by Peter Stone, lyrics by Bob Merrill, and (all-new) music by Jule Styne.\nOn January 5, 2019, Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman confirmed they were writing the music and lyrics for a new adaptation in an interview with Graham Norton on BBC Radio 2. The version had aimed for a Broadway production in 2020, but was delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic. On April 20, 2022, the production was confirmed to star Christian Borle at the Shubert Theatre with previews beginning November 1, 2022, with music by Shaiman, music and lyrics by Shaiman and Wittman, and book by Matthew Lopez and Amber Ruffin. The Broadway production went on to win four Tony Awards at the 76th annual ceremony in 2023: Casey Nicholaw for Best Choreography, Charlie Rosen &amp; Bryan Carter for Best Orchestrations, Gregg Barnes for Best Costume Design of a Musical, and J. Harrison Ghee for Best Leading Actor in a Musical. Ghee was the first openly non-binary actor to be both nominated for and to win a Tony Award, along with Alex Newell, who won for their role in \"Shucked\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76367", "revid": "4626582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76367", "title": "Stormy Weather (song)", "text": "Song written by Harold Arlen and Ted Koehler in 1933\n\"Stormy Weather\" is a 1933 torch song written by Harold Arlen and Ted Koehler. Ethel Waters first sang it at The Cotton Club night club in Harlem in 1933 and recorded it with the Dorsey Brothers' Orchestra under Brunswick Records that year, and in the same year it was sung in London by Elisabeth Welch and recorded by Frances Langford. Also in 1933, for the first time the entire floor revue from Harlem's Cotton Club went on tour, playing theatres in principal cities. The revue was originally called \"The Cotton Club Parade of 1933\" but for the road tour it was changed to \"Stormy Weather Revue\"; it contained the song \"Stormy Weather\", which was sung by Adelaide Hall.\nIn September 1933, the group Comedian Harmonists released their German cover version, titled \"Ohne Dich\" (\"Without You\") with lyrics that are quite different. The song has since been performed by Frank Sinatra, Judy Garland, Etta James, Ella Fitzgerald, Dinah Washington, Clodagh Rodgers, Reigning Sound, Lena Horne, Billie Holiday, The Spaniels, Willie Hutch, Jeff Lynne, Bob Dylan and others. Leo Reisman's orchestra version had the biggest hit on records (with Arlen himself as vocalist), although Ethel Waters' recorded version also sold well. \"Stormy Weather\" was performed by Horne in the 1943 film \"Stormy Weather\", a big, all-star show for World War II soldiers.\nThe song tells of disappointment, as the lyrics, \"Don't know why there's no sun up in the sky\", show someone pining for her man to return. The weather is a metaphor for the feelings of the singer: \"stormy weather since my man and I ain't together, keeps raining all the time\".\nThe original handwritten lyrics, along with a painting by Ted Koehler, were featured on the US version of \"Antiques Roadshow\" on January 24, 2011, where they were appraised for between $50,000 and $100,000. The lyrics show a number of crossings out and corrections.\nEthel Waters' recording of the song in 1933 was inducted in the Grammy Hall of Fame in 2003, and the Library of Congress added it to the National Recording Registry in 2004. Also in 2004, Horne's version finished at number 30 on AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs survey of top tunes in American movies.\nAccording to the Acoustic Music organization, the version by the Five Sharps (1952) \"is one of the rarest of all R&amp;B records. Only three 78rpm and no 45rpm copies are known to exist\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76368", "revid": "9781249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76368", "title": "Sunset Boulevard (film)", "text": "1950 film by Billy Wilder\nSunset Boulevard is a 1950 American dark comedy film noir directed by Billy Wilder and co-written by Wilder, Charles Brackett and D. M. Marshman Jr. It is named after a major street that runs through Hollywood and western Los Angeles.\nThe film stars William Holden as Joe Gillis, a struggling screenwriter, and Gloria Swanson as Norma Desmond, a former silent-film star who draws him into her deranged fantasy world, where she dreams of making a triumphant return to the screen. Erich von Stroheim plays Max von Mayerling, her devoted butler, and Nancy Olson, Jack Webb, Lloyd Gough, and Fred Clark appear in supporting roles. Director Cecil B. DeMille and gossip columnist Hedda Hopper play themselves, and the film includes cameo appearances by silent-film stars Buster Keaton, H. B. Warner, and Anna Q. Nilsson.\nPraised by many critics when first released, \"Sunset Boulevard\" was nominated for 11 Academy Awards (including nominations in all four acting categories) and won three. It is often ranked among the greatest movies ever made. As it was deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the U.S. Library of Congress in 1989, \"Sunset Boulevard\" was included in the first group of films selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. In 1998, it was ranked number 12 on the American Film Institute's list of the 100 best American films of the 20th century. In 2007, it was 16th on their 10th Anniversary list.\nPlot.\nAt a mansion on Sunset Boulevard, police officers and photographers discover the body of Joe Gillis floating face down in the swimming pool. In a flashback, Joe relates the events leading to his death.\nSix months earlier, Joe, a down-on-his-luck screenwriter, tries to interest Paramount Pictures in a story he submitted. Script reader Betty Schaefer harshly critiques it, unaware that Joe is listening. Later, while fleeing from repo men seeking his car, Joe turns into the driveway of a seemingly deserted mansion inhabited by forgotten silent film star Norma Desmond. Learning that Joe is a writer, Norma asks his opinion of a script she has written for a film about Salome. She plans to play the role herself in her return to the screen. Joe finds her script abysmal but flatters her into hiring him as a script doctor.\nJoe moves into Norma's mansion at her insistence and sees that Norma refuses to believe that her fame has evaporated. Her butler, Max, secretly writes all of the fan mail she receives to maintain the illusion. At her New Year's Eve party, Joe realizes that she has fallen in love with him. He tries to let her down gently, but Norma slaps him and retreats to her room, distraught. Joe visits his friend Artie Green and again meets Betty, who thinks a scene in one of Joe's scripts has potential. When he phones Max to have him pack his things, Max tells him Norma has cut her wrists with his razor. Joe then returns to Norma, and their relationship becomes sexual.\nNorma has Max deliver the edited \"Salome\" script to her former director Cecil B. DeMille at Paramount. She starts getting calls from Paramount executive Gordon Cole but refuses to speak to anyone except DeMille. Eventually, she has Max drive her and Joe to Paramount in her 1929 Isotta Fraschini. DeMille welcomes her affectionately and treats her with great respect but tactfully evades her questions about the script. Max then learns that Cole only called her because he wants to rent her Isotta Fraschini for use in a film.\nPreparing for her imagined comeback, Norma undergoes rigorous beauty treatments. Joe secretly works nights in Betty's office, collaborating on an original screenplay, and she eventually confesses she has fallen for him. After learning of Joe's moonlighting, Max reveals he was once a respected film director who discovered Norma, made her a star, and became her first husband. Following their divorce, he abandoned his career to become her servant.\nNorma discovers a manuscript with Joe and Betty's names on it and phones Betty, insinuating that Joe is not the man he seems. Overhearing the call, Joe invites Betty to the mansion to see for herself. When she arrives, he pretends that he is satisfied being a gigolo so that she can be with Artie. However, after she tearfully leaves, he packs to return to his old newspaper job in Dayton, Ohio. He bluntly informs Norma that there will be no comeback, that Max writes all of her fan mail, and that she has been forgotten, though Max refuses to break her delusions. Joe disregards Norma's threat to kill herself as she brandishes a gun; as he leaves the house, Norma shoots him three times, and he collapses into the pool.\nThe flashback ends, and the film returns to the present day, with Norma about to be arrested for murder. The mansion is overrun with police and reporters with newsreel cameras, which she believes are film cameras. Max pretends to \"direct\" her, and the police play along. As the cameras roll, Norma descends the grand staircase. Upon reaching the bottom, she stops and makes an impromptu speech about how happy she is to be making a film again. She then says, \"All right, Mr. DeMille, I'm ready for my close-up\" and approaches the camera.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* William Holden as Joe Gillis \"(Joseph C. Gillis)\"\nProduction.\nBackground.\nThe street known as Sunset Boulevard has been associated with Hollywood film production since 1911, when the town's first film studio, Nestor, opened there. The film workers lived modestly in the growing neighborhood, but during the 1920s, profits and salaries rose to unprecedented levels. With the advent of the star system, luxurious homes noted for their often incongruous grandeur were built in the area.\nAs a young man living in Berlin in the 1920s, Billy Wilder was interested in American culture, with much of his interest fueled by the country's films. In the late 1940s, many of the grand Hollywood houses remained, and Wilder, then a Los Angeles resident, found them to be a part of his everyday world. Many former stars from the silent era still lived in them, although most were no longer involved in the film business. Wilder wondered how they spent their time now that \"the parade had passed them by\" and began imagining the story of a star who had lost her celebrity and box-office appeal.\nThe character of Norma Desmond mirrors aspects of the twilight years of several real-life faded silent-film stars, such as the reclusive existences of Mary Pickford and Pola Negri and the mental disorders of Mae Murray, Valeska Surratt, Audrey Munson and Clara Bow. Dave Kehr has asserted that Norma Talmadge is \"the obvious if unacknowledged source of Norma Desmond, the grotesque, predatory silent movie queen\" of the film. The most common analysis of the character's name is that it is a combination of the names of silent film actress Mabel Normand and director William Desmond Taylor, a close friend of Normand's who was murdered in 1922 in a never-solved case sensationalized by the press.\nWriting.\nCinematographer John Seitz stated that Wilder \"had wanted to do Evelyn Waugh's 1948 novel \"The Loved One\", but couldn't obtain the rights.\" Waugh's story follows Dennis Barlow, a young British poet who is working at a Hollywood pet mortuary. His housemate is Sir Francis Hinsley, an aging screenwriter who hasn\u2019t written anything in years.\u00a0When Sir Francis is unceremoniously let go by the studio, he hangs himself and funeral arrangements are left to Barlow. Gossip columnist Hedda Hopper, who plays herself in the movie, wrote that \"Billy Wilder ... was crazy about Evelyn Waugh's book \"The Loved One\", and the studio wanted to buy it.\" Regardless, the plans for this adaptation fell through. The original script that followed nevertheless contains similarities to the novel. At one point, Norma mistakes Joe for a funeral director and inquires about a coffin for herself and her deceased pet chimp.\nWilder and Brackett began working on a script in 1948, but the result did not completely satisfy them. In August 1948, D. M. Marshman Jr., formerly a writer for \"Life\", was hired to help develop the storyline after Wilder and Brackett were impressed by a critique he provided of their film \"The Emperor Waltz\" (1948). In an effort to keep the full details of the story from Paramount Pictures and avoid the restrictive censorship of the Breen Code, they submitted the script a few pages at a time. The Breen Office insisted certain lines be rewritten, such as Gillis's \"I'm up that creek and I need a job,\" which became \"I'm over a barrel. I need a job.\" Paramount executives thought Wilder was adapting a story called \"A Can of Beans\" (which did not exist) and allowed him relative freedom to proceed as he saw fit. Only the first third of the script was written when filming began in early May 1949, and Wilder was unsure how the film would end.\nThe fusion of writer-director Billy Wilder's biting humor and the classic elements of film noir make for a strange kind of comedy, as well as a strange kind of film noir. There are no belly laughs here, but there are certainly strangled giggles: at the pet chimp's midnight funeral, at Joe's discomfited acquiescence to the role of gigolo; at Norma's Mack Sennett-style \"entertainments\" for her uneasy lover; and at the ritualized solemnity of Norma's \"waxworks\" card parties, which feature such former luminaries as Buster Keaton as Norma's has-been cronies.\nWilder preferred to leave analysis of his screenplays and films to others. When asked if \"Sunset Boulevard\" was a black comedy, he replied: \"No, just a picture\".\nCasting.\nAccording to Brackett, Wilder and he never considered anyone except Gloria Swanson for the role of Norma Desmond. Wilder, however, recalled first wanting Mae West and Marlon Brando for the leads. West rejected the offer outright. West portrayed herself as a sex symbol through her senior years, and was offended that she should be asked to play a Hollywood has-been.\nThe filmmakers approached Greta Garbo, whom they had worked with previously on \"Ninotchka\" (1939), but she was not interested. Wilder contacted Pola Negri by telephone, but had a difficult time understanding her heavy Polish accent. He then reached out to Clara Bow, the famed \"It girl\" of the 1920s, but she declined, having found the transition to sound films so difficult that she preferred to leave her film career behind her. They also offered the part of Norma Desmond to Norma Shearer, but she rejected the role due to both her retirement and distaste for the script. They were considering Fred MacMurray to play opposite her as Joe. Wilder and Brackett then visited Mary Pickford, but before even discussing the plot with her, Wilder realized she would consider a role involving an affair with a man half her age an insult, so they departed. They had considered pairing Montgomery Clift with her.\nAccording to Wilder, he asked George Cukor for advice, and he suggested Swanson, one of the most f\u00eated actresses of the silent-screen era, known for her beauty, talent, and extravagant lifestyle. In many ways, she resembled the Norma Desmond character, and like her, had been unable to make a smooth transition into talking pictures. The similarities ended there; Swanson made a handful of talking pictures. She accepted the end of her film career and, in the early 1930s, moved to New York City, where she worked in radio. In the mid-1940s, she worked in television and on the New York stage and had last appeared in the 1941 film \"Father Takes a Wife\". Though Swanson was not seeking a movie comeback, she became intrigued when Wilder discussed the role with her.\nSwanson was glad for the opportunity to earn a greater salary than she had been making in television and on stage. However, she was chagrined at the notion of submitting to a screen test, saying she had \"made 20 films for Paramount. Why do they want me to audition?\" Her reaction was echoed in the screenplay when Norma Desmond declares, \"Without me there wouldn't be any Paramount studios.\" In her memoir, Swanson recalled asking Cukor if it was unreasonable to refuse the screen test. He replied that since Norma Desmond was the role for which she would be remembered, \"If they ask you to do ten screen tests, do ten screen tests, or I will personally shoot you.\" His enthusiasm convinced Swanson to participate, and she signed a contract for $50,000 (). In a 1975 interview, Wilder recalled Swanson's reaction with the observation, \"There \"was\" a lot of Norma in her, you know.\"\nWilder harks back to Swanson's silent film career when Norma shows Joe the film \"Queen Kelly\", an earlier Gloria Swanson film directed by Erich von Stroheim, who himself portrays Norma's former director and husband Max von Mayerling, who now works as her butler. \"Queen Kelly\" was not released in the United States for over 50 years after Swanson walked off the set.\nMontgomery Clift was signed to play Joe Gillis for $5,000 per week for a guaranteed twelve weeks, but withdrew just before the start of filming, claiming his role of a young man involved with an older woman was too close to the one he had played in \"The Heiress\" (1949), in which he felt he had been unconvincing. An infuriated Wilder responded, \"If he's any kind of actor, he could be convincing making love to \"any\" woman.\" Clift himself was having an affair with singer Libby Holman, 15 years his senior, which some have suggested was his real reason for withdrawing from the film.\nForced to consider the available Paramount contract players, Wilder and Brackett focused on William Holden, who had made an impressive debut a decade earlier in \"Golden Boy\" (1939). Following an appearance in \"Our Town\" (1940), he served in the military in World War II, and his return to the screen afterward had been moderately successful. Holden was enthusiastic about the script and eager to accept the role. He did not know at the time that his salary of $39,000 () was much less than had been offered to Clift.\nFor the role of Betty Schaefer, Wilder wanted a newcomer who could project a wholesome and ordinary image to contrast with Swanson's flamboyant and obsessive Desmond. He chose Nancy Olson, who had recently been considered for the role of Delilah in Cecil B. DeMille's \"Samson and Delilah.\"\nDeMille, often credited as the person most responsible for making Swanson a star, plays himself, with his scenes filmed on the set of \"Samson and Delilah\" at Paramount Studios. He calls Norma \"young fella\", which had been his nickname for Swanson.\nNorma's friends who come to play bridge with her, referred to by Joe as \"the waxworks\", were Swanson's silent-era contemporaries Buster Keaton, Anna Q. Nilsson, and H. B. Warner, portraying themselves. Hedda Hopper also played herself, reporting on Norma Desmond's downfall in the film's final scenes.\nCinematography and design.\nThe film's dark, shadowy black-and-white cinematography was the work of John F. Seitz. Wilder had worked with Seitz on several projects before, and trusted his judgment, allowing him to make his own decisions. Seitz recalled asking Wilder what he required for the pet chimpanzee's funeral scene, to which Wilder replied, \"you know, just your standard monkey funeral shot.\" For some interior shots, Seitz sprinkled dust in front of the camera before filming to suggest \"mustiness,\" a technique he had also used for Wilder's \"Double Indemnity\" (1944). The film had the option to be shot in color, but it was instead shot in black and white to be more reflective of the noir genre.\nWilder was adamant that the corpse of Joe Gillis be seen from the bottom of the pool, but creating the effect was difficult. The camera was placed inside a specially constructed box and lowered under water, but the result disappointed Wilder, who insisted on further experiments. The shot was finally achieved by placing a mirror on the bottom of the pool and filming Holden's reflection from above, with the distorted image of the police officers standing around the pool forming a backdrop.\nFilm historian Tom Stempel writes: \"In both \"Double Indemnity\" and \"Sunset Boulevard\", Seitz does something that has always impressed me. Both are films noir, and he finesses the fact that both are set in the sunniest of locales, Los Angeles... he brings together the light and the dark in the same film without any seams showing... he brings together the realistic lighting of Joe Gillis out in the real world with the gothic look of Norma Desmond's mansion.\"\nEdith Head designed the costumes. Wilder, Head, and Swanson agreed that Norma Desmond would have kept somewhat up-to-date with fashion trends, so Head designed costumes closely resembling the Dior look of the mid-1940s. Embellishments were added to personalize them and reflect Norma Desmond's taste.\nSwanson recalled in her biography that the costumes were only \"a trifle outdated, a trifle exotic.\" Head later described her assignment as \"the most challenging of my career,\" and explained her approach with the comment, \"Because Norma Desmond was an actress who had become lost in her own imagination, I tried to make her look like she was always impersonating someone.\" Head later said she relied on Swanson's expertise because \"she was creating a past that she knew and I didn't.\" Head also designed the costumes for William Holden and the minor characters, but Wilder instructed von Stroheim and Nancy Olson to wear their own clothing.\nThe overstated decadence of Norma Desmond's home was created by set designer Hans Dreier, whose career extended back to the silent era. He had also been commissioned to complete the interior design for the homes of movie stars, including the house of Mae West. William Haines, an interior designer and former actor, later rebutted criticism of Dreier's set design with the observation, \"Bebe Daniels, Norma Shearer, and Pola Negri all had homes with ugly interiors like that.\"\nThe bed in the shape of a boat in which Norma Desmond slept had been owned by the dancer Gaby Deslys, who died in 1920. It had originally been bought by the Universal prop department at auction after Deslys's death. The bed appeared in \"The Phantom of the Opera\" (1925) starring Lon Chaney.\nWilder also made use of authentic locales. Joe's apartment is in the Alto Nido, a real apartment block in central Hollywood that was often home to struggling writers. It is located at 1851 Ivar Ave. and Franklin Ave. west of the Hollywood Freeway. The scenes of Gillis and Betty Schaefer on Paramount's back lot were filmed on the actual studio back lot, and the interior of Schwab's Drug Store was carefully recreated for several scenes. The exterior scenes of the Desmond house were filmed at a house on Wilshire Boulevard built during the 1920s by the millionaire William O. Jenkins. Jenkins and his family lived in it for only one year before then leaving it abandoned for more than a decade, which earned it the nickname \"Phantom House\". By 1949, it was owned by the former wife of J. Paul Getty. The house was later featured in Nicholas Ray's \"Rebel Without a Cause\" (1955). It was demolished by the Gettys in 1957 to make way for the construction of an office building.\nDuring filming, considerable publicity was given to the health-conscious Gloria Swanson's youthful appearance, which made her look the same age as Holden. Wilder insisted that the age difference between the characters be delineated, and instructed makeup supervisor Wally Westmore to make Swanson look older. Swanson argued that a woman of Norma Desmond's age, with her considerable wealth and devotion to self, would not necessarily look old, and suggested Holden be made up to appear younger. Wilder agreed, and Westmore was assigned this task, which allowed Swanson to portray Norma Desmond as more glamorous a figure than Wilder had originally imagined.\nScore.\nFranz Waxman's musical score was the final element added to \"Sunset Boulevard\". His theme for Norma was based on tango music, inspired by her having danced the tango with Rudolph Valentino. This style was contrasted with Joe's bebop theme. Waxman also used distorted arrangements of popular film-music styles from the 1920s and 1930s to suggest Norma Desmond's state of mind. The film's score was recorded for compact disc by the Royal Scottish National Orchestra, conducted by Joel McNeely, and released in 2002. The surviving parts of the original score were released in 2010.\nA suite from the film's score, as well as an arrangement by the conductor John Mauceri of various cues in sonata form are published by Sony Music.\nOriginal release and responses.\nPreviews and revision.\nWilder and Brackett, nervous about a major screening in Hollywood, held a preview in Evanston, Illinois, in late 1949. The original edit opened with a scene inside a morgue, with the assembled corpses discussing how they came to be there. The story began with the corpse of Joe Gillis recounting his murder to the others. The audience reacted with laughter and seemed unsure whether to view the rest of the film as drama or comedy. After a similar reaction during its second screening in Poughkeepsie, New York, and a third in Great Neck, the morgue opening was replaced by a shorter poolside opening, using footage filmed on January 5, 1950.\nIn Hollywood, Paramount arranged a private screening for the various studio heads and specially invited guests. After viewing the film, Barbara Stanwyck knelt to kiss the hem of Gloria Swanson's skirt. Swanson later remembered looking for Mary Pickford, only to be told, \"She can't show herself, Gloria. She's too overcome. We all are.\" Louis B. Mayer berated Wilder before the crowd of celebrities, saying, \"You have disgraced the industry that made and fed you! You should be tarred and feathered and run out of Hollywood!\" Upon hearing of Mayer's slight, Wilder strode up to the mogul and retorted with a vulgarity that one biographer said was allegedly because Mayer, who was Jewish, suggested that Wilder, who was also Jewish, would be better off being sent back to Germany, an extraordinary sentiment so soon after the war and the Holocaust, in which Wilder's family perished. In 2020 Olson recounted that friends who had attended the screening told her that Wilder had simply told Mayer, \"Go fuck yourself.\"\nThe few other criticisms were not so venomous. According to one often-told but later discredited anecdote, actress Mae Murray, a contemporary of Swanson, was offended by the film and commented, \"None of us floozies was \"that\" nuts.\"\nPremiere and box-office receipts.\n\"Sunset Boulevard\" had its official world premiere at Radio City Music Hall on August 10, 1950. After a seven-week run, \"Variety\" magazine reported the film had grossed \"around $1,020,000\", ($ in 2024 dollars ) making it one of that theater's most successful pictures. \"Variety\" also noted that, while it was \"breaking records in major cities, it is doing below average in ... the sticks.\" To promote the film, Gloria Swanson traveled by train throughout the United States, visiting 33 cities in a few months. The publicity helped attract people to the cinemas, but in many areas away from major cities it was considered less than a hit.\nThe film earned an estimated $2,350,000 at the U.S. box office in 1950 ($ in 2024 dollars ).\nCritical response.\nReview aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 98% of critics gave the film a positive review based on 112 reviews, with an average rating of 9.5/10. The critical consensus states: \"Arguably the greatest movie about Hollywood, Billy Wilder's masterpiece \"Sunset Boulevard\" is a tremendously entertaining combination of noir, black comedy, and character study.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 94 out of 100, based on 32 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\nContemporary.\n\"Sunset Boulevard\" attracted a range of positive reviews from critics. \"Time\" described it as a story of \"Hollywood at its worst told by Hollywood at its best\", while \"Boxoffice Review\" wrote \"the picture will keep spectators spellbound.\" James Agee, writing for \"Sight &amp; Sound\", praised the film and said Wilder and Brackett were \"beautifully equipped to do the cold, exact, adroit, sardonic job they have done.\" He further stated: \"There is no use pretending to discuss all the virtues, or even all the limitations, of this picture: it is one of those rare movies which are so full of exactness, cleverness, mastery, pleasure, and arguable and unarguable choice and judgment, that they can be talked about...for hours on end. The people of the present and their world are handled with a grimly controlled, mock-easy exactness which seems about as good as a certain kind of modified movie naturalism can get; this exactness is also imposed on the obsoletes and their world, but with that exactness they are treated always, with fine imaginativeness and eloquence, as heroic grotesques.\" \"Good Housekeeping\" described Swanson as a \"great lady [who] spans another decade with her magic,\" while \"Look\" praised her \"brilliant and haunting performance.\"\nSome critics accurately foresaw the film's lasting appeal. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" wrote that future generations would \"set themselves the task of analyzing the durability and greatness\" of the film, while \"Commonweal\" said that in the future \"the Library of Congress will be glad to have in its archives a print of \"Sunset Boulevard.\"\"\nIn a rare negative review of the film, \"The New Yorker\" deemed it \"a pretentious slice of Roquefort\" containing only \"the germ of a good idea\". Despite praising it as a \"great motion picture\" with \"memorable\" acting, Thomas M. Pryor wrote in \"The New York Times\" that the use of the dead Joe Gillis as narrator was a plot device \"completely unworthy of Brackett and Wilder\".\nRetrospective.\nIn 1999, Roger Ebert described Swanson as giving \"one of the all time greatest [acting] performances\", but singled out von Stroheim's performance as \"hold[ing] the film together\". He included it in his Great Movies list, calling it \"the best drama ever made about the movies because it sees through the illusions.\" Pauline Kael described the film as \"almost too clever, but at its best in its cleverness\", and also wrote that it was common to \"hear Billy Wilder called the world's greatest director.\" When Wilder died in 2002, obituaries singled out \"Sunset Boulevard\" for comment, describing it as one of his most significant works, along with \"Double Indemnity\" and \"Some Like It Hot\". Leslie Halliwell gave it three of four stars, stating: \"Incisive melodrama with marvelous moments but a tendency to overstay its welcome... though the last scene is worth waiting for and the malicious observation throughout is a treat.\"\nFilm writer Richard Corliss describes \"Sunset Boulevard\" as \"the definitive Hollywood horror movie\", noting that almost everything in the script is \"ghoulish\". He remarks that the story is narrated by a dead man whom Norma Desmond first mistakes for an undertaker, while most of the film takes place \"in an old, dark house that only opens its doors to the living dead\". He compares von Stroheim's character Max with the concealed Erik, the central character in \"The Phantom of the Opera\", and Norma Desmond with Dracula, noting that, as she seduces Joe Gillis, the camera tactfully withdraws with \"the traditional directorial attitude taken towards Dracula's jugular seductions\". He writes that the narrative contains an excess of \"cheap sarcasm\", but ultimately considers it a valuable part of Joe's characterization as a hack writer. David Thomson notes the irony of having Gillis tell the story: \"The man who can't dream up a viable story line becomes the best pitch he'll ever hear. He is the story and it is Billy Wilder's sour valedictory to let the ghost of Gillis tell the story, facedown in the gelid swimming pool exactly the Hollywood reward that Joe gets only in his dreams. And so this breathtaking portrait of Hollywood failure is wrapped up in rueful, ruined success.\"\nEddie Muller listed it as one of his Top 25 Noir Films.\nAccolades.\nOf the various films that have attracted Academy Award nominations in all four acting categories, \"Sunset Boulevard\" is one of only three not to win in any category, the others being \"My Man Godfrey\" (1936) and \"American Hustle\" (2013). At the time its eleven Oscar nominations were exceeded only by the fourteen received by \"All About Eve\", which won six awards, including Best Picture and Best Director. Many critics predicted that the Best Actress award would be given to Gloria Swanson or Bette Davis for \"All About Eve\" and were surprised that the recipient was newcomer Judy Holliday for \"Born Yesterday\". Bette Davis believed that her and Swanson's comparable characters effectively \"cancelled each other out\", allowing Holliday to win. Swanson recalled the press's reaction following Holliday's win: \"It slowly dawned on me that they were asking for a larger-than-life scene, or better still, a mad scene. More accurately, they were trying to flush out Norma Desmond.\"\n\"Sunset Boulevard\" was dramatized as an hour-long radio play on the September 17, 1951, broadcast of \"Lux Radio Theater\" with Gloria Swanson and William Holden in their original film roles.\nRecognition since 1989.\nIn 1989, the film was among the first group of 25 deemed \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. \"The Village Voice\" ranked the film at No. 43 in its Top 250 \"Best Films of the Century\" list in 1999, based on a poll of critics. The film was included in \"\"The New York Times\" Guide to the Best 1,000 Movies Ever Made\" in 2002. In January 2002, the film was included on the list of the \"Top 100 Essential Films of All Time\" by the National Society of Film Critics. \"Sunset Boulevard\" received 33 votes in the British Film Institute's 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls, making it the 63rd greatest film of all time in the critics' poll and 67th in the directors' poll. In the earlier 2002 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" polls the film ranked 12th among directors. In 2022 edition of Sight &amp; Sound's \"Greatest films of all time\" list the film ranked 62nd in the director's poll. The Writers Guild of America ranked the film's screenplay (written by Charles Brackett &amp; Billy Wilder and D.M. Marshman Jr.) the 7th greatest ever. In a 2015 poll by BBC Culture, film critics ranked \"Sunset Boulevard\" the 54th greatest American film of all time. The February 2020 issue of \"New York Magazine\" lists \"Sunset Boulevard\" as among \"The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars.\"\nAmerican Film Institute included the film on these lists:\nAftermath.\n\"Sunset Boulevard\" was the last collaboration between Wilder and Brackett. They parted amicably and did not publicly air any grievances for the rest of their lives. However, in later years, Brackett confided in screenwriter/director Garson Kanin that he had not anticipated the split, or had ever understood exactly what happened or why. He described it as \"an unexpected blow\" from which he never recovered fully; when asked to respond to Brackett's comments, Wilder remained silent.\nThe two men briefly reunited in October 1951 to face charges that they had plagiarized \"Sunset Boulevard.\" Former Paramount accountant Stephanie Joan Carlson alleged that in 1947 she had submitted to Wilder and Brackett, at their request, manuscripts of stories, both fictional and based on fact, she had written about studio life. She claimed that one in particular, \"Past Performance\", served as the basis for the \"Sunset\" script, and sued the screenwriters and Paramount for $100,000 in general damages, $250,000 in punitive damages, $700,000 based on the box office returns, and an additional $350,000 for good measure, for a total of $1,400,000. Carlson's suit was dismissed after two and a half years. In 1954, a similar suit was filed by playwright Edra Buckler, who claimed material she had written had been the screenplay's source. Her suit was dismissed the following year.\nBrackett's Hollywood career continued after his split with Wilder. He won an Academy Award for his screenplay for \"Titanic\" (1953), and wrote \"Niagara\" (1953), the breakthrough film for Marilyn Monroe as a dramatic actress. It was Wilder, however, who realized Monroe's comedic abilities in \"The Seven Year Itch\" and \"Some Like It Hot.\" Brackett's career waned by the end of the decade, though he did produce the Oscar-nominated film \"The King and I\" (1956). He received an Honorary Oscar for Lifetime Achievement in 1958.\nWilliam Holden began receiving more important parts and his career rose. He won the Best Actor Oscar for \"Stalag 17\" (1953), also directed by Wilder, and by 1956 he was the top box-office attraction in the United States. Holden and Wilder also rejoined forces for \"Fedora\" (1978), another film critical of Hollywood.\nBefore the film was released, Nancy Olson had grown disenchanted with film as a career partly because the themes of \"Sunset Boulevard\" resonated with her, and also because she had become engaged to songwriter Alan Jay Lerner and decided to move to New York with him. Nevertheless, Olson's pairing with William Holden was considered a success, and she appeared opposite him in several films during the 1950s, although none of them repeated their earlier success; she returned to Hollywood to make several other films, including \"The Absent-Minded Professor\" (1961) and \"Son of Flubber\" (1963), in which she was paired with Fred MacMurray.\nSimilarly, Gloria Swanson was not able to leverage her own success in \"Sunset Boulevard\". Although offered scripts, she felt that they all were poor imitations of Norma Desmond. Imagining a career that would eventually reduce her to playing \"a parody of a parody,\" she virtually retired from films.\n\"Sunset Boulevard\" was shown again in New York City in 1960, and drew such a positive response that Paramount arranged for a limited re-release in theaters throughout the United States.\nFilms that discuss \"Sunset Boulevard\" in their screenplays or pay homage in scenes or dialogue include \"Soapdish\" (1991), \"The Player\" (1992), \"Gods and Monsters\" (1998), \"Mulholland Drive\" (2001), \"Be Cool\" (2005), and \"Inland Empire\" (2006). The ending of \"Cecil B. Demented\" (2000) is a parody of \"Sunset Boulevard's\" final scene.\nRestoration and home media.\nBy the late 1990s, most \"Sunset Boulevard\" prints were in poor condition, and as the film was shot using cellulose nitrate filmstock, much of the original negative had perished. Paramount Studios, believing the film merited the effort of a complete restoration, mounted an expensive project to have it digitally restored. This restored version was released on DVD in 2002. In 2012, the film was digitally restored by Paramount Pictures for Blu-ray Disc debut. Frame-by-frame digital restoration by Prasad Corporation removed dirt, tears, scratches and other defects.\nIn 2025, the film was restored in 4K for the 75th anniversary and released in limited theater screenings and Ultra HD Blu-ray on August 5, 2025, by Paramount Home Entertainment.\nMusical adaptations.\nStapley and Hughes.\nFrom around 1952 to 1956, Gloria Swanson herself worked with actor Richard Stapley (aka Richard Wyler) and cabaret singer/pianist Dickson Hughes on an adaptation titled \"Boulevard!\" (at first \"Starring Norma Desmond\"). Stapley and Hughes first approached Swanson about appearing in a musical revue they had written, \"About Time\" (based on \"Time\"). Swanson stated that she would return to the stage only in a musical version of her comeback film. Within a week, Stapley and Dickson had written three songs which Swanson approved.\nIn this version, the romance between Gillis and Schaefer was allowed to blossom, and rather than shoot Gillis at the end, Norma gave the couple her blessing, sending them on their way to live \"happily ever after.\"\nAlthough Paramount gave verbal permission to proceed with the musical, there was no formal legal option. In the late 1950s, Paramount withdrew its consent, leading to the demise of the project.\nIn 1994, Dickson Hughes incorporated material from \"Boulevard!\" into a musical \"Swanson on Sunset\", based on his and Stapley's experiences in writing \"Boulevard!\".\nThis attempt is chronicled in the 2021 documentary Boulevard! A Hollywood Story.\nOther failed attempts.\nStephen Sondheim briefly considered turning \"Sunset Boulevard\" into a musical until meeting Billy Wilder at a cocktail party, who told him that the film would be better adapted as an opera rather than a musical. Hal Prince later approached Sondheim to adapt the film as a musical with Angela Lansbury playing Norma Desmond.\nJohn Kander and Fred Ebb were also approached by Hal Prince to write a musical of \"Sunset Boulevard\".\nAndrew Lloyd Webber.\nA musical adaptation with book and lyrics written by Don Black and Christopher Hampton, and music by Andrew Lloyd Webber was staged in 1993 in London, with Patti LuPone playing Norma Desmond. It closely followed the film story, retained much of the dialogue and attempted to present similar set designs. It reached Broadway in 1994, with Glenn Close playing Norma Desmond. The production staged 17 previews beginning November 1, 1994, and played 977 performances at the Minskoff Theatre from November 17, 1994, through March 22, 1997. It was named Best Musical at the 1995 Tony Awards.\nIn 2016, Close reprised the role in London's West End, followed by a 12-week run at the Palace Theater in New York City from February 2 to June 25, 2017.\nSunset Boulevard played one night at the Royal Albert Hall on December 3, 2021. The production was directed by Jordan Murphy and conducted by Alex Parker, and it starred Mazz Murray.\nIn 2023, Nicole Scherzinger revived the role of Norma Desmond in a 16-week run from September at London's Savoy Theatre, in a production directed by Jamie Lloyd. The production transferred to Broadway's St. James Theatre with an opening night on October 20, 2024, and closing on July 20, 2025.\nA film adaptation of the musical, with Close and Lloyd Webber producing, and Close playing Norma, is in development at Paramount Pictures, with Rob Ashford directing and Tom MacRae writing. Filming was originally set to begin in late 2019, but was delayed three times due to the COVID-19 pandemic and Paramount putting the project on hold in October 2021. In May 2024, Close revealed that the film is still moving forward, but with Ashford no longer attached as director. In 2025, Scherzinger revealed that there were talks to have her play Norma in the film.\nIn popular culture.\nLiterature.\n\"Sunset Boulevard\" is frequently referenced in the book\" The Disaster Artist: My Life Inside The Room, the Greatest Bad Movie Ever Made\" by Greg Sestero and Tom Bissell, which documents Sestero's relationship with director and actor Tommy Wiseau and the making of Wiseau's film \"The Room\". Quotes from \"Sunset Boulevard\" are used as epigraphs for several of the book's chapters. In a 2017 interview, Sestero stated that \"I saw a lot of similarities with my story, especially when Tommy lived in a place that had a pool and wanted to make his own vanity project.\"\nPolitics.\nDonald Trump has cited the film as one of his personal favorites, and screened it multiple times at the White House Family Theater during his presidency. The press subsequently brought up an analogy between Trump's Mar-a-Lago and Norma Desmond's Sunset Boulevard mansion.\nPopular music.\nThe song \"Antarctica Starts Here\" by John Cale, from his 1973 album \"Paris 1919\", describes a \"paranoid great movie queen\" that Cale said was inspired by the character of Norma Desmond.\nThe song \"Floating\" on the album \"Outskirts\" by Canadian country-rock band Blue Rodeo references the movie in its chorus line 'I feel like William Holden floating in a pool.' The album's liner notes explain the connection to the film.\nThe 1996 song \"Sunset Boulevard\" by the Spanish songwriter Javier \u00c1lvarez includes the verses (\"The paper years blind you again / as [they blinded] Norma Desmond in 'Sunset Boulevard'\".)\nProfessional wrestling.\nThe \"Timeless\" gimmick, as portrayed by Australian wrestler Toni Storm in All Elite Wrestling since 2023, is primarily based upon the character of Norma Desmond, with her \"butler\" \u2013 Canadian wrestler Dr. Luther \u2013 being based upon the character of Max von Mayerling. The storyline involving Storm also draws inspiration from the film \"All About Eve\", with Storm's character also sharing traits with the character of Margo Channing, and English wrestler Mariah May portraying an Eve Harrington-esque foil to Storm.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76369", "revid": "7213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76369", "title": "Computer clock", "text": ""}
{"id": "76370", "revid": "18953656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76370", "title": "Felix Mendelssohn", "text": "German composer (1809\u20131847)\n \nJakob Ludwig Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy (3 February 1809\u00a0\u2013 4 November 1847), widely known as Felix Mendelssohn, was a German composer, pianist, organist and conductor of the early Romantic period. Mendelssohn's compositions include symphonies, concertos, piano music, organ music and chamber music. His best-known works include the overture and incidental music for \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" (which includes his \"Wedding March\"), the \"Italian\" and \"Scottish\" Symphonies, the oratorios \"St. Paul\" and \"Elijah\", the \"Hebrides\" Overture, the mature Violin Concerto, the String Octet, and the melody used in the Christmas carol \"Hark! The Herald Angels Sing\". Mendelssohn's \"Songs Without Words\" are his most famous solo piano compositions.\nMendelssohn's grandfather was the Jewish philosopher Moses Mendelssohn, but Felix was initially raised without religion until he was baptised aged seven into the Reformed Christian church. He was recognised early as a musical prodigy, but his parents were cautious and did not seek to capitalise on his talent. His sister Fanny Mendelssohn received a similar musical education and was a talented composer and pianist in her own right; some of her early songs were published under her brother's name and her \"Easter Sonata\" was for a time mistakenly attributed to him after being lost and rediscovered in the 1970s.\nMendelssohn enjoyed early success in Germany, and revived interest in the music of Johann Sebastian Bach, notably with his performance of the \"St Matthew Passion\" in 1829. He became well received in his travels throughout Europe as a composer, conductor and soloist; his ten visits to Britain\u00a0\u2013 during which many of his major works were premiered\u00a0\u2013 form an important part of his adult career. His essentially conservative musical tastes set him apart from more adventurous musical contemporaries, such as Franz Liszt, Richard Wagner, Charles-Valentin Alkan and Hector Berlioz. The Leipzig Conservatory, which he founded, became a bastion of this anti-radical outlook.\nAfter a long period of relative denigration due to changing musical tastes and antisemitism in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, his creative originality has been re-evaluated. He is now among the most popular composers of the Romantic era.\nLife.\nChildhood.\nFelix Mendelssohn was born on 3 February 1809, in Hamburg, at the time an independent city-state, in the same house where, a year later, the dedicatee and first performer of his Violin Concerto, Ferdinand David, would be born. Mendelssohn's father, the banker Abraham Mendelssohn, was the son of the German Jewish philosopher Moses Mendelssohn, whose family was prominent in the German Jewish community. Until his baptism at age seven, Mendelssohn was brought up largely without religion. His mother, Lea Salomon, was a member of the Itzig family and a sister of Jakob Salomon Bartholdy. Mendelssohn was the second of four children; his older sister Fanny also displayed exceptional and precocious musical talent.\nThe family moved to Berlin in 1811, leaving Hamburg in disguise in fear of French reprisal for the Mendelssohn bank's role in breaking Napoleon's Continental System blockade. Abraham and Lea Mendelssohn sought to give their children\u00a0\u2013 Fanny, Felix, Paul and Rebecka\u00a0\u2013 the best education possible. Fanny became a pianist well known in Berlin musical circles as a composer; originally Abraham had thought that she, rather than Felix, would be the more musical. But it was not considered proper, by either Abraham or Felix, for a woman to pursue a career in music, so she remained an active but non-professional musician. Abraham was initially disinclined to allow Felix to follow a musical career until it became clear that he was seriously dedicated.\nMendelssohn grew up in an intellectual environment. Frequent visitors to the salon organised by his parents at their home in Berlin included artists, musicians and scientists, among them Wilhelm and Alexander von Humboldt, and the mathematician Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet (whom Mendelssohn's sister Rebecka would later marry). The musician Sarah Rothenburg has written of the household that \"Europe came to their living room\".\nSurname.\nAbraham Mendelssohn renounced the Jewish religion prior to Felix's birth and he and his wife decided against having Felix circumcised. Felix and his siblings were at first brought up without religious education; on 21 March 1816, they were baptized in a private ceremony in the family's Berlin apartment by the Reformed Protestant minister of the Jerusalem Church, at which time Felix was given the additional names Jakob Ludwig. Abraham and his wife Lea were baptised in 1822, and formally adopted the surname Mendelssohn Bartholdy (which they had used since 1812) for themselves and for their children.\nThe name Bartholdy was added at the suggestion of Lea's brother, Jakob Salomon Bartholdy, who had inherited a property of this name in Luisenstadt and adopted it as his own surname. In an 1829 letter to Felix, Abraham explained that adopting the Bartholdy name was meant to demonstrate a decisive break with the traditions of his father Moses: \"There can no more be a Christian Mendelssohn than there can be a Jewish Confucius\". On embarking on his musical career, Felix did not entirely drop the name Mendelssohn as Abraham had requested, but in deference to his father signed his letters and had his visiting cards printed using the form 'Mendelssohn Bartholdy'. In 1829, his sister Fanny wrote to him of \"Bartholdy\u00a0[...] this name that we all dislike\".\nCareer.\nMusical education.\nMendelssohn began taking piano lessons from his mother when he was six, and at seven was tutored by Marie Bigot in Paris. Later in Berlin, all four Mendelssohn children studied piano with Ludwig Berger, who was himself a former student of Muzio Clementi. From at least May 1819 Mendelssohn (initially with his sister Fanny) studied counterpoint and composition with Carl Friedrich Zelter in Berlin. This was an important influence on his future career. Zelter had almost certainly been recommended as a teacher by his aunt Sarah Levy, who had been a pupil of W. F. Bach and a patron of C. P. E. Bach. Sarah Levy displayed some talent as a keyboard player, and often played with Zelter's orchestra at the Berliner Singakademie; she and the Mendelssohn family were among its leading patrons. Sarah had formed an important collection of Bach family manuscripts, which she bequeathed to the Singakademie; Zelter, whose tastes in music were conservative, was also an admirer of the Bach tradition. This undoubtedly played a significant part in forming Felix Mendelssohn's musical tastes, as his works reflect this study of Baroque and early classical music. His fugues and chorales especially reflect a tonal clarity and use of counterpoint reminiscent of Johann Sebastian Bach, whose music influenced him deeply.\nEarly maturity.\nMendelssohn probably made his first public concert appearance at the age of nine, when he participated in a chamber music concert accompanying a horn duo. He was a prolific composer from an early age. As an adolescent, his works were often performed at home with a private orchestra for the associates of his wealthy parents amongst the intellectual elite of Berlin. Between the ages of 12 and 14, Mendelssohn wrote 13 string symphonies for such concerts, and a number of chamber works. His first work, a piano quartet, was published when he was 13. It was probably Abraham Mendelssohn who procured the publication of this quartet by the house of Schlesinger. In 1824 the 15-year-old wrote his first symphony for full orchestra (in C minor, Op.\u00a011).\nAt age 16 Mendelssohn wrote his String Octet in E-flat major, a work which has been regarded as \"mark[ing] the beginning of his maturity as a composer.\" This Octet and his Overture to Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", which he wrote a year later in 1826, are the best-known of his early works. (Later, in 1843, he also wrote incidental music for the play, including the famous \"Wedding March\".) The Overture is perhaps the earliest example of a concert overture\u00a0\u2013 that is, a piece not written deliberately to accompany a staged performance but to evoke a literary theme in performance on a concert platform; this was a genre which became a popular form in musical Romanticism.\nIn 1824 Mendelssohn studied under the composer and piano virtuoso Ignaz Moscheles, who confessed in his diaries that he had little to teach him. Moscheles and Mendelssohn became close colleagues and lifelong friends. The year 1827 saw the premiere\u00a0\u2013 and sole performance in his lifetime\u00a0\u2013 of Mendelssohn's opera \"Die Hochzeit des Camacho\". The failure of this production left him disinclined to venture into the genre again.\nBesides music, Mendelssohn's education included art, literature, languages, and philosophy. He had a particular interest in classical literature and translated Terence's \"Andria\" for his tutor Heyse in 1825; Heyse was impressed and had it published in 1826 as a work of \"his pupil, F****\" [i.e. \"Felix\" (asterisks as provided in original text)]. This translation also qualified Mendelssohn to study at the University of Berlin, where from 1826 to 1829 he attended lectures on aesthetics by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, on history by Eduard Gans, and on geography by Carl Ritter.\nMeeting Goethe and conducting Bach.\nIn 1821 Zelter introduced Mendelssohn to his friend and correspondent, the writer Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (then in his seventies), who was greatly impressed by the child, leading to perhaps the earliest confirmed comparison with Mozart in the following conversation between Goethe and Zelter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Musical prodigies\u00a0... are probably no longer so rare; but what this little man can do in extemporizing and playing at sight borders the miraculous, and I could not have believed it possible at so early an age.\" \"And yet you heard Mozart in his seventh year at Frankfurt?\" said Zelter. \"Yes\", answered Goethe, \"...\u00a0but what your pupil already accomplishes, bears the same relation to the Mozart of that time that the cultivated talk of a grown-up person bears to the prattle of a child.\"\nMendelssohn was invited to meet Goethe on several later occasions, and set a number of Goethe's poems to music. His other compositions inspired by Goethe include the overture \"Calm Sea and Prosperous Voyage\" (Op. 27, 1828), and the cantata \"Die erste Walpurgisnacht\" (\"The First Walpurgis Night\", Op. 60, 1832).\nIn 1829, with the backing of Zelter and the assistance of the actor Eduard Devrient, Mendelssohn arranged and conducted a performance in Berlin of Bach's \"St Matthew Passion\". Four years previously his grandmother, Bella Salomon, had given him a copy of the manuscript of this (by then all-but-forgotten) masterpiece. The orchestra and choir for the performance were provided by the Berlin Singakademie. The success of this performance, one of the very few since Bach's death and the first ever outside of Leipzig, was the central event in the revival of Bach's music in Germany and, eventually, throughout Europe. It earned Mendelssohn widespread acclaim at the age of 20. It also led to one of the few explicit references which Mendelssohn made to his origins: \"To think that it took an actor and a Jew's son to revive the greatest Christian music for the world!\"\nOver the next few years Mendelssohn travelled widely. His first visit to England was in 1829; other places visited during the 1830s included Vienna, Florence, Milan, Rome and Naples, in all of which he met with local and visiting musicians and artists. These years proved to be the germination for some of his most famous works, including the \"Hebrides Overture\" and the \"Scottish\" and \"Italian\" symphonies.\nD\u00fcsseldorf.\nOn Zelter's death in 1832, Mendelssohn had hopes of succeeding him as conductor of the Singakademie; but at a vote in January 1833 he was defeated for the post by Carl Friedrich Rungenhagen. This may have been because of Mendelssohn's youth, and fear of possible innovations; it was also suspected by some to be attributable to his Jewish ancestry. Following this rebuff, Mendelssohn divided most of his professional time over the next few years between Britain and D\u00fcsseldorf, where he was appointed musical director (his first paid post as a musician) in 1833.\nIn the spring of that year Mendelssohn directed the Lower Rhenish Music Festival in D\u00fcsseldorf, beginning with a performance of George Frideric Handel's oratorio \"Israel in Egypt\" prepared from the original score, which he had found in London. This precipitated a Handel revival in Germany, similar to the reawakened interest in J. S. Bach following his performance of the \"St. Matthew Passion\". Mendelssohn worked with the dramatist Karl Immermann to improve local theatre standards, and made his first appearance as an opera conductor in Immermann's production of Mozart's \"Don Giovanni\" at the end of 1833, where he took umbrage at the audience's protests about the cost of tickets. His frustration at his everyday duties in D\u00fcsseldorf, and the city's provincialism, led him to resign his position at the end of 1834. He had offers from both Munich and Leipzig for important musical posts, namely, direction of the Munich Opera, the editorship of the prestigious Leipzig music journal the \"Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung\", and direction of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra; he accepted the latter in 1835.\nLeipzig and Berlin.\nIn Leipzig, Mendelssohn concentrated on developing the town's musical life by working with the orchestra, the opera house, the Thomanerchor (of which Bach had been a director), and the city's other choral and musical institutions. Mendelssohn's concerts included, in addition to many of his own works, three series of \"historical concerts\" featuring music of the eighteenth century, and a number of works by his contemporaries. He was deluged by offers of music from rising and would-be composers; among these was Richard Wagner, who submitted his early Symphony, the score of which, to Wagner's disgust, Mendelssohn lost or mislaid. Mendelssohn also revived interest in the music of Franz Schubert. Robert Schumann discovered the manuscript of Schubert's Ninth Symphony and sent it to Mendelssohn, who promptly premiered it in Leipzig on 21 March 1839, more than a decade after Schubert's death.\nA landmark event during Mendelssohn's Leipzig years was the premiere of his oratorio \"Paulus\", (the English version of this is known as \"St. Paul\"), given at the Lower Rhenish Festival in D\u00fcsseldorf in 1836, shortly after the death of the composer's father, which affected him greatly; Felix wrote that he would \"never cease to endeavour to gain his approval\u00a0... although I can no longer enjoy it\". \"St. Paul\" seemed to many of Mendelssohn's contemporaries to be his finest work, and sealed his European reputation.\nWhen Friedrich Wilhelm IV came to the Prussian throne in 1840 with ambitions to develop Berlin as a cultural centre (including the establishment of a music school, and reform of music for the church), the obvious choice to head these reforms was Mendelssohn. He was reluctant to undertake the task, especially in the light of his existing strong position in Leipzig. Mendelssohn nonetheless spent some time in Berlin, writing some church music such as \"Die Deutsche Liturgie\", and, at the King's request, music for productions of Sophocles's \"Antigone\" (1841 \u2013 an overture and seven pieces) and \"Oedipus at Colonus\" (1845), \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" (1843) and Racine's \"Athalie\" (1845). But the funds for the school never materialised, and many of the court's promises to Mendelssohn regarding finances, title, and concert programming were broken. He was therefore not displeased to have the excuse to return to Leipzig.\nIn 1840 Mendelssohn initiated a project to erect a memorial monument to J. S. Bach in Leipzig. The Old Bach Monument was unveiled on 23 April 1843, financed primarily from the net proceeds of three concerts, with Mendelssohn contributing the remaining amount from his private fortune.\nIn 1843 Mendelssohn founded a major music school\u00a0\u2013 the Leipzig Conservatory, now the Hochschule f\u00fcr Musik und Theater \"Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy\". where he persuaded Ignaz Moscheles and Robert Schumann to join him. Other prominent musicians, including the string players Ferdinand David and Joseph Joachim and the music theorist Moritz Hauptmann, also became staff members. After Mendelssohn's death in 1847, his musically conservative tradition was carried on when Moscheles succeeded him as head of the Conservatory.\nMendelssohn in Britain.\nMendelssohn first visited Britain in 1829, where Moscheles, who had already settled in London, introduced him to influential musical circles. In the summer he visited Edinburgh, where he met among others the composer John Thomson, whom he later recommended for the post of professor of music at Edinburgh University. He made ten visits to Britain, lasting altogether about 20 months; he won a strong following, which enabled him to make a good impression on British musical life. He composed and performed, and also edited for British publishers the first critical editions of oratorios of Handel and of the organ music of J. S. Bach. Scotland inspired two of his most famous works: the overture \"The Hebrides\" (also known as \"Fingal's Cave\"); and the \"Scottish Symphony\" (Symphony No. 3). An English Heritage blue plaque commemorating Mendelssohn's residence in London was placed at 4 Hobart Place in Belgravia, London, in 2013.\nHis prot\u00e9g\u00e9, the British composer and pianist William Sterndale Bennett, worked closely with Mendelssohn during this period, both in London and Leipzig. He first heard Bennett perform in London in 1833 aged 17. Bennett appeared with Mendelssohn in concerts in Leipzig throughout the 1836/1837 season.\nOn Mendelssohn's eighth British visit in the summer of 1844, he conducted five of the Philharmonic concerts in London, and wrote: \"[N]ever before was anything like this season\u00a0\u2013 we never went to bed before half-past one, every hour of every day was filled with engagements three weeks beforehand, and I got through more music in two months than in all the rest of the year.\" (Letter to Rebecka Mendelssohn Bartholdy, Soden, 22 July 1844). On subsequent visits Mendelssohn met Queen Victoria and her husband Prince Albert, himself a composer, who both greatly admired his music.\nMendelssohn's oratorio \"Elijah\" was commissioned by the Birmingham Triennial Music Festival and premiered on 26 August 1846, at the Town Hall, Birmingham. It was composed to a German text translated into English by William Bartholomew, who authored and translated many of Mendelssohn's works during his time in England.\nOn his last visit to Britain in 1847, Mendelssohn was the soloist in Beethoven's Piano Concerto No. 4 and conducted his own \"Scottish Symphony\" with the Philharmonic Orchestra before the Queen and Prince Albert.\nDeath.\nMendelssohn suffered from poor health in the final years of his life, probably aggravated by nervous problems and overwork. A final tour of England left him exhausted and ill, and the death of his sister, Fanny, on 14 May 1847, caused him further distress. Less than six months later, on 4 November, aged 38, Mendelssohn died in Leipzig after a series of strokes. His grandfather Moses, Fanny, and both his parents had all died from similar apoplexies. Although he had been generally meticulous in the management of his affairs, he died intestate.\nMendelssohn's funeral was held at the Paulinerkirche, Leipzig, and he was buried at the Dreifaltigkeitsfriedhof I in Berlin-Kreuzberg. The pallbearers included Moscheles, Schumann and Niels Gade. Mendelssohn had once described death, in a letter to a stranger, as a place \"where it is to be hoped there is still music, but no more sorrow or partings.\"\nPersonal life.\nPersonality.\nWhile Mendelssohn was often presented as equable, happy, and placid in temperament, particularly in the detailed family memoirs published by his nephew Sebastian Hensel after the composer's death, this was misleading. The music historian R. Larry Todd notes \"the remarkable process of idealization\" of Mendelssohn's character \"that crystallized in the memoirs of the composer's circle\", including Hensel's. The nickname \"discontented Polish count\" was given to Mendelssohn on account of his aloofness, and he referred to the epithet in his letters. He was frequently given to fits of temper which occasionally led to collapse. Devrient mentions that on one occasion in the 1830s, when his wishes had been crossed, \"his excitement was increased so fearfully\u00a0... that when the family was assembled\u00a0... he began to talk incoherently in English. The stern voice of his father at last checked the wild torrent of words; they took him to bed, and a profound sleep of twelve hours restored him to his normal state\". Such fits may be related to his early death.\nMendelssohn was an enthusiastic visual artist who worked in pencil and watercolour, a skill which he enjoyed throughout his life. His correspondence indicates that he could write with considerable wit in German and English\u00a0\u2013 his letters were sometimes accompanied by humorous sketches and cartoons.\nReligion.\nOn 21 March 1816, at the age of seven years, Mendelssohn was baptised with his brother and sisters in a private domestic ceremony by Johann Jakob Stegemann, Minister of the Evangelical congregation of Berlin's Jerusalem Church and New Church. Although Mendelssohn was a conforming Christian as a member of the Reformed Church, he was both conscious and proud of his Jewish ancestry and notably of his connection with his grandfather, Moses Mendelssohn. He was the prime mover in proposing to the publisher Heinrich Brockhaus a complete edition of Moses' works, which continued with the support of his uncle, Joseph Mendelssohn. Felix was notably reluctant, either in his letters or conversation, to comment on his innermost beliefs; his friend Devrient wrote that \"[his] deep convictions were never uttered in intercourse with the world; only in rare and intimate moments did they ever appear, and then only in the slightest and most humorous allusions\". Thus for example in a letter to his sister Rebecka, Mendelssohn rebukes her complaint about an unpleasant relative: \"What do you mean by saying you are not hostile to Jews? I hope this was a joke\u00a0[...] It is really sweet of you that you do not despise your family, isn't it?\" Some modern scholars have devoted considerable energy to demonstrate either that Mendelssohn was deeply sympathetic to his ancestors' Jewish beliefs, or that he was hostile to this and sincere in his Christian beliefs.\nMendelssohn and his contemporaries.\n Throughout his life Mendelssohn was wary of the more radical musical developments undertaken by some of his contemporaries. He was generally on friendly, if sometimes somewhat cool, terms with Hector Berlioz, Franz Liszt, and Giacomo Meyerbeer, but in his letters expresses his frank disapproval of their works, for example writing of Liszt that his compositions were \"inferior to his playing, and [\u2026] only calculated for virtuosos\"; of Berlioz's overture \"Les francs-juges\" \"[T]he orchestration is such a frightful muddle\u00a0[...] that one ought to wash one's hands after handling one of his scores\"; and of Meyerbeer's opera \"Robert le diable\" \"I consider it ignoble\", calling its villain Bertram \"a poor devil\". When his friend the composer Ferdinand Hiller suggested in conversation to Mendelssohn that he looked rather like Meyerbeer\u00a0\u2013 they were actually distant cousins, both descendants of Rabbi Moses Isserles\u00a0\u2013 Mendelssohn was so upset that he immediately went to get a haircut to differentiate himself.\nIn particular, Mendelssohn seems to have regarded Paris and its music with the greatest of suspicion and an almost puritanical distaste. Attempts made during his visit there to interest him in Saint-Simonianism ended in embarrassing scenes. It is significant that the only musician with whom Mendelssohn remained a close personal friend, Ignaz Moscheles, was of an older generation and equally conservative in outlook. Moscheles preserved this conservative attitude at the Leipzig Conservatory until his own death in 1870.\nMarriage and children.\n Mendelssohn married C\u00e9cile Charlotte Sophie Jeanrenaud (10 October 1817\u00a0\u2013 25 September 1853), the daughter of a French Reformed Church clergyman, on 28 March 1837. The couple had five children: Carl, Marie, Paul, Lili and Felix August. The second youngest child, Felix August, contracted measles in 1844 and was left with impaired health; he died in 1851. The eldest, Carl Mendelssohn Bartholdy (7 February 1838\u00a0\u2013 23 February 1897), became a historian and professor of history at Heidelberg and Freiburg universities; he died in a psychiatric institution in Freiburg aged 59. Paul Mendelssohn Bartholdy (1841\u20131880) was a noted chemist and pioneered the manufacture of aniline dye. Marie married Victor Benecke and lived in London. Lili married Adolf Wach, later professor of law at Leipzig University.\nThe family papers inherited by Marie's and Lili's children form the basis of the extensive collection of Mendelssohn manuscripts, including the so-called \"Green Books\" of his correspondence, now in the Bodleian Library at Oxford University. C\u00e9cile Mendelssohn Bartholdy died less than six years after her husband, on 25 September 1853.\nJenny Lind.\nMendelssohn became close to the Swedish soprano Jenny Lind, whom he met in October 1844. Papers confirming their relationship had not been made public. In 2013, George Biddlecombe confirmed in the \"Journal of the Royal Musical Association\" that \"The Committee of the Mendelssohn Scholarship Foundation possesses material indicating that Mendelssohn wrote passionate love letters to Jenny Lind entreating her to join him in an adulterous relationship and threatening suicide as a means of exerting pressure upon her, and that these letters were destroyed on being discovered after her death.\"\nMendelssohn met and worked with Lind many times, and started an opera, \"Lorelei\", for her, based on the legend of the Lorelei Rhine maidens; the opera was unfinished at his death. He is said to have tailored the aria \"Hear Ye Israel\", in his oratorio \"Elijah\", to Lind's voice, although she did not sing the part until after his death, at a concert in December 1848. In 1847, Mendelssohn attended a London performance of Meyerbeer's \"Robert le diable\"\u00a0\u2013 an opera that musically he despised\u00a0\u2013 in order to hear Lind's British debut, in the role of Alice. The music critic Henry Chorley, who was with him, wrote: \"I see as I write the smile with which Mendelssohn, whose enjoyment of Mdlle. Lind's talent was unlimited, turned round and looked at me, as if a load of anxiety had been taken off his mind. His attachment to Mdlle. Lind's genius as a singer was unbounded, as was his desire for her success.\"\nUpon Mendelssohn's death, Lind wrote: \"[He was] the only person who brought fulfillment to my spirit, and almost as soon as I found him I lost him again.\" In 1849, she established the Mendelssohn Scholarship Foundation, which makes an award to a young resident British composer every two years in Mendelssohn's memory. The first winner of the scholarship, in 1856, was Arthur Sullivan, then aged 14. In 1869, Lind erected a plaque in Mendelssohn's memory at his birthplace in Hamburg.\nMusic.\nComposer.\nStyle.\n Something of Mendelssohn's intense attachment to his personal vision of music is conveyed in his comments to a correspondent who suggested converting some of the \"Songs Without Words\" into lieder by adding texts: \"What [the] music I love expresses to me, are not thoughts that are too \"indefinite\" for me to put into words, but on the contrary, too \"definite\".\"\nSchumann wrote of Mendelssohn that he was \"the Mozart of the nineteenth century, the most brilliant musician, the one who most clearly sees through the contradictions of the age and for the first time reconciles them.\" This appreciation brings to the fore two features that characterized Mendelssohn's compositions and his compositional process. First, that his inspiration for musical style was rooted in his technical mastery and his interpretation of the style of previous masters, although he certainly recognized and developed the strains of early Romanticism in the music of Beethoven and Weber. The historian James Garratt writes that from his early career, \"the view emerged that Mendelssohn's engagement with early music was a defining aspect of his creativity.\" This approach was recognized by Mendelssohn himself, who wrote that, in his meetings with Goethe, he gave the poet \"historical exhibitions\" at the keyboard; \"every morning, for about an hour, I have to play a variety of works by great composers in chronological order, and must explain to him how they contributed to the advance of music.\" Secondly, it highlights that Mendelssohn was more concerned to reinvigorate the musical legacy which he inherited, rather than to replace it with new forms and styles, or with the use of more exotic orchestration. In these ways he differed significantly from many of his contemporaries in the early Romantic period, such as Wagner, Berlioz and Franz Liszt. Whilst Mendelssohn admired Liszt's virtuosity at the keyboard, he found his music jejune. Berlioz said of Mendelssohn that he had \"perhaps studied the music of the dead too closely.\"\nThe musicologist Greg Vitercik considers that, while \"Mendelssohn's music only rarely aspires to provoke\", the stylistic innovations evident from his earliest works solve some of the contradictions between classical forms and the sentiments of Romanticism. The expressiveness of Romantic music presented a problem in adherence to sonata form; the final (recapitulation) section of a movement could seem, in the context of Romantic style, a bland element without passion or soul. Furthermore, it could be seen as a pedantic delay before reaching the emotional climax of a movement, which in the classical tradition had tended to be at the transition from the development section of the movement to the recapitulation; whereas Berlioz and other \"modernists\" sought to have the emotional climax at the end of a movement, if necessary by adding an extended coda to follow the recapitulation proper. Mendelssohn's solution to this problem was less sensational than Berlioz's approach, but was rooted in changing the structural balance of the formal components of the movement. Thus typically in a Mendelssohnian movement, the development-recapitulation transition might not be strongly marked, and the recapitulation section would be harmonically or melodically varied so as not to be a direct copy of the opening, exposition, section; this allowed a logical movement towards a final climax. Vitercik summarizes the effect as \"to assimilate the dynamic trajectory of 'external form' to the 'logical' unfolding of the story of the theme\".\nRichard Taruskin wrote that, although Mendelssohn produced works of extraordinary mastery at a very early age,\nhe never outgrew his precocious youthful style.\u00a0[...] He remained stylistically conservative\u00a0[...] feeling no need to attract attention with a display of \"revolutionary\" novelty. Throughout his short career he remained comfortably faithful to the musical status quo\u00a0\u2013 that is, the \"classical\" forms, as they were already thought of by his time. His version of romanticism, already evident in his earliest works, consisted in musical \"pictorialism\" of a fairly conventional, objective nature (though exquisitely wrought).\nEarly works.\nThe young Mendelssohn was greatly influenced in his childhood by the music of both J. S. Bach and C. P. E. Bach, and of Beethoven, Joseph Haydn and Mozart; traces of these composers can be seen in the 13 early string symphonies. These were written from 1821 to 1823, when he was between the ages of 12 and 14, principally for performance in the Mendelssohn household, and not published or publicly performed until long after his death.\nHis first published works were his three piano quartets (1822\u20131825; Op. 1 in C minor, Op. 2 in F minor and Op. 3 in B minor); but his capacities are especially revealed in a group of works of his early maturity: the String Octet (1825), the Overture \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" (1826), which in its finished form also owes much to the influence of Adolf Bernhard Marx, at the time a close friend of Mendelssohn, and the two early string quartets: Op. 12 (1829) and Op. 13 (1827), which both show a remarkable grasp of the techniques and ideas of Beethoven's last quartets that Mendelssohn had been closely studying. These four works show an intuitive command of form, harmony, counterpoint, colour, and compositional technique, which in the opinion of R. Larry Todd justifies claims frequently made that Mendelssohn's precocity exceeded even that of Mozart in its intellectual grasp.\nA 2009 survey by the BBC of 16 music critics opined that Mendelssohn was the greatest composing prodigy in the history of Western classical music.\nSymphonies.\nMendelssohn's mature symphonies are numbered approximately in the order of publication, rather than the order in which they were composed. The order of composition is: 1, 5 \"Reformation\", 4 \"Italian\", 2 \"Lobgesang\", 3 \"Scottish\". The placement of No. 3 in this sequence is problematic because he worked on it for over a decade, starting the sketches soon after he began work on No. 5 but completing it after both Nos. 5 and 4.\nThe Symphony No. 1 in C minor for full orchestra was written in 1824, when Mendelssohn was aged 15. This work is experimental, showing the influences of Beethoven and Carl Maria von Weber. Mendelssohn conducted the symphony on his first visit to London in 1829, with the orchestra of the Philharmonic Society. For the third movement he substituted an orchestration of the Scherzo from his Octet. In this form the piece was a success, and laid the foundations of his British reputation.\nDuring 1829 and 1830 Mendelssohn wrote his Symphony No. 5, known as the \"Reformation\". It celebrated the 300th anniversary of the Reformation. Mendelssohn remained dissatisfied with the work and did not allow publication of the score.\nMendelssohn's travels in Italy inspired him to compose the Symphony No. 4 in A major, known as the \"Italian Symphony\". He conducted the premiere in 1833, but did not allow the score to be published during his lifetime, as he continually sought to rewrite it.\nThe \"Scottish Symphony\" (Symphony No. 3 in A minor) was written and revised intermittently between 1829 (when Mendelssohn noted down the opening theme during a visit to Holyrood Palace) and 1842, when it was given its premiere in Leipzig, the last of his symphonies to be premiered in public. This piece evokes Scotland's atmosphere in the ethos of Romanticism, but does not employ any identified Scottish folk melodies.\nHe wrote the symphony-cantata \"Lobgesang\" (\"Hymn of Praise\") in B-flat major, posthumously named Symphony No. 2, to mark the celebrations in Leipzig of the supposed 400th anniversary of the printing press by Johannes Gutenberg; the first performance took place on 25 June 1840.\nOther orchestral music.\nMendelssohn wrote the concert overture \"The Hebrides\" (\"Fingal's Cave\") in 1830, inspired by visits to Scotland around the end of the 1820s. He visited Fingal's Cave, on the Hebridean isle of Staffa, as part of his Grand Tour of Europe, and was so impressed that he scribbled the opening theme of the overture on the spot, including it in a letter he wrote home the same evening. He wrote other concert overtures, notably \"Calm Sea and Prosperous Voyage\" (\"Meeresstille und gl\u00fcckliche Fahrt\", 1828), inspired by a pair of poems by Goethe and \"The Fair Melusine (Die sch\u00f6ne Melusine)\" (1830). A contemporary writer considered these works as \"perhaps the most beautiful overtures that, so far, we Germans possess\".\nMendelssohn also wrote in 1839 an overture to \"Ruy Blas\", commissioned for a charity performance of Victor Hugo's drama (which the composer hated). His incidental music to \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" (Op. 61), including the well-known \"Wedding March\", was written in 1843, seventeen years after the Overture.\nConcertos.\nThe Violin Concerto in E minor, Op. 64 (1844), was written for Ferdinand David. David, who had worked closely with Mendelssohn during the piece's preparation, gave the premiere of the concerto on his Guarneri violin. Joseph Joachim called it one of the four great violin concertos along with those of Beethoven, Brahms, and Bruch.\nMendelssohn also wrote a lesser-known, early concerto for violin and strings in D minor (1822); four piano concertos (\"no. 0\" in A minor, 1822; 1 in G minor, 1831; 2 in D\u00a0minor, 1837; and 3 in E minor, a posthumously published fragment from 1844); two concertos for two pianos and orchestra (E major, which he wrote at 14 [1823], and A-flat major, at 15 [1824]); and another double concerto, for violin and piano (1823). In addition, there are several single-movement works for soloist and orchestra. Those for piano are the \"Rondo Brillante\" of 1834, the \"Capriccio Brillante\" of 1832, and the \"Serenade and Allegro Giocoso\" of 1838. He also wrote two concertinos (\"Konzertst\u00fccke\"), Op. 113 and 114, originally for clarinet, basset horn and piano; Op. 113 was orchestrated by the composer.\nChamber music.\nMendelssohn's mature output contains numerous chamber works, many of which display an emotional intensity lacking in some of his larger works. In particular, his String Quartet No. 6, the last of his string quartets and his last major work\u00a0\u2013 written following the death of his sister Fanny \u2013 is, in the opinion of the historian Peter Mercer-Taylor, exceptionally powerful and eloquent. Other mature works include two string quintets; sonatas for the clarinet, cello, viola and violin; and two piano trios. For the Piano Trio No. 1 in D minor, Mendelssohn uncharacteristically took the advice of his fellow composer, Ferdinand Hiller, and rewrote the piano part in a more Romantic, \"Schumannesque\" style, considerably heightening its effect.\nPiano music.\nThe musicologist Glenn Stanley observes that \"[u]nlike Brahms, unlike his contemporaries Schumann, Chopin and Liszt, and unlike [his] revered past masters...Mendelssohn did not regard the piano as a preferred medium for his most significant artistic statements\". Mendelssohn's \"Songs Without Words\" (\"Lieder ohne Worte\"), eight cycles each containing six lyric pieces (two published posthumously), remain his most famous solo piano compositions. They became standard parlour recital items even during the composer's lifetime, and their overwhelming popularity, according to Todd, has itself caused many critics to underrate their musical value. As example, Charles Rosen equivocally commented, despite noting \"how much beautiful music they contain\", that \"[i]t is not true that they are insipid, but they might as well be.\" During the 19th century, composers who were inspired to produce similar pieces of their own included Charles-Valentin Alkan (his five sets of \"Chants\", each ending with a barcarolle) and Anton Rubinstein.\nOther notable piano works by Mendelssohn include his \"Variations s\u00e9rieuses\", Op. 54 (1841), the \"Rondo Capriccioso\" (1830), the set of six \"Preludes and Fugues\", Op. 35 (written between 1832 and 1837), and the \"Seven Characteristic Pieces\", Op. 7 (1827).\nOrgan music.\nMendelssohn played and composed for organ from the age of 11 until his death. His primary organ works are the \"Three Preludes and Fugues\", Op. 37 (1837), and the \"Six Sonatas\", Op. 65 (1845), of which Eric Werner wrote \"next to Bach's works, Mendelssohn's Organ Sonatas belong to the required repertory of all organists\".\nOpera.\nMendelssohn wrote some Singspiele for family performance in his youth. His opera \"Die beiden Neffen\" (\"The Two Nephews\") was rehearsed for him on his 15th birthday. 1829 saw \"Die Heimkehr aus der Fremde\" (\"Son and Stranger\" or \"Return of the Roamer\"), a comedy of mistaken identity written in honour of his parents' silver anniversary and unpublished during his lifetime. In 1825 he wrote a more sophisticated work, \"Die Hochzeit des Camacho\" (\"Camacho's Wedding\"), based on an episode in \"Don Quixote\", for public consumption. It was produced in Berlin in 1827, but coolly received. Mendelssohn left the theatre before the conclusion of the first performance, and subsequent performances were cancelled.\nAlthough he never abandoned the idea of composing a full opera, and considered many subjects\u00a0\u2013 including that of the Nibelung saga later adapted by Wagner, about which he corresponded with his sister Fanny\u00a0\u2013 he never wrote more than a few pages of sketches for any project. In Mendelssohn's last years the opera manager Benjamin Lumley tried to contract him to write an opera from Shakespeare's \"The Tempest\" on a libretto by Eug\u00e8ne Scribe, and even announced it as forthcoming in 1847, the year of Mendelssohn's death. The libretto was eventually set by Fromental Hal\u00e9vy. At his death Mendelssohn left some sketches for an opera on the story of the Lorelei.\nChoral works.\nMendelssohn's two large biblical oratorios, \"St Paul\" in 1836 and \"Elijah\" in 1846, are greatly influenced by J. S. Bach. The surviving fragments of an unfinished oratorio, \"Christus\", consist of a recitative, a chorus \"There Shall a Star Come out of Jacob\", and a male voice trio.\nStrikingly different is the more overtly Romantic \"Die erste Walpurgisnacht\" (\"The First Walpurgis Night\"), a setting for chorus and orchestra of a ballad by Goethe describing pagan rituals of the Druids in the Harz mountains in the early days of Christianity. This score has been seen by the scholar Heinz-Klaus Metzger as a \"Jewish protest against the domination of Christianity\".\nMendelssohn wrote five settings from \"The Book of Psalms\" for chorus and orchestra. Schumann opined in 1837 that his version of Psalm 42 was the \"highest point that he [Mendelssohn] reached as a composer for the church. Indeed the highest point recent church music has reached at all.\"\nMendelssohn also wrote many smaller-scale sacred works for unaccompanied choir, such as a setting of Psalm 100, \"Jauchzet dem Herrn, alle Welt\", and for choir with organ. Most are written in or translated into English. Among the most famous is \"Hear My Prayer\", whose second half contains \"O for the Wings of a Dove\", which became often performed as a separate item. The piece is written for full choir, organ, and a treble or soprano soloist. Mendelssohn's biographer Todd comments, \"The very popularity of the anthem in England\u00a0[...] later exposed it to charges of superficiality from those contemptuous of Victorian mores.\"\nA hymn tune \"Mendelssohn\"\u00a0\u2013 an adaptation by William Hayman Cummings of a melody from Mendelssohn's cantata \"Festgesang\" (\"Festive Hymn\"), a secular 1840s composition, which Mendelssohn felt unsuited to sacred music \u2013 has become the standard tune for Charles Wesley's popular Christmas hymn \"Hark! The Herald Angels Sing\".\nSongs.\nMendelssohn wrote many songs, both for solo voice and for duet, with piano. It has been asserted that from 1819 (when he was 10) until his death there was \"scarcely a single month in which he was not occupied with song composition\". Many of these songs are simple, or slightly modified, strophic settings. Some, such as his best-known song \"Auf Fl\u00fcgeln des Gesanges\" (\"On Wings of Song\"), became popular. The scholar Susan Youens comments \"If [Mendelssohn]'s emotional range in lied was narrower than Schubert's, that is hardly surprising: Schubert composed many more songs than Mendelssohn across a wider spectrum\", and whilst Schubert had a declared intent to modernize the song style of his day, \"[t]his was not Mendelssohn's mission.\"\nA number of songs written by Mendelssohn's sister Fanny originally appeared under her brother's name; this may have been partly due to the prejudice of the family, and partly to her own retiring nature. In 1842, this resulted in an embarrassing moment when Queen Victoria, receiving Felix at Buckingham Palace, expressed her intention of singing to the composer her favourite of his songs, \"Italien\" (to words by Franz Grillparzer), which Felix confessed was by Fanny.\nPerformer.\nDuring his lifetime, Mendelssohn became renowned as a keyboard performer, both on the piano and organ. One of his obituarists noted: \"First and chiefest we esteem his pianoforte-playing, with its amazing elasticity of touch, rapidity, and power; next his scientific and vigorous organ playing\u00a0[...] his triumphs on these instruments are fresh in public recollection. In his concerts and recitals Mendelssohn performed works by some of his German predecessors, notably Carl Maria von Weber, Beethoven and J.S. Bach, whose organ music he brought back into the repertoire \"virtually alone\".\nMendelssohn admired the grand pianos of the Viennese maker Conrad Graf; he acquired one in 1832 which he used in the family house and recitals in Berlin, and later another for use in D\u00fcsseldorf. In private and public performances, Mendelssohn was celebrated for his improvisations. On one occasion in London, when asked by the soprano Maria Malibran after a recital to extemporise, he improvised a piece which included the melodies of all the songs she had sung. The music publisher Victor Novello, who was present, remarked \"He has done some things that seem to me impossible, even after I have heard them done.\" At another recital in 1837, where Mendelssohn played the piano for a singer, Robert Schumann ignored the soprano and wrote \"Mendelssohn accompanied like a God.\"\nConductor.\nMendelssohn was a noted conductor, both of his own works and of those by other composers. At his London debut in 1829, he was noted for his innovatory use of a baton (then a great novelty). But his novelty also extended to taking great care over tempo, dynamics and the orchestral players themselves\u00a0\u2013 both rebuking them when they were recalcitrant and praising them when they satisfied him. It was his success while conducting at the Lower Rhine music festival of 1836 that led to him taking his first paid professional position as director at D\u00fcsseldorf. Among those appreciating Mendelssohn's conducting was Hector Berlioz, who in 1843, invited to Leipzig, exchanged batons with Mendelssohn, writing \"When the Great Spirit sends us to hunt in the land of souls, may our warriors hang our tomahawks side by side at the door of the council chamber\". At Leipzig, Mendelssohn led the Gewandhaus Orchestra to great heights; although concentrating on the great composers of the past (already becoming canonised as the \"classics\") he also included new music by Schumann, Berlioz, Gade and many others, as well as his own music. One critic who was not impressed was Richard Wagner; he accused Mendelssohn of using tempos in his performances of Beethoven symphonies that were far too fast.\nEditor.\nMendelssohn's interest in baroque music was not limited to the Bach \"St Matthew Passion\" which he had revived in 1829. He was concerned in preparing and editing such music, whether for performance or for publication, to be as close as possible to the original intentions of the composers, including wherever possible a close study of early editions and manuscripts. This could lead him into conflict with publishers; for instance, his edition of Handel's oratorio \"Israel in Egypt\" for the London Handel Society (1845) evoked an often contentious correspondence, with Mendelssohn refusing for example to add dynamics where not given by Handel, or to add parts for trombones. Mendelssohn also edited a number of Bach's works for organ, and apparently discussed with Robert Schumann the possibility of producing a complete Bach edition.\nTeacher.\nAlthough Mendelssohn attributed great importance to musical education, and made a substantial commitment to the Conservatoire he founded in Leipzig, he did not greatly enjoy teaching and took only a very few private pupils who he believed had notable qualities. Such students included the composer William Sterndale Bennett, the pianist Camille-Marie Stamaty, the violinist and composer Julius Eichberg, and Walther von Goethe (grandson of the poet). At the Leipzig Conservatoire Mendelssohn taught classes in composition and ensemble playing.\nReputation and legacy.\nThe first century.\nIn the immediate wake of Mendelssohn's death, he was mourned both in Germany and England. However, the conservative strain in Mendelssohn, which set him apart from some of his more flamboyant contemporaries, bred a corollary condescension amongst some of them toward his music. Mendelssohn's relations with Berlioz, Liszt and others had been uneasy and equivocal. Listeners who had raised questions about Mendelssohn's talent included Heinrich Heine, who wrote in 1836 after hearing the oratorio \"St. Paul\" that his work was\ncharacterized by a great, strict, very serious seriousness, a determined, almost importunate tendency to follow classical models, the finest, cleverest calculation, sharp intelligence and, finally, complete lack of na\u00efvet\u00e9. But is there in art any originality of genius without na\u00efvet\u00e9?\nSuch criticism of Mendelssohn for his very ability\u00a0\u2013 which could be characterised negatively as facility\u00a0\u2013 was taken to further lengths by Richard Wagner. Mendelssohn's success, his popularity and his Jewish origins irked Wagner sufficiently to damn Mendelssohn with faint praise, three years after his death, in an anti-Jewish pamphlet \"Das Judenthum in der Musik\":\n[Mendelssohn] has shown us that a Jew may have the amplest store of specific talents, may own the finest and most varied culture, the highest and tenderest sense of honour\u00a0\u2013 yet without all these pre-eminences helping him, were it but one single time, to call forth in us that deep, that heart-searching effect which we await from art\u00a0[...] The washiness and the whimsicality of our present musical style has been\u00a0[...] pushed to its utmost pitch by Mendelssohn's endeavour to speak out a vague, an almost nugatory Content as interestingly and spiritedly as possible.\nThe philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche expressed consistent admiration for Mendelssohn's music, in contrast to his general scorn for \"Teutonic\" Romanticism:\nAt any rate, the whole music of romanticism [e.g. Schumann and Wagner]\u00a0... was second-rate music from the very start, and real musicians took little notice of it. Things were different with Felix Mendelssohn, that halcyon master who, thanks to his easier, purer, happier soul, was quickly honoured and just as quickly forgotten, as a lovely \"incident\" in German music.\nSome readers, however, have interpreted Nietzsche's characterization of Mendelssohn as a 'lovely incident' as condescending.\nIn the 20th century the Nazi regime and its \"Reichsmusikkammer\" cited Mendelssohn's Jewish origin in banning performance and publication of his works, even asking Nazi-approved composers to rewrite incidental music for \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" (Carl Orff obliged). Under the Nazis, \"Mendelssohn was presented as a dangerous 'accident' of music history, who played a decisive role in rendering German music in the 19th century 'degenerate'.\" The German Mendelssohn Scholarship for students at the Leipzig Conservatoire was discontinued in 1934 (and not revived until 1963). The monument dedicated to Mendelssohn erected in Leipzig in 1892 was removed by the Nazis in 1936. A replacement was erected in 2008. The bronze statue of Mendelssohn by Clemens Buscher outside the D\u00fcsseldorf Opera House was also removed and destroyed by the Nazis in 1936. A replacement was erected in 2012. Mendelssohn's grave remained unmolested during the Nazi years.\nMendelssohn's reputation in Britain remained high throughout the 19th century. Prince Albert inscribed (in German) a libretto for the oratorio \"Elijah\" in 1847: \"To the noble artist who, surrounded by the Baal-worship of false art, has been able, like a second Elijah, through genius and study, to remain true to the service of true art.\" In 1851 an adulatory novel by the teenaged Elizabeth Sara Sheppard was published, \"Charles Auchester\". The book features as its leading character the \"Chevalier Seraphel\", an idealized portrait of Mendelssohn, and remained in print for nearly 80 years. In 1854 Queen Victoria requested that the Crystal Palace include a statue of Mendelssohn when it was rebuilt. Mendelssohn's \"Wedding March\" from \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" was played at the wedding of Queen Victoria's daughter, Princess Victoria, The Princess Royal, to Crown Prince Frederick William of Prussia in 1858, and it remains popular at marriage ceremonies. Mendelssohn's pupil Sterndale Bennett was a major force in British musical education until his death in 1875, and a great upholder of his master's traditions; he numbered among his pupils many of the next generation of English composers, including Sullivan, Hubert Parry and Francis Edward Bache.\nBy the early twentieth century, many critics, including Bernard Shaw, began to condemn Mendelssohn's music for its association with Victorian cultural insularity; Shaw in particular complained of the composer's \"kid-glove gentility, his conventional sentimentality, and his despicable oratorio-mongering\". In the 1950s the scholar Wilfrid Mellers complained of Mendelssohn's \"spurious religiosity which reflected the element of unconscious humbug in our morality\". A contrasting opinion came from the pianist and composer Ferruccio Busoni, who considered Mendelssohn \"a master of undisputed greatness\" and \"an heir of Mozart\". Busoni, like earlier virtuosi such as Anton Rubinstein and Charles-Valentin Alkan, regularly included Mendelssohn's piano works in his recitals.\nModern opinions.\nAppreciation of Mendelssohn's work has developed since the mid-20th century, together with the publication of a number of biographies placing his achievements in context. Mercer-Taylor comments on the irony that \"this broad-based reevaluation of Mendelssohn's music is made possible, in part, by a general disintegration of the idea of a musical canon\", an idea which Mendelssohn \"as a conductor, pianist and scholar\" had done so much to establish. The critic H. L. Mencken concluded that, if Mendelssohn indeed missed true greatness, he missed it \"by a hair\".\nCharles Rosen, in a chapter on Mendelssohn in his 1995 book \"The Romantic Generation\", both praised and criticized the composer. He called him \"the greatest child prodigy the history of Western music has ever known\", whose command at age 16 surpassed that of Mozart or Chopin at 19, the possessor at an early age of a \"control of large-scale structure unsurpassed by any composer of his generation\", and a \"genius\" with a \"profound\" comprehension of Beethoven. Rosen believed that in the composer's later years, without losing his craft or genius, he \"renounced\u00a0... his daring\"; but he called Mendelssohn's relatively late Violin Concerto in E minor \"the most successful synthesis of the Classical concerto tradition and the Romantic virtuoso form\". Rosen considered the \"Fugue in E minor\" (later included in Mendelssohn's Op. 35 for piano) a \"masterpiece\"; but in the same paragraph called Mendelssohn \"the inventor of religious kitsch in music\". Nevertheless, he pointed out how the dramatic power of \"the juncture of religion and music\" in Mendelssohn's oratorios is reflected throughout the music of the next fifty years in the operas of Meyerbeer and Giuseppe Verdi and in Wagner's \"Parsifal\".\nA large portion of Mendelssohn's 750 works still remained unpublished in the 1960s, but most of them are now available. A scholarly edition of Mendelssohn's complete works and correspondence is in preparation but is expected to take many years to complete, and will be in excess of 150 volumes. This includes a modern and fully researched catalogue of his works, the Mendelssohn-Werkverzeichnis (MWV). Mendelssohn's oeuvre has been explored more deeply. Recordings of virtually all of Mendelssohn's published works are now available, and his works are frequently heard in the concert hall and on broadcasts. \nR. Larry Todd noted in 2007, in the context of the impending bicentenary of Mendelssohn's birth, \"the intensifying revival of the composer's music over the past few decades\", and that \"his image has been largely rehabilitated, as musicians and scholars have returned to this paradoxically familiar but unfamiliar European classical composer, and have begun viewing him from new perspectives.\"\nNotes and references.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\nThere are numerous published editions and selections of Mendelssohn's letters.\nThe main collections of Mendelssohn's original musical autographs and letters are to be found in the Bodleian Library, Oxford University, the New York Public Library, and the Staatsbibliothek in Berlin. The autographs of his https:// are in Special Collections at Brotherton Library, University of Leeds."}
{"id": "76371", "revid": "50600157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76371", "title": "Sweet Smell of Success", "text": "1957 film by Alexander Mackendrick\nSweet Smell of Success is a 1957 American film noir satirical drama film directed by Alexander Mackendrick, starring Burt Lancaster, Tony Curtis, Susan Harrison, and Martin Milner, and written by Clifford Odets, Ernest Lehman, and Mackendrick from the novelette by Lehman. The shadowy noir cinematography filmed on location in New York City was shot by James Wong Howe. The picture was produced by James Hill of Hecht-Hill-Lancaster Productions and released by United Artists. The supporting cast features Sam Levene, Barbara Nichols, Joe Frisco, Edith Atwater, David White, and Emile Meyer. The musical score was arranged and conducted by Elmer Bernstein and the film also features jazz performances by the Chico Hamilton Quintet. Mary Grant designed the costumes.\nThe film tells the story of powerful and sleazy newspaper columnist J.J. Hunsecker (portrayed by Lancaster and based on Walter Winchell) who uses his connections to ruin his sister's relationship with a man he deems unworthy of her.\nDespite a poorly received preview screening, \"Sweet Smell of Success\" has greatly improved in stature over the years. It grew to become highly acclaimed by film critics, particularly for its cinematography and screenplay. In 1993, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nPlot.\nIn Manhattan, slick, up-and-coming press agent Sidney Falco scans the \"New York Globe\" for the column of the immensely popular journalist J.J. Hunsecker, an influential media kingpin whose journalistic contributions and associated radio show both dominate the entertainment world. For the fifth consecutive day, J.J. has neglected to publicize any of Sidney's clients: J.J. is overly protective of his 19-year-old younger sister Susan and has asked Sidney to end her recent affair with Steve Dallas, a budding jazz guitarist, but so far Sidney has been unsuccessful.\nAt the Elysian Room, where Steve performs with his group, the Chico Hamilton Quintet, Sidney argues with his uncle Frank D\u2019Angelo (who is Steve's manager), who has promised him that Steve and Susan will part. Upon learning from his casual girlfriend Rita, a cigarette girl, that Susan is awaiting Steve behind the club, he interrupts the pair. Steve accuses him of \"scratching for information like a dog.\" Rita appeals to Sidney to help her keep her job, which is at risk because she refused to sleep with J.J.\u2019s competitor, prominent columnist Leo Bartha, who then ordered her dismissal. Sidney fixes a date with Rita. Inside a cab, Susan questions his relationship with J.J. but he reassures her that J.J. is a close friend of his. Outside the 21 Club, J.J. greets his informer, Harry Kello, a corrupt police lieutenant, who is indebted to J.J. for petitioning the mayor to save his job after Kello beat a suspect severely. When Sidney reveals Steve's and Susan's engagement, J.J. gives him an ultimatum to destroy their relationship. Desperate to salvage his career, he vows not to disappoint J.J.\nSidney attempts to blackmail Leo at Toots Shor's Restaurant and Lounge, threatening to expose his marital infidelity with Rita unless Leo prints a defamatory gossip item stating that Steve is a Communist who smokes marijuana. Instead, Leo chooses exposure over compromising his journalistic integrity, which even his wife Loretta praises as his first decent act in years. Sidney bribes another columnist, Otis Elwell, who agrees to print the item if Sidney will arrange for him to receive a sexual favor from an \"available\" woman. At his apartment, Rita balks at the implications of getting acquainted with Otis, but ultimately assents to Sidney's plan in order to stay employed. The next morning, the smear appears in Otis's column and the quartet is fired.\nAs planned, J.J. theatrically gets Steve rehired with a phone call in front of Susan, but Steve rebukes him for being a malignant influence on society. Forced to choose between them, an overwhelmed Susan breaks up with Steve, hoping to save him from J.J.'s vengeance. Planning to destroy Steve's career, an incensed J.J. orders Sidney to plant marijuana on Steve; a shocked Sidney balks, saying he can accept a dog collar but not a noose, but once J.J. offers to let Sidney write his column for three months while he vacations with Susan in Europe, he acquiesces.\nAt the Elysian Room, Sidney slips marijuana into the pocket of Steve's coat. Once Steve finishes work that evening, Kello accosts him outside and so assaults him that he is hospitalized. At a bar, surrounded by his industry cohorts, Sidney celebrates his accomplishment but is then summoned to J.J.'s penthouse apartment. He arrives to find a distraught Susan in her nightgown, about to commit suicide by jumping off the balcony. He rescues her, and takes her into her bedroom to rest. Upon arriving to find the two holding each other, J.J. harshly scolds him. Realizing that Susan set him up, Sidney irately reveals to her that J.J. conspired to frame Steve; he then departs, vowing to reveal the truth and informing J.J. that Susan is permanently lost to him. J.J. then calls Kello and tells him Steve is innocent, ordering Sidney to be arrested for planting the evidence. As Sidney exits the building, Kello brutally beats him.\nAs Susan packs her belongings, J.J. unsuccessfully begs her to stay; she coolly informs him that death is preferable to living with him. An overwrought J.J. watches from the balcony as she strides into the coming dawn to start life afresh with her lover.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Burt Lancaster as J. J. Hunsecker\nProduction.\nFaced with potential unemployment from the sale of Ealing Studios to the BBC in 1954, director Alexander Mackendrick began entertaining offers from Hollywood. He rejected potential contracts from Cary Grant and David Selznick and signed with independent production company Hecht-Hill-Lancaster, enticed by their offer to adapt George Bernard Shaw\u2019s play \"The Devil's Disciple\". After the project collapsed during pre-production, Mackendrick asked to be released from his commitment. Harold Hecht refused and asked him to start work on another project \u2013 adapting Ernest Lehman's novellette \"Sweet Smell of Success\" into a film.\nLehman's story had originally appeared in the April 1950 issue of \"Cosmopolitan\", renamed \"Tell Me About It Tomorrow!\" because the editor of the magazine did not want the word \"smell\" in the publication. It was based on his own experiences working as an assistant to Irving Hoffman, a New York press agent and columnist for \"The Hollywood Reporter\". Hoffman subsequently did not speak to Lehman for a year and a half. Hoffman then wrote a column for \"The Hollywood Reporter\" speculating that Lehman would make a good screenwriter, and within a week Paramount called Lehman, inviting him to Los Angeles for talks. Lehman forged a screenwriting career in Hollywood, writing \"Executive Suite\", \"Sabrina,\" \"North by Northwest,\" \"The Sound of Music\", \"West Side Story\", \"The King and I\", and \"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?\".\nPre-production.\nBy the time Hecht-Hill-Lancaster acquired \"Success\", Lehman was in position to not only adapt his own novelette but also produce and direct the film. After scouting locations, Lehman was told by Hecht that distributor United Artists was having second thoughts about going with a first-time director, so Hecht offered the film to Mackendrick. Initially, the director had reservations about trying to film such a dialogue-heavy screenplay, so he and Lehman worked on it for weeks to make it more cinematic. As the script neared completion, Lehman became ill and had to resign from the picture. James Hill took over and offered Paddy Chayefsky as Lehman's replacement. Mackendrick suggested Clifford Odets, the playwright whose reputation as a left-wing hero had been tarnished after he named names before the House Un-American Activities Committee.\nMackendrick assumed that Odets would need only two or three weeks to polish the script, but he took four months. The director recalled, \"We started shooting with no final script at all, while Clifford reconstructed the thing from stem to stern\". The plot was largely intact, but in Mackendrick's biography he is quoted from \"Notes on Sweet Smell of Success\": \"What Clifford did, in effect, was dismantle the structure of every single sequence in order to rebuild situations and relationships that were much more complex, had much greater tension and more dramatic energy\". This process took time, and the start date for the production could not be delayed. Odets had to accompany the production to Manhattan and continued rewriting while they shot there. Returning to the city that had shunned him for going to Hollywood made Odets very neurotic and obsessed with all kinds of rituals as he worked at a furious pace, with pages often going straight from his typewriter to being shot the same day. Mackendrick said, \"So we cut the script there on the floor, with the actors, just cutting down lines, making them more spare \u2013 what Clifford would have done himself, really, had there been time\".\nTony Curtis had to fight for the role of Sidney Falco because Universal, the studio to which he was contracted, was worried that it would ruin his career. Tired of doing pretty-boy roles and wanting to prove that he could act, Curtis got his way. Orson Welles was originally considered for the role of J. J. Hunsecker. Mackendrick wanted to cast Hume Cronyn because he felt that Cronyn closely resembled Walter Winchell, the basis for the Hunsecker character in the novelette. Lehman made the distinction in an interview that Winchell was the inspiration for the version of the character in the novelette, and that this differs from the character in the film version. United Artists wanted Burt Lancaster in the role because of his box office appeal and his successful pairing with Curtis on \"Trapeze\". Robert Vaughn was signed to a contract with Lancaster's film company and was to have played the Steve Dallas role but was drafted into the Army before he could begin the film. Ernest Borgnine, contracted to Hecht-Hill-Lancaster since \"Marty\" (1955) was offered a role in the film but turned it down as his role was only seven pages long in the script. His refusal led him to be put on suspension from Hecht-Hill-Lancaster.\nHecht-Hill-Lancaster allowed Mackendrick to familiarize himself with New York City before shooting the movie. In \"Notes on Sweet Smell of Success\", Mackendrick said, \"One of the characteristic aspects of New York, particularly of the area between 42nd Street and 57th Street, is the neurotic energy of the crowded sidewalks. This was, I argued, essential to the story of characters driven by the uglier aspects of ambition and greed\". He took multiple photographs of the city from several fixed points and taped the pictures into a series of panoramas that he stuck on a wall and studied once he got back to Hollywood.\nCellist Fred Katz and drummer Chico Hamilton, who briefly appear in the film as themselves, wrote a score for the movie, which was ultimately rejected in favor of one by Elmer Bernstein.\nPrincipal photography.\nMackendrick shot the film in late 1956, and was scared the entire time because Hecht-Hill-Lancaster had a reputation for firing their directors for any or even no reason at all. The filmmaker was used to extensive rehearsals before a scene was shot and often found himself shooting a script page one or two hours after Odets had written it. Lancaster's presence proved to be intimidating for numerous individuals involved with the production; at one point, Lehman had been approached to direct the film, but declined due to his fear of Lancaster, although Hecht maintained that Lehman had never been offered the chance to direct. Mackendrick and composer Elmer Bernstein both found Lancaster intimidating, with Bernstein later recalling, \"Burt was really scary. He was a dangerous guy. He had a short fuse\". Mackendrick decided to use Lancaster's volatility to work for the character of J.J., asking that Lancaster wear his own browline glasses, which Mackendrick felt gave him the presence of \"a scholarly brute\". Mackendrick smeared a thin layer of vaseline on the lenses, preventing Lancaster from focusing his eyes and giving him a perpetually blank gaze. Assisted by cinematographer James Wong Howe, Mackendrick intentionally filmed scenes with J.J. from a low angle using a wide-angle lens and with overhead lighting directly above Lancaster, so that the spectacle frames cast shadows on his face.\nShooting on location in New York City also added to Mackendrick's anxieties. Exteriors were shot in the busiest, noisiest areas with crowds of young Tony Curtis fans occasionally breaking through police barriers. Mackendrick remembered, \"We started shooting in Times Square at rush hour, and we had high-powered actors and a camera crane and police help and all the rest of it, but we didn't have any script. We knew where we were going vaguely, but that's all\".\nReaction.\nA preview screening of \"Sweet Smell of Success\" was poorly received, as Tony Curtis fans were expecting him to play one of his typical nice guy roles and instead were presented with the scheming Sidney Falco. Mackendrick remembered seeing audience members \"curling up, crossing their arms and legs, recoiling from the screen in disgust\". Burt Lancaster's fans were not thrilled with their idol either, \"finding the film too static and talky\".\nThe film was a box-office failure, and Hecht blamed his producing partner Hill. \"The night of the preview, Harold said to me, 'You know you've wrecked our company? We're going to lose over a million dollars on this picture,'\" Hill recalled. According to Lehman, Lancaster blamed him, claiming that: \"Burt threatened me at a party after the preview. He said, 'You didn't have to leave \u2013 you could have made this a much better picture. I ought to beat you up.' I said, 'Go ahead \u2013 I could use the money.'\"\n\"Variety\" estimated the film lost at least $400,000 on its initial run.\nAlthough he and Hecht would fire Mackendrick from \"The Devil's Disciple\" for the same painstaking (and costly) approach, Lancaster was quoted as saying that he felt Mackendrick had done a fantastic job for \"Sweet Smell of Success\" and that it was not his fault the film lost money. He also believed that Curtis should have gotten an Oscar for his role as Falco.\n\"Sweet Smell of Success\" premiered in New York at Loew's State in Times Square on June 27, 1957. Critical reaction was much more favorable. \"Time\" magazine said the movie was \"raised to considerable dramatic heights by intense acting, taut direction ... superb camera work ... and, above all, by its whiplash dialogue\". \"Time\" and the \"New York Herald\" included the film on their ten-best lists for films released in 1957. The film's critical reputation increased in subsequent decades. David Denby in \"New York\" magazine later called it \"the most acrid, and the best\" of all New York movies because it captured, \"better than any film I know the atmosphere of Times Square and big-city journalism\".\n\"Sweet Smell of Success\" holds a 98% rating based on 61 reviews at Rotten Tomatoes; the critical consensus explains, \"\"Sweet Smell of Success\" boasts a top-notch cast, sharp direction, atmospheric cinematography, and an appropriately jazzy score, making it one of the best noir crime thrillers ever made.\" At Metacritic it has a weighted average score rating of 100 out of 100 based on 5 reviews. According to \"The Guardian\", British press assessed it a perfect 10/10 based on reviews from multiple British newspapers. A. O. Scott wrote in March 2002 for \"The New York Times\": \"Courtesy of Ernest Lehman and Clifford Odets, a high-toned street vernacular that no real New Yorker has ever spoken but that every real New Yorker wishes he could\". Andrew Sarris in the \"New York Observer\", again in 2002, wrote, \"the main incentive to see this movie is its witty, pungent and idiomatic dialogue, such as you never hear on the screen anymore in this age of special-effects illiteracy\". Pauline Kael wrote: \"... the film is a slice of perversity\u2014a study of dollar and power worship... Alexander Mackendrick has a crisp \"film-noir\" style: the production is shaped by a zest for the corrupt milieu, the pulsating big-city life (what used to be called 'the symphony of a city')\u2014the streets, the nightclubs, the cynical types, the noise and desperation. His temperament enables us to respond to the vitality in this decadence.\" Eddie Muller wrote that the film \"emerged from the cutting room a perverse, unpleasant, brilliant, and profound film. Arguably the best work of everyone involved.\"\nLegacy.\nIn 1993, the year Mackendrick died, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nIn 2002, a was created by Marvin Hamlisch, Craig Carnelia and John Guare. It was not considered a critical or commercial success.\nIn its \"100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains\" list, the American Film Institute (AFI) named J. J. Hunsecker number 35 of the top 50 movie villains of all time in 2003.\nFilmmaker Barry Levinson paid tribute to \"Sweet Smell of Success\" in his 1982 film \"Diner\" . One character quotes only lines from the film. In an early scene from Levinson's 1988 movie, \"Rain Man\", \"Sweet Smell of Success\" is seen playing on television.\nThe \"\" episode \"Contract\" is an homage to the film. Mo Rocca playing a gossip columnist who is clearly based on J.J. (in both appearance and attitude) and other characters from the episode quoting the film's lines many times.\nThe film has been cited as \"Breaking Bad\" creator Vince Gilligan's favorite movie. The tiles of the episodes \"Cat's in the Bag...\" and \"...And the Bag's in the River\", both from the first season of the show, are quotes from the film.\nAmerican Film Institute recognition.\n\"100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains\" -- #35 Villain (J.J. Hunsecker)\nHome media.\n\"Sweet Smell of Success\" was released on DVD (Region 1) and Blu-ray (Region A) as part of The Criterion Collection in February 2011. The release includes new audio commentary featuring film scholar James Naremore, \"Mackendrick: The Man Who Walked Away\", a 1986 documentary produced by Scottish Television featuring interviews with director Alexander Mackendrick, actor Burt Lancaster, producer James Hill, and others. \"James Wong Howe: Cinematographer\", a 1973 documentary about the film's director of photography, featuring lighting tutorials with Howe, a new video interview with film critic and historian Neal Gabler (Winchell: Gossip, Power and the Culture of Celebrity) about legendary columnist Walter Winchell, inspiration for the character J. J. Hunsecker, and a new video interview with filmmaker James Mangold about Mackendrick, his instructor and mentor. There is also a booklet featuring an essay by critic Gary Giddins, notes about the film and two short stories introducing its characters by screenwriter Ernest Lehman, and an excerpt about Clifford Odets from Mackendrick's book \"On Film-making\", introduced by the book's editor, Paul Cronin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76372", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76372", "title": "Mendelssohn (surname)", "text": "The surname \u05de\u05e2\u05e0\u05d3\u05e2\u05dc\u05e1\u05d0\u05df (original yiddish: '\u05f3\u05de\u05e2\u05e0\u05d3\u05e2\u05dc\u05d6\u05d0\u05df) is transliterated to English as Mendelssohn, Mendelsson, Mendelson, or Mandelson. It is a common Polish/German Jewish surname. The variant spellings are used interchangeably, often even within a single family.\nThe name means \"son of Mendel\" (\"Mendel's son\"), or \"son of Menachem\", as Mendel is a Yiddish diminutive of the Hebrew given name \"Menahem\". Menachem itself means \"consoling\" or \"one who consoles\".\nPeople.\nMendelssohn.\nthe Mendelssohn family starting with Jewish philosopher Moses Mendelssohn (1729\u20131786),\na significant figure in the Age of Enlightenment in Germany, and his descendants:\nOthers\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname . "}
{"id": "76377", "revid": "45093283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76377", "title": "The Tall T", "text": "1957 film by Budd Boetticher\nThe Tall T is a 1957 American Western film directed by Budd Boetticher and starring Randolph Scott, Richard Boone, and Maureen O'Sullivan. Adapted by Burt Kennedy from the 1955 short story \"The Captives\" by Elmore Leonard, the film is about an independent former ranch foreman who is kidnapped along with an heiress, who is being held for ransom by three ruthless outlaws. In 2000, \"The Tall T\" was selected for the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nPlot.\nPassing a stagecoach way station on his journey into town, Pat Brennan agrees to return with some store-bought candy for the friendly station manager's young son. At a ranch where he once worked, Brennan tries to buy a bull, but is talked into riding one. If he wins, he gets the bull. If he loses he has to give up his horse. Brennan loses, and is forced to walk home, carrying his saddle.\nHe manages to get a lift from stagecoach driver Rintoon, an acquaintance of Brennan's from town, who has been hired specially to transport the newlyweds Willard and Doretta Mims. Doretta is a plain woman, but the daughter of a rich copper mine owner. It tickles Brennan, who tells Rintoon this is the first time he's ever been on a honeymoon.\nWhen they stop at the way-station, they are mistaken for the regular stage by three outlaws, Chink, Billy Jack, and their leader, Frank Usher, who have already killed the station manager and his son. Rintoon goes for his shotgun, only to be killed by gun-happy Chink.\nTerrified of sharing the same fate, Willard suggests to the outlaws that ransoming his wife would be far more profitable than robbing the stage. Frank likes the idea. He also immediately recognises, and is disgusted by, the groom's clear lack of devotion to his bride.\nThe outlaw leader takes a liking to Brennan, later telling him that under different circumstances the two of them might have been friends. After ordering Billy Jack to ride along with Willard and deliver a ransom note demanding $50,000 to Doretta's father, Frank takes the woman and Brennan to a remote hideout. Willard returns, saying his father-in-law has agreed and is gathering the money. Willard is told he is no longer needed and can leave. A coward, he does not even bother to say goodbye to his new wife, which deepens Frank's disgust for him. As Willard begins to ride off, Chink ruthlessly shoots him down.\nBrennan knows full well that he and Doretta will also end up dead once the ransom is paid. He tells the distraught widow to collect herself and be ready to take any opportunity for life that presents itself. He then takes her in his arms. She hesitates, then kisses him. She confesses she married Willard because she was getting older and did not want to be alone.\nBilly Jack and Chink are left behind to guard the hostages while Frank goes off to collect the money. Brennan plants the thought that their ringleader might just ride off alone with all the money, so Chink leaves the camp to keep an eye out for Frank. Brennan suggests to Billy Jack that he take advantage of Doretta, a lonely woman denied even her wedding night. Billy Jack does indeed try to force himself on Doretta, whereupon Brennan overpowers him and shoots him dead.\nChink hears the shots and turns back. Brennan kills him. Frank then returns with the money. Brennan however gets the drop on him, so Frank surrenders his revolver and the money. He slowly walks away, gambling that Brennan will not shoot him in the back. He mounts his horse and rides off. However, he has a rifle stowed in his saddle, so he pulls it and turns around; he rides back towards Brennan, who is forced to kill the outlaw. Walking away, side by side, Doretta reaches for Brennan's arm, which he places around her. He tells her it is going to be a good day.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Randolph Scott as Pat Brennan\nProduction.\nJohn Wayne ran Batjac with producer Robert Fellows. Burt Kennedy was under contract to the company, and he wrote \"The Tall T\" as a vehicle for Wayne, based based on Elmore Leonard's \"The Captive\"; Kennedy said he had persuaded Wayne to buy the rights to the story. Fellows and Wayne decided to go their separate ways and as part of the settlement Fellows was given the rights to the script of \"The Tall T\" which he sold to Harry Joe Brown. Kennedy said, \"I did some re-write on it, not too much, but that was a good script. That was a good picture. \"Seven Men [from Now]\"\u2018s good but \"The Tall T\" was different, because it didn\u2019t have as much of the girl. She was good, I liked the gal.\"\nAwards and nominations.\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nHome media.\nIn 2008 a DVD box set of five Budd Boetticher films starring Randolph Scott was released. Along with \"The Tall T\" the set includes \"Buchanan Rides Alone\", \"Decision at Sundown\", \"Ride Lonesome\", and \"Comanche Station\".\nMill Creek Entertainment released a 6-disk Blu-ray set of 12 Randolph Scott films including \"The Tall T\" and the other Ranown Westerns, i.e., the Boetticher/Scott films.\nThe Criterion Collection announced the box set \"The Ranown Westerns: Five Films Directed by Budd Boetticher\" including the 5 films that were in the DVD box set. The set was released on July 18, 2023.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76379", "revid": "51010458", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76379", "title": "The Tell-Tale Heart (1953 American film)", "text": "1953 American horror animated short film\nThe Tell-Tale Heart is a 1953 American adult animated psychological horror short film produced by UPA, directed by Ted Parmelee, and narrated by James Mason. The screenplay by Bill Scott and Fred Grable is based on the 1843 short story of the same name by Edgar Allan Poe. The British Board of Film Censors made this the first cartoon to receive an adults-only X certificate in the United Kingdom.\nPlot.\nA murderer's increasing guilt leads him to believe he can hear his victim's heart still beating beneath the floorboards where he buried him. Seen through the eyes of the nameless narrator, the surrealistic images help convey his descent into madness.\nProduction.\nPaul Julian served as both designer and color artist for film, and Pat Matthews was the principal animator.\nIn May 1953, pre-production started on \"The Tell-Tale Heart\", which originally was intended to be a 3-D film. It is not known if the film was animated in this fashion, but it was not released in 3D. There is no reference to 3D in a technical trade review. Furthermore, the leaders on original prints of the film do not indicate it ever was part of a pair of 3D prints.\nReception.\nThe film was the first cartoon to be rated X, indicating it was suitable only for adult audiences, by the British Board of Film Censors. It was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film but lost to \"Toot, Whistle, Plunk and Boom\" from Walt Disney Productions.\nIn 1994, animation historian Jerry Beck surveyed 1000 people working in the animation industry and published the results in \"The 50 Greatest Cartoons: As Selected by 1,000 Animation Professionals\", in which \"The Tell-Tale Heart\" ranked #24.\nIn 2001, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film \"culturally significant\" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.\nAvailability.\nThe short is included as a bonus feature on the first DVD release of \"Hellboy\". It is also included, with commentary by Leonard Maltin and Jerry Beck, on disc 2 of \"The Jolly Frolics Collection\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76380", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76380", "title": "Liszt (surname)", "text": "Last Name Liszt\nLiszt is a Hungarian surname that means 'flour'.\nNotable people with the surname include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname Liszt. "}
{"id": "76381", "revid": "16405733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76381", "title": "Civil procedure", "text": "Rules and standards used in civil lawsuits\nCivil procedure is the body of law that sets out the rules and regulations along with some standards that courts follow when adjudicating civil lawsuits (as opposed to procedures in criminal law matters). These rules govern how a lawsuit or case may be commenced; what kind of service of process (if any) is required; the types of pleadings or statements of case, motions or applications, and orders allowed in civil cases; the timing and manner of depositions and discovery or disclosure; the conduct of trials; the process for judgment; the process for post-trial procedures; various available remedies; and how the courts and clerks must function.\nDifferences from criminal procedure.\nIn most cases, criminal prosecutions are pursued by the state in order to punish offenders, although some systems, such as in English and French law, allow citizens to bring a private prosecution. Conversely, civil actions are initiated by private individuals, companies or organizations, for their own benefit. Government agencies may also be a party to civil actions. Civil and criminal cases are usually heard in different courts.\nIn jurisdictions based on English common-law systems, the party bringing a criminal charge (in most cases, the state) is called the \"prosecution\", but the party bringing most forms of civil action is the \"plaintiff\" or \"claimant\". In both kinds of action the other party is known as the \"defendant\". A criminal case against a person called Ms. Sanchez would be described as \"The People v. (=\u00a0\"versus\", \"against\" or \"and\") Sanchez\", \"The State (or Commonwealth) v. Sanchez\" or \"[The name of the State] v. Sanchez\" in the United States and \"R. (\"Rex\", Latin for \"King\" but spoken as \"The Crown\") v. Sanchez\" in England and Wales, amongst other Commonwealth realms. But a civil action between Ms. Sanchez and a Mr. Smith would be \"Sanchez v. Smith\" if it were started by Sanchez, and \"Smith v. Sanchez\" if it were started by Mr. Smith (though the order of parties' names can change if the case is appealed).\nMost countries make a clear distinction between civil and criminal procedure. For example, a criminal court may force a convicted defendant to pay a fine as punishment for their crime, and the legal costs of both the prosecution and defence. But the victim of the crime generally pursues their claim for compensation in a civil, not a criminal, action. In France and England, however, a victim of a crime may incidentally be awarded compensation by a criminal court judge.\nEvidence from a criminal trial is generally admissible as evidence in a civil action about the same matter. For example, the victim of a road accident does not directly benefit if the driver who injured them is found guilty of the crime of careless driving. The victim still has to prove his case in a civil action, unless the doctrine of collateral estoppel applies, as it does in most American jurisdictions. The victim may be able to prove their civil case even when the driver is found not guilty in the criminal trial, because the standard to determine guilt is higher than the standard to determine fault. However, if a driver is found by a civil jury not to have been negligent, a prosecutor may be estopped from charging them criminally.\nIf the plaintiff has shown that the defendant is liable, the main remedy in a civil court is the amount of money, or \"damages\", which the defendant should pay to the plaintiff. Alternative civil remedies include restitution or transfer of property, or an injunction to restrain or order certain actions.\nThe standards of proof are higher in a criminal case than in a civil one, since the state does not wish to risk punishing an innocent person. In English law the prosecution must prove the guilt of a criminal \"beyond reasonable doubt\"; but the plaintiff in a civil action is required to prove his case \"on the balance of probabilities\". Thus, in a criminal case a crime cannot be proven if the person or persons judging it doubt the guilt of the suspect and have a reason (not just a feeling or intuition) for this doubt. But in a civil case, the court will weigh all the evidence and decide what is most probable.\nTypes.\nCivil procedure is traditionally divided into inquisitorial and adversarial.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76383", "revid": "6897434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76383", "title": "The Ten Commandments (1956 film)", "text": "1956 film by Cecil B. DeMille\nThe Ten Commandments is a 1956 American epic biblical drama film produced, directed, and narrated by Cecil B. DeMille, shot in VistaVision (color by Technicolor), and released by Paramount Pictures. Based on the Bible's Book of Exodus and other sources, it dramatizes the story of the life of Moses, an adopted Egyptian prince who becomes the deliverer of his real brethren, the enslaved Hebrews, and thereafter leads the Exodus to Mount Sinai, where he receives, from God, the Ten Commandments. The film stars Charlton Heston in the lead role, Yul Brynner as Rameses, Anne Baxter as Nefretiri, Edward G. Robinson as Dathan, Yvonne De Carlo as Sephora, Debra Paget as Lilia, and John Derek as Joshua; and features Sir Cedric Hardwicke as Sethi I, Nina Foch as Bithiah, Martha Scott as Yochabel, Judith Anderson as Memnet, and Vincent Price as Baka, among others.\nFirst announced in 1952, \"The Ten Commandments\" is a remake of the prologue of DeMille's 1923 silent film of the same title. Four screenwriters, three art directors, and five costume designers worked on the film. In 1954, it was filmed on location in Egypt, Mount Sinai, and the Sinai Peninsula, featuring one of the largest exterior sets ever created for a motion picture. In 1955, the interior sets were constructed on Paramount's Hollywood soundstages. The original roadshow version included an onscreen introduction by DeMille and was released to cinemas in the United States on November 8, 1956, and, at the time of its release, was the most expensive film ever made. It was DeMille's most successful work, his first widescreen film, his fourth biblical production, and his final directorial effort before his death in 1959.\nIn 1957, the film was nominated for seven Academy Awards, including Best Picture, winning the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects (John P. Fulton, A.S.C.). DeMille won the Foreign Language Press Film Critics Circle Award for Best Director. Charlton Heston was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Performance by an Actor in a Motion Picture (Drama). Yul Brynner won the National Board of Review Award for Best Actor. Heston, Anne Baxter, and Yvonne De Carlo won Laurel Awards for Best Dramatic Actor, 5th Best Dramatic Actress, and 3rd Best Supporting Actress, respectively. It is also one of the most financially successful films ever made, grossing approximately $122.7 million at the box office during its initial release; it was the most successful film of 1956 and the second-highest-grossing film of the decade. According to \"Guinness World Records\", in terms of theatrical exhibition, it is the eighth most successful film of all-time when the box office gross is adjusted for inflation.\nIn 1999, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". In June 2008, the American Film Institute revealed its \"Ten Top Ten\"\u2014the best ten films in ten American film genres\u2014after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. The film was listed as the tenth best film in the epic genre. The film has aired annually on U.S. network television in prime time during the Passover/Easter season since 1973.\nPlot.\nAfter hearing the prophecy of a Hebrew deliverer that would free the Hebrews from Egyptian bondage, Pharaoh Rameses I of Egypt ordered the death of all newborn Hebrew males. Yochabel saves her infant son by setting him adrift in a basket on the Nile. Rameses I's recently widowed daughter Bithiah finds the basket and decides to adopt the boy by naming him Moses, even though her servant Memnet recognizes the child's Hebrew heritage.\nPrince Moses grows up to become a successful general, winning a war with Ethiopia and establishing an alliance. Moses falls in love with the princess Nefretiri. But, she is betrothed to whomever Sethi chooses to become the next Pharaoh. While working on the building of a city for Pharaoh Sethi's jubilee, Moses meets the stonecutter Joshua, who tells him of the Hebrew God. Moses saves an elderly woman from being crushed, not knowing that she is his biological mother, Yochabel, and he reprimands the master builder, Baka. Moses reforms the treatment of slaves on the project, but Prince Rameses, Moses's adoptive brother and Sethi's son, charges him with planning an insurrection. Moses says he is merely making the slaves more productive, and after demonstrating the results, Sethi declares him the next Pharaoh.\nNefretiri learns from Memnet that Moses is the son of Hebrew slaves. She kills Memnet, but reveals the story to Moses after he finds the piece of Levite cloth he was wrapped in as a baby, which Memnet had kept. Moses follows Bithiah to Yochabel's house, where he meets his biological mother, brother Aaron, and sister Miriam. Moses learns more about the slaves by working with them. Nefretiri urges him to return to the palace, so that he may help his people when he becomes pharaoh, to which he agrees after he completes a final task. Moses saves Joshua from death by killing Baka, telling Joshua that he, too, is Hebrew. The confession is witnessed by the Hebrew overseer Dathan, who then reports to Prince Rameses. After being arrested, Moses explains that he is not the Deliverer, but would free the slaves if he could. Sethi reluctantly declares Prince Rameses his sole heir, and Rameses banishes Moses to the desert. At this time, Moses learns of the death of his mother. Moses makes his way across the desert to a well in Midian. After defending seven sisters from Amalekites, Moses is housed with the girls' father Jethro, a Madianite sheikh, who worships the God of Abraham. Moses marries Jethro's eldest daughter Sephora. Later, he finds Joshua, who has escaped from the hard labor imposed on the Hebrews in Egypt. While herding, Moses sees the burning bush on the summit of Mount Sinai and hears the voice of God. At God's command, Moses returns to Egypt to free the Hebrews.\nMoses comes before Rameses, now Pharaoh Rameses II, to win the slaves' freedom, turning his staff into a cobra. Jannes performs the same trick with his staves, but Moses's snake swallows his. Rameses prohibits straw from being provided to the Hebrews to make their bricks. Nefretiri rescues Moses from being stoned to death by the Hebrews wherein he reveals that he is married. To convince Rameses of obliging to his wishes, Moses gets God to initiate plagues against Egypt. Moses turns the river Nile to blood at a festival of Khnum, and brings burning hail down upon Pharaoh's palace. Moses warns him that the next plague to fall upon Egypt will be summoned by Pharaoh himself. Enraged at the plagues, Rameses orders that all first-born sons of Hebrews will die, but a cloud of death instead kills all the first-born sons of Egypt, including the child of Rameses and Nefretiri. Despairing at the loss of his heir, Rameses gives in to Moses' demands and frees the Hebrews, who begin the Exodus from Egypt. Bithiah reunites with Moses and goes with the Hebrews. After being taunted by Nefretiri, Rameses takes his chariots and pursues the Hebrews to the Red Sea. Moses uses God's help to stop the Egyptians with a pillar of fire, and parts the Red Sea. After the Hebrews make it across to safety, Moses releases the walls of water, drowning the Egyptian army. A devastated Rameses returns empty-handed to Nefretiri, stating that he now acknowledges Moses's god as God.\nMoses again ascends the mountain with Joshua. He receives the Ten Commandments created by God in two stone tablets. Meanwhile, Dathan exploits the people to gain power, claiming that Moses is dead and urging a reluctant Aaron to construct a golden calf idol. A decadent orgy is held by most of the Hebrews. After God informs them of the Hebrews' sins, Moses and Joshua descend from the mountain. Enraged at his own people's betrayal of God, Moses deems the Hebrews unworthy and smashes the tablets at the golden calf, destroying it and sending Dathan and his cohorts to the hole that's formed. The remaining Hebrews are forced to wander in the wilderness for 40 years as punishment for their sins. Moses leads the Hebrews towards Canaan, though he cannot enter himself because he disobeyed God at the fountain of Marah.\nCast.\nSpelling differences exist between the original screenplay characters and the actual biblical/historical persons the role is based upon. The screenplay character Nefretiri is based on the historical/biblical Nefertari. The character Pharaoh Sethi I is based on historical/biblical Pharaoh Seti I. And the character of Prince Rameses / Pharaoh Rameses II is not an inaccurate spelling; however Ramesses\u2014a.k.a. Ramesses the Great\u2014is the preferred translation.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nIn July 1951, while he was working on his circus film \"The Greatest Show on Earth\", producer-director Cecil B. DeMille chose Homer's \"Odyssey\" as the subject of his next epic. Several weeks later, he announced he was going to make a film about the Book of Esther, but then he changed his mind and said he was planning a new film about Helen of Troy, which he eventually canceled. For more than twenty years and especially after World War II, DeMille had received letters from people worldwide who asked him to make a new version of his 1923 silent film \"The Ten Commandments\" because the world \"needs a reminder, they said, of the Law of God\", which \"is the essential bedrock of human freedom.\" DeMille talked about the idea with his staff and they initially considered producing it as a modern story with a biblical prologue, like the original film. A suggestion was to have the contemporary protagonist be an honest politician struggling with \"forces aligned against him\" and show through that conflict the effects of keeping or breaking the Ten Commandments. DeMille discarded the present-day storyline because he kept thinking about the first film's biblical section, which was \"still not dated\". Another early concept was to film the story of the Exodus, led by Moses, with interconnected subplots involving Israelites whose lives reflect each of the Ten Commandments. DeMille wrote that he thought the final choice\u2014to let the biblical story \"speak for itself\"\u2014was the \"soundest\". He said the biblical account was \"timeless\" and \"timely\", and that when \"Moses led his people to Mount Sinai, they learned, as the world today must learn, that true freedom is freedom under God.\"\nAfter \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" was released, DeMille went to Paramount Pictures to discuss his next film with the studio's executives, including Barney Balaban and Adolph Zukor. He had already made up his mind to direct a new version of \"The Ten Commandments\" that would incorporate Moses' life as an Egyptian prince. He had to \"sell\" the idea to them and, although only Zukor and Y. Frank Freeman championed it, all accepted it. Some Paramount businessmen were not too keen about another biblical film, and one of those even questioned the film's title, saying \"You won't call it \"The Ten Commandments\", of course.\" When he heard this, Zukor leapt from his seat and made it clear that there would be no other title for the film but that one.\nIn June 1952, DeMille formally informed the press that his next production would be a Technicolor remake of his successful silent film \"The Ten Commandments\" (1923). From the beginning, his plan was to produce the film on a \"lavish scale\" with \"a cast of outstanding stars\" and a budget that would allow it \"to possess the quality and spectacular values that have earned for DeMille the title of 'Hollywood's master showman.'\" DeMille explained why he decided to revisit Moses' story:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn October 1952, DeMille told reporter Bob Thomas, \"The actual shooting is the easiest part of making a picture. It is here in the production office that the picture is really created.\"\nWriting.\nAs the on-screen credits declare, The Holy Scriptures are the predominant source of the film's narrative. DeMille chose to use the 17th-century King James Version, which he grew up reading. Moses' biography is found in the Hebrew Bible's Torah, also called the \"Five Books of Moses\". In order to depict Moses' early years in Egypt, DeMille searched for extrabiblical sources that expanded on Moses' life as a young man. He said, \"There is a lapse of 26 years between two verses of the Bible. One verse tells of Moses being found among the bulrushes, or papyrus, by the Pharaoh's daughter and in the next verse he is grown and has killed a man. We have to find out what happened to him between those two events.\"\nHenry Noerdlinger, the film's researcher, consulted ancient historical texts, such as \"On the Life of Moses\" by Philo, \"Antiquities of the Jews\" by Josephus, \"Preparation for the Gospel\" by Eusebius, the Midrash Rabbah on Exodus, and the Mishnah. Philo and Josephus describe the prince Moses as the heir to the throne of Egypt, and the Midrash states that both his adoptive mother (the Pharaoh's daughter) and the Pharaoh had great affection for him. Josephus and Eusebius also say that Moses, as the commander of the Egyptian army, prevented the Ethiopians from invading Egypt and conquered their nation; he was also the subject of court intrigues against him. Moses' concern for the overworked Hebrew slaves, his implementation of their weekly \"day of rest\", and Dathan as the witness to Moses' slaying of an Egyptian man were details taken from the Midrash.\nDeMille also found and modified names for several people related to Moses. In the Book of Exodus, the Egyptian princess who adopted Moses is not named, but the Midrash identifies her as the woman \"Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, which Mered took\" mentioned in the Book of Chronicles. DeMille preferred the spelling \"Sephora\", found in the Douay\u2013Rheims Bible, for the name of Moses' wife, originally Zipporah in the Hebrew Bible and King James version. To make it more euphonious, the name of Moses' Hebrew mother Jochebed was changed by DeMille to \"Yochabel\", which is a transliteration from Josephus' Greek text.\nIn 1952, DeMille bought the screen rights to Dorothy Clarke Wilson's best-selling novel \"Prince of Egypt\" (1949), from which he got several subplots and characters, including the \"lively\" Egyptian princess Nefretiri and her romance with Moses. In the book, Nefretiri is the heiress to the throne as the daughter of Pharaoh Sethi I and older sister of Rameses, while the adopted prince Moses is rumored to be the illegitimate child of an Egyptian princess and a Mitannian prince. Memnet, a character from the novel, is Nefretiri's old nurse who detests Moses and reveals the secret of his real Hebrew parentage; she is later \"silenced\" when Nefretiri pushes her off a balcony. Baka, a foreman commissioned by Sethi to build a new city in the Nile Delta, is Wilson's depiction of the Egyptian that Moses killed.\nDeMille also found another novel about Moses titled \"On Eagle's Wings\" (1939) by English minister and author Arthur Eustace Southon, who sold the screen rights to the director in 1953. The film was also based on \"Pillar of Fire\" by Joseph Holt Ingraham.\nTo write the film's screenplay, DeMille chose Jewish screenwriters Jesse L. Lasky Jr. and Fredric M. Frank, who wrote the script of his previous biblical epic, \"Samson and Delilah\". He also hired two writers he had never collaborated with before, Aeneas MacKenzie and Jack Gariss. DeMille said MacKenzie had \"piercing insight into dramatic values\" and a \"fine sense of story construction\", and he described Gariss as \"deeply thoughtful and sensitively attuned to the spiritual no less the dramatic values of our theme\". Lasky Jr. remembered MacKenzie as \"a peppery Scotsman\" and \"a fine film dramatist and a walking encyclopedia of obscure information\", and he considered Gariss \"a tower of erudition, exuding infinite tranquility and mysticism.\" DeMille noted that, during their story conferences, he and the writers alternated \"in the roles of hammer and anvil\" and that when \"sparks\" flew, they \"glow[ed] with the intelligence and wit\" of the four who worked with him.\nAccording to Lasky Jr., the screenplay was divided into the four main phases of Moses' life as prince, shepherd, deliverer, lawgiver; the screenwriters worked individually and all wrote parts of each of the four sections. In order to brief the screenwriters and ensure historical accuracy, Noerdlinger wrote \"pertinent notes\" based on his research, for which he studied 950 books, 984 periodicals, 1,286 clippings, and 2,964 photographs. Lasky Jr. and Noerdlinger stated that the rivalry between Moses and Rameses and Sethi's erasure of Moses' name were based on altered reliefs of a Karnak temple, which hint that Rameses had a disinherited older brother whose name was obliterated from the records. Lasky Jr. was chosen by DeMille to write the scene of the first Passover. DeMille ultimately entrusted Lasky Jr. with the task of revising the screenplay \"for consistency's sake\". The script contained many scenes that were either cut or not filmed, including a longer prologue that depicted stories from the Book of Genesis. The screenplay was written over a period of three years.\nCasting.\nLeading roles.\nIn December 1952, Jeff Chandler sought the role of Moses in the upcoming DeMille epic. In October 1953, DeMille said his favorite choice was Charlton Heston, the star of his previous film, \"The Greatest Show on Earth\". He also considered casting a middle-aged man. In December, DeMille offered the part to quinquagenarian actor William Boyd, who was famous for his portrayal of cowboy Hopalong Cassidy on television and had worked with DeMille in the silent era, but Boyd's representative said the actor was \"worried that it will be out of character.\" In January 1954, Dan Dailey said he wanted to play Moses in DeMille's film. The following month, Heston and Kirk Douglas were reported to be two of the many top stars who wanted the role. In May, DeMille briefly considered Rock Hudson after he saw him in \"Magnificent Obsession\". Interviewed twice by the director, Heston finally won the role when he impressed DeMille with his knowledge of Moses and ancient Egypt and his strong resemblance to Michelangelo's sculpture of Moses. Heston was later chosen to be the voice of God in the Burning Bush, toned down to a softer and lower register.\nDeMille described the role of Rameses II as \"a part equal in dramatic strength to that of Moses\". Rory Calhoun, Jeff Chandler, Anthony Dexter, Mel Ferrer, Stewart Granger, William Holden, and Michael Rennie were considered to play Moses' opponent and rival for the Egyptian throne. In New York City, DeMille's granddaughter and his secretary convinced him to see the Broadway musical \"The King and I\", starring Yul Brynner. DeMille recalled, \"During the first act, they wondered why I said nothing. I couldn't. I was seeing a rare theatrical experience\u2014a performance of dramatic integrity.\" The director went backstage to meet the star. He told Brynner the story of the film from Rameses' point of view, and offered him the role. \"Nobody has ever been allowed backstage during intermission but everybody gets awed by DeMille,\" remembered Brynner. \"I was fascinated by him. He showed me material for a picture and I agreed to do that and another film. We shook hands. It all happened in seven and a half minutes!\" In April 1953, Brynner was already in Hollywood talking with DeMille about the part, and in October it was confirmed that he was the first actor to be cast in the film.\nIn October 1953, DeMille said he wanted Audrey Hepburn to play the role of Rameses' wife, Nefretiri. In February 1954, his office was said to be full of photographs of Hepburn, but he later noticed her figure was not curvaceous enough for Nefretiri's form-fitting gowns. In May, DeMille asked Vanessa Brown if she \"could fill out the clinging, revealing Egyptian costumes\". She assured him she could, but also warned him that she had \"unattractive feet\". Ann Blyth, Joan Evans, Rhonda Fleming, Coleen Gray, Jane Griffiths, Vivien Leigh, and Joan Taylor were also considered. In June, columnist Louella Parsons regarded the part of Nefretiri as \"the most sought-after role of the year\". That same month, DeMille chose Anne Baxter after he screened her film \"Carnival Story\" at home three times. His other top choice was Jane Russell, who wanted the part. \"There was only one DeMille, and there wasn't an actor in the world who didn't want to work for him just once, however short the salary or tall the corn\", Baxter wrote in her memoir.\nMany actors were considered for the role of the evil overseer Dathan. DeMille was enthusiastic about Jack Palance as Dathan, but Palance's agent angered DeMille when he stole a part of the script and demanded that the part be rewritten. Raymond Massey was signed for the role, but later turned it down. In September 1954, DeMille cast Edward G. Robinson in the role of the \"quisling who fights Moses all the way through the picture.\" Robinson had been blacklisted in Hollywood because of his \"former political leanings\" and needed \"recognition again by a top figure in the industry.\" Someone had suggested him for the role but thought he could not be hired. In his autobiography, Robinson remembered, \"Mr. DeMille wanted to know why, coldly reviewed the matter, felt I had been done an injustice, and told his people to offer me the part. Cecil B. DeMille returned me to films. Cecil B. DeMille restored my self-respect.\"\nFor the role of Sephora, the Midianite shepherdess who becomes Moses' wife, more than 20 actresses were under consideration. Grace Kelly, DeMille's first choice, was unavailable. In May 1954, television actress Maria Riva, Marlene Dietrich's daughter, was said to be the director's number-one choice for the role. In July, he signed Merle Oberon for the part. He interviewed Rita Gam and asked her if she believed in God, but she said she did not. In the process of casting the role of Bithiah, he screened the MGM film \"Sombrero\" and was \"very much impressed\" with Yvonne De Carlo's portrayal of a \"saintly type of woman\". DeMille said he \"sensed in her a depth, an emotional power, a womanly strength which the part of Sephora needed and which she gave it.\" De Carlo had always wanted to play a starring role for DeMille, so she accepted the part and did not care how much he would pay her. She later thought, \"Actually, that's probably why he got away with paying such low salaries. He \"did\" know that most dedicated actors would work for him for nothing.\"\nIn April 1955, columnist Erskine Johnson noticed, \"Anne Baxter and Charlton Heston got top billing over some other very important stars (Yvonne De Carlo and Edward G. Robinson, for instance) in \"The Ten Commandments\". So far, the others aren't squawking.\"\nSupporting roles.\nDeMille considered several leading ladies for the part of Lilia, the young Hebrew woman who gives water to the slaves. He originally chose Pier Angeli, but MGM refused to loan their contract star to Paramount. In September 1954, DeMille borrowed Debra Paget from 20th Century-Fox and cast her in the role of the \"lissome and beatific slave girl\". Paget later became a born-again Christian. She said, \"I think my evangelical work was foreshadowed when Cecil B. DeMille chose me for \"The Ten Commandments\" and said, 'I feel the hand of God has been on you.'\"\nFor the role of Joshua, the Hebrew stonecutter destined to succeed Moses, DeMille looked at a number of actors. He first gave the part to Cornel Wilde, one of the stars of his previous film, \"The Greatest Show on Earth\". Wilde's casting was widely mentioned in the press, but the actor made his \"worst mistake\" and said the part was too small. In his autobiography, DeMille remarked, \"Cornel Wilde declined the role [\u2026] thus giving John Derek his opportunity for a noteworthy performance.\"\nIn May 1954, Sir Cedric Hardwicke got the supporting role of Pharaoh Sethi \"the Just\" and became one of the first actors signed for the film. It took DeMille longer to find an actress to play Sethi's sister and Moses' adoptive mother, Bithiah. He had offered the part to Joan Crawford in January, and also considered other famous actresses. His favorite choice, Jayne Meadows, declined the role because she did not want to leave her home in New York. Associate producer Henry Wilcoxon recommended his \"Scaramouche\" co-star Nina Foch, who signed for the part in September. In October, John Carradine won the role of Moses' brother, Aaron.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\" style=\"\n width:250px; \n \n \"&gt;\n I think all of us, you know, Eddie Robinson, myself, Judith Anderson, we all really wanted to be in a DeMille picture. We really felt that you couldn't call yourself a star unless you had been in a DeMille picture! So we all took these sort of small, but rather arresting parts.\n Vincent Price\n , \"Vincent Price: A Daughter's Biography\"\nDeMille wanted a \"strong dramatic actress\" to portray Moses' real mother, Yochabel. In March 1955, he selected Martha Scott for the role after he saw her performance in William Wyler's \"The Desperate Hours\" (1955). That same month, Judith Anderson was cast as Memnet. Also in March, Basil Rathbone said he wanted to work for DeMille and wrote him for the part of Baka in the film: \"I wanted it for the record as this probably will be DeMille's last picture and I knew there was a real good heavy in the script\u2014a real heel type\u2014but C. B. gave it to Vincent Price instead.\"\nDeMille considered Heston's wife, Lydia Clarke, for the role of Moses' sister, Miriam, but she became pregnant and the director assigned the part to Olive Deering, who had portrayed another Miriam in DeMille's \"Samson and Delilah\" (1949). Heston's newborn son, Fraser (born February 12, 1955), was cast by DeMille (on the suggestion of Henry Wilcoxon, who said to him: \"The timing's just right. If it's a boy, who better to play the Baby Moses?\") as soon as Heston announced to DeMille that his wife Lydia was pregnant. Fraser Heston was three months old during filming.\nHenry Wilcoxon was chosen to play the Egyptian military commander in both Egypt and Hollywood to provide continuity in the Exodus scenes, and his wife, Joan Woodbury, was cast as Korah's wife in the golden calf sequence. Two cast members of the 1923 silent version, Julia Faye (who played Rameses' wife) and Edna Mae Cooper, were given the roles of Moses' sister-in-law Elisheba and a lady of the pharaoh's court, respectively. DeMille saw Gail Kobe eating in the studio commissary and gave her the role of Nefretiri's personal servant.\nDeMille was reluctant to cast anyone who had appeared in \"The Egyptian\", a rival production at the time. Exceptions to this are the casting of John Carradine and Mimi Gibson in credited supporting roles. Seven casting directors hired actors to play 53 star and featured roles, 488 speaking parts, and 100 dancers.\nArt direction and set design.\nHal Pereira, Walter H. Tyler, and Albert Nozaki were in charge of the film's art direction. In 1952, DeMille commissioned concept art from Italian artist Fortunino Matania, who made paintings of several scenes in the film, including those of Moses defending Jethro's daughters and the golden calf revelry. In 1953, officials of the Metropolitan Museum of Art recommended artist Arnold Friberg to Paramount and DeMille. Friberg was hired to paint scenes that would \"set the dramatic stage for the production.\" He painted a new version of the Paramount mountain logo with \"dramatic lighting\" and designed the lettering of the film's titles.\nDeMille had tablets of the Ten Commandments hewn from the dark red granite of Mount Sinai. The Commandments inscribed on the tablets were written in ancient Canaanite letters by Dr. Ralph Marcus of the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago. DeMille asked Paramount scenic artist A.J. Ciraolo to make six different sets of the tablets for lighting purposes. Ciraolo's replicas of the tablets were made of wooden cores covered in fiberglass, which was then chipped and hand-painted to resemble the Sinai granite.\nAn artist named Roy Rulin designed the golden calf and numerous props and d\u00e9cor for the film. DeMille's film crew also bought props from the 20th Century-Fox production \"The Egyptian\", including the \"hounds and jackals\" game. In March 1954, Walter M. Scott, Fox's set decorator, said: \"We have made 5,000 different items for the picture. Now the others want to borrow our things. We've already had four men from Cecil B. DeMille over here to see what they can use in [his film].\" Paramount's backlot and train shed were turned into temporary workshops, where several assembly lines made most of the 70,000 props used in the film.\nThe gate of the city of Per-Rameses, a replica of the set from DeMille's 1923 silent film, was designed by an architect named Anis Serag El Dine. Said to be \"the biggest film set ever built\", the pylon was high and long and cost more than $250,000. The 60-acre Per-Rameses set (alternatively called Tanis) was constructed near Cairo, Egypt, between Saqqara and the Giza pyramid complex, and also included a city wall, four statues of Rameses, and an avenue of sphinxes. DeMille ordered the construction of wooden pyramids that appear to be covered in alabaster; they stood on stilts so they could be seen rising above the horizon. Behind the facade of the set, there were a mess tent, a wardrobe department, and a stable for horses.\n67 master sets, not including the gate of Per-Rameses, were constructed for the film. The sets required 950,000 board feet of lumber; 11,200 pounds of nails; 1,540 tons of plaster; and 4,725 gallons of paint. 2,400 tons of soil that matched or were dyed to match Egyptian soil were trucked into the studio's soundstages for the ground of various sets, such as the streets of Goshen, the brickpits, and Sethi's unfinished city. Some studio sets were so large they occupied an entire soundstage each. These included Sethi's throne room, Nefretiri's quarters, and the Hebrew village. DeMille used thousands of real flowers for the Ethiopian tribute scene, the fabrication of garlands, and the decoration of hairstyles, tables, and food platters; he ordered lilies from Hawaii and lotuses from British Guiana.\nCostume design.\nEdith Head, Ralph Jester, John Jensen, Dorothy Jeakins, and Arnold Friberg received on-screen credit for the film's costumes. Jensen and Friberg made drawings and paintings of their designs, while Head and Jeakins worked on the costumes with the actresses and actors, respectively. A team of ten designers and sketch artists planned a total of 25,000 costumes, and it took 125 tailors and dressmakers more than a year to complete them. The costumes required 300 leopard, lion, and zebra skins; 2,500 pairs of made-to-order sandals; and 40,000 yards of material that were specially woven or dyed. Ten jewelers created 1,100 pieces of jewelry and bejeweled props. 98 wardrobe people were hired.\nFriberg designed Moses' distinctive robe in red with black and white stripes, and the film's researchers later discovered that these colors were traditionally associated with the Israelite tribe Moses belonged to, the Tribe of Levi. According to Friberg, the costume was woven on an ancient loom using goat's hair, although the film's publicity stated it was made from jute, wool, and linen fibers. As a gift, after the production, DeMille gave Moses' robe to Friberg, who had it in his possession until his death in 2010.\nThe Pharaohs in the film (Rameses I, Sethi, Rameses II) are shown wearing the nemes royal headdress or the red-and-white crown of Upper and Lower Egypt. For his pursuit of the Israelites, Rameses II wears the blue khepresh helmet-crown, which the pharaohs wore for battle. Paramount's makeup department made a plaster cast of Yul Brynner's head so his helmet could fit perfectly. The shirt Sethi wears in his death scene was inspired by the design of a tunic that belonged to Tutankhamun. In the second half of the film, Rameses II wears a royal robe that is an adaptation of the vulture cloak design on Tutankhamun's second coffin and a miniature one in his tomb.\nEdith Head designed the costumes of the main female characters, including Nefretiri. Anne Baxter wrote that she and Head had fittings on the \"unbelievably extravagant\" gowns for eight months. Baxter wanted to wear a putty nose to look more Egyptian, but DeMille preferred her real nose. Head's designs for Nefretiri were inspired by the life-size depictions of the real queen inside her tomb in the Valley of the Queens. Nefretiri's vulture crown and gold-cloth dress with protective wings were copied from a painting in the tomb and the statue of Karomama, the Divine Adoratrice of Amun.\nEgyptian wall paintings were the source for the lively dance performed by a circle of young women at Sethi's jubilee. Their movements and costumes are based on art from the tomb of the Sixth Dynasty Vizier Mehu in Saqqara and a tomb in Deir el-Gabrawi.\nSome of the film's cast members, such as Debra Paget, John Derek, Nina Foch, and Eduard Franz, wore brown contact lenses, at the behest of DeMille, in order to conceal their light-colored eyes which were considered inadequate for their roles. Paget once said that, \"If it hadn't been for the lenses I wouldn't have got the part.\" However, she also said that the lenses were \"awful to work in because the Klieg lights heat them up\". When DeMille interviewed Yvonne De Carlo for the role of Sephora, he admired her \"wonderful gray eyes\" but told her that the part would require her to wear brown contact lenses and De Carlo agreed. Although she had her lenses properly fitted by an ophthalmologist, De Carlo could not manage to keep them from popping out of her eyes. DeMille ultimately decided to have De Carlo appear on-screen with her natural eye color because he felt her eyes were her \"main asset\" and he was not going to modify \"a God-given treasure.\"\nFilming.\nFrom New York City, DeMille sailed for Egypt on September 23, 1954. On October 6, he arrived in Cairo to make \"the greatest production of my life\"; the following day, he met the Prime Minister of Egypt, Colonel Gamal Abdel Nasser. DeMille had two meetings with Nasser and Abdel Hakim Amer, Egypt's Minister of War. Nasser and Amer were fans of DeMille's 1935 film \"The Crusades\" and especially of its star, Henry Wilcoxon, the associate producer of \"The Ten Commandments\". The first day of filming was October 14. DeMille said that the journey from Cairo to Mount Sinai can be made \"by motor car in one long, hard day\", but he and his crew traveled with a two-car caravan in case one of the cars broke down. They made a stop in Abu Rudeis, where they camped overnight, and reached Saint Catherine's Monastery by sunset of the second day. The Greek Orthodox monks gave DeMille a blessing before he started to scout locations on Mount Sinai. On a hill near the monastery, DeMille encountered a Bedouin woman who (according to an Egyptian interpreter) said, \"Sirs, you are welcome. We are too poor to offer you any gifts, but we offer you our welcome.\" The first scenes shot in Egypt included the ones on the summit of Mount Sinai. DeMille and the film crew spent several days and nights living in tents on \"a plateau high above the monastery, near the very top of the holy mountain.\" On their way back to Cairo, DeMille and the crew made a couple of stops to film shots of the Red Sea.\nDeMille and 20 assistant directors who spoke English and Arabic directed 8,000 people in the Exodus sequence. The Cavalry Corps of the Egyptian Armed Forces portrayed the Pharaoh's chariot host. Yul Brynner flew from New York City to film the scene where Rameses and his chariots leave the city. In November, DeMille suffered a heart attack after he climbed the 107-foot-tall Egyptian pylon set to see one of John P. Fulton's special effects shots. Egyptian doctors advised DeMille to stay in bed for \"an indefinite number of weeks\", but DeMille wanted to go back to work as soon as he could and took medication from Dr. Max Jacobson. After ten weeks in Egypt, DeMille and Heston returned to the United States on November 24. The second unit's final day of production in Egypt was December 3, 1954. DeMille refused an offer from the Egyptian government to turn the Gates of Per-Rameses into a museum and instead ordered its demolition because he knew other production companies would use the set.\nThe Hollywood footage was shot between March and August 1955.\nUnder DeMille's direction, the film's cast members performed their roles in the theatrical style of acting. Anne Baxter later remembered, \"I loved slinking around\u2014really, this was silent film acting but with dialogue. No shading was permitted. 'Louder! Better!' That's what DeMille roared at everybody.\" Yvonne De Carlo said that DeMille wanted \"florid\" acting and would often shout, \"More! More!\" Vincent Price similarly recalled, \"I'd do a rehearsal and C. B. would thunder, 'More! More passion! More understanding!' What he was asking for was the Victorian way of acting, so I'd throw my hands around.\" In his memoirs, Sir Cedric Hardwicke stated, \"I enjoyed working with DeMille, who of all the directors I have met was the only one who really knew what he wanted\u2014he and Olivier. In his seventies, DeMille's energy was unbelievable.\" On the set of the film, DeMille was initially not satisfied with Edward G. Robinson's portrayal of Dathan, but he admired and respected Robinson and did not say anything to him. After he saw the dailies of Dathan's first scenes, DeMille was pleased with the \"sardonic humor\" Robinson gave to the originally serious character.\nOn August 15, DeMille was directing approximately 500 extras for the filming of the \"matching shots\" of the Exodus sequence. In late August, he was directing the scenes where Moses comes down from Mount Sinai and finds his people worshiping the golden calf.\nSpecial effects.\nThe special photographic effects in \"The Ten Commandments\" were created by John P. Fulton, A.S.C. (who received an Oscar for his effects in the film), head of the special effects department at Paramount Pictures, assisted by Paul Lerpae, A.S.C. in optical photography (blue screen \"travelling matte\" composites) and Farciot Edouart, A.S.C., in process photography (rear projection effects). Fulton's effects included the building of Sethi's treasure city, the Burning Bush, the fiery hail from a cloudless sky, the Angel of Death, the composites of the Exodus, the Pillar of Fire, the giving of the Ten Commandments, and the tour de force, the parting of the Red Sea.\nIn his autobiography, DeMille wrote about the making of some of the film's special effects. He said he wanted to depict the Burning Bush the way it is described in the Bible, \"burning but not consumed.\" His secretary Doris Turner bought him a fireplace-shaped clock \"with wavy light from a hidden source playing over small artificial logs,\" and DeMille showed the clock to Fulton, who managed to recreate the effect on the screen. For God's voice in the Burning Bush, DeMille turned to an ancient Jewish legend in the Midrash Rabbah, which said that God spoke to Moses with the voice of Amram, Moses' father, so he would not be frightened. Charlton Heston's voice was slightly slowed and deepened. DeMille's depiction of the Angel of Death was based on a sketch made by another of his secretaries, Lynn Hayne. One night, Hayne was looking out a window and saw a strange cloud that spread across the sky and had \"fingers\" pointing down toward the horizon; she drew it and sent it to DeMille the following day.\nThe cloud effects in the Red Sea sequence were formed with white smoke filmed against a translucent sky backing, and colors were added optically. Striking portraits of Charlton Heston as Moses and three women in front of menacing clouds were photographed by Wallace Kelly, A.S.C. in Farciot Edouart's process (rear projection) department, in what are still considered unforgettable scenes. DeMille used these scenes to break up the montage, framing his subjects like a Renaissance master.\nDeMille was reluctant to discuss the technical details of the optical tricks used in the parting and crossing of the Red Sea. The parting of the Red Sea was considered the most difficult special effect ever performed up to that time. It took eight months of VistaVision filming, cost $1 million, and combined footage shot in Egypt at the Red Sea and Abu Rawash with footage shot in Hollywood at Paramount. Paramount built a huge water tank split by a U-shaped trough, into which approximately 360,000 gallons of water were released from the sides. To achieve the effect of the parting of the waters, the footage of the water pouring over the trough was printed in reverse. The sideways filming of the turbulent backwash of a large waterfall (also built on the Paramount backlot) was used to create the effect of the walls of the parted sea. The shots of the parting and the closing of the Red Sea required a maximum of 12 film negatives that were combined in Paul Lerpae's optical printer using the split screen, rotoscope and blue screen techniques. Matte paintings of rocks by Jan Domela concealed the matte lines between the location footage and the studio's water effects. The parting of the Red Sea is considered by many to be one of the greatest special effects of all time.\nParamount borrowed several Disney animators, including Joshua Meador, for the Pillar of Fire and the Finger of God sequences. The swirling sparks that emerge when the fire appears and disappears were created by superimposing slow-motion footage of burning magnesium. The Pillar of Fire contains nine shades of color, and three distinct drawings were animated for each frame of the writing of the Ten Commandments. The voice of God in the tablet-giving scene was provided by a voice actor with a deep bass voice, Jesse Delos Jewkes, who was a member of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir. Additionally, Jewkes' voice was enhanced by the use of the vox humana stop of the Salt Lake Tabernacle organ. DeMille, who was good friends with LDS church president David O. McKay, asked for and received permission to record the organ from McKay.\nEditing.\n\"The Ten Commandments\" was edited by Academy Award-winning film editor Anne Bauchens, who had cut every DeMille film since \"We Can't Have Everything\" in 1918, including the original silent version. She described DeMille as \"a man whose judgment you respect, who knows what he wants, who has temperament and fire but is courteous and who can tell a story better than anyone else.\" In his autobiography, DeMille said Bauchens was the best film editor he knew. During the editing process, Bauchens saw the film 106 times on a moviola and on the screen. After several months of viewing the film in Paramount's projection room, DeMille and Bauchens cut the film from 1,000,000 feet to 19,710 feet.\nMusic.\nThe score for \"The Ten Commandments\" was composed and conducted by Elmer Bernstein. Initially, DeMille hired Bernstein, then a relatively unknown film composer, to write and record only the diegetic music required for the film's dance sequences and other onscreen musical passages, with the intention of employing frequent collaborator Victor Young to write the score proper. However, Young turned down the assignment due to his own failing health, causing DeMille to hire Bernstein to write the underscore as well.\nIn total, Bernstein composed 2\u00bd hours of music for the film, writing for a full symphony orchestra augmented with various ethnic and unusual instruments such as the shofar, the tiple, and the theremin. The score is written in a highly Romantic style, featuring unique musical leitmotifs for the film's characters (God, Moses, Rameses, Nefretiri, Dathan, Sephora, Lilia, Joshua, et al.) used in a manner inspired, at DeMille's direction, by the opera scores of Richard Wagner. Bernstein recorded both the diegetic music and the score at the Paramount Studios Recording Stage in sessions spread from April 1955 to August 1956.\nA double-LP monaural soundtrack album was released in 1957 by Dot Records, using excerpts from the original film recordings. A stereo version of the 1957 album was released in 1960 containing new recordings conducted by Bernstein, as the original film recordings, while recorded in three-channel stereo, were not properly balanced for an LP stereo release, as the intent at the time of recording had been to mix the film masters to mono for the film soundtrack itself; this recording was later issued on CD by MCA Classics in 1989. For the film's tenth anniversary, United Artists Records released a second stereo re-recording in 1966, also conducted by Bernstein and employing different orchestral arrangements unique to this release.\nFor the film's 60th anniversary in 2016, Intrada Records released a six-CD album of the score. The Intrada release contains the complete 2\u00bd hour score as originally recorded by Bernstein, with much of it remixed in true stereo for the first time. In addition, the 2016 release contains all the diegetic music recorded for the film, the original 1957 Dot album (in mono), the 1960 Dot album (in stereo), and the 1966 United Artists album, as well as a 12-minute recording of Bernstein auditioning his thematic ideas for DeMille on the piano. The box set won the IFMCA Award for Best New Archival Release \u2013 Re-Release or Re-Recording of an Existing Score.\nRelease.\nCecil B. DeMille promoted the film by placing Ten Commandment monuments as a publicity stunt for the film in cities across the United States. DeMille and Paramount executives attended the film's sneak preview, which took place at the Centre Theater in Salt Lake City, Utah, in August 1956. The print shown at the preview ran 3 hours and 49 minutes (10 minutes longer than the final cut).\n\"The Ten Commandments\" premiered at New York City's Criterion Theatre on November 8, 1956. Described as \"one of the most tumultuous film openings in years\", the event was covered on television and radio by Dave Garroway's \"Today\" and Tex McCrary and Jinx Falkenberg's show. Among the cast and crew members (and their relatives) who attended the premiere were Cecil B. DeMille and his eldest child, Cecilia DeMille Harper; Charlton Heston and his wife, Lydia Clarke; Yul Brynner; Anne Baxter; Edward G. Robinson; Yvonne De Carlo and her husband, Bob Morgan; Martha Scott and her husband, Mel Powell, and son, Carleton Alsop; and Olive Deering. The list of other actors and entertainment personalities who went to the New York opening included William Holden, Brenda Marshall, John Wayne, Pilar Pallete, Tony Curtis, Janet Leigh, William Boyd, Katherine Cornell, Marlene Dietrich, John Forsythe, Arlene Francis, Celeste Holm, Bob Hope, Dorothy Kilgallen, Bert Lahr, Ed Sullivan, and Sophie Tucker.\nThe film had its Hollywood premiere at the Stanley Warner Beverly Hills Theatre on November 14, 1956. DeMille, Heston, Brynner, Baxter, and De Carlo also attended this opening, which included televised interviews with the stars. Clark Gable, Kay Williams, Eddie Fisher, and Debbie Reynolds were some of the celebrities who saw the film at its West Coast debut.\nIt played on a roadshow basis with reserved seating until mid-1958, when it finally entered general release.\n\"The Ten Commandments\" was re-released in 1966 and 1972, and one more time in 1989. The 1972 and 1989 re-issues included 70mm and 35mm prints that reframed the picture's aspect ratio to 2.20:1 and 2.39:1, respectively, cropping the top and bottom of the picture's original 1.85:1 aspect ratio. \"The Ten Commandments\" was released on DVD on March 30, 1999; March 9, 2004, as a Special Collector's Edition; and March 29, 2011, as a Special edition and Standard edition. \"The Ten Commandments\" received a 4K UHD Blu-ray release on March 30, 2021.\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"The Ten Commandments\" was the highest-grossing film of 1956, and the second most successful film of the decade. By April 1957, the film had earned an unprecedented $10 million from engagements at just eighty theaters, averaging about $1 million per week, with more than seven million people paying to watch it. It played for 70 weeks at the Criterion Theatre in New York, grossing $2.7 million. During its initial release, it earned theater rentals (the distributor's share of the box office gross) of $31.3 million in North America, and $23.9 million from the foreign markets, for a total of $55.2 million (equating to approximately $122.7 million in ticket sales). It was hugely profitable for its era, earning a net profit of $18,500,000, against a production budget of $13.27 million (the most a film had cost up to that point).\nBy the time of its withdrawal from distribution at the end of 1960, \"The Ten Commandments\" had overtaken \"Gone with the Wind\" at the box office in the North American territory, and mounted a serious challenge in the global market\u2014the worldwide takings for \"Gone with the Wind\" were reported to stand at $59 million at the time. \"Gone with the Wind\" would be re-released the following year as part of the American Civil War Centennial, and re-asserted its supremacy at the box office by reclaiming the US record. Also at this time, \"Ben-Hur\"\u2014another biblical epic starring Charlton Heston, released at the end of 1959\u2014would go on to eclipse \"The Ten Commandments\" at the box office. A 1966 re-issue earned $6 million, and further re-releases brought the total American theater rentals to $43 million, equivalent to gross ticket sales of $89 million at the box office. Globally, it ultimately collected $90,066,230 in revenues up to 1979.\nIt remains one of the most popular films ever made. Adjusted for inflation, it has earned a box office gross equivalent to $2 billion at 2011 prices, according to \"Guinness World Records\"; only \"Gone with the Wind\" (1939), \"Avatar\" (2009), \"Star Wars\" (1977), \"Titanic\" (1997), \"The Sound of Music\" (1965), and \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" (1982) have generated higher grosses in constant dollars. \"The Ten Commandments\" is estimated to have sold 262million tickets at the worldwide box office.\nCritical response.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\" style=\"\n width:30%; \n \n \"&gt;\nAs Mr. DeMille presents it in this three-hour-and-thirty-nine-minute film, which is by far the largest and most expensive that he has ever made, it is a moving story of the spirit of freedom rising in a man, under the divine inspiration of his Maker. And, as such, it strikes a ringing note today.\n \u2013Bosley Crowther for \"The New York Times\"\n\"The Ten Commandments\" received rave reviews after its test screening in October 1956. James Powers of \"The Hollywood Reporter\" declared the film to be \"the summit of screen achievement. It is not just a great and powerful motion picture, although it is that; it is also a new human experience. If there were but one print of this Paramount picture, the place of its showing would be the focus of a world-wide pilgrimage.\" Philip K. Scheuer, reviewing for the \"Los Angeles Times\", said the film served \"almost as a religious experience as it is a theatrical one. C. B. remains, at 75, the ablest living director of spectacle in the grand manner. His production measures up to the best for which his admirers have hoped\u2014and far from the worst that his detractors expected. That old-time religion has a new look.\" \"New York Daily News\" called it \"an absorbing and exciting historical record, documented with excerpts from the Books of Exodus and Numbers of the Old Testament, the Psalms and from the works of such ancient historians as Josephus, Philo and Eusebius.\"\n\"Variety\" described the \"scenes of the greatness that was Egypt, and Hebrews by the thousands under the whip of the taskmasters\" as \"striking\", and believed that the film \"hits the peak of beauty with a sequence that is unelaborate, this being the Passover supper wherein Moses is shown with his family while the shadow of death falls on Egyptian first-borns\". Bosley Crowther for \"The New York Times\" was also among those who lauded DeMille's work, acknowledging that \"in its remarkable settings and d\u00e9cor, including an overwhelming facade of the Egyptian city from which the Exodus begins, and in the glowing Technicolor in which the picture is filmed\u2014Mr. DeMille has worked photographic wonders\".\nThe film's cast was also complimented. \"Variety\" called Charlton Heston an \"adaptable performer\" who, as Moses, reveals \"inner glow as he is called by God to remove the chains of slavery that hold his people\". Powers felt that Heston was \"splendid, handsome, and princely (and human) in the scenes dealing with him as a young man, and majestic and terrible as his role demands it. He is the great Michelangelo conception of Moses, but rather as the inspiration for the sculptor might have been than as a derivation.\" \"Variety\" also considered Yul Brynner to be an \"expert\" as Rameses, too. Anne Baxter's performance as Nefretiri was criticized by \"Variety\" as leaning \"close to old-school siren histrionics\", but Crowther stated that it, along with Brynner's, is \"unquestionably apt and complementary to a lusty and melodramatic romance\". The performances of Yvonne De Carlo and John Derek were acclaimed by Crowther as \"notably good\". He also commended the film's \"large cast of characters\" as \"very good, from Sir Cedric Hardwicke as a droll and urbane Pharaoh to Edward G. Robinson as a treacherous overlord\".\nThere were some critics who gave the film mixed reviews and disapproved of the extrabiblical love story between Moses and Nefretiri. \"Time\" thought the film was \"[s]omething roughly comparable to an eight-foot chorus girl\u2014pretty well put together, but much too big and much too flashy.\" \"Newsweek\" commented, \"Viewing his current three and a half hour work, [the public] may find a DeMille production a trying experience now and then, but a very educational one. They are bound to be, as their parents and grandparents were [by the 1923 version], impressed.\"\nIn November 1956, \"The Ten Commandments\" was named the \"most popular entrant\" for the Best Picture Oscar and Heston was considered a top contender for the Best Actor Oscar. In March 1957, the Academy's failure to nominate Heston was considered a great upset.\nIn his \"Movie Guide\", film critic Leonard Maltin gave the film four out of four stars and wrote, \"Vivid storytelling at its best. [\u2026] Parting of the Red Sea, writing of the holy tablets are unforgettable highlights.\" The critic Camille Paglia has called \"The Ten Commandments\" one of the ten greatest films of all time.\nRotten Tomatoes retrospectively collected 45 reviews, and reported that 84% of critics have given the film a positive review, with an average rating of 7.7/10. The site's critics consensus states: \"Bombastic and occasionally silly, but extravagantly entertaining, Cecil B. DeMille's all-star spectacular is a muscular retelling of the great Bible story.\"\nAccolades.\nPolls.\n\"The Ten Commandments\" was included in three lists of the American Film Institute's AFI 100 Years... series:\nPopularity and legacy.\nFor decades, a showing of \"The Ten Commandments\" was a popular fundraiser among revivalist Christian Churches, while the film was equally treasured by film buffs for DeMille's \"cast of thousands\" approach and the heroic acting.\nIn a 1970s interview, Anne Baxter stated, \"It's on TV every Easter. I advise sitting down with a big box of chocolates, a jug of white wine, and a loaf of freshly baked bread. I do it that way and I still love this last gasp of Hollywood excessiveness.\" In 1976, Yvonne De Carlo remembered she agreed with DeMille when, while they were making the film, he told her that \"a religious picture will last forever.\"\nMartin Scorsese later said it was one of his favorite films, writing in 1978 that:\nI like De Mille: his theatricality, his images. I've seen \"The Ten Commandments\" maybe forty or fifty times. Forget the story\u2014you've got to\u2014and concentrate on the special effects, and the texture, and the color. For example: The figure of God, killing the first-born child, is a green smoke; then on the terrace, while they're talking, a green dry ice just touches the heel of George Reeves or somebody, and he dies. Then there's the reel Red Sea, and the lamb's blood of the Passover. De Mille presented a fantasy, dream-like quality on film that was so real, if you saw his movies as a child, they stuck with you for life.\nMetallica were inspired to write their inspired smash hit \"Creeping Death\" (1984) after watching the second half of the movie. While watching the scene of the final plague killing every Egyptian first-born child, bassist-at-the-time Cliff Burton remarked, \"Whoa \u2013 it's like creeping death,\" as the plague was represented by a fog rolling into the Pharaoh's palace in the movie. The band liked the sound of \"creeping death\" and decided to write a song about the plagues, using the phrase as its title. The song's chorus also makes use of the film's famous \"So let it be written, so let it be done\" line.\nIn 1999, film historian Katherine Orrison published her book \"Written in Stone: Making Cecil B. DeMille's Epic The Ten Commandments\", which features recollections of several of the film's cast and crew members.\nHome media.\n\"The Ten Commandments\" has been released on DVD in the United States on four occasions. The first edition (Widescreen Collection) was released on March 30, 1999, as a two-disc set, The second edition (Special Collector's Edition) was released on March 9, 2004, as a two-disc set with audio commentary by Katherine Orrison, a 6-part documentary, the New York premiere newsreel, and several trailers. The third edition (50th Anniversary Collection) was released on March 21, 2006, as a three-disc set with the 1923 version and special features. The fourth edition (55th Anniversary Edition) was released on DVD again in a two-disc set on March 29, 2011, and for the first time on Blu-ray in a two-disc set and a six-disc limited edition gift set with the 1923 version and DVD copies. In 2012, the limited edition gift set won the Home Media Award for Best Packaging (Paramount Pictures and Johns Byrne). In March 2021, a UHD Blu-ray was released. Using the 2010 6K scans, Paramount spent over 150 hours on new color work and clean-up.\nTelevision broadcast.\n\"The Ten Commandments\" was first broadcast on the ABC network on February 18, 1973, and has aired annually on the network since then, with the exception of 1999, traditionally during the Passover and Easter holidays. Since 2006, the network has typically aired \"The Ten Commandments\" on the Saturday night prior to Easter, with the broadcast starting at 7:00\u00a0p.m. in the Eastern, Pacific and Hawaii Time Zones and 6:00\u00a0p.m. in the Central, Mountain and Alaska Time Zones. (Exceptions\u2014all of which resulted in the film airing on the Saturday before Palm Sunday\u2014occurred in 2020 when the film aired prior to Palm Sunday, which that year was April 4, due to the COVID-19 pandemic; in 2022, when the film aired on April 9, due to an NBA game telecast scheduled on the night before Easter the following week; 2023, when the film aired on April 1, due to an NHL game telecast scheduled on the night before Easter the following week; and in 2025, when the film aired on April 12, due to a scheduled NBA broadcast.) The film is one of only three pre-scheduled \"ABC Saturday Movies of the Week\" every year, the other being \"The Sound of Music\" and \"Home Alone\".\nUnlike many lengthy films of the day, which were usually broken up into separate airings over at least two nights, ABC elected to show \"The Ten Commandments\" in one night and has done so every year it has carried the film, with one exception; in 1997, ABC elected to split the movie in two and aired half of it in its normal Easter Sunday slot, which that year was March 30, with the second half airing on Monday, March 31 as counter-programming to the other networks' offerings, which included CBS' coverage of the NCAA Men's Basketball Championship Game.\nThe length of the film combined with the necessary advertisement breaks has caused its broadcast window to vary over the years; by 2023, ABC's total run time for \"The Ten Commandments\" stood at four hours and 44 minutes, just above one hour longer than its three-hour and 39-minute length. This requires the network to overrun into the 11:00\u00a0p.m./10:00\u00a0p.m. timeslot that belongs to the local affiliates, thus delaying their late local news and any other programming they may air in the overnight hours. Affiliates may also delay the film to the usual start of prime time at 8:00\u00a0p.m./7:00\u00a0p.m. to keep their schedules in line for early evening, at the cost of further delaying their local newscasts or forgoing them entirely.\nIn 2010, the film was broadcast in high definition for the first time, which allowed the television audience to see it in its original 1.66:1 VistaVision aspect ratio. It is also broadcast with its original Spanish language dub over the second audio program channel. In 2015, for the first time in several years, the network undertook a one-off airing of the film on Easter Sunday night, which fell on April 5.\nAll of ABC's telecasts omit Cecil B. DeMille's opening prologue and some musical elements (Overture, Entr'acte, and Exit Music) seen in the theatrical release.\nIn the Philippines, the film is traditionally aired every Holy Week (yearly except 2019) since it premiered on April 1, 2015, on GMA Network, either cut for time or in full, and dubbed in Filipino.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76384", "revid": "50917674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76384", "title": "Tevye", "text": "Tevye the Dairyman, also translated as Tevye the Milkman (, ), is the fictional narrator and protagonist of a series of short stories by Sholem Aleichem, and their various adaptations, the most famous being the musical \"Fiddler on the Roof\", which premiered on Broadway in 1964, and its 1971 film adaptation. Tevye is a pious Jewish dairyman living in the Russian Empire, the patriarch of a family including several troublesome daughters. The village of Boyberik, where the stories are set (renamed Anatevka in \"Fiddler on the Roof\"), is based on the town of Boyarka, Ukraine, then part of the Russian Empire. Boyberik is a suburb of Yehupetz (based on Kyiv), where most of Tevye's customers live.\nThe stories were written in Yiddish and first published in 1894; they have been published as \"Tevye and His Daughters\", \"Tevye's Daughters\", \"Tevye the Milkman\", and \"Tevye the Dairyman\".\nAs Tevye \"tells\" Aleichem the tales of his family life, six of his seven daughters (Tzeitel, Chava, Hodel, Shprintze, Taybele, and Bielke) are named, and of these five play leading roles in Tevye's stories. The stories tell of his business dealings, the romantic dealings and marriages of several of his daughters, and the expulsion of the Jews from their village by the Russian government.\nThe Tevye stories have been adapted for stage and film several times. Sholem Aleichem's own Yiddish stage adaptation was not produced during his lifetime; its first production, by Maurice Schwartz, was in 1919. (Schwartz did a film based on the play twenty years later.) The Broadway musical \"Fiddler on the Roof\" was based on a play written by Arnold Perl called \"Tevye and His Daughters\". \"Tevye the Dairyman\" has had four film adaptations: in Yiddish (1939), Hebrew (1968), English (1971) and Russian (2017).\nName.\nThe name is the Yiddish derivative of the Hebrew name , (i.e., Tobias).. In Hebrew, the character is known as , , , 'Tobias the dairyman'.. Tevye's full name, with its Yiddish patronymic, is .\nStories.\n\"Tevye the Dairyman\" comprises eight stories, with Tevye each time supposedly meeting Sholom Aleichem by chance and relating the latest tale of his trials and tribulations. They have been published in translation under the following titles:\nNot all the events of the stories are depicted in \"Fiddler on the Roof\", the best-known adaptation. For instance, by the time of the events of \"Lekh-Lekho\", Tevye's wife Golde, his daughter Shprintze, and his son-in-law Motl have all died; also in \"Lekh-Lekho\", upon learning of the Jews' expulsion, Chava leaves her Russian Orthodox husband, wanting to return to her family and share their exile. Aleichem leaves it to the reader to decide whether or not Tevye forgives her and takes her back, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Put yourself in Tevye's place and tell me honestly, in plain language, what you would have done\u2026 \"(Hillel Halkin translation)\".\nand ending the story with \"The old God of Israel still lives!\"\nA 2009 translation includes a final short story titled \"Vachalaklokos\" that takes place after \"Lekh-Lekho\".\nOther translations include:\nThe story \"Tevye Strikes It Rich\" was adapted for children by Gabriel Lisowski in 1976 and published under the title \"How Tevye Became a Milkman\".\nAudio adaptations.\nThe Tevye stories have been recorded and commercially released twice:\nAn audio production of Arnold Perl's play \"Tevya and His Daughters\" was released by Columbia Masterworks in 1957 (OL 5225); the cast included Mike Kellin as Tevya, Anna Vita Berger as Golde/The Rich Woman, Joan Harvey as Tzeitl, Carroll Conroy as Hodl, and Howard Da Silva (who also directed the production) as Lazar Wolf/The Rich Merchant/The Rabbi.\nThe NPR/Yiddish Book Center 13-part mid-1990s radio series \"Great Jewish Stories from Eastern Europe and Beyond\", hosted by Leonard Nimoy, broadcast a reading of the story \"Chava\" performed by Walter Matthau.\nPortrayals.\nZero Mostel and Chaim Topol are the two actors most associated with the role of Tevye, although Theodore Bikel performed it many times on stage. For the film version of \"Fiddler on the Roof\", the part ultimately went to Topol, as producer-director Norman Jewison felt that Mostel's portrayal was too unnecessarily comic. Topol was nominated for an Academy Award for his performance in the film version of \"Fiddler\". He also portrayed the character nearly 3,500 times on stage, retiring the role in 2009.\nOther noteworthy musical Tevyes have included Luther Adler, Herschel Bernardi, Paul Lipson (original Broadway run, over 2,000 performances), Leonard Nimoy (1971 touring company), Shmuel Rodensky (original Israeli, Yiddish and German productions), Alfred Molina and Harvey Fierstein (2004 Broadway revival), Henry Goodman (2007 London revival), Danny Burstein (2015 Broadway revival), Yehezkel Lazarov (2018 touring company) and Steven Skybell (2018 Off-Broadway revival in Yiddish). Paul Michael Glaser, who played Perchik in the 1971 film version, played Tevye in a 2013\u201314 touring production in the United Kingdom.\n\"Tevya\" is the name of a 1939 film adaptation of the story, performed entirely in Yiddish. In this adaptation, Tevye, played by Maurice Schwartz, is portrayed as gruff with flashes of wit and humor.\nPrior to the 1964 Broadway debut of \"Fiddler on the Roof\", adaptations of the Tevye stories appeared on stage and screen, in America and beyond. The earliest screen version was an American silent film called \"Broken Barriers\", based on Aleichem's own theatrical treatment and released in 1919 (just a few years after Aleichem died). In 1962, Gerhard Klingenberg directed the television film \"Tevya und seine T\u00f6chter\". After \"Fiddler on the Roof\" became a Broadway sensation, an Israeli film called \"Tuvia Vesheva Benotav\" (\"Tevye and His Seven Daughters\") starring Shmuel Rodensky was released in 1968, as well as two Russian versions: \"Teve-molochnik\" (\"Tevye the Milkman\") in 1985 and \"Myr vashomu domu!\" (\"Tevye's Daughters\") in 2017.\nIn 2018, Jerusalem Ballet published a ballet adaptation based on both \"Tevye the Dairyman\" and \"Fiddler on the Roof\", by Russian ballet dancer-choreographer Igor Menshikov. Tevye has been portrayed by Israeli ballet dancer Meitar Basson.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76385", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76385", "title": "The Thief of Bagdad (1924 film)", "text": "1924 film by Raoul Walsh\nThe Thief of Bagdad is a 1924 American silent fantasy adventure film directed by Raoul Walsh and starring Douglas Fairbanks, and written by Achmed Abdullah and Lotta Woods. Adapted from \"One Thousand and One Nights\", the film tells the story of a thief who falls in love with the daughter of the Caliph of Baghdad. In 1996, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nFairbanks considered this to be the favorite of his films, according to his son. The imaginative gymnastics suited the athletic star, whose \"catlike, seemingly effortless\" movements were as much dance as gymnastics. Along with his earlier \"The Mark of Zorro\" (1920) and \"Robin Hood\" (1922), the film marked Fairbanks's transformation from genial comedy to a career in \"swashbuckling\" roles. The film, strong on special effects (flying carpet, magic rope and fearsome monsters) and featuring massive Arabian-style sets, also proved to be a stepping stone for Anna May Wong, who portrayed a treacherous Mongol slave.\n\"The Thief of Bagdad\" is now widely considered one of the great silent films and Fairbanks's greatest work. Fairbanks biographer Jeffrey Vance writes, \"An epic romantic fantasy-adventure inspired by several of the Arabian Nights tales, \"The Thief of Bagdad\" is the greatest artistic triumph of Fairbanks's career. The superb visual design, spectacle, imaginative splendor, and visual effects, along with his bravura performance (leading a cast of literally thousands), all contribute to making this his masterpiece.\"\nThe film was remade several times; the 1940 Technicolor version split the main character into two: a deposed prince and a thief, the latter played by Sabu.\nPlot.\nAhmed steals as he pleases in the city of Bagdad. Wandering into a mosque, he tells a holy man he disdains his philosophy: \"What I want, I take.\"\nThat night, he sneaks into the caliph's palace using a magic rope he stole during ritual prayers. All thoughts of plunder are forgotten when he sees the sleeping princess, the caliph's daughter. The princess's Mongol slave alerts the guards, but he gets away.\nWhen his associate reminds the disconsolate Ahmed that a bygone thief once stole another princess during the reign of Haroun al-Rashid, Ahmed sets out to do the same. The next day is the princess's birthday. Three princes arrive, seeking her hand in marriage (and the future inheritance of the city). Another of the princess's slaves foretells that she will marry the man who first touches a rose-tree in her garden. The princess watches anxiously as first the glowering Prince of the Indies, then the obese Prince of Persia and finally the Prince of the Mongols pass by the rose-tree. The sight of the Mongol fills the princess with fear, but when Ahmed appears (disguised in stolen garments as a suitor), she is delighted. The Mongol slave tells her countryman of the prophecy, but before he can touch the rose-tree, Ahmed's startled horse tosses its rider into it.\nThat night, the princess chooses Ahmed for her husband. Out of love, Ahmed gives up his plan to abduct her and confesses all to her in private. The Mongol prince learns from his spy, the princess's Mongol slave, that Ahmed is a common thief and informs the caliph. Ahmed is lashed mercilessly, and the caliph orders he be torn apart by a giant ape, but the princess has the guards bribed to let him go.\nWhen the caliph insists she select another husband, her loyal slave advises her to delay. She asks that the princes each bring her a gift after \"seven moons\"; she will marry the one who brings her the rarest. In despair, Ahmed turns to the holy man. He tells the thief to become a prince, revealing to him the peril-fraught path to a great treasure.\nThe Prince of the Indies obtains a magic crystal ball from the eye of a giant idol, which shows whatever he wants to see, while the Persian prince buys a flying carpet. The Mongol prince leaves behind his henchman, telling him to organize the soldiers he will send to Bagdad disguised as porters. (The potentate has sought all along to take the city; the beautiful princess is only an added incentive.) After he obtains a magic golden apple which has the power to cure anything, even death, he sends word to the Mongol slave to poison the princess. After many adventures, Ahmed gains a cloak of invisibility and a small chest of magic powder which turns into whatever he wishes when he sprinkles it. He races back to the city.\nThe three princes meet as agreed at a caravanserai before returning to Bagdad. The Mongol asks the Indian to check whether the princess has waited for them. They discover that she is near death, and ride the flying carpet to reach her. Then the Mongol uses the apple to cure her. The suitors argue over which gift is rarest, but the princess points out that without any one gift, the remaining two would have been useless in saving her. Her loyal slave shows her Ahmed in the crystal ball, so the princess convinces her father to deliberate carefully on his future son-in-law. The Mongol prince chooses not to wait, unleashing his secret army that night and capturing Bagdad.\nAhmed arrives at the city gate, shut and defended by Mongols. When he conjures up a large army with his powder, the Mongol soldiers flee. The Mongol prince is about to have one of his soldiers kill him when the Mongol slave suggests he escape with the princess on the flying carpet. Ahmed liberates the city and rescues the princess, using his cloak of invisibility to get through the Mongols guards and capturing their prince. In gratitude, the caliph gives his daughter to him in marriage.\nCast.\nThe eccentric Second World War soldier Jack Churchill had an uncredited part, as did blues musician Jesse Fuller.\nProduction.\nFairbanks sought to make an epic. Lavishly staged on a Hollywood studio set, at a reputed cost of $1,135,654.65, \"The Thief of Bagdad\" was one of the most expensive films of the 1920s. Art director William Cameron Menzies was largely responsible for the production design, closely following the requirements laid down by Fairbanks, who acted as writer, producer and star. Fairbanks' meticulous attention to detail, as well as complex visual imagery, required the use of state-of-the-art special effects, featuring a magic rope, a flying horse, a flying carpet and full-scale palace sets.\nMusic.\nDouglas Fairbanks encouraged the respected composer Mortimer Wilson to provide a fully-fledged classical score. Wilson composed leit-motifs for each character and developed them symphonically. He also spent many hours in the editing room working on combining his music with the film. The score has been re-constructed by Mark Fitz-Gerald and recorded. A 1924 Literary Digest article details Wilson's work on the film (and includes a photo of the composer). Wilson also wrote the music for Fairbanks's next two films, \"Don Q, Son of Zorro\" (1925) and \"The Black Pirate\" (1926).\nReception.\nGlenn Erickson praised the film, writing:\nEvery age has its wonder entertainments, and 1924's The Thief of Bagdad transported audiences to a new level of imaginative fantasy. It had the biggest star of the era in a production that dwarfed anything anyone had ever seen ... It has sets bigger than those in Intolerance and costumed crowd scenes to rival the enormous Italian spectacles of the day. What's more, the picture is packed with elaborate special effects, many of which still have the power to impress. ... Some critics prefer Douglas Fairbanks' earlier modern-day adventures to his twenties' costume epics, but this dazzler still takes people's heads off. Simply put, the production's overall design and execution -- sets, costumes, lighting, special effects -- are coordinated so tightly that the illusion of grandeur is complete.\nDarragh O'Donoghue is of the opinion that:\n\"The first reel provides some of the purest joy the silent cinema can offer. ... Where initially there had been a satisfying equivalence between the discrete adventures of Ahmed as a psychologically plausible thief in medieval Mesopotamia and Ahmed as a universal Everyman figure, in the film's latter two-thirds, the former distinctive superstructure gives way to a kind of Pilgrim\u2019s Progress in Orientalist drag. ... Adventure sequences are staged like fairground tableaux and have none of the interest in physical process or emotional investment that made the early reels so exciting. ... After promising a dream, this great but flawed film eventually sends its audience to sleep.\nThe film along with \"The Sheik\" (1921) was adapted into a broadway by Dardanella which was performed on October 12, 1928, in Surabaya, and starred Indonesian actor Tan Tjeng Bok which later earned him the nickname \"Douglas Fairbanks of Java\". Future American dancer, Devi Dja, also appeared in the broadway by working behind the stage.\nHonors.\nIn June 2008, the American Film Institute revealed its \"10 Top 10\", the 10 best films in 10 \"classic\" American film genres. After polling over 1,500 people from the creative community, \"The Thief of Bagdad\" was acknowledged as the ninth best film in the fantasy genre.\nPreservation status.\nThe George Eastman Museum has a 16mm triacetate positive print.\nRemakes.\nThe 1940 film of the same name made the title character, played by Sabu, a sidekick for a handsome prince rather than the leading man. Indian actor M. G. Ramachandran assumed the role of Ali, the thief of Baghdad in the 1960 film \"Baghdad Thirudan\". The 1924 film was directly remade in Europe in 1961 as \"Il Ladro di Bagdad\", with Steve Reeves in the lead, while a 1978 made-for-television film combined plot elements of these with others from the Sabu version.\nA number of Indian films, were made under the titles of: \"Baghdad Ka Chor\" (\"The Thief of Baghdad\") in 1934, 1946, 1955; \"Baghdad Gaja Donga\" (\"Thief of Baghdad\") in 1968; and \"Thief of Baghdad\" in 1969 and 1977. A television series, \"Thief of Baghdad\", was also made in India which aired on Zee TV between 2000 and 2001.\nHome media.\n\"The Thief of Bagdad\" is in the public domain and many cheap, unrestored black-and-white copies have been issued on VHS and DVD. A restored version first appeared on US DVD in 1998, distributed by Image Entertainment. It featured original color tinting and a musical accompaniment arranged from the original 1924 music cue sheets and performed in 1975 by Gaylord Carter on a Wurlitzer theater pipe organ. Kino International reissued the DVD in 2004, this time with a longer, improved print and chamber ensemble score. The film has also been released on Blu-ray by the Cohen Film Collection (US) in 2013 and Eureka! Entertainment (UK) in 2014. That version features a Carl Davis orchestral score and an audio commentary by Fairbanks biographer Jeffrey Vance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76387", "revid": "1319741053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76387", "title": "The Thing from Another World", "text": "1951 science fiction film\nThe Thing from Another World, sometimes referred to as just The Thing, is a 1951 American black-and-white science fiction-horror film directed by Christian Nyby, produced by Edward Lasker for Howard Hawks' Winchester Pictures Corporation, and released by RKO Radio Pictures. The film stars Margaret Sheridan, Kenneth Tobey, Robert Cornthwaite, and Douglas Spencer. James Arness plays The Thing. \"The Thing from Another World\" is based on the 1938 novella \"Who Goes There?\" by John W. Campbell (writing under the pseudonym of Don A. Stuart).\nThe film's storyline concerns a United States Air Force crew and scientists who find a crashed flying saucer frozen in the Arctic ice and a humanoid body nearby. Returning to their remote arctic research outpost with the body still in a block of ice, they are forced to defend themselves against the still alive and malevolent plant-based alien when it is accidentally thawed out.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlot.\nIn Anchorage, journalist Ned Scott, looking for a story, visits the officer's club of the Alaskan Air Command, where he meets Captain Pat Hendry, his co-pilot and flight navigator. General Fogarty orders Hendry to fly to Polar Expedition Six at the North Pole, per a request from its lead scientist, Nobel laureate Dr. Arthur Carrington; Carrington has radioed that an unusual aircraft has crashed nearby. With Scott, Corporal Barnes, crew chief Bob, and a pack of sled dogs, Hendry pilots a Douglas C-47 Skytrain transport aircraft to the remote outpost.\nUpon arrival, Scott and the airmen meet radio operator Tex, scientists Dr. Chapman and his wife, and colleagues Vorhees, Stern, Redding, Stone, Laurence, Wilson, Ambrose, and Carrington. Hendry later rekindles his romance with Nikki Nicholson, Carrington's secretary. Several scientists fly with the airmen to the crash site, finding a large object buried beneath the ice. As they spread out to determine the object's shape, they realize that they are standing in a circle, outlining a flying saucer. The team attempts to free it from the ice with thermite, but a violent reaction with the craft's metal alloy completely destroys it. Their Geiger counter, however, detects something buried nearby: a frozen body. It is excavated intact in a large block of ice and flown back to the base as an Arctic storm closes in on them.\nGiven the discovery, Hendry assumes command of the outpost and, pending radio instructions from General Fogarty, denies Scott permission to send out his story and refuses the scientists' demands to examine the body. Tex sends an update to Fogarty, and the airmen settle for the storm. A watch is posted; relieving the first shift, Barnes is disturbed by the creature's glare through the clearing ice and covers it with an electric blanket he does not realize is plugged in. The block slowly thaws and the creature, still alive, escapes into the storm. It fights with the sled dogs and kills two, but loses most of its right forearm.\nAn airman recovers the stump after the attack and the scientists examine its tissue, concluding that the creature is an advanced form of plant life. Carrington is convinced of its superiority to humans and becomes intent on communicating with it. The airmen begin a search, which leads to the outpost's greenhouse. Carrington stays behind with other scientists, having noticed evidence of alien activity there. They discover a hidden third sled dog, which had been bled dry, revealing the creature as a vampire that feeds on blood. Carrington and the scientists post a secret watch of their own, hoping to encounter it before the airmen do.\nThe next morning, the airmen continue their search. Tex informs them that Fogarty is aware of their discovery and demands further information, now prevented by the fierce storm. Stern appears, badly injured, and tells the group that the creature has killed and bled two scientists. When the airmen investigate, they are attacked, but manage to barricade the creature inside the greenhouse. Hendry confronts Carrington and orders him to remain in his lab and quarters.\nCarrington, obsessed with the creature, shows Nicholson and the other scientists that he has been growing small alien plants from seeds taken from the severed arm and feeding them with the base\u2019s blood plasma supply. Hendry discovers the theft when plasma is needed to treat Stern, which leads him to Carrington. Fogarty transmits orders to keep the creature alive, but it escapes from the greenhouse and attacks the airmen in their quarters. They douse it with buckets of kerosene and set it aflame, forcing it to retreat into the storm. After regrouping, they realize the creature has sabotaged the base furnaces\u2019 oil supply, plummeting temperatures indoors. They retreat to the station's generator room to keep warm, and rig a high-voltage electrical \"fly trap\". The creature continues to stalk them. At the last moment Carrington pleads with it, but is knocked violently aside. The creature walks into the trap and is electrocuted. On Hendry's order, it is reduced to a pile of ash.\nWhen the weather clears, Hendry and Nicholson are careening toward marriage, and Scotty is finally able to radio his \"story of a lifetime\" to a roomful of reporters in Anchorage. He ends his broadcast with the warning: \"Tell the world. Tell this to everybody, wherever they are. Watch the skies everywhere. Keep looking. Keep watching the skies...\".\nProduction.\nIn 1950, Lederer and Hecht convinced Hawks to buy the rights to \"Who Goes There?\", who did so for $1,250.\nIn an unusual practice for the era, no actors are named during the film's dramatic \"slow burning letters through background\" opening title sequence; the cast credits appear at the end of the film. Appearing in a small role was George Fenneman, who at the time was gaining fame as Groucho Marx's announcer on the popular quiz show \"You Bet Your Life\". Fenneman later said he had difficulty with the overlapping dialogue in the film.\nThe film was partly shot in Glacier National Park with interior sets built at a Los Angeles ice storage plant.\nThe scene where the alien is set aflame and repeatedly doused with kerosene was one of the first full-body fire stunts ever filmed.\nScreenplay.\nThe film was loosely adapted by Charles Lederer, with uncredited rewrites from Howard Hawks and Ben Hecht, from the 1938 novella \"Who Goes There?\" by John W. Campbell. The story was first published in \"Astounding Science Fiction\" under Campbell's pseudonym, Don A. Stuart. (Campbell had just become \"Astounding\"'s managing editor when his novella appeared in its pages.) Science fiction author A. E. van Vogt, who had been inspired to write from reading \"Who Goes There?\" and who had been a prolific contributor to \"Astounding\", had wanted to write the script.\nThe screenplay changes the fundamental nature of the alien from Campbell's novella as a life form capable of assuming the physical and mental characteristics of any living thing it encounters (as realized in John Carpenter's 1982 adaptation of the original source, \"The Thing\".) into a humanoid life form whose cellular structure is closer to vegetation, although it must feed on blood to survive. The internal, plant-like structure of the creature makes it impervious to bullets, but not to other destructive forces such as fire and electricity.\nFilm critic Bill Warren has argued that the film reflects a post-Hiroshima skepticism about science and prevailing negative views of scientists who meddle with things better left alone. This suspicion of science, though, is also a larger theme in Arctic horror, including \"Who Goes There\" (1938) the source material for the film, and other notable works like H.P. Lovecraft's \"At the Mountains of Madness\" (1936), as well as older works of in horror and the Gothic, such as \"Frankenstein\" (1818) and \"The Island of Doctor Moreau\" (1896).\nDirector.\nThere is debate as to whether the film was directed by Howard Hawks, with Christian Nyby receiving the credit so that Nyby could obtain his Director's Guild membership or whether Nyby directed it with considerable input from producer Hawks for Hawks' Winchester Pictures, which released the film through RKO Radio Pictures Inc. Hawks gave Nyby only $5,460 of RKO's $50,000 director's fee and kept the rest, but Hawks always denied that he directed the film.\nCast members disagree on Hawks' and Nyby's contributions: Tobey said that \"Hawks directed it, all except one scene\" while, on the other hand, Fenneman said that \"Hawks would once in a while direct, if he had an idea, but it was Chris' show\". Cornthwaite said that \"Chris always deferred to Hawks\u00a0... Maybe because he did defer to him, people misinterpreted it.\"\nOne of the film's stars, William Self, later became President of 20th Century Fox Television. In describing the production, Self said, \"Chris was the director in our eyes, but Howard was the boss in our eyes.\" Although Self has said that \"Hawks was directing the picture from the sidelines\", he also has said that \"Chris would stage each scene, how to play it. But then he would go over to Howard and ask him for advice, which the actors did not hear\u00a0... Even though I was there every day, I don't think any of us can answer the question. Only Chris and Howard can answer the question.\"\nAt a reunion of \"The Thing\" cast and crew members in 1982, Nyby said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Did Hawks direct it? That's one of the most inane and ridiculous questions I've ever heard, and people keep asking. That it was Hawks' style. Of course it was. This is a man I studied and wanted to be like. You would certainly emulate and copy the master you're sitting under, which I did. Anyway, if you're taking painting lessons from Rembrandt, you don't take the brush out of the master's hands.\nReception.\nCritical and box office reception.\n\"The Thing from Another World\" was released in April 1951. By the end of that year, the film had accrued $1,950,000 in distributors' domestic (U.S. and Canada) rentals, making it the year's 46th biggest earner, beating all other science fiction films released that year, including \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" and \"When Worlds Collide\".\nBosley Crowther in \"The New York Times\" observed, \"Taking a fantastic notion (or is it, really?), Mr. Hawks has developed a movie that is generous with thrills and chills\u2026Adults and children can have a lot of old-fashioned movie fun at 'The Thing', but parents should understand their children and think twice before letting them see this film if their emotions are not properly conditioned\". \"Gene\" in \"Variety\" complained that the film \"lacks genuine entertainment values\". In 1973, science fiction editor and publisher Lester del Rey compared the film unfavorably to the source material, calling it \"just another monster epic, totally lacking in the force and tension of the original story\". Isaac Asimov thought it to be one of the worst movies he had ever seen. For his part, Campbell acknowledged that an adaptation would have to change elements from the original, which he considered too scary for most audience members, and hoped that at least the movie would succeed in getting people interested in science fiction.\nThe film is now considered to be one of the best films of 1951 and one of the great science fiction films of the 1950s. It garnered an 87% \"Fresh\" rating at the film review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes from 69 reviews as of October 2025, with the consensus that the film \"is better than most flying saucer movies, thanks to well-drawn characters and concise, tense plotting\". In 2001, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film \"culturally significant\" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry. Additionally, \"Time\" magazine named \"The Thing from Another World\" \"the greatest 1950s sci-fi movie\".\nAmerican Film Institute lists\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "76389", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76389", "title": "To Be or Not to Be (1942 film)", "text": "1942 film by Ernst Lubitsch\nTo Be or Not to Be is a 1942 American black comedy film produced and directed by Ernst Lubitsch, starring Carole Lombard and Jack Benny, and featuring Robert Stack, Felix Bressart, Lionel Atwill, Stanley Ridges, and Sig Ruman. The plot concerns a troupe of actors in Nazi-occupied Warsaw who use their abilities at disguise and acting to fool the occupying troops. It was adapted by Lubitsch (uncredited) and Edwin Justus Mayer from the story by Melchior Lengyel. \"To Be or Not to Be\" was released one month after Lombard was killed in an airplane crash. In 1996, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nPlot.\nIn 1939, the well-known stars of a Warsaw theater company, including \"ham\" Joseph Tura and wife Maria, are rehearsing \"Gestapo\", a play satirizing the Nazi regime. During the company's production of \"Hamlet\" that night, with Joseph in the title role, Maria receives a bouquet of flowers from Lieutenant Stanislav Sobinski. After Maria arranges a secret meeting with Sobinski in her dressing room, he walks out as Joseph begins Hamlet's \"To be, or not to be\" soliloquy. Soon, the government issues orders to cancel \"Gestapo\" in order to avoid worsening relations with Germany. The following night, Sobinski again walks out on Hamlet's soliloquy to meet Maria, infuriating Joseph. Sobinski confesses his love for Maria, but as Germany invades Poland, he leaves to join the Royal Air Force's Polish squadron.\nIn England, Sobinski and his fellows meet the Polish resistance leader, Professor Siletsky, who will soon return to Warsaw on a secret mission. As the men give Siletsky messages for their loved ones, Sobinski gives him a secret message for Maria, which reads \"To be or not to be\", but becomes suspicious when Siletsky fails to recognize the famous actress. After informing British intelligence that Siletsky has a list of names and addresses of Polish airmen's relatives, Sobinski is sent to Warsaw to warn the resistance. In Warsaw, Siletsky sends for Maria and relays Sobinski's message to her. He invites Maria to dinner, hoping to recruit her as a Nazi spy. Just before she arrives at her apartment, Joseph returns and finds Sobinski in his bed. Although confused, Joseph agrees to help Maria and Sobinski obtain Siletsky's list.\nSiletsky is summoned to \"Gestapo headquarters\"\u2014the theater\u2014where Joseph impersonates Colonel Ehrhardt. After giving Joseph the list of Polish resistance fighters' relatives, Siletsky mentions Sobinski's secret message for Maria. Overcome with jealousy, Joseph inadvertently reveals himself. Siletsky pulls a gun on him and tries to escape but is shot dead by Sobinski. Joseph disguises himself as Siletsky and goes to Siletsky's hotel to retrieve an additional copy of his list. There, he finds Maria, who was unable to leave without Siletsky's approval, and Captain Schultz, who has come to take him to meet with Ehrhardt.\nPosing as Siletsky, Joseph names recently executed prisoners as the leaders of the resistance. The next day, the real Siletsky's corpse is found in the theater, and Ehrhardt sends for Maria to inform her. Unaware of this, Joseph, again masquerading as Siletsky, arranges another meeting with Ehrhardt. To expose Joseph as an impostor, Ehrhardt leaves him in a room with Siletsky's dead body. Joseph shaves off Siletsky's beard and applies a spare fake beard. He then goads Ehrhardt into pulling it off, convincing him Joseph is the real Siletsky. The scheme works until several actors disguised as Adolf Hitler's safety squad arrive, yank off Joseph's fake beard, and pretend to arrest him. Everyone is safe but now cannot leave Poland on the plane Ehrhardt had arranged for Siletsky.\nThe Nazis stage a show to honor the visiting Hitler. The actors slip into the theater dressed as Nazis and hide until Hitler and his entourage take their seats. Jewish actor Greenberg suddenly appears and rushes Hitler's box while the rest of the actors infiltrate the real Nazis. Greenberg is captured by the Nazis, giving him the long-awaited opportunity to deliver Shylock's speech from \"The Merchant of Venice\". Posing as Hitler's security chief, Joseph \"arrests\" Greenberg. All the actors\u2014including Bronski disguised as Hitler\u2014march out, get in Hitler's cars and drive away.\nEhrhardt arrives at Maria's apartment and tries to seduce her until Bronski, dressed as Hitler, arrives to pick her up. As Maria leaves with Bronski, a shocked Ehrhardt assumes she is Hitler's mistress and tries to shoot himself. The actors take off in Hitler's plane, and Sobinski flies to England. When Joseph is asked by the press what reward he would like for saving the underground movement, Maria declares that he wants to play Hamlet. While performing on stage, Joseph sees Sobinski in the audience, but to the surprise of both men, another young officer walks out on Joseph's soliloquy.\nProduction.\nLubitsch had never considered anyone other than Jack Benny for the lead role in the film. He had even written the character with Benny in mind. Benny, thrilled that a director of Lubitsch's caliber had been thinking of him while writing it, accepted the role immediately. Benny was in a predicament as, strangely enough, his success in the film version of \"Charley's Aunt\" (1941) did not interest anyone in hiring the actor for their films.\nFor Benny's co-star, the studio and Lubitsch decided on Miriam Hopkins, whose career had been faltering in recent years. The role was designed as a comeback for the veteran actress, but Hopkins and Benny did not get along well, and Hopkins left the production.\nLubitsch was left without a leading lady until Carole Lombard, hearing his predicament, asked to be considered. Lombard had never worked with the director and yearned to have an opportunity. Lubitsch agreed and Lombard was cast. The film also provided Lombard with an opportunity to work with friend Robert Stack, whom she had known since he was a teenager. The film was shot at United Artists, which allowed Lombard to say that she had worked at every major studio in Hollywood.\nRelease.\n\"To Be or Not to Be\" opened in three theaters in Los Angeles on February 19, 1942, followed by a nationwide release on March 6.\nReception.\nThe initial reception of \"To Be or Not to Be\" was marked by public apprehension due to its satirical depiction of the Nazis. Reviewers at the time criticized the use of such a serious and palpable threat as a basis for comedy. However, modern-day critics have since come to regard the movie as one of Lubitsch's notable achievements. According to Jack Benny's unfinished memoir, published in 1990, Benny's father initially left the theater in disgust at seeing his son in a Nazi uniform in the film, but Benny eventually convinced him to return. Subsequently, his father not only embraced the film but watched it 46 times.\nThe same could not be said for all critics. While they generally praised Lombard, some scorned Benny and Lubitsch and found the film to be in bad taste. Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" wrote that it was \"hard to imagine how any one can take, without batting an eye, a shattering air raid upon Warsaw right after a sequence of farce or the spectacle of Mr. Benny playing a comedy scene with a Gestapo corpse. Mr. Lubitsch had an odd sense of humor\u2014and a tangled script\u2014when he made this film.\" \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\" agreed, calling the film \"a callous, tasteless effort to find fun in the bombing of Warsaw.\" Some critics were especially offended by Colonel Ehrhardt's line: \"Oh, yes I saw him [Tura] in 'Hamlet' once. What he did to Shakespeare we are now doing to Poland.\"\nHowever, other reviews were positive. \"Variety\" called it one of Lubitsch's \"best productions in [a] number of years...a solid piece of entertainment.\" \"Harrison's Reports\" called it \"[a]n absorbing comedy-drama of war time, expertly directed and acted. The action holds one in tense suspense at all times, and comedy of dialogue as well as of acting keeps one laughing almost constantly.\" John Mosher of \"The New Yorker\" also praised the film, writing \"That comedy could be planted in Warsaw at the time of its fall, of its conquest by the Nazis, and not seem too incongruous to be endured is a Lubitsch triumph.\"\nIn 1943, critic Mildred Martin reviewed another of Lubitsch's films in \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\" and referred derogatively to his German birth and his comedy about Nazis in Poland. Lubitsch responded by publishing an open letter to the newspaper in which he wrote: What I have satirized in this picture are the Nazis and their ridiculous ideology. I have also satirized the attitude of actors who always remain actors regardless of how dangerous the situation might be, which I believe is a true observation. ... It can be argued if the tragedy of Poland realistically portrayed as in \"To Be or Not to Be\" can be merged with satire. I believe it can be and so do the audience which I observed during a screening of \"To Be or Not to Be\"; but this is a matter of debate and everyone is entitled to his point of view, but it is certainly a far cry from \"the Berlin-born director who finds fun in the bombing of Warsaw.\"\nIn recent times, the film has become recognized as a comedy classic. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, \"To Be or Not to Be\" holds an approval rating of 96% based on 52 reviews, with an average rating of 8.8/10. The website's critics consensus reads, \"A complex and timely satire with as much darkness as slapstick, Ernst Lubitsch's \"To Be or Not To Be\" delicately balances humor and ethics.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 86 out of 100, based on 13 critics, indicating . In an interview in 2015, Slovenian cultural critic and philosopher Slavoj \u017di\u017eek named it his favorite comedy, where he remarked, \"It is madness, you can not do a better comedy I think.\"\nAwards and honors.\n\"To Be or Not to Be\" was nominated for one Academy Award: the Best Music, Scoring of a Dramatic or Comedy Picture.\nThe film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
